SUNDAY, JULY 22. 1945 



SPOT 7-- ; 



liUSIC: 
GRIFFITH: 

MUSIC: 
GRIFFITH ! 



MUSIC: 
GRIFFITH : 



THE PHILIPPINE HOUR 
presented ly 

PSYCHOLOGICAL WaRFARE BRANCH OMS GHQ 
WLC 9295 kilocycles 

mabuhay (full to ei®) 

From Manila, the headquarters of General MacArthur, 

we bring you - THE PHILIPPINE HOURJ 

PHILIPPINE NaT'L anthem (uP FULL, THEN FADE FOR..,) 

From the coital of the Philippine Commonv^ealth, v;e 
present the 448th edition of The Philippine Hour - a 
broadcast of late world nows, analysis of current affairs 
and music selected for your Sunday listening pleasure. 
Tonight you will also hear James G.' Wingo, feature 
commentator of Tao Philippine Hour, interviev/ Major General 
Basilic J. Valdes, chief of staff of the Philippine Army. 

F/e invite j ou to stay tuned to this oroadcast. 

PHILIPPINE NAT*L ANTHEtvI (UP FULL TO EfJD) 

Now for our coverage of the news. First, here are 
the latest dispatches from the Pacific. 

(INSERT NffiJS SPOTS 2*5) 






SPOT 



2 











J IJ'JPIB: 1 

Shortly after Friday morning's record attack by 600 B-29 

"x^rfortresses, a fleet of 94 Mustang fighters fro^ Iwo Jima strafed 

Japanese airfields and aircraft factories in the Nagoya-Osaka area. This 

],600~raile round trip followed Thursday's attack by 80 Mustangs which 

struck airfields in the same area. No Japanese aerial opposition was en- 

cruntered and the planes saw on.ly 12 enemy aircraft, all on the ground. 

One wad destroyed, another probably destroyed and six were damaged. Airfield 

r ;ets were scant, so the pilots turned to aircraft factories, but 

those were just as limited. Returning pilots reported that the Kamasaki 

.arcraft plant appeared to have been totally burned out by the earlier 

Superfort attack. Three Mustangs were lost to anti-aircraft .fire. 

Night patrol planes from Philippines bases hit Mako in the 
Pescadores, All other attack were cancelled because of bad weather. Planes 
of the 7th Fleet at+acked a Jap troop concentration near Swatow and sank 
three enemy vessels along the China coast. Targets inland in Indo-China 
were damaged and the Kuantan shipyards in Malaya were straged. Planes 
oi 'ho 13th airforce hit Itu Aba island in the South China sea. 

The Navy department announced that American submarines have sunk 
sloven more Japanese vessels, inclu.ding two minesweepers and two patrol 
CGccrt vessels. Others were a large cargo-transport, a medium transport, 
three small merchant vessels, a subII freighter, and a medium freighter. 

Jhene losses raise to 1,174 the total of enemy ships of all types sunk 
by United States submarines since the start of the war. 

action on Borneo was limited to mopping-up operations in recently 
captured territory. General MacArthur announced that counted enemy 
dead in the Borneo operations have now reached 4,396, with an additional 
4A1 prisoners. Allied casualties total 386 killed, 12 missing, • and ' 

1,351 wounded. 



yo 



SPOT 2 




GJIiUSPIE; 2 

j'lanes bombed and strafed Japanese rear areas on Borneo while light nrval 
units of the 7th Fleet shelled Japanese harbor instaJlations at Jessolton, 
damaging watercraft and starting many fires. 

Heavy bombers and fighter units ranged over Celebes, the Halmaheras 
and other islands of the East Indies. Light units of the 7th Fleet 
patrolled Makassar Strait, damaging shore facilities. 

Admiral Nimitz announced that light units of the Third Fleet which 
bombarded Nojima Cape, 55 miles south of Tokyo during Y/ednesday night 
encountered no opposition whatsoever. They patrolled the eastern entrance 
to Sagatal Gulf, and after bombarding radi, radar and other shore 
installations, retired without incident. 

Privateers destroyed a powered barge and a lugger near fflhikine 
island in •< he Izu chain, south of Honshu, and also raided Miyake island 
in the same group. Night patrol planes caused an explosion on a coastal 
ship near southern end of Honshu. Liberators of the 11th Army airforce 
hit Ifetsuwa island in the Kuriles yesterday, 

Chinese droops closing in from three sides on the former American 
air base of Kweilin in Kwangsi province have beaten off enemy counter- 
attacks. One column is now less than one mile from the city while 
another is 13 miles away. Considerable casualties were inflicted on -^ho 
Japanese in Fukien province, 65 miles northeast of Ev/atow, 

Japanese troops in Burma have stopped an attack by British and 
Ghurka troops west of Mawchi, 40 miles from the Thailand border. The drive 
was opened along the stalemated Toungoo-Mawchi front after Allied 
bombers blasted enemy positions, bu+ Japanese fire was intense and 
halted the attack, Mawchi is one of the Jap*s last strongholds in this 
area and thousands of the enemy caught west of the Sittang river are 
trying to break through to reach this fortress. 






2 



SPOT 
Page 3 



-;u. 



( n 



ltd 



■nt,) 



The New York Times reported that 16,090 Japanese are known to have 
died on Bougainville. These figures were released by the Hew Zealand air 
deL'<‘^rtment, which placed the number of remaini.ng eneny troops dm this 
island at 13,700, concentrated mainly in the south in an area roughly 
20 by ten miles. Although outnumbered abou+ 100 to one, the Japs on 
L''ugcinvil]e are still shelling /.ustralian troops and also have sent 
r^xiding parties five miles behind the Australian lines. 

The Japanese plan to cut China in two by establishment of a heavy 
lar" line from Siberia to Singapore is "more of a liability than an asset." 
n.is statement wa^ made by Lt. Col. Charles H. Older, leading American 
ace in Chinn . Ke had just returned to the United States and has 22 confirmed 
top planes to his crodix. Col, Older said that Ame-^can air rai'rht has 
made supply problems a nightmare for the enemy. Ke also expressed the 
belief that the Japs have more air strips than planes in China at the 
present time, and said enemy fighters are definitely inferiwp. 









