
( MA So. I | 



J • 



V 




TOP: LIEUTENANT GENERAL DWIGHT EISENHOWER, 

commander of American troops in Europe, was the guest 
of President Quezon at a luncheon in Washington, D. C. 
shortly before MacArthur's former aide went to London. 

LEFT: PRESIDENT QUEZON received an ovation when 
he appeared in a "New York at War" parade shortly after 
his arrival in the United States. With the President is 
Colonel Manuel Nieto, his aide. 

LOWER LEFT: VICE PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA 

participated in a nationwide radio broadcast on July 13 
under the auspices of the Institute of Pacific Relations. 
The address was repeated in Spanish for Lali:\ .Vncric^. 

LOWER RIGHT: RESIDENT COMMISSIONER J, ;* "V 
ZALDE administered the oath of allegiance to Di . L 
mo Rustia, who was commissioned a captain in the V - y 
of the United States. Rustia was assigned to the Fih]. ino 
Regiment. 





\t\ 




HTI - W 







Remember the Philippines! 

An Editorial 



ALMOST A YEAR AGO, on August 19, 1941, 
President Quezon of the Philippines participated in 
an exchange of greetings by radio with Vice Presi* 
dent Wallace of the United States. At the lime, the 
event was notable mainly for the presence of the 
two national leaders. Today, however, what stands 
out most significantly is a paragraph in the remarks 
of President Quezon. 

"In this grave national emergency," he declared 
then (and it must be remembered that in August, 
1941 it was not apparent that Japan was going to 
precipitate war in the Pacific liy attacking the United 
States), "the stand of the Filipino people is clear 
and unmistakable. . . . Should the United States 
r nlrr the war, the Philippines would follow her and 
fight by her side, placing at her disposal all our 
manpower and all our material resources, however 
limited these may be. We stand with the United 
States in life and in death." 

However rhetorical those words may have 
sounded at that time to Americans, to the Filipino 
oeopJc they were obvious statements of fact. What 
alhsr reaction w r as possible in a nation that had for 
years received such just treatment as we had 
\n i.i the United States? Could we sincerely have 
viken any other attitude toward the source of so 
many great benefits? With independence promised 
u v in 1946 by the Congress of the United States, 
wxjnjd our national pride have permitted us to take 
any >ther course? The sincerity of President 
Quezon's statement was soon proved by the crudest 
of all tests— war. 

The events that followed December 7 were tragic 
enough, but they also proved that the bonds between 
the United States and the Philippines transcended 
mere political and legal relationships. A great 
spiritual kinship had grown up in 10 years. Our 
hopes, our aims, our aspirations were the same as 
your own. In the great moral causes— the principles 
of righteousness, of liberty ami of peace— our na- 
tions were in complete accord, And so. when Japan 
so suddenly loosed its fanatical might on both our 



peoples last winter, the Filipinos did not hesitate. 
They fought with the same desperate courage your 
soldiers did to defend the Stars and Stripes. 

Shortly after his arrival in the United States 
from the war zone. President Quezon was honored 
by an invitation from the Senate to address that 
august body. On that occasion, he reminded the 
Senators of the special relation between his 
people and theirs; then lie asked that the United 
States add another war slogan to "Remember Pearl 
Harbor 7 '. It was "Remember the Philippines". 

Such a motto is needed to sum up the dual nature 
of Japan's campaign against Democracy. When 
they bombed Hawaii without justification, the 
Japanese were attacking the greatest citadel of 
liberalism in the world today. But the invasion of 
the Philippines, which had sought only to live in 
peace with its neighbors, was fundamentally an 
attempt to check the spread of the democratic way 
of life that had followed your flag to the Orient 

When we were attacked, we were still living under 
your flag. We owed allegiance to it, and our de- 
fenses were under the command of one of your 
great generals, Douglas Mac Arthur. Despite our 
virtual autonomy in domestic affairs, the entire 
responsibility and power in our foreign affairs lay 
in your bands. In other words, you were the trustees 
for the Filipino people in the world at large, a rela- 
tionship that carries with it a responsibility. . . . 

It is not the place of the Filipino people to urge 1 
the United States to send forces at once to the 
Philippines, to wrest our beloved homeland from 
the Japanese. Nor do we feel it proper to try to 
convince you that the Pacific is a more vital field 
of battle than the Atlantic or Europe or Africa. 
Those are issues that only the highest strategists can 
decide. But we are confident that ynu w ill not ignore 
the plight of the Philippines, nor will you forget 
that only in nur islands has the Stars and Stripes 
hern hauled down to make run in tor the Rising Sun. 
Until that crime againsi ihe whole democratic 
of life has been righted, we can onl\ ec ho President 
Quezon's plea. "Remember the Philippines", if 



AUGUST, 1942 

Volume 2 • Number 1 



Philippines 



Manila to Washington, Lu CoL Andres Soriano 3 

Filipino Soldier in Bataan, Major General B. J* V aides 4 

Philippine Government in Washington 6 

In the United Nations s 

O Ion gap o Naval Base, James K. Eyre, Jr. 9 

Filipinos Aid the War Effort, Manuel Adeva IP 

P T Pilot 15 

Philippine Quinine, Florencio Tamesis 

20 

News From the Philippines 

o "i 

Mindanao, Ernesto D. I lust re ' *** 

Filipino Footnotes 23 

Philippine Red Cross, Alwyn Knight . 24 

Photo Credits: Wide World; International 
News Photos; Blaekstone Studios, New 
York: United States Navy; United States 
Army Signal Corps; American Red Cross; 
Australian News and Information Service; 
and Palmer Pictures, New York. 

Back cover; Moro vintns near Zamhoanga, Mindanao 



Per miss San id r*-|»riiit nisili-i-ial u(*iu i nriiip 
in PUILIPPIiVKS is jrloclty granliMl exvupl In 
r;lfvi'> ivlicrc usr i.h ^jn-ri fi ru.1 ly rr&trirtril. Proper 
frt-ilh will hi- ii]>i»rn , iii trd. 



PJll MPPI.MCS l« ifiiMiitfiftl hy ■ J i - - uffiri* af Otv PJtiJijipinj' Restdniil ' Uuiimi**i*miT in the 
I uiu-tl Stairs EiliinrlaJ ami rin-ulminii dJlli'i^ at 2:jrt2 Hun^u-luisf-Li*; Avrmn* lV»rt]iH'i»«i* 
ft :i-Jiiri-*tiui. H. i-'rirf-rt'iF ji» lliirpl rtflss m.lltl-r in lW SVasliili^Luti JHisf uflli'i- Oil l.ti-f^m hrr I- 

1940. Per mi l 30-13. Printed in ILS.A. 




Flags of 2*4 democratic nations were 
unfurled in the White House on June 
15 when President Quezon and Am- 
bassador Najcra signed the United 
Nations Pari for the Philippines and 
the Republic of Mexico. 

In This Issue 
MAJOR GENERAL BASILIO J. VALDES 

is chief of staff of the Philippine 
Army and Secretary of National De- 
fense in the Commonwealth Govern 
ment in Washington, He spent two 
months in Bataan and Corregi<] or 

LIEUT. COLONEL ANDRES SORIANO 

headed one of the most important 
mining and industrial firms in the 
Philippines before the war. Ke uonv 
manded a front-line unit in B. ; t 

MANUEL ADEVA is rhiei 
tionals Division of the Re*„ 
mfosi oner's office in W a shin: . 

JAMES K. EYRE Jr., formerly mth 
Library of Congress, is an fcufcsfet^ 
ing authority on early Phil!, pir _ 
American relations. 

FLORENCIO TAMESIS was Di; etoj , (J 
Forestry in Manila prior to t ; U: 
Japanese invasion, His present w 1 ^^. 
a bouts is unknown. 

ERNESTO D. I LUSTRE is a former me*, 
her of the informalion staff of t| lu 
Resident Commissioners office. He j s 
now a private in the Filipino Regi- 
ment of the I ' n i ted States Army. 

ALWYN KNIGHT is ihr rdih.r of tlm 
Red Cross Caurici and a innnluT of 
ihe public infmination staff of Un- 
American Rnd Cross headquarters. 



cc Under the Sea^ Over the Sea, and Through the Air" 

THE STORY OF PRESIDENT QUEZON'S TRIP FROM MANILA TO WASHINGTON 




THE PORT AREA OF MANILA was in Raines after a 
Japanese air raid when Ills Excellency, President Quezon, 
left the Philippine capital for Corregidor on December 
2 1. ]IML W ith the President were the members of his 
family. Vice President Osmefia, Ma jor General Y aides, the 
Philippine chief of staff. Colonel Manuel Nieto, his 
senior aide, and several others- secretaries, aides, a chap- 
lain, and three doctors. Nigh Commissioner and Mrs. 
Say re and their sou. as well as members of the High 
Commissioner's staff, met us on hoard the Ma you, which 
carried us across Manila Bav. 




Outside the tunnels rrf Corregidor: Mrs. Quezon. Mrs. 
Mac-Arthur, iho President, Arthur MaMrtluu III, and 
Miss Marin A mora Quezon. 



^™ by Lieutenant Colonel Andres Soriano w ™" 
Secretary of Finance 

PRESIDENT QUEZON'S LIFE ON CORREGIDOR 

was punctuated by air raids. For two months, as I was 
informed on my visits to the rock on February 3 and 
February 18. he remained always close to shelter. Al- 
though they were relatively safe, the Presidents health 
and the necessity of organizing a belter food supply 
finally made it necessary for his party to leave. 




ON THE NIGHT Of FEBRUARY 20, the President and 
his family, Vice President Osmeria. Secretary of Justice 
Jose A had Santos, Crucial \ aides and Colonel Nieto 
boarded a I idled Stall s submarine for the voyage to the 
southern island of Paua>. After successfully running the 
Japanese blockade to San Jose do Buenavista the sub- 
marine relumed u> Corregidor to take High Commis- 
sioner Say re and his staff to safety. 




TO ILOItO THE PRESIDENT WENT from San jose dc 
|ineua\ ista b\ auto, uith his fumih and [>arl\ . In lioilo 
ihe President conferred with public officials and. aflor a 
brief sla\. proceeded east to Bacolod, the capital of 
Oc C i d en I a I Neg ros, 

j Turn to Page 16 J 



• 3 • 



ALTHOUGH nearly 36,000 Americans and 
Filipinos are today prisoners of the Japanese as 
the result of the invasion of the Philippines, the 
four months of fighting that preceded the fall of 
Corregidor did not. in my estimation, constitute a 
national defeat. To the contrary, in many respects 
the Filipino proved that he was a better man than 
his Japanese adversary. 

I am convinced that, had the Philippine Army 
possessed adequate aircraft, we would still he fight- 
ing the Japanese in Luzon today. 

A great deal has been written about the valor of 
the American troops in the Philippines. I want to 
take this opportunity to reiterate my admiration for 
the gallantry, the courage, and the dogged de- 
termination shown by the soldiers from the United 
States, Far from their own homes, they did a job 




Major General Basilio J. Valdes 



The FILIPINO SOLDIER 



IN B ATA AN 

that will live forever in history. Less has been pub- 
lished, however, about the Filipinos who comprised 
five-sixths of our forces in Luzon- Their work was 
no less exemplary. 

The men of the Philippine Army showed some 
surprising points of strength, and some not-so- 
surprising weaknesses. For instance, our men de- 
veloped into excellent artillery teams. They were 
quick to learn, they stood up well under fire, and 
their marksmanship was remarkable. Colonel 
Brow! ay, the American officer in charge of anti- 
aircraft artillery on Bataaru told me he had two 
outstanding batteries. One was a National Guard 
unit from California and the other was from the 
Philippine Army. 

Philippine coast artillery played an important 
part in our beach defenses. Batteries of the 21st 
Division under Brigadier General Mateo Capinpin 
were guarding the shores of Lingayen Gulf, north 
of Manila, when the Japanese made their first 
attempt to land there. To test the defenses, Japanese 
warships fired a few rounds at the beach. The artil- 
lery promptly replied so effectively that the fleet 
steamed on up the coast. The test was repeated 
again and again, and each time the convoy was met 



war 



By Major General Basilio J. Valdes 
Chief of St tiff) Philippine Army 

by a fire too hot to risk landing. Not until the 
ships reached the I locos coast were they able to 
put their troops ashore* We had run out of artillery 
and were unable to defend the I locos beach. 

A similar situation occurred along the coastline 
sollth of Manila Bay. Brigadier General Vicente 
Lim, commanding general of the 41st Division, had 
sufficient artillery on the Batangas coast to prevent 
enemy landings there. The Japanese had to reroute 
their transports to an undefended bay farther south. 

Long before the war started, many of us realized 
that the Philippine Army was deficient in two fields, 
The first was the serious shortage o[ sufficient! v 
trained officers. The Philippine Military Academy, 
the West Point of the Philippines, gradual t about 
100 officers a year, but this number was insufficient 
to meet the needs of a citizen army growing at die 
rate of 40,000 annually. We organized schools fur 
reserve officers, but this was not entirely successful 
because those that should have attended were not 
always able to leave their jobs for the period of 
time necessary for proper training, I n an e fYort to 
solve this problem, the President issued an Execu- 
tive Order making it compulsory for college stu- 
dents to complete four years of R.O.T.C. training. 



4 



Graduates were automatically appointed 3rd Lieu- 
tenants in the Philippine Army Reserve, and as- 
signed to reserve units. 

The overwhelming majority of our soldiers had 
only five and a half months of training, A few' had 
served up to a year. All had been hurriedly called 
from civilian life. As a matter of fact the Philip- 
pine Army is essentially a citizen army. Inevitably, 
such men were easily confused — even panicked — in 
the early stages of the fighting. This was particu- 
larly true because they were called upon to engage 
in the hardest maneuver of modem warfare — a 
fighting withdrawal before overwhelming enemy 
superiority- It was a miracle that they were not dis- 
organized completely in the first week of war* 

I take a great deal of pride in saying that they 
w r ere not disorganized. They never ceased to be an 
army able to deal out punishment. The Filipino 
recruit quickly developed into a Lough, courageous 
lighter. 

I am occasionally asked how the individual 
Filipino soldier measured up to his opponent. My 
answer is, "Very favorably," 

We found we had to fight two types of Japanese. 
One was the man who had campaigned in China; 
he was experienced, ruthless and seemingly fear- 
less. Our young fighters were always at a disad- 
vantage against this kind of opposition, Only the 
Philippine Scout soldiers, whose long years of 
training had made them just as tough and fearless, 
were a match for the long-term Japanese soldiers. 



But there was another type in the Nipponese 
army. He was the recent conscript, the grocery 
clerk or fisherman hurriedly called into service. He 
had little advantage in point of training or experi- 
ence. Man for man, our Filipino fighters generally 
had him beaten before the battle started. 

The Filipino soldier was seldom over-awed by 
the juggernaut opposing him. 

"Sir, please get us some planes." they begged me 
wdien I visited them on Bataan. " We'll lick those 
Japs." 

I am quite convinced that had I been able to 
produce those planes, they would have done it. 

For all its tragedy, the invasion of the Philip- 
pines has shown us the path we must take when 
peace returns to our homeland. Our program of 
national defense, planned by General MacArthur, 
approved by President Quezon, and successfully 
carried out by the United States Military Mission 
to the Philippines and the General Staff of the 
Philippine Army, has been sound. We must continue 
our system of universal military training, in which 
the wealthy boy serves side- by-side wiUi the son 
of the farmer and of the common laborer. The ait- 
force must be enlarged, of course. Experience has 
proved the value of our coast artillery; we must 
expand that, too, With these alterations in our na- 
tional defense program — and given time to build, up 
the industrial plant that must support it — the 
Philippines in the future w r ill be able to defend its 
shores successfully- ^ 




PHILIPPINE SCOUT soldiers display trophies of a skirmish 
with Japanese forces on Bala an. These men proved to be 
the equal of the toughest fighters the Nipponese could 
send against them. 



5 



PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT ESTABLISHED 

IN WASHINGTON 



President Quezon Assisted in Administration by Reorganized 

Four-Man Cabinet 




OFFICIALS OF THE PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT meet with President Quezon in Washington: Left to right. Vice 
President Osmefta, Secretary of Finance Soriano. Resident Commissioner Eli /aide, President Quezon, Auditor 
General Hernandez, and Secretary of National Defense Valde?. 



A'FTEK a long, dangerous trek from Manila by way of Corregidor, 
Mindanao and Australia, the Government of the Philippines has been 
re-established in Washington, D. C. as a regime in exile. It is recognized 
by the democratic world as the representative of the Filipino people. 

One of its first formal acts on reaching the United States was to make 
itself a signatory of the Declaration by United Nations, 

President Quezon, who arrived in Washington in May, is now assisted 
by a War Cabinet of four men. These men include Vice President 
Sergio Osmena, Resident Commissioner J. M. Elizalde, Major General 
Basilio J. Valdes, and Lieutenant Colonel Andres Soriano. Colonel Man- 
uel Nieto is aide to President Quezon, and Dr. Art tiro B. Rotor is Secre- 
tary to the President and the Cabinet. 

The Government of the Commonwealth is now functioning in Wash- 
ington with wide executive and even legislative powers. These powers 
were voted to the President by the Philippine Legislature in three 




The Commonwealth Headquarters 
in Washington, D, C. 



• 6 • 



emergency laws passed in 1941. The last of these 
was approved after the Japanese forces had landed 
in Luzon and were advancing toward Manila. 

Two members of President Quezon's official fam- 
ily hold other government positions in addition to 
their Cabinet posts. The senior member of the body, 
Vice President Osmena, is also Secretary of Public 
Instruct ion, a portfolio he has held, except for a 
brief interruption, since 1939. In addition to his 
Cabinet tin Lies. Osmena now serves as proxy for the 
President at many public functions- In the absence 
of the President from Washington, the Vice Presi- 
dent represents him in the Pacific War Council. 

Resident Commissioner Elizalde has been a mem- 
ber of the Cabinet, without portfolio, since Septem- 
ber, 1941, Following the establishment of the Com- 
monwealth Government in Washington, however, 
he was appointed Secretary of National Develop- 
ment. As the representative of the Philippines in 
the Congress of the United States, Elizalde will 
continue to serve as the legal link between the Com- 
monwealth and the United States Government. Most 
of the activities of the Resident Commissioner's of- 
fice will continue under his direct supervision. 

Prior lo the Japanese invasion of the Philippines- 
Major General Valdes was the Chief of Staff of the 
Philippine Army. He is now Secretary of National 
Defense, serving as the chief link between the Com- 
monwealth Government and the military men of 
the other United Nations. 
He is also active in con- 
nection with the recruit- 
ing and training of Fili- 
pino soldiers in the Army 
of the United States. 

The fourth member of 
the War Cabinet is Lieu- 
tenant Colonel Andres So- 
riano, the Secretary of 
Finance, The head of ex- 
tensive mining and indus- 
trial interests in the Phil- 
ippines, S o i' i a n o look 
command of a unit of 
Filipino troops at the out- 
break of war and was in 
repeated frontline skir- 
mishes against the Japan- 
ese on Bataan. 





An important official of the Commonwealth Gov* 
eminent is Auditor General Jaime Hernandez, A 
member of the Philippine civil service for nearly 
20 years, Hernandez was visiting the United States 
for a routine audit of Commonwealth funds when 
the war broke out. Unable to return to Manila, he 
made his headquarters with the Resident Commis- 
sioner until President Quezon reached Washington. 

Other members of the Philippine Government 
who made the long trek to Washington from Manila 
include Lieutenant Colonel Jaime Velasquez, the 
junior aide to the President; Dr. Benvenuto R. Dino 
and Major Emigdio C. Cruz, of the Philippine 
Army Medical Corps; Captain Pacifico Ortiz, chap- 
Jain; Major Carmelo Manzano. aide to General 
Valdes; Serapio D. Canceram private secretary to 
the President, and Dr. Andreas Treppe, 

President Quezon and his family have estab- 
lished their residence al Belmont, the 150-year-old 
estate of former Secretary of War Patrick J, Hur- 
ley, near Leesburg, Virginia. The President main- 
tains his office in Washington, however. With him 
at Belmont are Mrs, Quezon, Miss Maria Aurora 
Quezon, Miss Zenaida Quezon, and Master Manuel 
Quezon, Jr. who is 15, 

Although he is recovering satisfactorily from 
the rigors of his trip from Manila, the Presi- 
dent, on strict orders from his doctors, is de- 
voting the summer to recuperation. Until Sep- 
tember 1, he has announced, he will make no 

public appearances and 
give no interviews. 

Shortly after his arrival 
in Washington. President 
Quezon received an invi- 
tation from President 
Manuel Avila Camacho 
^^^A of Mexico to visit Mexico 

City. In accepting the in- 
vitation. President Que- 
zon recalled that he hud 
visited Mexico City in 
upper left; colonel 1937, when General A vi la 
manuel nieto Catnacbo Was Serrelurv 

ol War. 

Upper ritjhf: major Plans are also un- 

CARMELO MANZANO j ■ i . i 

tier consideration tor the 
President to visit other 
Left: dRh arturo rotor Central and South Ameri- 
can republics, ifc 





• 7* 



PHILIPPINES in the UNITED 



NATIONS 




In AN EPOCH-MAKING CEREMONY at the 
White House on June 15 7 1912, the Philippines 
was made a signatory to the Declaration hy United 
Nations. President Quezon signed the document on 
behalf of the Commonwealth, while Ambassador 
Francisco Castillo Najera subscribed to the treaty 
for the Republic of Mexico, They were, respectively, 
the 27th and 28th national leaders to commit their 
homelands to the world-wide undertaking. 

Adherence to the United Nations pact was of par- 
ticular importance to the Filipino people. For the 
first time in history, their government had become 
a party to an international agreement on terms of 
equality. President Quezon's signature on the agree- 
ment symbolized recognition by the democratic 
world of Philippine national identity. 

Following the Commonwealth's inclusion among 



PRESIDENT QUEZON addresses members of the Inter- 
American Defense Board following his arrival in Wash- 
ngton. Speaking in Spanish, he stressed the necessity 
for unity and preparedness. 

AFTER A MEETING of the Pacific War Council, President 
Quezon chats with the Chinese, Canadian, Australian and 
New Zealand members at the W hite House. 



the United Nations, President Quezon took a seat in 
the Pacific War Council, winch brings together rep- 
resentatives of the United States, Canada, Chin-t, 
Australia, New Zealand, and the Netherl ' A ~ 
Indies for consideration of Pacific strategy, 
meetings are held weekly in Washington, D. C 

By the terms of the Philippine Independence Act 
of 1934, under which the Commonwealth was estab- 
lished in Manila to govern until full independence 
was achieved in 1946, the foreign affairs of the 
islands were entirely in the hands of the United 
States. Even such domestic matters as the control 
of immigration had to be referred to President 
Roosevelt for approval- The ceremony of June 15, 
therefore, was tacit recognition of the fact that the 
Philippines has earned the right to stand on its 
own feet among the nations of the world, 



» 8 • 




HEN THE JAPANESE swept southward on Luzon 
early in the current war, the sole American naval base 
in the Far East, located on Subic Bay, a deep indentation 
in the Bataan Peninsula, fell to the onrushing invaders. 
The capture of Olongapo meant more than the loss of 
a key point to the enemy; it ended an era of indecision 
regarding American naval policy in the Far East. 

Olongapo was in fact a secondary base, too small and 
ill-equipped to service a fleet of any* great size. The 
absence of a great naval station in the Philippines, 
similar to the one at Singapore, was a severe handicap 
to the United States in combatting Japanese aggression. 
The vulnerability of the Philippines to sea attack has long 
been recognized, and the problem of maintaining a 
fleet there was debated for many years at Washington. 

Following the termination of the Spanish- American 
War, the protagonists of overseas expansion in the United 
Stales claimed that the natural advantages offered by the 
Opines, particularly its favorable geographical posi- 
- Guld best be translated into practical value by 
- ij*irncting a fortified naval base in the islands. Such a 
base, fully equipped to accommodate a large fleet, would 
have made it possible for the United States, through the 
effective use of sea power, to throw added weight behind 
its political and commercial policies in the Pacific. 

By 1900 the Navy Department had concluded that the 
former Spanish naval station at Cavite, located on a 
peninsula below Manila, was not the logical place for a 
first-class insular base. A commission of experts selected 
Olongapo, situated on Subic Bay about sixty miles north 
of the Philippines capital, as more appropriate. 

Prior to 1893, Spanish officers had repeatedly peti- 
tioned the authorities at Madrid concerning the neces- 



By James K. Eyre, Jr. 

sity of building a strong 
base at Olongapo for the pur- 
pose of protecting Manila 
from naval assault. Little 
was accomplished in this di- 
rection, however, Adhering 
to the practice of their Span- 
ish predecessors, American 
observers sent detailed re- 
ports to Washington regard- 
ing the advisability of be- 
ginning the Subic Bay proj- 
ect without further delay. 
The absence of adequate 
facilities for the docking and 
repairing of vessels pre- 
sented a problem demanding immediate attention, for the 
Phil ippines possessed no dock capable of holding a ship 
of more than LOGO tons displacement. 

Admiral Dew T ey exercised much influence in the de- 
termination of American naval policy during the period 
which followed the Spanish- American War. In Decem- 
ber, 1903, he made a terse statement to Congress in which 
he pointed out that the Joint Army and Navy Board was 
of the unanimous opinion that, without a protected base 
in the Philippines, the Asiatic Fleet under war conditions 
would not be able to keep open the supply lines from 
the United States, or between the army posts in the 
Islands, If this happened, American control of the insular 
possession would be seriously threatened. 

Responding to this challenge. Congress appropriated 
funds for the fortification of Subic and Manila Bays, but 
the question of a major naval base remained unsettled. 
Pending the clarification of policy at Washington, im- 
provements were made in the plant at Cavite, but its 
facilities were not expanded, with machinery and other 
equipment being gradually transferred to Subic Bay. 
Finally the floating drydock, Dewey, able to accommo- 
date vessels of the cruiser classes, was dispatched to 
Olongapo, This repair unit was used extensively although 
it had to be refloated after it sank at its moorings in 1910. 

After years of uncertainty, the Joint Army and Navy 
Board adopted a program in 1909 which assigned the 
Philippines a role of secondary importance in the 
grand strategy for the Pacific Ocean. The main naval 
bane was placed at Pearl Harbor. Hawaii, with small 
docking and repairing facilities to be maintained at 
Olongapo. It is probably not an exaggeration to stale 
that the failure to provide for a Philippine base had con- 

{ Turn to Page 23) 



• 9 • 














IN COMMON CAUSE 


111 ■• 




How Filipinos in the 
United States Are 
| ; A idingthe Wa> Effort; 










By Man u el A d&vtt w' m '-^ 



"JAPS BOMB MANILA" 

This headline in American newspapers on December 8, 
1941, electrified the Filipinos in the United States. Their 
reaction was instantaneous. They boycotted everything 
Japanese. Filipinos on the West Coast refused to work 
for Japanese farmers. 

In a circular letter, dated December 8, 1941 , J. M. 
Elizalde, Philippine Resident Commissioner in Wash- 
ington, informed Filipinos in the United States. Hawaii 
and Alaska that "the crucial hour, which we all had 
fervently hoped could be averted, is at hand. The United 



States and our country are 



now at war with Japan." 



He counselled them to "have faith in the courage and 
strength of our countrymen to make the severest sacrifices 
which may be demanded of them" and ". . . b e prepared 
to share the hardships and sufferings of our people." 

Commissioner Elizalde further urged them to "co- 
operate with the authorities in your communities in all 
that they do for the protection of the United States," 

™i „ «aI ^ y °, Ur Smices to the Civil i*n Defense Coun- 
cils. Above all," he reminded them, "be ready at all 
times to show that you are true Filipinos and loyal na- 
tionals of the L'nited States." 

Stirring messages were received by the Commissioner 
rom Filipino groups and from individuals all over the 
United States and Alaska. Without exception, they re- 
newed their pledge of loyalty to the Philippine Common- 
wealth and to the United States. Typical was this message 
from a student in New York City : "I am ready for the 
service of the Philippines and the United States anytime 
you need me." 

Immediately after Congress formally declared war 
against Japan. Filipinos renewed their agitation for a 
place in the United Stales A rmv. Commissioner Elizalde 
addressed a letter to the Secretary of War, advising him 
of the Filipino desire to serve in these critical times. In 
answer. Secretary Stimson gave assurance of his "ap- 
preciation for the courageous expression on the part of 
the Philippine peopled but regretted that "under our 
present law a person who is not a citizen of the United 
States may not be commissioned or enlisted in the 



MANUEL AD EVA 



Army* 7 ' Subsequently. Commissioner Elizalde brought 
the matter to the attention of [he President of the l'nited 
States, who wrote him the following: 

"Your assurances of the loyalty of the Filipino 
people as expressed in your letter of the 17th instant 
and their willingness to join with us in a common 
cause are greatly appreciated. 

"I am happy to say that Public Law 360— 77th 
Congress approved by me on December 20th now 
makes it possible for Filipinos to serve in the Army 
of the United Stales and I am informed that the War 
Department is now studying the best utilization of 
those who may volunteer for induction with the 
armed forces. 

"The courageous defense of their homeland, as now- 
being exhibited by the Filipino people, leaves no 
doubt in my mind that those residing in the United 
States will also serve with equal credit," 

Public Law 360 amends the Selective Training and 
Service Act of 1940, and classifies citizens of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines as American citizens for 
the purpose of induction into the armed forces of the 
United States. 

The desire of the Filipinos in the United States to fight 
side by side w r ith the Americans in a common cause 
made possible the announcement on February 19. 1942, 
by the Secretary of War, of the organization of the 1st 
Filipino Infantry Battalion, Army of the l'nited States, 
with station at Camp San Luis Obispo, California. Re- 
ferring to this announcement, the Secretary of War 
declared it to be '\ . . in recognition of the intense loyalty 
and patriotism of those Filipinos who are now residing 
in the United States," And President Roosevelt in a letter 
to Commissioner Elizalde on this matter, said : "The 
loyalty and courage of the Filipino people are an asset 

(Turn to Page 23) 



10 




• 11 • 




• 12 • 



The traditional Filipino bolo has a place in modern 
war — in this case, cutting grass for a machine- 
gun nest. 




A unit of Filipino soldiers marches with full kit 
under the watchful eye of a Filipino graduate of 
West Point. 




* 13 • 



PT PILOT 

★***★**★★*★**** 

A LTHOUGH he already holds six medals for braver) 
in action and will undoubtedly earn several more. 
Lieutenant John D. Bulkeley. L.S.N, will prohahly never 
have a more sincere admirer than Manuel Luis Quezon. 
The basis for this feeling is sound: Bulkeley personally 
brought the President of the Philippines through tun 
crises within six hours during the perilous dash from 
Corregidor to Australia. Had it not been for the skill and 
courage of this vouthful-looking hero. Quezon told his 
friends later, the President of the Philippines would 
probably today be either a prisoner of the Japanese, or 
dead in the Mindanao Sea. 

President Quezon and his party, moving slowly south- 
ward from Corregidor through the Visayan Islands of 
the Central Philippines, were on one of the southern 
islands when thev received word that General Douglas 
MacArthur had safely reached Australia. With this news 
came a message from MacArthur himself, asking the 
Quezon party to come to Melbourne at the earliest op- 
portunity. Two motor torpedo boats, the note added, 
would be waiting at a certain fishing village to transfer 
everyone across 100 miles of inland sea to the a.r fields 
of Mindanao. 

"About midnight, we drove down to the pier for our 
rendezvous," President Quezon recalled later. The PI 
boats had not arrived yet. Instead, I found a telegram 
from General Wainwright, advising me to cancel the trip 
because a number of Japanese destroyers had been re- 
ported cruising in the Mindanao Sea that day. Obediently, 
we turned around and drove back toward the place where 
we were staying. 

"A few minutes later we were overtaken by a car that 
was literally flying up the road. A tough-looking sea wolf, 
wearing a heavy black beard and a fierce expression 
jumped out and introduced lumself as L.eutenant 
Bulkelev. 

"<I most strongly urge you to rcvoiisider ' he told 
me. Til guarantee to get von through safely to Mindanao. 

-This voung pirate was so self-eon fident and seemed SO 
>uun b F r l P( .ided to disregard General 

capable that I promptly cieciutu 

m • • i , F • i ' ready to let Bulkeley try to 
Wainwright s warning. I was rtdU > « .1 , i , nf 
. i & * j Mil rWrovere m the world, ut 

take me past a the Japanese ciesmn 

• > n i. i i j m me in his shore uniform 

course, if Bulkelev had come to mt 
and without his heard, as he did * Australia he 
time I saw him. I never would have put my We m his 
hands. Shaved, he looked like sueh a youngster. 

Bulkelev's cool confidence was responsible for Presi- 
dent Quezon's escape from the Japanese, who almost cer- 




PRESIDENT QUEZON points to the Distinguished 
Conduct Star he conferred on Lieutenant Bulkeley 
for his exploits against Japanese naval forces in the 
Philippines. 



tainly would have captured him had he remained on the 
island. But it was Bulkelev's equally cool courage that 
saved the entire group from death before morning. 
Nearly 100 persons owe their lives to the quick work of 
Bulkeley. Ensign George Cox, Jr. of Niagara Falls. New 
York, Chief Torpedoman James D. Light of Vallejo, 
California, and Torpedoman First Class John L. Houlihan 
Jr. of Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts. 

The story of that perilous moment at night in the 
Mindanao Sea is told best by the Navy Department. 

"The safety of all on board was threatened at one 
juncture," this statement reported, "when heavy seas 
broke the retaining pins of two torpedoes, leaving the 
deadly missiles partly out of their tubes, their mechanism 
set for action. All were faced with death. 

"Lieutenant Bulkeley. Ensign Cox, Chief Torpedoman 
Light, and Torpedoman Houlihan calmly set about to 
release the torpedoes. Despite the heav\ seas sweeping 
flie small boat, the four made their way aft and employed 
a hammer to motivate the firing mechanism. The tor- 
pedoes plunged into the ocean." 

Lieutenant Bulkeley began collecting medals and cita- 
tions for bravery within a few days of the first Japanese 
attack on the Philippines. When he returned to the 1 nited 
States in May to enter the Naval Torpedo School at New- 
port, Rhode Island l"I don't know much about the theory 
of this business,* 5 he explained! he had earned the Nav) 
Cross, the Army's Distinguished Service Cross, an Oak 
Leaf cluster I in lieu of a second Distinguished Service 
Cross), an Armv Silver Star, and a Distinguished Con- 
duct Star from the Philippine Government In August he 
received from the hands of President Roosevelt America's 
highest award— the Congressional Medal of Honor. And 
all at the age of 32! ^ 



15 • 



From Manila to Washington (from page 3) 




IN THE ISLAND OF NEGROS the President made 
his headquarters for nearly a month. Members of his 
government scattered to the nearby islands, where they 
organized local resistance to the Japanese, and arranged 
food shipments to the beleaguered American and Filipino 
troops on Balaam 

The President was in frequent communication with 
General Mac Arthur and his staff on Corregidor. but 
was not informed in advance of the GeneraPs orders to 
go to Australia. On March 17, I flew from Del Monte, 
in the southern island of Mindanao, to Bacolod. I had 
seen the General board a Flying Fortress the day before, 
and had brought a letter from him. In it General Mac- 
Arthur invited the President to join him at his new head- 
quarters in Australia. The President immediately ac- 
cepted. 




AT DUMAGUETB LIEUTENANT JOHN BULKELEY 

picked us up with motor torpedo boat late on the night 
of March IB. The trip was rough but we landed safely, 
early the following morning, at Oroqnieta. mi the north 
shore of the great island of Mindanao. (See page 15 
of this issue for another story of that crossing). 

• 16 • 



After only a brief pause we continued to Jimenez, then 
to Dansalan, and from there proceeded to the headquar- 
ters of General Sharp, where we waited a few days for 
the planes that were to take us to Australia, 

Three Flying Fortresses dropped down on our field at 
dusk on March 26. We boarded them about midnight, and 
nine hours later we were breakfasting in Northern Aus- 
tralia. Even there the President's party was not entirely 
safe from the Japanese. While having breakfast we re- 
ceived word that a flight of bombers was heading our 
way. We soon were in the air again, heading for Mel- 
bourne, by way of Alice Springs, where we spent a night. 



ARRIVING SAFELY at the United Nations headquar- 
ters in Australia. President Quezon rejoined General Mac- 
Arthur five weeks after leaving Corregidor. The Presi- 
dent, worn by constant traveling, obeyed doctor's orders 
to rest completely until he was ready to leave for the 
( nited States. 




WE WERE IN AUSTRALIA a tittle over three weeks, 
Soon after our arrival, President Roosevelt renewed 
his kind invitation to President Quezon to have his 
headquarters in the United States. 

So, on April 21, 1942. the President boarded a large 




army transport (on which we had several times trav- 
eled when it was a luxury liner) with members of his 
family, his cabinet and staff. May 8 ? the day of our 




arrival in San Francis^ was made doubly happy 
by the knowledge thai we were safe and by the great 
news of the American naval victory in the Coral Sea, 

A week later we were in Washington, D, C. Stand- 
ing at the entrance to Union Station, with the graceful 
dome of the Capitol behind him, was President Roose- 




velt. His much appreciated personal welcome was the 
conclusion of a harrowing four-and-a-half month jour- 
ney from tLe stricken Philippine capital. That evening, at 
the White House, President Roosevelt and President Que^ 
zon began making plans for the return of democratic 
rule to the Philippines, it 



I Want to Know 

Information Division of Philippine 
Commissioner's Office Has 
Maps, Books, Pictures 

Invasion of the Philippines put l wo additional strains 
on the Information Division of the Office of the Philippine 
Resident Commissioner in Washington. Requests for in- 
formation on the Commonwealth have more than tripled 
since December 7. At the same time, the flow of docu- 
mentary material, photographs and personal reports from 
Manila has ceased. 

Despite this handicap, however, the Information Di- 
vision endeavors to assist all Americans seeking material 
on the Philippines. No charge is made for this service, 

Of particular importance to teachers, librarians and 
students is a 64-page booklet. Facts and Figures on the 
Philippines, issued early in 1942 by the Information Di- 
vision, Copies are available on request. The booklet con- 
tains a wealth of basic material on the Commonwealth. 

Maps of the Philippines (as well as mats to permit 
easy reproduction) are now stocked. These include a 
colored wall map, 32 by 58 inches, and smaller political 
and physical maps. 

In response to repeated requests, the Information Di- 
vision now has two sets of colored lantern slides on the 
Islands, These may be borrowed by responsible parties. 
A suggested lecture outline is included. 

Another popular feature is a selection of mounted en- 
larged photographs. These are suitable for exhibitions, 
and may be borrowed by responsible persons. 

Philippines, which is published by the Information 
Division for the purpose of making factual material on 
the Commonwealth widely available, goes to all news- 
papers, public libraries and chambers of commerce. It 
is also sent without charge upon request to individuals 
interested in the Philippines and its problems. 

The Information Division possesses a steadily dwin- 
dling supply of pamphlets on specialized aspects of the 
Philippines, The most popular are brief studies of some of 
the principal industries, an Atlas of Philippine Statistics, 
copies nf press releases, and transcripts of important 
speeches by Commonwealth officials. 

A current project of particular interest to many Ameri- 
cans is the compilation of a directory of former residents 
of the Philippines now living in the United States. When 
completed, the directory is expected to be available for 
general distribution. All former residents of the Islands 
are asked to cooperate by sending their own name and 
address, together with those of any friends who should 
be included, to the Information Division. Office of the 
Resident Commissioner. 1617 Massachusetts Avenue, 
Northwest. Washington, D. C. ^ 



• 17 • 




• IS • 



Sel{-Su§cleua f U QUININE 



* Mr, Tamcsis* article on cinchona was 
written prior to the Japanese invasion of 
the Philippines, No attempt Has been made 
to bring it lip to dale. 



I HE CINCHONA PLANTATION of the Philippine 
Bureau of Forestry in the province of Bukidnon, Min- 
danao, was the outgrowth of many years of investigation 
and planning on the part of Filipino and American medi- 
cal men. Conceived in the early years of this bureau, the 
project's feasibility has never been doubted. On the whole, 
conditions in Bukidnon are more or less similar to those 
obtaining in Java, where cinchona trees have been grown 
successfully for a century. We believed that, if a cin- 
chona plantation could be developed, we would progress 
a long way toward the control of malaria in the Philip- 
pines, since quinine, die must effective remedy- could 
then be made available al a price within the reach of 
the majority of our people. 

Malaria causes a tremendous annual economic loss 
and considerably retards the development of our remain- 
in- virgin agricultural lands. An adequate supply of low- 
cost quinine would probably remedy the human suffer- 
ing from this ill thereby accelerating the development 
of the industrial and agricultural enterprises. Fortunately, 
quinine is non-competitive and is greatly in demand. 

The Bureau of Forestry's first attempt lo grow cinchona 
lives was made al the mountain resort of Baguip i« L91X 
It failed. Another trial, made in 1916, gave partly 
positive results: out of the seeds sown, about 300 planls 
were obtained. This was encouraging, although only a 
few plants survived an unexpected disease. 

Studies of the growth requirements of this plant were 
continued, while, at the same time and in con junction 
with the reconnaissance and land classification work, 
the bureau attempted to locate sites that offered a better 
prospect than Baguio. As the result of this work, a tract 
of about 924 acres situated in Barrio Iinpalutao. mu- 
nicipality f) f Impasugong. province of Bukidnon, Min- 
danao, was selected for experimental culture of cinchona. 
Work was started on the new location by the Bureau of 
Forestry late in 1927 Seedling were raised from seeds 
purchased from Java, and in 1929 trim plantings were 
made at several points within the province. 

Following these planting*, several other sites were 
examined. As a result of this work, a tract ol U&ll 
hectares (aboui 3 267 acre) in Kaatoan, uuunnpaliU 
of Malaybalav, Bukidnon Province, was proclaimed a 
forest reserve. This reservation comprises part of the 
southern slopes of Kitangland Mountain, with an alti- 
tude ranging from 4.100 "to 6-500 feet above sea level. 
The climate and other environmental factors prevailing 



By Florencio Tamesis* 
Directory of Forestry- Manila 



in the area are quite similar to those of the regions of 
Java where cinchona trees have been successfully culti- 
vated for years. 

In the big Kaatoan reserve we now have no less than 
1.300.000 cinchona trees. An adequate seed supply is now 
being produced, and the plantation is being extended. 
The whole reservation will be devoted to cinchona trees 
within a few years. Similar projects will then be started 
at other points in Mindanao: our plan is lo establish 
and maintain on a 10-year rotation basis several planta- 
tions of about 2.500 acres each. 

Concurrently with the extensive planting program, 
basic research projects are being undertaken. Studies 
are in progress on the growth and yield of the four 
species of cinchona under cultivation, namely; C. led- 
geriana. C, hybrid a. C. sued rubra, and C. officinalis. The 
first three species are of Javanese origin and the last is 
from Hawaii. It is gratifying to state in this connection 
that the rate of growth of these plants in Kaatoan 
compares favorably with that of the same species grown 
in Java. Recently seeds of C. cahsaya and a high yield- 
strain of C. ledgeriatia were obtained. Seedlings of these 
two are at present under culture and so far are growing 
successfully. 

I'p to now. cinchona ledge nana has been the most 
promising species, insofar as Weld in alkaloid and adapt* 
ability to Philippine conditions are concerned. 

Two sets of problems are being worked oul by the 
men directly in charge of the Kaatoan Cinchona Plan- 
tation. These problems refer to the improvement of 
cinchona stocks, and the control of pest and disease 
enemies of cinchona. 

1 wo beetles. Mefapocyttus appoejisis Schultze and M. 
rufithorax Heller, attack cinchona trees. The larvae feed 
on the roots and the adults on the leaves. Aside from 
these inserts, a soil-borne fungus. Stigeosporium Cin- 
chona? Holdau Sp. nov.. develops canker on the trees 
and causes blight to the seedlings. However, these pest 
and disease enemies are under control. 

From all indications the future outlook of the cin- 
chona planting project of the Bureau of Forest r\ is very 
encouraging, The Commonwealth Government is whole- 
heartedly behind this undertaking. The Philippine Na- 
tional Assembly- during its last regular session in 1941. 
enacted legislation authorizing the establishment, cultiva- 
tion, maintenance, and development of cinchona planta- 
tions in public forest lands, and appropriated the neces- 
sary funds. The bill, approved by the President of the 
Philippines, became effective on June 12, 1941, jr 



• 19 



ff NEWS" from 
the PIHL1PPIXES 



Mi HE activity of the German radio in dissemi- 
nating Nazi propaganda is well-known- However, 
few Americans are acquainted with the short-wave 
barrage from the Japanese transmitters in Toyko 
and the occupied capitals of Asia. The following 
excerpts are typical of Japanese * 4 news ? * about the 
Philippines. These notes are presented verbal im 
and without comment. Readers should keep in 
mind that publication in PHILIPPINES does not 
indicate acceptance. The purpose of these broad- 
casts was not to provide news, hut to convince 1 the 
listener that resistance to Japan is useless* 



June 7 — Manila to beam unknown, in English: 

"Twenty Filipino Bank officials have been shot and 
three others sentenced to long prison terms for issuing 
bogus Japanese military notes- Hand reds of bills began 
to appear around February 5. ... 28 others have been 
court martialed and sentenced for various offenses, in- 
cluding espionage, the spreading of false rumors, arson, 
robbery, and assault. (Manila: June 8) 44 persons have 
been sentenced to death for violation of Japanese law 
in the Philippines , . , 11 others . , . sentenced to long 
terms. . . - Let us alt help to better the Philippines by 
not doing these things/' 



June 8— Tokyo to beam unknown: 

"The [Japanese] Cabinet will select a committee of 
its own members to give new names to areas occupied 
by the Japanese . . . Asiatic names will replace American. 
British and Dutch names/' (Singapore has already been 
rechristened Shortan in honor of the Emperor.) June 2\ 
—■'With an idea of eradicating the American color from 
everything, primary schools in the Philippines will in 
lhe future be named after Filipino pioneers or heroic 
Filipino generals. . . . Three primary schools in Manila 
have already put this into practice;* 1 



June 26 — Manila to beam unknown: 

"To avoid farther bloodshed and unnecessary loss of 
life, the Japanese imperial forces will guarantee the safety 
of the lives of the people provided they give themselves 
up not later than the end of this month, June, 1942. 
Those who will not surrender will be rapidly put to trial 
and punished to the full extent of the existing military 



law. So do not repent too iale by continuing your stupid 
resistance and letting the first chance for you to surrender 
slip by." 

June 26 — Tokyo to North America, in English: 

"Japanese Military Authorities in the Philippines on 
May 2 declared the invalidity of legal Peso notes, pro- 
hibiting their circulation."' ( While it is not so stated, 
presumably Japanese-issued currency has been put into 
circulation to replace the regular peso. The radio states 
that no currency shortage has resulted from the change.) 

* * * * 

June 24 — Tokyo to North America; 

"The Japanese headquarters in the Philippines ■ 
yesterday announced that all sick and wounded prisoners 
in the Philippines will be released shortly." 

June 25 — Tokyo to Italy, in Italian: 

"These men are to return to their homes, recover their 
health, and get rid of the mentality acquired under the 
domination of the United States so they can become active 
forces in the collaboration among Asiatic peoples. Lib- 
eration of prisoners who are neither sick nor wounded 
will take place when the Philippines shows signs of readi- 
ness to collaborate/ 3 

July 2 — Tokyo to North America, in English: 

'"Jorge Vargas, chief administrator of the Philippines 
was pleased to hear that his son, Jorge Vargas, Jr., was 
among the Filipino war prisoners recently released bv 
the Japanese military authorities to return to their 
homes. Young Vargas . . . had been forcibly taken by the 
Americans to Corregidor Island after the outbreak of 
the present war to serve there . . . until the Japanese 
captured the fortified island/' 

June 28^—ManiIa to beam unknown, j n English: 

"Here is a statement issued by the military police- It 
is believed that the order for the release of prisoner 
brought hope. It is too bad that certain elements are 
jeopardizing the chances of all prisoners to be released 
These men implicate relatives. The military police cannot 
tolerate this, and action will be taken. They must not 
obstruct the full working of the administration The 
families of prisoners get our full sympathy. The families 
are urged to have full confidence in the Japanese Army. 
If you come in contact with this disgruntled element, 
noUiy the police. 

f * ::- * g 

July 8— Tokyo to Japan and Japanese Empire, hi 
Japanese: 

"The Philippine expeditionary forces recently forbade 
political assemblies and political societies. However, in 
view of the fact that there are some obstructing construc- 
tion of the new Philippines, the authorities again issued a 
severe warning, pointing out that such elements do not 
understand our true motives. Those who violate the 
icjjiilalions will be punished." 



• 20 • 



MINDANAO... LAND OF PROMISE 



By Ernesto D, Ilustre 



L\ING i-lose to the f aided Indies, the creat undeveloped 
island of Mindanao in the southern Philippines is the 
most distant and the most picturesque territory under 
the American flag. Its rugged- always-green landscape, its 
mighty rivers lined for mile after mile with lush man- 
grove forests, above all, its gaily dressed and befezzed 
Moslem people, have given Mindanao a eharm all its own. 
Comparable in many ways to that of Bali, a few hundred 
miles to the south. 

Most of the million people of Mindanao are an ad- 
mixture of Chinese. Malnv. and Arabian racial strains 
who were so thorough lv converted to the Islamic faith 
that they repulsed with almost fatalistic courage every 
attempt hv the Spaniards to convert them to Christianity. 
Possessing a culture of their own. they used the Arabic 
system of writing and were trading with nearby Borneo, 
Java. Sumatra, and the Spice Islands and such faraway 
places as the Malay Peninsula, India, and Arabia, even 
before the discovery of America by Columbus. As early as 
the 13th century." swift prows with curiously carved 
Arabian designs and big bamboo outnggers were dis- 
charging valuable cargoes from the Near East m 

Mindanao harbors, &tii*i^ H h 
Contrary to widespread belief, the Moros of Mindanao 
do not differ racially from the Visayan, Tagalog. and 
Ilocano people to the north There «g*J* rat ' al 
» , t . cnpvnr although He difference of re- 
am most Lv whatsoever, mwou&u » 

ligion occasionally generate, bad feehng. Sponge Ot* 
breaks in the past, which had to be quelled by both 
American and Filipino authorities, were primarily caused 
by brigandage or by religious fanat.c.sm. which hardlj 
presented the general feeling of the Moros 

With the object or improving their lot. President 
Oue/on made it a cardinal policy of the Commonwealth 
Government to protect the social, political, economic, and 
reli-inus interests of the Moro people. So popular and 
widespread was the response to this mm* Iff the Moros 
the.nilves that they were exercising their rights of 
suffrage at every recent election. One Moro recently won 
a seat hi the Philippine Congress, and quite a number hold 
responsible government positions. 

Mindanao occupies a position m the Pluhppmcs com- 
parable to that of the West in the United Mates of the 
earlv eighties. In fact, many FiUpWQ 
Horace Greeley's advice and say. "Go to Mindanao, young 
,., * i | . „.u flt Mindanao really oilers, 
man ! And knowing Wtiat " llllu ° . , , , 

Filipinos could give no wiser advice. Sparsely populated, 
but with an area of 36,906 unbelievably fertile square 
miles-slightlv larger than the state of Ind.ana-it IS a 

1 i r i j, ; lv for the industrious and 

land of boundless opportuiiit) U,J 

Uiose willing to do pioneering work. 

Zamboanga Province, for instance, has more than 
2,000,000 acres of commercial forest and fertile coastal 



plains. The city of Zamboanga — the name is Moro dia- 
lect for "the place of the mooring poles 7 " — was the site of 
the L nited Slates* most remote military outpost. This post 
was built around a great stone fortress, constructed three 
centuries ago by the Spaniards and called by them the 
Royal Fortress of Our Lady of Pilar of Zaragosa. The 
Americans renamed it Pet tit Barracks. Zamboanga City is 
a port of great importance in the South. 

In Cotabato Province, possessing fertile valleys that 
stretch to the horizon, one of the resettlement projects 
undertaken by the Commonwealth Government is lo- 
cated. Besides having 2,000.000 acres of commercial 
forest, the province has over a million acres of untitled 
land available for agriculture. It has been said that in this 
province alone the Philippines could grow enough rice 
to meet all its needs. 

One of the great Manila hemp centers. Davao Province, 
has nearly half a million acres of land devoted exclusive!} 
to the cultivation of abaca, the fiber that is so essential 
for navies and merchant marines. Ramie, first produced 
at Davao on an experimental basis, promises to become 
another important crop. The ramie fiber is used for 
textile manufacturing. 

Several gold mines were operating in Davao Province 
before the war. Although their annual production did 
not compare with that of the Benguet district or the Bicoi 
provinces in the North, their output was considerable and 
expanding steadily. In the valleys that border the Davao 
River, cattle raising was being carried on to such an ex- 
tent that the Philippines promised to attain self-sufficiency 
in beef in the next few years. 

Bukidnon Province has another million acres available 
for agriculture and has been proclaimed ideal for pine- 
apple production. One important American canning com- 
pany had a plantation in adjoining Misamis Oriental 
Province that sent $2,500,000 worth of canned pineapple 
Lo the United States annually. Agusan Province, besides 
having very fertile valleys, has gold and gypsum in its 
subsoils. Surigao. fronting the Pacific Ocean, produces 
hemp and alcohol from its nipa palms. Its great iron ore 
deposits, reserved by the Philippine Government, contain 
an estimated half billion Ions. The two Misamis— Mis- 
amis Oriental and Misamis Occidental — have fertile 
coastal plains, ideal for growing coconuts, hemp, and 
bananas, Fishing is their most important industry. 

Basilan Island at the tip of Zamboanga Province has 
great promise as the center of rubber cultivation. Its soil, 
its extensive river system, its even temperature through- 
out the year, its abundant but cmistani rainfall, and the 
absence of hphoons and high winds, all ronlnhnle to its 
value for ru liber culture. The rubber thai could be grown 
in Basilan and in Mindanao proper could probably meet 
the world's demand for rubber. ^ 



• 21 • 




• 22 ■ 



In Common Cause (from Page 10) 

of incalculable value in the struggle for freedom which 
the world now witnesses. 1 think it especially fitting that 
the soldierly qualities of the Filipinos in the United States 
are thus to be recognized, 

The Filipinos responded enthusiastically to this an- 
nouncement. By the 15th of July, the Filipino Battalion 
had grown into a regiment. The soldiers hope that a full 
division composed wholly of Filipinos will soon be 
organized. 

In addition to enlisting in the army, thousands of 
Filipinos are employed in United Stales navy yards, on 
U. S. Army transports, in the merchant marine, and in 
defense industries. Many others are employed in the 
various branches of the Federal Government. Still others 
have volunteered for service with the Civilian Defense 
Councils in their communities. 

Believing that in winning this war, the production of 
food is as vital as the production of munitions, thousands 
of Filipinos, especially on the West Coast, are returning 
to the farm. Throughout the West, they are engaged in 
planting, thinning, weeding, and harvesting vegetable 
and fruit crops. 

Realizing the extreme privations which their families 
face in the Philippines, organized Filipino communities 
and National Councils have held benefits and solicited 
funds to further the work of the American Red Cross in 
the Philippines. They have also contributed liberally to 
the Relief Funds of the other United Nations. 

Service, money, life— those are the contributions of 
the Filipinos to the successful prosecution of this war 
which, in the words of our President, Manuel U Quezon. 
IB fought "to secure for all peoples the essential freedoms 
pr^claatied by President Roosevelt— freedom of thought 
and expression, freedom of religion, freedom from want, 
and freedom from fear." Filipinos believe m these free- 
doms. No sacrifice is too great in their attainment. 

Filipinos in the United States and Hawaii, no matter 
w fml their occupation, are digging in and doing their 
*vel best to aid the United States in her war program. 
\ President Quezon has said, "We stand with the United 
SU\^ U IHe and in death." * 

Otonaspo (from Page 9) 

siderable effect upon the subsequent development of 
American policy for the entire Far Eastern area. 

Once discarded, the Olongapo project was never re- 
vived. When the Japanese treacherously attacked the 
Philippines in December, 1941. the ancient floating dry- 
dock still operating at the Subic Bay «te bore mute 
testimony to the grandiose plans formerly entertained by 
American naval strategists. Forced to retreat from 
Olongapo, United Stales Navv personal removed the 
Dewey t<> the waters near Corregidor, where it was util- 
ized as a makeshift repair shop by the gallant American 
artd FMIphm defenders- When the end appeared near, 
the battered drvdoek was blown up in order lu prevent its 
falling into the hands of the eiiem). ^ 



Filipino Footnotes 



-AMERICAN writers and editors stick stubbornly and 
mistakenly to the plural verb when predicating the nouiu 
Philippines. The Constitution of the Philippines, formu- 
lated in English and approved by the President of the 
United States, employs a singular verb to predicate the 
Philippines. For the phrase. Philippine Islands- however, 
the plural verb is used. Thus, the Philippines is* and 
the Philippine Islands are. 

★ ★ ★ 

XhE UNITED STATES has a land area 25 times that 
of the Philippines. But its coast line is less than one-half 
that of the Philippine archipelago. In order properly to 
guard Philippine waters, therefore, the Commonwealth 
could have used pro lit ably twice as many coast guard 
vessels as the United States, 

it * * 

T 

XHE most popular adult recreation in our Philippine 
towns is coekfighting. whieh is featured every Sunday 
and other holidays. This sport has become a second 
vocation for many of the older folk, especially the men 
of the passing generation. While cockfight ing" might be 
said to be a form of legalized gambling, its excitement 
unquestionably serves to break the oppressive monotony 
of the prosaic life of the poor, 

★ ★ * 

T 

1 HE most popular sports in the Philippines are base- 
ball, boxing, tennis, and volley-ball, games introduced by 
the Americans. In boxing, the Philippines contributed a 
world champion, Pancho Villa, flyweight, while others 
have been recognized in the United States as near* 
champions, such as Ceferino Garcia. Small Montano. 
Little Dado. At present no Filipino boxer seems suffici- 
ently outstanding to rate as a real contender for a world 
crown, 

★ ★ * 

T 

± HERE are seven chartered cities in the Philippines- 
Manila. Baguio ? Hoilo. Cebu, Zamboanga, Davao, and 
Bacolod. While Manila is the biggest in point of popula- 
tion, Zamboanga is the world's largest city in point of 
land area. New York City covers 320 square miles. Zanv 
boanga occupies 1,059 square miles. 

★ ★ ★ 

THE PHILIPPINES uses the metric svstent o[ nunw 
unwul. It M in operation long before ihe \monran 
occupation. 



* 23 • 



JL AMERICAN RED CROSS 
utL PHILIPPINES 



By Alwyn Knight 



1 HOSE Fil ipinos were 
splendid, especially the 
Scouts," 

The speaker was Juanita 
Redmond, one of 22 nurses 
recruited by the American 
Red Cross for the Army, 
who were evacuated from the 
Philippines to Australia. 

"The Philippine nurses 
who worked with us were 
man clous, too/' Miss Red- 
mond continued. "They were 
well trained and utterly fear- 
less, ft will be nice to work 
with them again — and we 
=halir 

1 talked to Miss Redmond 
at an affair recently given 
in Washington in honor of five of the heroic American 
nurses Each of the five I approached praised the valor 
and ability of both Filipino soldiers and nurses. 

American Red Cross has recruited thousands of 
nurses tor the Army and Navy, It is common knowledge 
nia many participated in the last-ditch fight at Bataan 
J? CoTregidox with their Filipino allies. But this-the 
tecniiting of nurses for military dutv— is only one of 
6mCeS rent,€red the Philippines by the American 
Pl ;1 . l ° SS? * Panned program carried on through the 
IWippmo Chapter of the Society 

up to December 3L 1941, the American Red Cross 
^ expended $316,744 for Philippine relief, and it is 
! , to exter «d further relief whenever operations 
St , me P^JCabk. Obviously this will not be 
fuVh ? ternalif,nal Red Cross Committee is success- 
ive 1 - 1 1 " in 8 a representative in the Islands to guarantee 
e impartial distribution of supplies. It goes without 

'VnV r eVer - thhlg l 3Q ^ ible is beill £ done ' 
Ch 11 r ei ? lar ' es lister, its manager, the Philippine 

mioni ° t American Red Cross built a stron s or ^ an '- 
vasion " se ™ice. At the time of the Japanese ln- 

BfepB ** ,ta P10grani int 'luded instruction in first aid and 
qualified^ m ^ ome nurs i n g> Nurse's aides were being 
i 1Urs \ a . S ^ ui( % as possible to replace registered 
i( . (1 WS ,lml,,fl <^ewhere. The Chapters prodm -Lion sen - 

ot uJmt i. dire !' tion oi Mrs - Franci * B - wife 

In ldriv ^''nmissioner. was accomplishing miracles, 
tfcfe* w ' the Cha l**r had a War Relief Inquiry Scrv- 

iiHvil^if 0 ""* 1 "^' ' M r ' vii ' an rpli<jf and mililar> and 
U;Ua,p W( >rk. and but! built a strung disaster relief 

• 24 * 




Filipino Red Cross Nurses in Bataan 



organization, a nursing serv- 
ice, and a Junior Red Cross 
— the latter a service pro- 
gram for school children. 

The sailing of the Red 
Cross "mercy" ship, Macttuu 
was one of the dramatic 
highlights of the war. Just 
before Manila fell. General 
Mac Arthur asked the Ameri- 
can Red Cross to evacuate 
200 wounded men. The Mac- 
tiw was chartered by cable, 
painted with Red Cross flags 
and emblem, placed under 
the direction of Irving Wil- 
liams, Red Cross field direc- 
tor at Manila, and staffed 
with doctors and nurses 
from the Philippine Red Cross Chapter—all within 24 
hours. Safe conduct was provided by the Japanese govern- 
ment, despite rumors to the contrary, and the wounded 
were taken safely to an Australian port. 

Following the opening of hostilities, the responsibil- 
ities delegated to the Red Cross in the Philippine ii: 
creased enormously. Cabled reports from Manage; o: 
ster give you an idea: 

"Our emergency services have slood the . . . 

Evacuation of Manila and other areas proceeding under 
our administration. ... We are acting immediately on all 
reports of relief needs as they come in* . . . Philcro^s 
( Philippine Red Cross) is and has been entirely re^ 
sponsible for evacuation and welfare of evacuees. . . . 
Our work is going along smoothly; we plan to get food 
and relief materials through to all affected areas. 1 ' 

One of the last cables received staled: "With swiftly 
moving events, and under prevailing conditions, difficult 
to report number now receiving material relief. Our 
estimate is 120,000 at a cost of S450.000 per mouth. The 
peak relief load may reach 500,000 persons/' 

Eight emergency hospitals were in operation on Decem- 
ber 31, 1941, with twelve more about to be established. 

Next came this cable: ^One hundred thousand per- 
sons were evacuated from Manila following and in the 
midst of air raids. Ahrmsl as orderly as our practice 
evacuation. . . /' 

Then llie Japanese army entered Manila. The pall of 
silence that descended over our eommunk at ions with the 
Philippine rapila) has not \et been lifted. When it is* 
il will reveal more valiant work by the Red Cross. ^ 




evacuation for citizens of Manila. young English evacuee from Hongkong. 



