•V 









The Reestablishment of the Commonwealth 

Government of the Philippines in Manila 

February 27, 1945 


The Induction Into Office of the Members of 
the Philippine Cabinet at Malacahan 
March 8, 1945 



Addresses of 

The Honorable Sergio Osmeha 

President of the Philippines 




Extension of Remarks of 

Hon. C. jasper Bell 

of Missouri 
in the 

House of Representatives 
Friday, April 20, 1945 



Not printed 
at Government 
expense 

United States Government Printing Office, Washington : 1945 



642670—11334 










I ' 



1 










PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE JC) *h CONGRESS, FIRST SESSION 



Addresses of President Sergio Osmena 



EXTENSION OP REMARKS 

OF 

HON. C. JASPER BELL 

OF MISSOURI 

IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

Friday , April 20, 1945 

Mi*. BELL. Mr. Speaker, I take pleas- 
ure in inserting into the Record at this 
time two speeches delivered in Manila by 
President Sergio Osmena of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines. 

These are great speeches. Every Amer- 
ican should read them not only because 
President Osmena in words of stirring 
eloquence has voiced the hopes and pa- 
triotic sentiments of the Filipino people 
but because both of these great utter- 
ances are moved by a spirit of devotion 
and love of liberty which is dear to the 
heart of every true American. 

These speeches for generations to come 
will be read and appreciated not only by 
millions of Filipino people who will thank 
him for his inspired leadership at this 
time but also by thoughtful Americans 
who will realize that he spoke as a chosen 
instrument for the purpose of keeping 
alive the fires of liberty in that far-off 
oriental country. 

I commend both of these speeches to 
your thoughtful reading: 

642670—11334 (3) 



ADDRESS DELIVERED BY PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA 
ON THE OCCASION OF THE REESTABLISHMENT 
OF THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT OF THE 
PHILIPPINES IN MANILA, FEBRUARY 27, 1945 

My fellow countrymen, this Is an historic 
event in an historic city. From the time our 
Malay ancestors founded it more than eight 
centuries ago, colonial powers have fought 
for its conquest and domination. The Span- 
iards, the Dutch, the English, a Chinese pirate, 
our revolutionary fathers, have all vied with 
each other and shed blood for its possession; 
because its conquest has always meant the 
ultimate control of the entire archipelago. 
But today’s event is different from any of the 
previous conquests and victories. The pres- 
ent victory of American arms is not a victory 
for power, control or domination, but a vic- 
tory for freedom, democracy and independ- 
ence. 

In sharing with you today the exhultation 
over the triumph of American arms, let us 
bow our heads in reverent memory of our 
sacred dead and the dead of our Allies, whose 
lives are the forfeit that these, our liberties, 
might be restored. We mourn the destruc- 
tion of cur once beautiful capital city of Ma- 
nila and the murder of thousands of innocent 
people by the Japanese vandals, but this lat- 
est dastardly act of a savage enemy which 
has aroused the conscience of an outraged 
world should steel us to the firm resolve to 
continue the fight with every ounce of our 
strength until he shall have bsen completely 
vanquished. 

To President Roosevelt who, in our grim 
days in Corregldor and Bataan, solemnly 



* 



6 



esses of our Government, disrupted by the 
enemy. United and in close cooperation with 
the United States, we can win for ourselves 
and our children all the blessings of de- 
mocracy, freedom, and security for which we 
have sacrificed so much in this titanic strug- 
gle against the brutal forces of tyranny and 
oppression. 

ADDRESS OP PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA ON THE 
OCCASION OP THE INDUCTION INTO OFFICE OF 
THE MEMBERS OF HIS NEW CABINET AT 
MALACANAN, MARCH 8, 194 5 

My fellow countrymen, today I have in- 
ducted into office the members of my new 
cabinet. I wish to take advantage of this 
occasion when the heads of our various ex- 
ecutive departments are installed in their 
posts to summarize in rough outline the de- 
velopments of the war during the last 3 years 
as they affected the functioning of our Com- 
monwealth Government and the carrying 
out of the independence program as agreed 
upon between the United States and the 
Philippines. I wish also to lay down the 
basic principles that will guide us as we 
reestablish the Commonwealth Government 
in our capital city. 

I would like my coworkers in the govern- 
ment to always bear ill mind- two cardinal 
thoughts: First, That there should always 
be a close relationship between the people 
and their government, and to achieve this 
the government must take the people into 
its confidence. Second, that our govern- 
ment, as it is today, is the product of Philip- 
pine-American collaboration and that every 
effort should be exerted to maintain and 
foster closer relationship between the two 
peoples. 

The Japanese occupation of the Philip- 
pines was not only a military invasion; it 
was also an ideological and cultural invasion. 
It was an attempt to foist on our people the 
invader’s totalitarian ideas, his spirit of con- 
quest and exploitation, his theories of the 
642670—11334 



superiority of the Yamato race, his way of 
life. 

The Filipinos soon found this out, and 
closing their ears to the alluring promises 
of the enemy, put up a brave and determined 
opposition. They continued the struggle 
even after organized military resistance, so 
gallantly maintained by American and Fili- 
pino soldiers, had to cease before the over- 
whelming numerical superiority of the 
enemy. 

Now that the veil of secrecy imposed by 
military necessity surrounding the Philip- 
pines has been lifted, the outside world has 
obtained glimpses of the brave and heroic 
deeds of our guerrillas, the intrepid expo- 
nents of popular resistance. All honor to 
these soldiers of liberty who brilliantly con- 
tinued the epic fight of the heroes of Bataan. 
It would be an error, however, to believe that 
the struggle was limited to the sphere of ac- 
tion of the guerrillas. The fountain springs 
were wider and deeper — they were in the very 
soul of the people itself. Coming from the 
ranks of the people, the guerrillas were in 
reality the people’s army. For this reason, 
the enemy, inherently despotic and cruel, 
laid violent hands on the people. But in 
spite of his repressive measures, resistance 
persisted all over the country — on the plains 
as in the mountains, in the population cen- 
ters as in the remote barrios, in the north- 
ernmost islands, in the southernmost tip of 
the country. It was the common will of the 
people; it was the entire nation, resolved to 
oppose at any cost, domination by the in- 
vader. 

Throughout 3 long years of misery and 
suffering, of persecution and sacrifices, the 
Filipino people remained faithful to their 
ideals. The military control by the enemy 
in certain areas, especially near the coasts, 
did not for a moment break the absolute and 
complete moral resistance of the people 
through the length and breadth of the land. 



7 



To represent this will of the people and to 
act on their behalf abroad, and especially in 
the United States, the highest officials of 
your constitutional Government accepted the 
invitation of the President of the United 
States to evacuate Corregidor, transferring 
the seat of government to Washington. This 
step was authorized by an act of the national 
assembly. The Commonwealth officials real- 
ized that so long as we maintained the 
nucleus of the Commonwealth government 
abroad through its head, the President, and 
his cabinet, and by means of the emergency 
powers given him by the national assembly, 
our legal status under international law 
would not be changed, even if the enemy 
were able militarily to occupy all of the Phil- 
ippine Territory. It is well known that mere 
military occupation of a Territory does not 
confer sovereign rights on the invading army. 
Thus, despite the Japanese invasion, our 
constitutional government was not only 
saved from destruction, but continued to 
function in Washington. It was officially 
recognized by the United States and the 
other 42 countries constituting the impor- 
tant international group known as the 
United Nations. 

Working closely with the Government of 
the United States, your government, during 
its stay in that country, set before itself the 
following objecrives: 

1. To maintain the interest oi the Ameri- 
can people in the redemption of the Philip- 
pines as a sacred obligation which had been 
assumed by the United States: 

2. To speed up the preparation of the nec- 
essary men, materiel, and plans for the re- 
conquest of the Philippines; 

3. To accelerate the advent of our inde- 
pendence; 

4. To obtain adequate guaranties of the 
permanence of our political independence; 

6. To work for our economic rehabilitation 
and stability as the material foundation of 
our independent structure. 

642670—11334 



All these objectives have been substantially 
achieved. 

The successful landing of the liberating 
forces under the command of General Mac- 
Arthur in Leyte, Mindoro, Lingayen, Zam- 
bales, Batangas, Bataan, and Corregidor, fol- 
lowed by the complete occupation of the city 
of Manila, represents a partial but eloquent 
reply to our appeals to the United States for 
aid in our redemption. The might of Amer- 
ica which has destroyed in a few weeks all 
the power built up by Japan in years will 
continue to be employed until every vestige 
of the invasion has disappeared from our 
soil. 

” We were on the road to independence in 
accordance with the program agreed upon be- 
tween the United States and the Philippines 
when Japan treacherously attacked us, bent 
on taking away that freedom from us. The 
leaders of your government have taken the 
necessary steps in the United States so that 
the realization of this independence program 
would not be delayed in spite of the war. 
Not only is the speedy realization of this 
program already assured, but' we have ob- 
tained a new and important concession from 
the United States: the formal pledge that 
our independence will be guaranteed. 

Having been a member during the last 20 
years of various Philippine missions sent to 
the United States, I may say that during our 
negotiations for independence with the lead- 
ers of the two principal parties in the United 
States, we had never before found any in- 
terest among them in the protection of our 
independence, once granted. The best that 
we heard from our sympathizers was that 
since we wanted to be independent, and since 
independence had been promised, it would be 
given to us; but once given, our political con- 
nection with the United States would be 
definitely terminated. This aroused in the 
minds of many of us serious concern as to 
the future of oUr independent Philippines. 
Living in the Orient, surrounded by coun- 



or God-chosen rulers, and we hereby reaffirm 
our devotion to the principle of popular sov- 
ereignty, of a government of the people, for 
the people, and by the people. 

We believe in the superiority of a respon- 
sible democracy, peaceful and law-abiding, 
loyal to its institutions and determined to 
fight for its way of life over a degenerate 
fascism and totalitarianism with its regi- 
mented lives, devoid of wills of their own. 

Wc shall reestablish in our country a so- 
cial and political system which is founded 
on mutua 1 faith, honesty, and confidence and 
not on suspicion, corruption, and fear, and 
in which government officials and employees 
are not the masters of the people but their 
servants, acting as necessary instrumentali- 
ties through which the public good and the 
individual welfare may be advanced and 
safeguarded. 

We denounce the barbarous doctrine of 
collective responsibility for individual acts 
under which thousands of innocent men and 
women have met their death. 

We stand for the individual liberties, guar- 
anteed by our Constitution, for the right of 
every man and woman to enjoy life, liberty, 
and the pursuit of happiness. 

We reject the theory of the existence of 
chosen or superior races; we hold to the self- 
evident truth that no particular race has a 
monopoly on the capacity for progress and 
self-government. 

We believe in the universality of culture, 
and we shall seek the implements of progress 
in whatever source they may be found. 

We reaffirm our faith in the principle of 
Philippine-American collaboration, its work- 
ability having been successfully tested both 
in peace and In war. This principle has 
been responsible for the unparalleled prog- 
ress of our country during the last 46 years. 
It is a guarantee for the permanence of 
Christian civilization in the Orient. 

642670—11334 



We reiterate our adherence to the Atlantic 
Charter signed by the United Nations, of 
which we are one, for in that document they 
expressed their desire to effect no territorial 
changes that do not accord with the freely 
expressed will of the people concerned, and 
“to respect the right of all peoples to chose 
the form of government under which they 
will live.’* 

We believe in the efficacy of the principle 
of collective security as a guaranty of world 
peace and the best assurance of the settle- 
ment of international disputes not by the 
arbitrament of arms but by the processes of 
peace and justice. The legislation providing 
for the use, after the independence of the 
Philippines, by the United States of naval 
and air bases here for the mutual protection 
of the Philippines and the United States is 
a concrete example of the application of this 
principle. It is a mutual agreement designed 
not only for the protection of both nations 
but as a contribution to the peace of the 
Pacific region and the collective ■ security of 
the nations of the world. 

We stand for a new world free from want 
and fear, provided with greater safeguards 
for lasting peace and offering ample oppor- 
tunities for friendly negotiations and judi- 
cial adjudication of international disputes 
and the self-development of nations. We are 
ready to take part, in close association with 
the United States, in any international pact 
based on justice and directed toward the 
organization and preservation of the peace of 
the world. 

On these principles we take our stand. 

By the miseries, the sufferings, and the 
sacrifices undergone by our people during 
their iong night of captivity; 

By the smoke that even now rises from 
our ravaged cities, towns, and villages; 

By the blood, Filipino as well as American, 
which was poured out so unstintedly at Ba- 
taan and on Corregidor; in the hills of Leyte, 




the mountains and plains of Luzon, and all 
over the Philippines; 

We call on the God of Nations to witness, 
for ourselves and for a people welded into 
one in the crucible of fire, this pledge to 



consecrated the determined prosecution of 
jthis war until final victory is achieved, our 
lives, that which our fathers have bequeathed 
to us and without which life would be mean- 
ingless — our sacred honor. 



V 

% 



642670—11334 

/ o 




\ 







I 



i 



