SECRET 


Paraphrase of radio received by the CommandingGeneral, 

U. S. Army Forces in the Far East, February 11, 1942. 

"Kindly transmit the following communication to President 
Quezon: 

Your message, transmitted through General MacArthur, 
has just reached me. My' communication of January 30th must 
have made clear to you the fact that I both understand and 
sympathize with you and the Commonwealth Government about 
the difficulties in which you are today. The present cru- 
cial times assuredly appear almost hopeless but such crises 
and their handling must be considered by a more exact yard- 
stick than the misgivings and agonies of the immediate mo- 
ment, however poignant. For more than two score years the 
Government of the United States has been fulfilling to the 
people of the Philippines its pledged word to aid them suc- 
cessfully, no matter as to the length of time it might take, 
in their hopes to attain self-government and to become a 
free nation with the particular independence and economic 
power which that high design renders necessary. You per- 
sonally have taken part in and are conversant with the 
:nu3fle rous thoughtfully conceived steps by which that promise 
of self-government has been conducted and also the progress 
of events by which the economic freedom of your country is 
to be made an accomplished fact. May I bring to your memory 
at this time that in the idealism of its purpose and the 
faithfulness with which it has been accomplished, this policy 
of the United States towards another people has been un- 
paralleled in the annals of the world. In the Tydings-McDuffy 
Act, of 1934, to which you have a reference, the Congress of 
the United States at last determined 1946 as the year in which 
the Government of the x hilippines founded by that enactment 
should finally attain the aim of its aspirations for econo- 
mic and political freedom. 

By a malevolent plot of a few but mighty nations this 
aim is at present being thwarted and retarded. In planned 
assault upon personal independence and national freedom 
throughout the whole world, starting in Europe, has now ex- 
tended and been brought to the Southwe stern Pacific by Japan. 
The elemental factors which have governed the u n j.ted States 
in its relations towards the Philippines have been profaned 
in the plundering of Poland, Czechoslovakia, Holland, Luxem- 
burg, Belgium, Norway, Denmark, Greece, Albania, Manchulcuo, 
Yugoslavia, Thailand, China, and, at last the Philippines, 

Can the populations of any of these countries truly expect 
an honest reinstatement of their free sovereignty under the 
rule of Japan, Germany or Jtaly? Reference is made by you 

- 1 - 


SECRET 


SECRET 

in your radiogram to the proclamation of the Prime 
Minister of Japan of that nation's willingness to allow 
to the Philippines her freedom. It is only necessary for 
me to bring to your attention the present status of Man- 
chukuo, Korea, Indo- China, North China and all other na- 
tions which have been brought under the inhuman rule of 
Japan, to indicate the shallow deception of such a pronounce- 
ment. The immediate agonies of the Filipino people, griev- 
ous as they may be, are incomparably 3e ss than the misery 
and enduring slavery which will surely follow the accepting 
of Japanese pledges. In any case, is it still possible for 
any thoughtful man to place reliance in any proposal or 
pledge of the Japanese? 

The United States is now pledged with all its strength 
and united with twenty- six other countries to an exertion 
to vanquish the encroachment of Japan and its Axis allies. 
These exertions will never be surrendered until the abso- 
lute and complete downfall of the whole axis system and 
the nations which uphold it. We have commenced now to lay 
the groundwork in the Southwest Pacific of an increasing 
force in military, air, and naval strength which shall at- 
tain to sufficient power to oppose and conquer the far 
scattered and haughty effort of the Japanese. Naval and 
military strategies demand that realities be recognized. 

That which we are doing there comprises the most adequate 
and unfailing assistance that we can afford the Philippines 
at the present time. 

By the stipulations of our sacred promise to the 
Philippines implied in our two score years of behavior to- 
wards your people and explicitly set forth in the Tydings- 
McDuffy Act, we have pledged ourselves to afford you the 
protection to the fullest extent of our strength until such 
time as your final freedom had been accomplished. American 
soldiers in the Philippines are now fulfilling that pledge. 
The sacred v/ord of the United States has been given to car- 
rying out this pledge. We are determined that it be ful- 
filled cost what it may. Those soldiers of the United 
States who are now battling will continue to battle until 
the very last. Soldiers of the Philippines have been volun- 
tarily and gallantly fighting in defense of their native 
land. 


While the banner of the United States is still raised 
in the Philippines as a sacred promise of our obligation to 
your nation, it will be protected to the last extremity. 

Come what may to the present American Force we shall not 
slacken our exertions until the power which we are now as- 
sembling outside the Philippines returns to the Philippines 
and expels the last remaining invader from your native land. 

Signed: Franklin D. Roosevelt. 


2 


