Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




The President's Report 

1986-1992 



The 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 

PRESIDENCY 




The President's Report 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 

Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 
Director Ana Maria Cadena 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Writers/Researchers 

Director Ana Maria Cadena (lead writer) 

Medardo C. Abad, Jr. (lead writer) 

Irwin Baylon 

Maria Antoinette Bihis 

Irah Ruth Borinaga 

Arthur Defensorjr. 

Maria Teresa Garcia 

Maria Esperanza Gerochi 

Gloria Georgina Jota 

Ann Lopez 

May Manauis 

Vladimir Mata 

May Jean Name 

Director Aurora Siacunco 

Susan Solo 

MerciBiluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzonlll 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 

Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Asst. Secretary Patricia Lontoc 
NEDA Secretariat 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

NEDA Secretariat - APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second par of 
the series provides a chronicle of some specific undertakings initiated by the Office 
of the President which, now, constitute part of the legacies of the Aquino govern 
ment. This volume is the third part of the series which is a summation of the Aquino 
government's performance during its years in office. 

This volume, 'The President's Report", covers the achievements of the Aquino 
administration from day one as President Aquino uneasily took over the reins of 



power until the day she bowed out of it, formidable and steeled. Although this 
volume records what the Aquino administration had accomplished from the more 
abstract feat as the restoration of democracy to the more palpable one as given in 
facts and figures, what is more revealing is that so much had been achieved in such 
a short span with so little space and lesser resources. It also says much of the man- 
agement style of a President whose sole and simple desire was to serve the people 
but ended up in teaching the world the humane and benevolent way to reign. 

This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by no 
means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of those 
riot documented here are contained in materials better covered by other line agen- 
cies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to preserve 
them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the hearts of the 
people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



Contents 



REESTABLISHMENT OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITU- 
TIONS AND PROCESSES 

Political Freedom • Freedom Of Clioice Through 
Elections • Independent Judicial System • Independent Bicameral 
Body • Freedom Of Expression • Restoration Of Peace And Order 



II. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND GOOD 
WILL 

Dcvclopmoit Diplomacy • The 3rd ASEAN Summit • The 4tli 
ASEAN Summit • Regional Security • Asia-Pacific Relations • 
European Relations • Specific Accomplishments Of The Presidential 19 
Trips 



III. PEOPLE EMPOWERMENT 

Decentralization For Local Autonomy • Regional And Local Devel- 
opment Councils • Decentralization In Budget Preparation And 
Allocation • NGOs For Socioeconomic Development • NGOs For 
Disaster Relief And Rehabilitation • NGOs For Policy Advocacy 
And Contingency Planning • Institutional Development • New 
Local Government Code 31 

IV. ENERGIZING THE BUREAUCRACY 

Promoiion Of Honesty, Integrity, And Accountability • Raised 
Standards And Streamlined Operations » Promotion Of Employees 
Welfare • Employee Empowerment 43 



V. LEGACY OF ECONOMIC RECOVERY 

Agriculture: Towards A Market-Oriented Economy • Agrarian 
Reform: TJic Land Problem Addressed • Environment And Natural 
Resources: Strategy For Sustainable Development • Trade And 
Industry: Backbone Of A Developing Country • Education And 
Human Resources Development: Molding The Young • Health: 
Ensurvig A Strong Base • Housing: Providing More Shelter for 
More People • Social Welfare And Community Development: 
Giving Assista)icc and Dignity • Infrastructure: Timely Public 
Works In Record Time • Science And Technology (S & T) 
Dcvelopmoit Programs 51 



PHOTOS 

A brief visual review of the activities of the President 117 



"REFLECTIONS ON OUR DEMOCRACY" 

Speech delivered by President Corazon C. Aquino at tlic U.P. 
Public Lecture on the Record and Legacy of the Aquino Adminis- 
tration on June 18, 1992 124 

REFERENCES 136 



1 



Reestablishnient 
of 

Democratic Institutions 

and 
Processes 



w ^ ~y hen President Corazon C. Aquino took over the reins of government in 
\ A / 2986, all the basic processes and institutions that make up a democratic 
V v government were in shambles. The most significant act of her adminis- 

1 tration was the speedy reestablishnient of these structures: drafting of a 

new Constitution; conduct of free elections at the local and national levels; installa- 
tion of an independent judiciary; restoration of the freedom of expression; and 
extending its hand inpeace to communist rebels and secessionists. 

All the efforts would have daunted a more fragile soul. But President Aquino, 
through cheers and jeers, successfully put the house in order, in record time. And 
they said she would not last. 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




President Aquino speaks before members of the constitutional com- 
mission and top government officials. 



Political Freedom 

One of the first official acts of 
President Corazon C. Aquino was the is- 
suance of Presidential Proclamation No. 
2 lifting the suspension of the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus through- 
out the Philippines. Through this act, 
the Aquino government revoked Procla- 
mation No. 2045 (1981) and 2045- A 
(1983) which suspended the privilege 
of the writ of habeas corpus in certain 
parts of the country. These two repres- 
sive decrees have no place in the re- 
stored democratic Philippine society. 
As a result of the proclamation granting 
amnesty to all political prisoners, 
about 459 political detainees were set 
free. 



Freedom Of Choice Through Elections 

Eager to build from the ashes, Presi- 
dent Corazon C. Aquino appointed the 
Constitutional Commission of 1986 to 
draft a new Philippine Constitution. The 
Filipino people, in a referendum in Feb- 
ruary 1987, overwhelmingly ratified the 
new fundamental law of the land. The 
huge voter turnout on plebiscite day was 
a reaffirmation of the people's faith in the 
newly-installed government. 

In the 1987 congressional elections, 
there was a significant increase in the 
number of registered voters and the na- 
tional voter turnout surpassed those for 
previous exercises. The multiparty sys- 
tem provided the Filipino voters a wide 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



5 



array of choices for people to represent 
them in the Legislature. Even the leftist 
Partido ng Bayan fielded their own can- 
didates. 

Although there were isolated cases of 
alleged irregularities, the overall fair out- 
come made the elections credible. The re- 
sults of these electoral exercises also 
showed that the Aquino administration 
had the full support of the Filipino peo- 



The severe test of democracy's 
survival was the 1992 synchronized 
national and local elections. Predicted 
by many to be the bloodiest ever to be 
held, the said electoral exercise proved 
to be the most peaceful, cleanest, and 
most orderly the country ever had. Also, 
voter turnout was one of the highest ever 
as more than 80 percent of the some 32 
million registered voters went to the 
polls. 




The President signs appointment of Christian Monsod as head of 
COMELEC. The COMELEC was primarily responsible for the peace- 
ful and orderly synchronized elections of 1992. 



pie. During the congressional elections, 
the administration's senatorial candi- 
dates won 22 out of 24 seats. Candidates 
who supported the Aquino administra- 
tion won majority of the seats in the Lower 
House. 



The government and the private sec- 
tor worked closely to ensure its success. 
Empowered by the Constitution to depu- 
tize the police, the highly-esteemed Com- 
mission on Elections (COMELEC) put in 
place the mechanisms that would ensure 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



honest and peaceful elections. The suc- 
cess of the elections was also the result of 
the active participation of the Church, 
media, and nongovernment organiza- 
tions (NGOs) in poll vigilance. 

Independent Judicial System 

The Aquino administration had the 
highest regard for the judiciary proc- 
esses, thus, at the onset, President 
Aquino ensured that basic democratic in- 
stitutions were installed without delay. 
This restored public confidence in the rule 
of law through an independent judiciary 
and promoted and preserved the general 
public's faith in the democratic institu- 
tions. Supreme Court decisions were 
handed down without the slightest inter- 
vention by the executive. 

The courts worked for the expedi- 
tious administration of justice. The dis- 
position of cases were hastened with the 
institutionalization of the continuous trial 
procedure and the completion of more 
halls of justice. With this development 
the number of pending cases was signifi- 
cantly reduced. Free legal assistance was 
extended and significantly expanded to 
people who could ill-afford the expen- 
sive services of lawyers. 

The Supreme Court had the power 
to declare the acts of the President and 



the laws passed by Congress unconstitu- 
tional and, thus, null and void. On many 
occasions, the Supreme Court functioned 
to break the deadlock over certain dis- 
putes and legal questions between the ex- 
ecutive and legislative branches of gov- 
ernment. 

The Presidential Task Force on the 
Improvement of the Administration of 
Justice was created to review and assess 
the judicial system. Their work became 
the basis for many administrative reform 
measures, ranging from procedural re- 
forms to alternatives to litigation and 
conflict-resolution mechanisms at the 
lowest level of government. 



Independent Bicameral Body 

The Philippine Constitution provided 
for a presidential form of government 
with appropriate check and balance 
mechanisms. The Congress, consisting of 
the Senate and the House of Representa- 
tives, extended authority to the President 
to exercise powers necessary to carry out 
critical or emergency measures. It was 
vested with the power to override any 
presidential veto. 

The bicameral legislature was truly 
representative of the people. It was com- 
posed of 24 members in the Upper 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



7 



House, 250 in the Lower House, and 50 
members nominated by organizations 
and special interest groups. Its 
legislations were more responsive to the 
people's needs. The primary objective of 
the Lower House was to develop and 
protect their respective districts and the 
people they represented. The Senate, on 
the other hand, had a national and 
broader perspective. The checks and bal- 
ances between the Senate and the House 
of Representatives discounted the possi- 
bility of the Executive manipulating the 
legislature. 

Freedom Of Expression 

Freedom of the press was immedi- 
ately restored upon President Aquino's 



assumption to office. There was a total 
change in the government's media 
policy. Under a climate of press freedom, 
the Philippine press was envied by me- 
dia practitioners the world over. The 
daily newspapers also mushroomed 
from less than 10 under the Martial Law 
period to about 30. 

The government's commitment to be 
transparent in all government informa- 
tion was firm. One of the first measures 
the government took was to abolish the 
media offices used for propaganda by 
the Marcos regime. The Office of the 
Press Secretary (OPS) including its bu- 
reaus and attached agencies were reor- 
ganized. These were done to reorient the 
information system and professionalize 
news agencies such as the Philippine 



Aquino with officers of the Malacanang Press Corps 1991-1992. 




8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Agency. Moreover, the government en- 
couraged the privatization of media fa- 
cilities. 

The Aquino administration exercised 
maximum tolerance with newspapers 
and political commentators having dif- 
ferent views from that of government. Al- 
though not spared from criticisms, gov- 
ernment had respected the people's right 
to free expression. 

Restoration Of Peace And Order 

Office of the Peace Commissioner (OPC) 

The government realized that the 
reestablishment of democratic institu- 
tions would prove futile if there was no 
peace and order throughout the coun- 
try. Immediately, government started to 
extend its hand in peace to insurgents and 
secessionists alike. 

The OPC was created as a special 
unit in the Office of the President explic- 
itly mandated to seek nonmilitary means 
to address the internal conflict arising 
from armed insurgent and secessionist 
movements. 

In many parts of the country, par- 
ticularly in those areas directly affected 
by the armed conflict, people were grow- 



ing weary of war. On their own initia- 
tive, some communities and organized 
groups were making decisions to initiate 
or actively participate in efforts to bring 
an end to the violence around them, to 
define for themselves the peace that they 

i want, and to decide on ways to achieve 

i that peace. 

The OPC actively supported such 
group's peace efforts which included the 
following: 

1. Declaration of "peace zones" or 
"demilitarized zones" by local communi- 
ties. There were eight such "peace zones" 
- Sagada, Kalinga, and Tinoc in the 
Cordillera; Naga in the Bicol Region; 
Cantomanyog in Negros Occidental; and 
Bituan, Nabundasan, and Tuburan in 
North Cotabato. 

2. Efforts to preserve, strengthen, 
and apply indigenous conflict resolution 
mechanisms to problems arising from the 
insurgency conflict. Kalinga, Tingguian, 
and Maguindanao groups were involved 
in such efforts. 

3. Local peace agenda development, 
peace advocacy, and peace education by 
communities and nongovernment or- 
ganizations. The growing peace move- 
ment gave rise to continuing requests for 
OPC support for peace visioning and ac- 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



9 



tion planning activities by area-based 
NGOs. This included such organizations 
as the Kalinga Women's Movement for 
Peace, the Movement for Peace in 
Basilan, the Basilan Peace and Ecology 
Movement, and the Mindanao Peace 
Conference. 

The OPC also extended assistance to 
peace advocacy and education activities, 
such as the Concerned Women of the Phil- 
ippines Peace Awards, the Ateneo de 
Zamboanga Peace Education Workshop 
for Region IX teachers, and the Notre 
Dame University Peace Education Work- 
shops for Region XII teachers and sol- 
diers. 

4. Dialogues to bring about 
intercultural understanding. The OPC 
consistently supported Muslim-Christian 
dialogues organized by the Silsilah 
Dialogue Movement in Mindanao. 

The OPC support for these peace ini- 
tiatives was given in various forms - tech- 
nical and research assistance; financial 
support; liaison with military and civil- 
ian government agencies, as well as with 
other NGOs; facilitating sharing and ex- 
change between peace-building commu- 
nities and/or NGOs; and responding to 
specific requests and problems requiring 
national level intervention. 



Finally, the OPC extended its inter- 
nal advocacy to this front as well. 
Through briefings and dialogues with ci- 
vilian government and military person- 
nel on various levels of the bureaucracy, 
OPC worked to build acceptance and a 
support infrastructure within the govern- 
ment for these people's peace initiatives. 

Pro-Poor and Special Development 
Areas 

Recognizing that poverty and gov- 
ernment neglect were among the root 
causes of the internal armed conflict, the 
Office of the Peace Commissioner coor- 
dinated with other government agencies 
to develop and implement programs and 
projects meant to bring services directly 
to insurgent areas, address the identified 
needs of these communities, and bring 
government closer to the people. Among 
these were the Special Development Area 
(SDA) Program and the Program to 
Refocus Orientation for the Poor (Pro- 
POOR). The OPC also maintained a "re- 
source-brokering" service for communi- 
ties and community-based NGOs seek- 
ing funding and capability-building as- 
sistance. 

The SDA introduced "development 
first" prior to any military operations. The 
concept of "development first" specifi- 
cally involved: 1) consultations and dia- 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



logues with the people on local prob- 
lems; 2) establishing and institu- 
tionalizing community and civilian gov- 
ernment structure responsive to the 
identified needs; and 3) delivery of 
development services to the communi- 
ties. The strategy was fast-tracked, area- 
focused, and pooled government serv- 
ices. 

There was a total of 15 SDAs 
launched. These were municipalities or 
a set of contiguous municipalities which 
were confronted by conditions of adverse 
poverty and insurgency. 

To ensure the success of the Program, 
a Lead Implementing Agency (LIA) was 
designated for each province to coordi- 
nate the implementation of needed 
projects in these areas. The LIAs also des- 
ignated SDA project managers in each 
province. 

As of May 31,1992, in addition to 
the regular programs and projects im- 
plemented by the line agencies in the vari- 
ous SDAs, a total of 353 small but high 
impact projects had been completed and 
43 projects are ongoing. Around 61 per- 
cent or 260 infrastructure projects were 
funded by the Department of Public 
Works and Highways (DPWH). Another 
24 percent or 120 were livelihood, water 
supply, and schoolbuilding projects 



funded from the President's Social 
Fund (PSF). The DPWH and the 
PSF alone infused an estimated P78.9 
million for projects in the SDAs. The 
rest were projects funded from the 
savings or special funds of line agencies 
and special sources such as Countryside 
Development Fund, Rural Roads Pro- 
gram of DILG, LGA, PAGCOR, PCSO, 
and the USAID Child Survival Pro- 
gram. 

In addition to actual projects imple- 
mented in the SDAs, the Program also 
exemplified effective collaboration 
among government agencies, local gov- 
ernment officials, and NGOs. 

Undertaking the Peace Process on the 
Homefront: Coping with Communist 
Insurgency 

Peace talks between the government 
and the National Democratic Front 
(NDF) were held in 1986. While these 
talks failed to terminate the more than 
two decades of insurgency, it demon- 
strated the government's willingness and 
commitment to address the social unrest 
through peaceful means. 

In 1 988, the Department of National 
Defense - Armed Forces of the Philip- 
pines (DND-AFP) launched an all-out of 
fensive against the Communist Party of 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



11 




The Commander-in-Chief troops the line at the Borromeo Field of 
the Philippine Military Academy during its 86th graduation rites, Feb- 
ruary 17, 1991. 



the Philippines/National People's 
Army/National Democratic Front (CPP/ 
NPA/NDF) which resulted in serious 
setbacks to the communist movement. Its 
regular strength declined continuously 
since 1988 with the highest annual de- 
crease registered in 1989 at 19.2 percent. 
The CPP/NPA/NDF's regular strength 
declined by 34 percent from January 
1988 to June 1991. Its peak strength of 
some 25,800 in 1988 had been brought 
down to some 15,400 at the end of 1991, 
a reduction of 40 percent. 

From a peak of some 8,496 in 1986 
representing 19 percent of the total 
barangays nationwide, the number of 



insurgent-affected barangays was re- 
duced to 3,710 at the end of 1991, or a 
reduction of 56 percent. The government 



CPP/NPA/NDF'S REGULAR STRENGTH 
January 1988 to June 1991 

30000 



20000 



10000 




1988 1989 1990 1991 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



had considered this the most significant 
achievement in the counter-insurgency 
campaign. 

During the period 1988-90, the gov- 
ernment captured top CPP/NPA/NDF 
leaders consisting of 18 members of the 
Central Committee, 33 functional and 
territorial staff officers, nine members of 
the territorial commissions, 34 regional 
leaders, and four provincial/front com- 
mittee members. 

Handling Regional Secessionist Move- 
ments 

Following the failed negotiations with 
the Mo ro National Liberation Front 
(MNLF) and in an effort to keep the door 
of reconciliation open, the government 
maintained the informal ceasefire. How- 
ever to preempt the resumption of con- 
flict the government adopted a deterrent 
posture by keeping a sizeable military 

anycommgenq,. Such policy of deter- 
rence allowed peaceful initiatives to be 
pursued. The informal ceasefire in the 
south continued to hold, although 
marred occasionally by sporadic fight- 
ing. 

On the other hand, despite repeated 
attempts, the MNLF had failed in its bid 



to gain membership in the Organization 
of Islamic Conference COIC). At home, a 
newly established government for the 
Autonomous Region in Muslim Min- 
danao (ARVTM) as mandated by the Con- 
stitution had politically blunted the 
MNLF and demonstrated the sincerity of 
the government to address the Muslim 
Mindanao concerns at its roots. 

National Reconciliation and Develop- 
ment Program (NRDP) 

The government knew that in extend- 
ing its hand in peace, it should also ex- 
tend its support to rebel returnees (RRs) 
to enable them to return to the main- 
stream of society and lead normal lives. 
Thus, the creation of the NRDP. The 
NRDP was composed of several projects 
to assist RRs: skills training (carpentry, 
adobe-making, and such); balik- 
probinsiya where an RR who expressed 
his desire to go home can do so without 
fear of reprisal from local authorities; 
Balik-Baril where RRs surrendered their 
firearms for a fee; livelihood projects 
(poultry and pig or cattle raising; buying 
a passenger jeepney or fishing boat) 
where RRs were given financial and 
technical assistance; and, the resettlement 
project wherein groups of RRs were pro- 
vided a piece of land to build their 
homes. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



13 



The program was intended to coor- 
dinate and integrate the related projects 
and efforts of the government, NGOs, 
and the private sector for the RRs. 

Although launched in December 24, 
1986, it was not until 1988 that the 
NRDP went into full swing providing 
loans to rebel returnees under the Depart- 
ment of Trade and Industry's (DTI) P30 
million fund through the local govern- 
ments and the Balik-Baril program. The 
relative success of NRDP was attributed 
to the transfer of the program to Peace 
and Order Councils which facilitated and 
hastened the processing of assistance to 
the rebels at the lowest levels of govern- 
ment. 

NRDP had greatly contributed to the 
substantial neutralization of the seces- 
sionist movement in southern Philippines 
as well as improved peace and order 
situation in erstwhile insurgent-affected 
areas. 

A total of 1,813 RRs from the New 
People's Army (NPA), 837 Cordillera 
People's Liberation Army (CPLA) mem- 
bers, and 12,978 secessionist members 
from Muslim Mindanao returned to the 
fold of the law between 1987 to 1991. 
The returnees were granted P53.8 mil- 
lion in financial assistance to start their 
livelihood, resettlement, and training 



programs. Another 1,845 subversive 
mass activists and 4,655 NPA sympa- 
thizers also availed of the Program. 

Crushing Militaiy Rebels 

One of the more serious groups that 
the Aquino government had to contend 
with was that sector ironically clothed 
with authority to bring about peace and 
order. These were the military rebels. 

Despite the shaky start of President 
Aquino's governance, it successfully 
weathered seven coup attempts. The su- 
premacy of the Constitution and the duly 
constituted government, consistently up- 
held by the Armed Forces who believed 
in the democratic processes and institu- 
tions, was preserved. 

About 5,000 military rebels, consist- 
ing of 575 officers and 4,376 enlisted 
men, had been captured or had surren- 
dered. Only 99 remained at large, 14 of 
them officers. 

Of those who participated in the 
coup attempts, 225 are serving prison 
sentences; 221 remain detained pending 
results of court martial action; and 4,505 
were less severely punished through dis- 
missal from service, forfeiture of pay, de- 
motion, administrative confinement, loss 
of seniority, and reprimand. 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




and 

Commander-in-Chief. AFP 

GUEST OF HONOR AND S 
TURNOVER CEREM 
OFFICE OF TUUHIEF OF 

T ^RIL 1 991 3 





CHANGE OF GUARDS. The turn-over ceremonies between outgoing 
Chief of Staff Gen. Rodolfo Biazon and incoming Chief of Staff 
Lisandro Abadia is witnessed by the President. 



The success of the government in 
crushing seven coup attempts may be at- 
tributed to the following factors: 1) lack 
of public support to the ultra-rightists; 
and 2) the firm resolve of the vast major- 
ity of the Armed Forces to preserve the 
Constitution and defend the duly-consti- 
tuted authorities. 

The conviction by court martial of 81 
officers and enlisted men to prison terms 
ranging from 12 to 32 years for taking 
part in the failed coup attempt of Au- 
gust 28, 1987, as well as the enactment 



of R.A. 6968 imposing stiff punishments 
for the crimes of sedition and rebellion 
served as deterrent to future coup at- 
tempts. 

Fighting Crime in the Streets 

The intensified drive of the Philip- 
pine Constabulary/Integrated National 
Police (PC/INP) against criminality in- 
creased crime solution efficiency from 
67 percent in 1988 to 74 percent in 1990. 
Police operations resulted in the capture 
of some 19,000 criminals and the neu- 



The P residents Report 1986-1992 

tralization of about 600 organized crime 
groups. A total of 9,255 loose firearms 
were also recovered. 

The anti-carnapping campaign re- 
sulted in the recovery of 2,068 vehicles 
out of the 2,686 reported stolen. Recov- 
ery rate of 65 percent in 1988 increased 
to 97 percent (574 out of 592 stolen vehi- 
cles) in 1989, and 84 percent in 1990 (588 
out of the 701 stolen vehicles). Average 
monthly carnapping cases recorded in 
1988 numbered 122 and dropped signifi- 
cantly to 58 in 1990. Meanwhile, the 
Narcotics Command confiscated narcot- 
ics and dangerous drugs worth P2.17 
billion during the period. 

Upon President Aquino's instruc- 
tions, the Cabinet Cluster on Security and 



15 



Political Development created the Task 
Force on Law Enforcement to identify 
major cases requiring priority attention. 
As a venue for strategy-formulation to 
improve law enforcement, the Cluster 
advocated the Witness Protection and 
Security Benefits Act, the National Crime 
Prevention Information System, and the 
adoption by the courts of the continuous 
trial system. 

There had also been more vigorous 
coordination between government agen- 
cies and courts to facilitate the servicing 
of warrants and the issuance of hold de- 
parture orders to prevent those charged 
with serious crimes from fleeing to other 
countries. Of the monitored cases which 



CRIMEBUST. inspecting the 'chop-chop' vehicles seized ^ at the 
Logistics command compound in Camp Aqumaldo, Nov. 1983. 




16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




BEST-WEAPON. The President and Presidential Security Group (PSG) 
commander Col. Voltaire Gazmin (right) are welcomed by their 'inaanak' 

l!f ??™ Val 3t Ma,acan ang's Heroes Hall to attend the wedding reception 
of 133 PSG Troopers. 



^ere disposed in 1990, 60 percent had 
convictions. 

Efforts for International Peace 

The Aquino administration's insist- 
ence on stronger RP-US relations mainly 
focused on the need to continue commit- 
ments to the 1947 RP-US Military Bases 
Agreement. This approach heightened 
into a series of exploratory talks by sepa- 
rate negotiation panels held mostly in 
Manila. This process culminated in the 
drafting of the RP-US Treaty of Friend- 
ship, Cooperation and Security. The Sen- 
ate, however, strictly adhered to the 



Philippine Constitution which mandated 
that no foreign military bases will be al- 
lowed in the country beyond 1 991 . 

The nation places value to its contin- 
ued alliance with the United States un- 
der the 1947 Mutual Defense Treaty. 
However, preparations are underway to 
convert the Philippine military bases into 
economic assets following the non-ap- 
proval of the proposed treaty. While the 
country welcomed alliance with the 
United States under the Mutual Defense 
Treaty, it faced the reality of the even- 
tual phaseout of the U.S. military facili- 
ties in the Philippines. 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



17 



In anticipation of less direct U.S. mili- 
tary assistance, the DND launched the 
Self-Reliance Defense Posture Program 
(SRDP). The government had pursued a 
good measure of self-reliance and started 
to provide the foundation for the growth 
of national defense-based industries. 
These efforts had generated savings of 
$20.36 million through export savings, 
import substitution, and local value 
added costs. The SRDP also generated 
job opportunities for heads of families 
benefitting 1,206 families. Meanwhile, 
self-reliance in small arms ammunition 
was achieved through the Government 
Arsenal which produced a total of 64.4 
million assorted rounds of ammunition 
or 74 percent of the target. 

Among the most significant deliver- 
ies by defense contractors were 55,596 



Ml 6 rifles, 140,000 rounds of M79/ 
M203 grenade launcher ammunitions, 
3,659 radio sets, 15,450 mortar fusses, 
10,000 mortar ammunitions, and 22,600 
rifle grenades. 

On external defense, the government 
focused its efforts in preventing illegal in- 
trusions into Philippine territory and il- 
legal exploitation of marine resources in 
the 200-mile exclusive economic zone. 
This was achieved by optimally using the 
air force and naval assets resulting in the 
apprehension of 52 foreign fishing ves- 
sels with 212 crew members. 

Meanwhile, the AFP continued to 
make its presence felt in the Kalayaan 
Islands or the Spratly Islands in order to 
protect national interest in the area. 



2 



International 
Relations 

and 
Goodwill 




he success of the EDS A Revolution was celebrated not only by 
Filipinos here and abroad but leaders and peace-loving people the world 
over. They all marvelled at this modern day miracle who was pitted 
against a 20-year old dictatorship. 



As she performed the duties of her office which includes the mending of relations 
with foreign governments and institutions, all hailed her immediate feat. The 
goodwill that the People Power Revolution generated was put to great advantage. 
President Aquino had it in her heart. With it, she gained for the country the 
much-needed support in rising from the ruins. 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Development Diplomacy 

"Development Diplomacy" - the po- 
litical and economic reconstruction of the 
Philippines through international coop- 
eration had been the country's thrust in 
its foreign relations. This guided the 
countr/s dealings with the rest of the 
world. 

The following were the initiative un- 
dertaken to pursue development diplo- 
macy: 

1 ) holding of the First International 
Conference of Newly-Restored 
Democracies in Manila, 1988. At 
Present, the Conference of 
Newly-Restored Democracies is 
fast becoming institutionalized 
with the next meeting to be held 

in Nicaragua in the first quarter 
of 1993; 

2) forging closer ties with India, Vi- 
etnam, and Myanmar (formerly 
Burma); 

3) holding of the First Hispano- 
Asian Pacific Conference. The 
conference was aimed to 
strengthen the bonds among 
countries which have been 
touched and influenced by Span- 
ish culture; and 



4) establishment/improvement of 
relations with West Asia (for- 
merly Middle East) and members 
of the Organization of Islamic 
Countries. 



The 3rd ASEAN Summit 

The Third Meeting of the ASEAN 
Heads of Government or the ASEAN 
Summit was held in Manila on Decem- 
ber 14 and 15, 1987. What made the 
event significant was the fact that it was 
pushed through despite the fact that a 
bloody coup attempt had just been 
staged two months earlier. The attend- 
ance of the ASEAN leaders in the Sum- 
mit was a concerted show of support for 
the newly-restored Philippine democ- 
racy. 

During the Summit, the Manila Dec- 
laration of 1987 was signed which de- 
clared 1992, being the 25th anniversary 
of ASEAN, as "Visit ASEAN Year". It 
also provided the framework for en- 
hanced cooperation and assistance 
among Asean countries to ensure secu- 
rity, stability, and growth in the region. 
Also signed were the Protocol amending 
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation 
(Treaty of Amity) and the Revised Basic 
Agreement on ASEAN Industrial Joint 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



21 



Ventures (AIJV). The Treaty of Amity 
was revised to enable states outside the 
region to accede to the Treaty while 
the AIJV was improved to make the 
scheme more flexible, more attractive to 
investors, and to facilitate its implemen- 
tation. 

Other agreements signed during the 
Summit included: 1) Protocol on the Im- 



tries; and 3) Agreement on the Protec- 
tion and Promotion of ASEAN Invest- 
ments. 



The 4th ASEAN Summit 

The Fourth Meeting of the ASEAN 
Heads of Government in Singapore 
served as a fitting venue for the valedic- 




The President with ASEAN leaders in Singapore. 



provements on the Extension of Tariff 
Preferences under the ASEAN Preferen- 
tial Trading Arrangements to further en- 
hance and expand intra-ASEAN trade 
cooperation; 2) Memorandum of Under- 
standing on Standstill and Rollback on 
Non-Tariff Barriers among ASEAN coun- 



tory address of President Aquino to the 
other ASEAN Heads of Government. 

The adoption of the four Philippine 
initiatives presented before the forum re- 
flected the high esteem for President 
Aquino by her counterparts. The initia- 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



fives were: 1) the Framework Agreement 
on Enhancing ASEAN Economic Coop- 
eration which was substantially based on 
the Philippine-proposed ASEAN Treaty 
of Economic Cooperation (ATEC); 2) the 
proposal on continuing dialogue to de- 
velop a regional consensus on political 
and security cooperation; 3) the call to 
UN Secretary General for the early dis- 
patch of the UN Transitional Authority 
in Cambodia (UNTAC); and 4) forging 
of regional cooperation on the develop- 
ment of programs for children. These ini- 
tiatives would serve as the legacies of 
President Corazon C. Aquino to the 
ASEAN. 



Regional Security 

The Philippine proposal to hold a 
consultative dialogue on regional secu- 
rity with its ASEAN counterparts in July 
1 990 was accepted and the first dialogue 
took place in Manila on June 1991 . This 
was followed by another in Bangkok in 
October 1991, and finally, in Singapore 
in January 1992. A formal statement was 
communicated in the Singapore Summit 
communique where ASEAN members 
committed to undertake formal talks on 
a regional security framework as one of 
its highest priorities in the immediate fu- 
ture. 



Promotion Of Human Rights 

The Philippines was the lead sponsor 
of the United Nations' Commission on 
Human Rights resolution on "Regional 
Arrangement for the Promotion and Pro- 
tection of Human Rights in the Asia-Pa- 
cific Region". The resolution led to the 
holding of the first Asia-Pacific Human 
Rights Workshop in Manila 1 990. 

The Philippines was a co-sponsor of 
the resolution adopting the "International 
Convention on the Protection of the Rights 
of All Migrant Workers and Members of 
Their Families". This was adopted by 
consensus during the 45th UN General 
Assembly. 

International Debt 

In 1989 and 1990, the Philippines 
participated actively in drafting the G- 
77 resolution on debt and successfully 
won the inclusion of the Philippine pro- 
posal - a call for the establishment of an 
International Advisory Commission on 
Debt and Development. The Philippine 
delegation was also the chief coordina- 
tor for the draft resolutions on human 
resources development and on assistance 
to debtor developing countries seriously 
affected by the Gulf crisis which were 
both adopted without a vote. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



23 



Asia-Pacific Relations 

The Asia-Pacific region has become 
a focus of events involving the major play- 
ers in international affairs. These events 
will shape the future foreign policy di- 
rections of countries in the region and at 
the same time influence their allies to as- 
sess their respective policies towards 
Asia. 

Five countries in the region - Japan, 
the Republic of Korea, Singapore, Aus- 
tralia, and New Zealand - participated 
in the Multilateral Aid Initiative/Philip- 
pine Assistance Program. The Philippines 
obtained benefits from programs of Tech- 
nical Cooperation Among Developing 
Countries (TCDC) conducted by Asian 



countries for mutual help and coopera- 
tion. 

Japan provided the largest contri- 
bution to the MAI/PAP, committing 
about a third of the total pledge at 
the Pledging Session in Tokyo in July 
1989. It had become the country's sec- 
ond largest trading partner and market 
for Philippine products, and the largest 
source of bilateral Official Development 
Assistance provided through grants, 
loans, and technical assistance. In 1989, 
Japan disbursed a total of US$403.75 
million in official development assistance. 
In 1990, agreements were signed for the 
provision of Y39,486 billion, where 29 
percent were used as grants and 71 per- 
cent in loans. 



President Aquino greets Minuro Masada, chairman of the Japan External Trade 
Organization (JETRO) in Malacanang on Oct. 21, 1991. Masuda expressed Ja- 
pan's continued confidence in the stability of the country and promised the 
President more economic cooperation. With them is DTI Secretary Peter 
Garrucho, Jr. 




24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



European Relations 

In 1990, Europe underwent a historic 
transformation. Germany became one 
nation. The Soviet Union and much of 
Eastern Europe pursued the process of 
democratization. Free elections were 
held in Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary, and 
Czechoslovakia for the first time after 
nearly five decades. Leaders identified 
with freedom were elected. The Cold War 
formally ended with the signing by 34 na- 
tions of the Treaty of Paris in November 
1990. 

The Philippines welcomed these 
Ganges in Europe. Support for the 
newly-transformed governments of East- 
ern Europe and their continuing search 
tor freedom was affirmed during the vis- 
£ made by Secretary Manglapus and 

J^mjun, and July 1990. In tan, 
the cc .untnes in Eastern Europe reiter- 
ated the* support for the government of 
President Aquino. Mutually beneficial 
projects and agreements that could ad- 
vance bilateral relations were concluded 
during these visits. 

The DFA implemented measures to 
eliminate the barriers which previously 
inhibited the full development of rela- 
tions with Eastern Europe. Some of these 
measures were: the liberalization of en- 



try rules for Eastern European nationals; 
negotiation of air agreements with the 
USSR and Yugoslavia; and active encour- 
agement of direct trading of private en- 
tities with Eastern European firms. The 
Department likewise delisted Hungary 
from the jurisdiction of the Philippine In- 
ternational Trading Corporation (PITC). 
This will help intensify trade relations 
with Hungary which transformed itself 
into a free-market economy. The removal 
of Yugoslavia, Poland, Romania, and 
Bulgaria from the PITC ambit was also 
planned. 



Specific Accomplishments Of The 
Presidential Trips 

The state visits made by President 
Aquino to numerous countries generated 
for the Philippines goodwill, respect, and 
admiration the world over. Her meetings 
with the heads of state and top govern- 
ment officials yielded tangible results. Bi- 
lateral economic relations were strength- 
ened and expanded with the United 
States, Canada, Japan, Europe, and our 
Asia Pacific neighbors. 

Canada (November 1989) 

The following were the agreements 
signed by the Philippine and Canadian 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



25 



governments during the state visit of 
President Aquino in Canada: 

1. Memorandum of Understanding 
(MOU) on Commodity Assistance. This 
was a grant amounting to Canadian $50 
million. Supported by the Canadian In- 
ternational Development Agency 
(CIDA), this project will provide the Phil- 
ippines with commodities such as paper, 
vaccines, fertilizers, and industrial prod- 
ucts and help ease the government's bur- 
den of commercial borrowing for devel- 
opment projects. 

2. MOU on Assistance in Tel- 
ecommunications. A grant amounting to 
Canadian $15 million and supported by 
CIDA, the project helps the Department 
of Transportation and Communications 
(DOTC) by providing microwave tel- 
ephone systems for rural areas with one 
installation targeted per barrio. 

3. MOU on the Establishment of 
a Canadian $27.1 million Line of 
Credit by the Export Development 
Corporation (EDC). The EDC is Cana- 
da's official export credit agency. This 
was related to the CIDA telecommuni 
cations project. 

4. Agreement by Exchange of Let- 
ters providing Grant Assistance from 
CIDA amounting to Canadian $4.9 mil- 



lion for an environment and natural re- 
sources management project. 

5. MOU on Fish Inspection which 
seeks to facilitate the entry to Canada of 
Philippine products that meet Canadian 
and international standards. 

6. Third Bilateral Debt Reschedul- 
ing Agreement signed with the EDC of 
Canada covering Canadian $6.8 million 
rescheduled over 10 years inclusive of a 
five-year grace period. 

7. Treaty of Extradition which will 
facilitate the deportation to the Philip- 
pines of Canada-based fugitives. 

United States of America (November 
1989) 

1. MOU reached with Agency for 
International Development to support 
project feasibility studies. 

2. US-RP Trade and Investment 
Facilitation Agreement 

3. Restoration of US pledge to 
grant RP with a $200 million assistance 
under the PAP and the commitment to 
provide a $25 million grant to support 
PAP-related activities. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




The President's Report 1986-1992 



27 




4b. 

- 1 j 



King Badouin of Belgium transmits a 'very special message' to the 
President, through Belgian Foreign Minister Leo Tindemans. The 
President was assured by Tindemans of the support of Belgium and 
the European Economic Community. 



4. Signing with the World Bank 
of three Loan Agreements totalling 
$175 million which provided for co-fi- 
nancing amounting to $222.4 million. 

5. New loan negotiations with the 
World Bank amounting to $430 million. 

Germany, France, Belgium, and the Eu- 
ropean Economic Community (EEC) (July 
1989) 

1. A total of $232.4 million 
pledges in soft loans and grants was re- 



alized during the President's trip to West- 
ern Europe. 

2. MOU on Trade between RP 
and France making the social security 
law of France applicable to the Filipinos 
working in France. 

3. Official Development Assist- 
ance (ODA) in the total amount of 
$156.4 million over four years from the 
government of France. The Philippines 
also had the assurance to be an early ben- 
eficiary of debt reduction. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



4. MOU between RP and EEC 

providing for $18 million a year for the 
next five years for Philippine agricultural 
and rural development projects. 

People's Republic of China (April 1988) 

1. MOU on Trade and Protocol 

2. MOU on the Importation and 
Exportation of Commodities 

Japan (November 10-13, 1986) 

The Philippines enjoys warm and 
cordial relations with Japan. The first visit 
of the President to Japan in November 
1986 laid the groundwork for strength- 
ened RP-Japan economic, political, and 
cultural ties. Highlights of the visit were 
the following: 

1. Commitment to the Philippines 
of an eight-point aid package totalling 
some $625 million. The financial pack- 
age included a $252 million loan for the 
construction of the Calaca II coal-fired 
power project in Batangas. 

2. ODA in the total amount of 
$308 A million and $100 million in tech- 
nical assistance grants was also ex- 
tended. 

Switzerland (June 1988) 

Switzerland, which happens to be 
one of the top investors in the Philippines, 
extended: 



1. A total of $43 million techni- 
cal loan-grant package. 

Italy (June 1988) 

Italy, the staunchest political and 
economic ally of the Philippines in Eu- 
rope and the first European country to 
recognize the Aquino government, had 
been the most generous European eco- 
nomic benefactor of the country. It ex- 
tended the largest development assist- 
ance to the Aquino government through: 

1 . The first RP-Italy Protocol of Un- 
derstanding. This Protocol of Under- 
standing which included a development 
cooperation program amounting to $270 
million in grants and highly concessional 
loans, highlighted President Aquino's 
state visit. Moreover, it also extended a 
total of $188.6 million grants and soft 
loans and $60 million in loans for CARP. 

Indonesia and Singapore (August 24- 
27,1986) 

The President took this opportunity 
to strengthen bilateral relations with our 
neighboring countries. Her visit in Indo- 
nesia resulted in the signing of: 

1 . Trade agreements covering eco- 
nomic relations and joint search and res- 
cue operations in the border areas. 

2. A memorandum which sought 
to increase air and sea links between 
the two countries. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



29 



Negara Brunei Darrusalam (August 
1988) 

President Aquino's visit succeeded in 
establishing a strong bond of friendship 
and cooperation between the two coun- 
tries. Her visit resulted in: 



1 . Brunei's firm commitment to 
assist in the proposed US$10 billion 
Philippine Aid Plan 

2. Assistance in the construction 
of a $39 million fiber optic submarine 
cable network. 



People 
Empowerment 



Borne by the people to power, President Corazon C. Aquino would 
return the favor a millionfold . She actually did more, she decided to 
institutionalize the empowerment of the people through legislation. 



Government powers which were centralized in Malacanang were sooji devolved to 
the local governments and to the autonomous regions, giving the people a freer 
hand in planning and governing their lives. She also strengthened the linkages 
between the government and peoples organizations by giving them due recognitio 
and logistical support. 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Decentralization And Local Autonomy 

The 1987 Constitution embodies defi- 
nite provisions for conferring more au- 
thority to local governments and au- 
tonomy to the regions in order to address 
historical, cultural, and political impera- 
tives. 

The bureaucracy had actively par- 
ticipated in the devolution of powers and 
functions from the central offices to the 
regional offices. Provincial and regional 
offices were set up and enhanced to fa- 
cilitate the delivery of services to the peo- 
ple in the rural areas. 

Pending the enactment of the Local 
Government Code, the President put in 
place Cabinet-level structures that would 
formulate and implement policies and 



programs that would pave the way for a 
true and meaningful local autonomy. 

As an initial undertaking, the Presi- 
dent created the Cabinet Action Commit- 
tee on Decentralization (CACD) in 1988 
which implemented the Pilot Decentrali- 
zation Project (PDP). The PDP was to 
provide structures, mechanisms, and re- 
| sources to support local autonomy by pi- 
! lot testing innovative decentralization 
| schemes in five provinces which was later 
expanded to 15. 

The PDP successfully laid the foun- 
dation for legislative initiatives toward 
decentralization and local autonomy 
such as the Local Government Code. The 
lessons learned in Phases I and II of the 
PDP served as inputs in the formulation 
of the Code. 



The President sets the Local Government Code in action. 




The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



33 



Regarding regional autonomy, the 
Cordillera Administrative Region in the 
north and the Autonomous Region for 
Muslim Mindanao in the south were es- 
tablished. 



Regional And Local Development 
Councils 

In November 1987, the President is- 
sued Executive Order No. 308, which 
empowered the Regional Development 




Meeting with Misuari in September 1986. 



The powers and functions of the Au- 
tonomous Regional Government are tre- 
mendous. It is vested with powers to ex- 
ercise jurisdiction over matters covering 
administrative organization; creation of 
sources of revenues; ancestral domain 
and natural resources; personal, family 
and property relations; regional, urban 
and rural planning and development; 
economic, social, and tourism develop- 
ment; and educational policies. 



Councils (RDCs) to be the "primary in- 
stitutions in the region which shall set the 
direction of economic and social devel- 
opment". E.O. 308 defined the RDC 
membership and prescribed that one- 
fourth of the composition was to come 
from representatives of the private sec- 
tor. This move was meant to involve the 
private sector in regional planning and 
development efforts. 



34 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The RDCs were mandated to admin- 
ister most of the Integrated Area Devel- 
opment Programs (IADPs). This included 
authority over the finances of the IADPs. 
To strengthen the RDCs, a Regional De- 
velopment Fund was instituted in 1988 
to finance the operating requirements and 
capital outlays of regional and local de- 
velopment projects identified and 
adopted by the RDCs. 

The Department of Interior and Lo- 
cal Governments (DILG) assisted in or- 
ganizing Local Development Councils at 
all levels. As of December 31, 1989, 99 
percent of 75 provinces, 100 percent of 
the 60 cities, and 96 percent of the 1,534 
municipalities had already organized 
Local Development Councils. In coordi- 
nation with the RDCs, the DILG con- 
ducted information drive and/or train- 
ing activities among the local develop- 
ment councils to keep them abreast with 
their functions, duties, and government 
program thrusts. 

More public funds had been allo- 
cated to Local Government Units (LGUs) 
- from P5.6 billion in 1985 to PI 6.6 bil- 
lion in 1990. Excluding debt service and 
net lending payments, PI 47.2 billion or 
close to two-thirds of the 1990 budget 
had been earmarked for capital projects 
in the different regions. 



Decentralization In Budget Prepara- 
tion And Allocation 

Under the Aquino administration, 
budget preparation was participated in 
by all national government agencies as 
well as Regional Development Councils. 
It held sectoral consultations where each 
sector prioritized its funding require- 
ments based on the sectoral ceiling, and 
through RDC-agency workshops to en- 
sure that agency budgets and physical 
targets per region supported the regional 
needs and priorities. 

Where before the budget was appor- 
tioned to various regions that did not 
specify the breakdown by project cat- 
egory or by province, the Aquino admin- 
istration adopted the more decentralized 
approach to regional budgeting known 
as the "block" or "lump sum" approach 
initiated by the Department of Budget 
and Management (DBM). During Presi- 
dent Aquino's term, the RDCs sub-allo- 
cated the lump sums using the following 
criteria: 20 percent of the total to be 
equally divided among the provinces of 
the region, 30 percent to be allotted on 
the basis of population, and the remain- 
ing 50 percent to be apportioned in ac- 
cordance with measures of scarcity or 
availability of infrastructure facilities ex- 
isting in the region. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



35 



The decentralization policy of the na- 
tional government as implemented by the 
DBM devolved additional authorities 
and responsibilities to LGUs and DBM 
regional offices. 

The authority to review provincial 
and city budgets, hire new personnel, and 
purchase equipment was delegated to 
governors and city mayors to hasten the 
implementation of their own priority 
programs and projects. 



NGOs are involved in policy planning, 
decision making, implementation, and 
evaluation of programs and projects. 

The development of NGOs became 
synonymous with people empowerment. 
It moved along two mutually enriching 
directions: increasing NGO involvement 
in government programs and decreasing 
government assistance to NGO pro- 
grams. The administration efforts were 
directed toward the encouragement and 
capability-building of NGOs. 




The President admires hand-made cross-stitch towels made by Nancy 
Yadao at Pineda-Pasig livelihood project under the Development Ad- 
vocacy for Women Volunteerism, October 7, 1991. 



GO-NGO Partnership 

The Aquino administration actively 
promoted the development of NGOs as 
a strategy to empower the people. Mean- 
ingful development is achieved when 



The 1987 Constitution laid the foun- 
dation for the development of the NGOs. 
It encourages the formation of non- 
governmental, community-based, or 
sectoral organizations that promote the 
welfare of the nation. It also guarantees 



36 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



the "right of the people and their organi- 
zations to effective and reasonable par- 
ticipation at all levels of social, political 
and economic decision-making". 

A landmark law for people empow- 
erment was the New Local Government 
Code which institutionalized and en- 
hanced the partnership between NGOs 
and LGUs. The Code provided for the in- 
volvement of NGOs and the private sec- 
tor in local development councils, deliv- 
ery of basic services, joint ventures and 
cooperative programs, financial and 
other forms of assistance, and in financ- 
ing and construction. It also gave prefer- 
ential treatment for cooperatives devel- 
opment and organizations. 

The Medium-Term Philippine Devel- 
opment Plan 1987-1992 which was 
adopted through Presidential Proclama- 
tion No. 51 on December 1 2, 1 986 made 
explicit the role of NGOs and commu- 
nity organizations as the: "prime mover 
of development ... the lead in undertak- 
ing and sustaining programs and 
projects aimed at improving the Philip- 
pine socioeconomic situation". 

From 1987 to 1992, various partner- 
ship modes between GOs and NGOs had 
evolved. These flowed into three streams 
of people-empowerment: 1) socioeco- 
nomic development vital for poverty al- 



leviation; 2) disaster management for ca- 
lamity-stricken areas; and 3) political de- 
velopmental activities necessary to pre- 
serve democratic institutions and the 
progress gained. 

The underlying theme for all these ef- 
forts in promoting GO-NGO partnership 
is doing things the kabisig way - enlisting 
the active support of all sectors, includ- 
ing the private sector, toward establish- 
ing an economically self-reliant, socially 
participative and responsible, and politi- 
cally progressive and stable, nation and 
citizenry. 

Thus, the Kabisig Peoples' Move- 
ment, institutionalized in Proclamation 
No. 650 and in Article XII of the Consti- 
tution, had been a movement for people 
empowerment and developmental objec- 
tives. It was tasked to facilitate, coordi- 
nate, and monitor the implementation of 
programs and projects, and provide link- 
ages between and among the private sec- 
tor and government agencies and instru- 
mentalities. 

Its accomplishments included the 
launching of the Kabisig Livelihood Pro- 
gram, the Kabisig Resource Comple- 
mentation Program, the Kabisig 
Kabuhayan Centers nationwide, and the 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



37 



Kabisig fairs and exhibits. There were 
also the Kabisig projects under govern- 
ment agencies such as the Tulong sa Tao 
of the DTI, the Integrated Social Forestry 
and Livelihood Project of the DENR, and 
the Bamboo Reforestation Project of the 
DND. 

NGOs For Socioeconomic Develop- 
ment 

It was in this first stream where most 
GO-NGO partnership arrangements 
were explored and attained the most 
gains. Exemplary partnerships in this 
area included: 

o Integrated People's Livelihood 
Cooperative System of the Department 
of Agriculture which provided financing, 
technical, and training assistance, and 
values education for farmer coopera- 
tives; 

o Community Mortgage Program 
where urban poor NGOs negotiated and 
purchased the land, and initiated hous- 
ing projects with assistance from govern- 
ment housing agencies. Since the onset 
of the program, some 200,000 urban 
poor families had availed of the CMP; 

o President' s Social Fund where 
NGOs were tapped to construct 



schoolbuildings, potable water systems, 
and provide livelihood to identified ben- 
eficiaries; and 

o Special Development Area Pro- 
gram of various government agencies 
where NGO networks were utilized to 
fast track development projects in pov- 
erty stricken and insurgency infested 
areas. 

NGOs For Disaster Relief And Reha- 
bilitation 

This may be considered the tradi- 
tional form of partnership where NGOs 
automatically respond to the immediate 
needs of relief mobilization and the task 
of rehabilitation and reconstruction. 

The Integrated Livelihood Recon- 
struction Program for Earthquake Vic- 
tims (ILRP-EV1) and Eruption Victims 
(ILRP-EV2) of the Office of the President 
exemplified NGO involvement in recon- 
struction work. An estimated 300,000 
beneficiaries had benefited from the re- 
stored footrails, footbridges, communal 
irrigation systems, pumps, flood control 
dikes; desiltation of farmlands, rivers and 
earth dams; and the farm tools, equip- 
ment and machineries provided through 
the assistance of about 50 NGOs. 



38 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




Former NPA Supremo Dante Buscayno assists the President in inau- 
gurating a manual water pump in Kalangitan Aeta Resettlement and 
Rehabilitation Center in Capas, Tarlac. 



NGOs had also been involved in early 
warning systems. For example, local 
farmers had been made part of the Flood 
Warning System to disseminate informa- 
tion about water levels and to initiate 
evacuation to relocation sites. With the 
growing concern on lahar flow from Mt. 
Pinatubo and other volcanic activities in 
other parts of the country, local 
neighborhood associations had also been 
tapped as channels for information and 
feedback. 

NGOs For Policy-Advocacy And Con- 
tingency Planning 

This area involved the utilization of 
NGOs in generating support to demo- 
cratic organizations: 



o Drugwatch with a network of 200 
NGOs who linked up with the local po- 
lice and Armed Forces to identify and ap- 
prehend drug pushers, among others; 

o National Coalition for Transpar- 
ency where NGOs assisted in energizing 
the bureaucracy. It aided in the formu- 
lation of policies to reduce red tape, and 
graft and corruption in frontline services; 

o Emergency Coordinating Council 
which was organized with NGOs. In- 
cluded in its Contingency Planning were 
the linkages with NGOs for swift mobili- 
zation in times of destabilization such as 
coup attempts; and the 

o Multisectoral Contingency Plan- 
ning where five task forces with NGO rep- 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



39 




40 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



resentation were created to address the 
adverse effects of the 1990 Gulf war. The 
task forces were for food, fiscal and mon- 
etary reforms, freedom and security, for- 
eign exchange, and oil. 

Institutional Development 

Towards institutionalizing govern- 
ment's partnership with NGOs, each de- 
partment or agency tasked specific units 
< >r persons in coordinating with NGOs at 
the national and local levels. Specifically, 
these desks officers had been tasked to: 
1) relate with leaders of the major NGO 
networks and federations; 2) assist in 
policy formulation; 3) provide informa- 
tion regarding the progress of activities 
in their respective agencies; and 4) com- 
municate with their local levels, the 
policies and program development re- 
lated to GO-NGO matters. 

To coordinate the activities of these 
NGO liaison officers, the NGO Liaison 
System was created in 1989 to bring to- 
gether the liaison officers of 70 govern- 
ment agencies with critical frontline serv- 
ices. The System served as a forum 
where operational issues on NGO mat- 
ters were discussed. The System also 
launched the NGO Capability Building 
Program where NGOs with capabilities 
to organize were tapped to assist smaller 
NGOs develop their own capabilities. 



Under the Program, eight NGOs were 
tapped to train smaller NGOs on com- 
munity organizing. 

New Local Government Code 

On October 1991, Republic Act 
No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local 
Government Code was signed into law. 
The Code aimed to enable local govern- 
ment units (LGUs) to attain their fullest 
development as self-reliant commu- 
nities and make them more effective 
partners in the attainment of national 
goals. It also sought to give them more 
powers, authority, responsibilities, and 
resources. 

"Devolution" was the key word. The 
Code mandated that national govern- 
ment agencies must devolve functions, 
responsibilities, and even facilities, 
records, equipment, assets, and person- 
nel to LGUs. 

The local governments were to as- 
sume the delivery of basic services and 
facilities in the following areas: agricul- 
tural support services; health and social 
welfare services including maintenance 
of hospitals, health centers, and day care 
centers; general hygiene and sanitation; 
beautification and solid waste collection; 
maintenance of roads and bridges; local 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



41 



infrastructures intended primarily to 
serve the residents; community forest 
projects; and other projects. 

The basic services and facilities were 
to be funded from the share of the LGUs 
in the proceeds of national taxes and 
other local revenues and funding support 
from the national government, its 
instrumentalities, and government- 
owned or -controlled corporations. Any 
fund or resource available for the use of 



LGUs should first be allocated to provide 
basic services or facilities. 

On February 24, 1992, President 
Aquino issued Executive Order No. 507 
directing the transfer of the amounts ap- 
propriated in the 1 992 General Appro- 
priations Act for devolved services and 
facilities, and projects and activities of 
affected national government agencies 
and departments to the Internal Revenue 
Allotment (IRA) of the LGUs. 



4 



Energizing 

the 
Bureaucracy 



ransparency in governance was what President Corazon C. Aquino 
directed. Slie led by example. Honest, frugal, and with an unassail- 
able integrity, she set the tone of true public service. Under her 
administration, the Salary Standardization was implemented which 
made the payscale of government workers approximating those in the private 
sector. 

Aquino acknowledged the public servants' worth, not just by giving them benefits 
but by making them active participants in nation building. 




44 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Promotion Of Honesty, Integrity, And 
Accountability 

Presidential Committee on Public Eth- 
ics and Accountability 

To set the moral tone to promote hon- 
esty, integrity, and accountability in pub- 
lic service, the President created the 
Presidential Committee on Public Ethics 
and Accountability through the issuance 
of Administrative Order No. 25 on May 
15, 1987. Through this Committee, the 
President and the Cabinet were able to 
coordinate the efforts of the various de- 
partments in fighting graft and corrup- 
tion and in promoting the ethical stand- 
ards of public service in the executive 
branch. 

President Aquino also approved 
the Code of Conduct and Ethical Stand- 
ards for Public Officials and Employees. 

Office of the Ombudsman 

Following a Constitutional mandate, 
the Office of the Ombudsman was cre- 
ated as an independent body to investi- 
gate complaints of any illegal act and 
conduct by any public official. It also rec- 
ommended the removal, suspension, and 
prosecution of any public official found 
guilty of wrongdoing. 



Committee on Energizing the Bureauc- 
racy 

In view of the President's concern in 
developing a results-oriented bureauc- 
racy, the Committee on Energizing the 
Bureaucracy was created in May 1988 
as a Standing Committee of the Cabinet 
Assistance System (CAS). This body rec- 
ommended appropriate double meas- 
ures to address existing gaps in policies 
and programs in the bureaucracy. 

One of the administrative reforms 
initiated by the Committee was the adop- 
tion of performance contracts for gov- 
ernment officials. This scheme was im- 
plemented government- wide through the 
Career Executive Service Board in 1990. 
It also reviewed and recommended im- 
mediately implementable programs 
which improved critical frontline services 
in the Philippine Overseas Employment 
Authority (POEA); National Bureau of 
Investigation (NBI); Land Transportation 
Office (LTO); and Department of Foreign 
Affairs (DFA). 

At the DFA, reforms were instituted 
in August 1989 to improve the passport 
processing service. This resulted in part 
to a 46 percent increase in the number of 
passports processed from 766,360 in 
1 990 to 1 ,1 20,481 in 1 991 . At the LTO, a 
significant increase in the number of 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



45 



transactions was also noted with the in- 
troduction of the Fast Lane System in 
1988. Processing time for license renewal 
applications was reduced from three 
hours to an average of 30 minutes per 
application. This had resulted in savings 
of approximately four million manhours 
or about P60 million for the 1.6 million 
applications in 1991 alone. 

Improvement in the Administration of 
Justice 

The President's issuance of Adminis- 
trative Order No. 75 on June 11, 1988 
created the Presidential Task Force on the 
Improvement of the Administration of 
Justice as a nongovernment organization. 
It was composed of officials from the 
government, private organizations, and 
the academe with the primary task of re- 
viewing, prioritizing, and adopting pro- 
posals for the improvement of the admin- 
istration of justice. It was tasked to for- 
mulate short- and medium-term plans to 
improve the system and to identify 
mechanism that will sustain efficient and 
effective performance of the reforms to 
be instituted. 

The Task Force developed a Case 
Tracking System and Productivity Im- 
provement Program which recorded and 



monitored the performance of 150 fiscals 
and 2,500 assistant fiscals nationwide. A 
data base system was also developed 
which the Department of Justice used in 
determining the grant of incentives and 
promotions in the department as well as 
the imposition of administrative penal- 
ties to erring employees. 

Review and Monitoring of Agency Per- 
formance 

Through the President's initiative, 
several measures to enhance account- 
ability in government had been imple- 
mented. Upon her instruction, all agen- 
cies set well-defined targets and their 
performance was regularly monitored. 
For this purpose, a mechanism for 
yearend assessment of government per- 
formance had been adopted. The Presi- 
dent tasked the then Cabinet Secretariat 
to coordinate all activities relevant to this 
effort in order to facilitate each agency's 
review and monitoring of performance. 

Raised Standards And Streamlined 
Operations 

Upgrading of Standards 

One of the methods developed to up- 
grade the standard of the bureaucracy 



46 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



was the institutionalization of a perform- 
ance appraisal system as a prerequisite 
in any personnel action particularly serv- 
ing as a basis for promotion. With the 
system in place, a government employee 
with a rating of "very satisfactory" for 
two consecutive rating periods can be 
promoted. 

The entry standards for the civil serv- 
ice were also raised. The passing grade 
for the civil service eligibility examina- 
tion was raised from 70 to 80 percent. 
With the above increase, the government 
expects to employ the best and the bright- 
est among the applicants. In 1991, eligi- 
bility requirement was strictly imposed 
which minimized granting of temporary 
appointments. 

Likewise, the schedule of penalties 
for administrative offenses had been up- 
graded. 

Systems Improvement 

The "Do Away with the Red Tape" 
(DART) Program and the "Ang 
Magalang, Bow" courtesy campaign in- 
stilled courtesy in the frontline personnel 
of agencies and cut unnecessary docu- 
mentation requirements in the agency. 
Public Assistance Centers were institu- 
tionalized in all government offices as 
part of the deregulation thrust of the 
Aquino administration. 



Maayos na Kapaligiran, 
Mahusay na 
Paglillngkod-Bayan 




The bureaucracy also started com- 
puterizing the government personnel 
records. Moreover, the bureaucracy's 
human resource development programs 
had been deregulated and vigorously ex- 
panded. 

Easy Access 

The staggered examination scheme 
was initiated under the Aquino adminis- 
tration to facilitate the provision of civil 
service eligibility, an increasing demand 
by new graduates, and interested civil 
service entrants. Instead of holding one 
national career service examination once 
a year, examinations were given thrice a 
year in different centers nationwide. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



47 



The walk-in examination system 
where applicants can take the examina- 
tion at a date of his choice was also im- 
plemented. 

Promotion Of Employees Welfare 

Democracy m the Work Place 

As a result of the change in govern- 
ment in 1986, agencies underwent reor- 
ganization which, for a while, created 
unrest among government employees at 
all levels. 

The Aquino administration, however, 
reaffirmed and strengthened the security 



of tenure of the employees and the basic 
democratic principle of due process. An 
example was the reorganization and sub- 
sequent actions at the Bureau of Cus- 
toms. The Supreme Court upheld the 
CSC action on these cases. The legisla- 
tive supported the CSC efforts by setting 
down the ground rules on the reorgani- 
zation procedures. 

The Career Executive System was 
also recognized and this had helped in 
the stabilization of the bureaucracy. The 
merit and fitness system had been re- 
stored as the sole criteria for entry, re- 
tention, and advancement in government 
service. 



;emen and teachers 

KA 1 mmhii viULhOt,r«JHi ui i, mtirurm«mj^ 




48 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Increased Salaries and Benefits 

The Salary Standardization Law was 
enacted and passed through the initia- 
tive of the executive to promote uniform- 
ity in wages across the bureaucracy. This 
had been regarded as the most substan- 
tial upgrading of government salaries in 
the history of the Philippine civil serv- 
ice. Likewise, the government wage 
structure was finally rationalized so that 
distortions and inequities were largely 
eradicated. 

Moreover, the package of govern- 
ment employees benefits were made per- 
manent upon the initiative of the Chief 
Executive. The 13th month pay for each 
employee had been continued and an ad- 
ditional PI ,000.00 cash gift was initiated 
in 1989. 

New Benefits 

Measures to upgrade the financial 
condition of the civil service after the eco- 
nomic crisis brought by the July 1990 
earthquake and the June 1991 Mt. 
Pinatubo eruption was also imple- 
mented. Effective January 1991, the Per- 
manent Emergency Relief Allowance 
(PERA) for each employee below the rank 
of Assistant Director in the amount of 
P500.00 per month was integrated in the 
pay envelope of government employees. 



In the same year,monetization of leave 
credits up to 10 days per year was also 
started. 

Moreover, the Aquino administra- 
tion increased the amounts of benefits to 
Government Service Insurance System 
(GSIS) members. 



Employee Empowerment 

Public Sector Unionism 

Promotion of employee unions/ em- 
ployee associations had been a primary 
concern in keeping with the democratic 
ideals of the nation. Activities and meas- 
ures were pursued intended to give gov- 
ernment employees a bigger role and a 
stronger voice on matters that affect 
them. As a result of these efforts, employ- 
ees unions increased from 79 in 1988 to 
242 by end 1991. 

The first collective bargaining agree- 
ment in the public sector took place in 
1991 when the Memorandum of Under- 
standing between the government and 
employee representatives and govern- 
ment management represented by the 
Executive Secretary was forged. 

In support to government employees 
associations, the President released P10 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



49 



million from her Social Fund to the Com- 
pensation and Review Panel, Inc., a fed- 
eration of government employees asso- 
ciations, in February 1992. The amount 
served as a seed fund which can be 
tapped by any government employees 
cooperatives. 

Panibagong Sigla 2000 

To implement other administrative 
reforms of the Aquino administration, 



Panibagong Sigla 2000 was launched in 
March 1991 . The program was expected 
to address the gaps in policies and pro- 
grams, institutionalize reforms through 
consultative and active participation 
of government employees to make the 
bureaucracy more responsive, and pre- 
pare the public service for the chal- 
lenges and opportunities in the year 
2000. 



Legacy 




Economic 





he economy was hemorrhaging when President Corazon C. Aquino 
assumed leadership in 19S6. There was flight in capital, the nation 
was heavily in debt, national banks were in the red, inflation was 
galloping, and GNP was plunging continuously down. The Aquino 



administration stopped all these and turned the economy around. 



Although having to do with only about half of the national budget (since the 
other half was meant to honor obligations), the Aquino administration did 
remarkably well in delivering bask services to the people. And in putting the 
country back on track towards being an NIC in the year 2000. 



52 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



SECTORAL GAINS 

Agriculture: Towards A Market- 
Oriented Economy 

One of the most significant accom- 
plishments of the Aquino administration 
was the restoration of a market-oriented 
economy and the dismantling of crony 
capitalism and economic cartels in the 
sugar and coconut industries. These 
measures and others carried out imme- 
diately upon its assumption to office 
partly explain the resilience of the 
economy despite the series of natural and 
man-made disasters that confronted the 
country's economy. Agriculture served 
as the safety net as it proved to be a more 
efficient and consistent earner and saver 
of foreign exchange. When the perform- 
ance of all the sectors of the economy 
went down, only the agricultural sector 
registered positive growth rate. For the 
years 1986-90, the agricultural sector 
grew by an average of 3.14 percent, 11 
percent higher than the targetted growth 
rate. 

The specific measures taken were: 

o abolition of the meat importation 
cartel; 

o breaking up of the fertilizer car- 
tel; 



o dismantling of cargo handling 
cartels; 

o lifting of price controls which hin- 
dered market development dur- 
ing normal situations; 

o abolition of quantitative restric- 
tions on the importation of all 
fertilizer grades; 

o lifting of the copra export ban; 

o relaxation of restrictions on the 
establishment of dessicated coco- 
nut plants; and 

o bidding out of fertilizer grants to 
the private sector. 

The Aquino administration also intro- 
duced reforms in the sector with the re- 
moval of all agricultural export taxes 
and exemption of all primary agricul- 
tural products from the value added tax 
(VAT); lowering of tariff rates on ferti- 
lizer; reduction of tariff rates on fishing 
vessels and animal breeders; and, priva- 
tization or leasing of government-owned 
postharvest processing facilities to 
farmer associations. 

Four themes characterized the 
Aquino administration's record in agri- 
culture: 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



53 



1) Agricultural production served 
as the bulwark of the economy despite 
tremendous constraints and major ca- 
lamities. 

In 1991, although the country expe- 
rienced a backlash from the Gulf War 
and suffered from the Mt. Pinatubo erup- 
tion, drought at the start and end of the 
year, and several typhoons, agriculture 
still achieved a 2 percent growth for the 
entire year. In addition, good harvests in 
rice and corn stimulated by the Rice Ac- 
tion Program (RAP) and the Corn Pro- 
duction Enhancement Program (CPEP) 
allowed the country to gain self-suffi- 
ciency and to export. For the period 1 987 
to 1991, rice production increased from 
6.7 million M.T. to 7.3 million M.T. while 
corn production increased from 3.01 mil- 
lion M.T. to 3.4 million M.T. 

2) The market-orientation of agri- 
culture had been realized. 

The Livelihood Enhancement for Ag- 
ricultural Development (LEAD) Program 
was designed to spur farmer entrepre- 
neurship. It had extended assistance in 
project packaging, fund sourcing, and 
management of bank-assisted livelihood 
projects, as well as financing numerous 
grant-assisted projects. 

To date, under the bank-assisted 
component of the LEAD, around P215.2 



million had been released to finance a to- 
tal of 39 projects benefiting 35,129 farm- 
ers. For the grant-assisted compo- 
nent, PI 84.72 million had been released 
to 214,194 farmers involving 3,232 
projects. 

3) The pursuit of democracy and 
development through people empower- 
ment had been enhanced and promoted. 

Over the years, the government had 
established many linkages with farmers 
and the private sector through 
multisectoral task forces, the Agriculture 
and Fishery Councils, and the Peasant 
Council. 

Special projects directed towards 
disadvantaged groups were also under- 
taken. These included: 

o Lalakas ang Katawang Sapat sa 
Sustansiya (LAKASS) Program 
which aimed at improving the 
nutrition situation in 131 nutri- 
tionally-deficient low-income 
municipalities nationwide; 

o National Reconciliation Develop- 
ment Program (NRDP) provided 
rebel returnees services which in- 
cluded livestock dispersal, seed 
and seedling distribution 
construction of small water i m ' 



54 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



pounding projects, cooperatives 
establishment, and technology 
transfer. As of 1991, 2,674 heads 
of livestock and poultry had been 
dispersed benefiting 3,074 rebel 
returnees; 35 M.T. of seedlings, 
300 bags of fertilizers had been 
distributed to 1,778 barangays; 
and 270 small water impound- 
ing projects had been con- 
structed in 270 barangays all 
over the country; 

o Tribal Agricultural Support Serv- 
ices Program benefited 6,750 
tribal farmers by extending assist- 
ance and support for farming 
systems suitable for cultural 
communities; 

o Highland Agricultural Develop- 
ment Project had increased 
the income of 17,311 upland 
farmers through the intensified 
production and diversification of 
established crops; and 

o Central Cordillera Agricultural 
Project (CECAP) had provided 
infrastructure and support serv- 
ices as well as initiated commu- 
nity resource development activi- 
ties in 22 municipalities in Nueva 
Vizcaya, Ifugao, Mountain 
Province, Abra, and Kalinga 
Apayao; 



Other area-specific projects were 
also undertaken such as the Samar Is- 
land Development Project, the Aurora 
Integrated Area Development Project, 
and various Southern Mindanao Agri- 
cultural Projects. 

4) Agricultural research had been 
rationalized. 

The National Research and Extension 
Agenda (NAREA) had provided the 
mechanism for allowing a surge in agri- 
cultural productivity through the ration- 
alization of research and extension serv- 
ices to farmers and fishermen, providing 
them access and opportunities to utilize 
cost-effective, location-specific, and ecol- 
ogy-oriented technologies. Also comple- 
menting these research and extension 
services were the Integrated Pest Man- 
agement Program and Soil Resources 
Management and Conservation Pro- 
grams which included the Sloping Agri- 
cultural Land Technology (SALT) 
Project, the Farm Home Resources Man- 
agement Project, and the Farm Youth 
Development Program. 

The increase in farm productivity 
had resulted to a corresponding increase 
in income of farmers. In 1987, the aver- 
age nominal income of farmers was only 
P31.62 per day. By 1989, farmers income 
had increased to P41.72. In real terms, 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



55 



the average income of P30.24 had inched 
up to P33.17inl989. 

Agrarian Reform: The Land Problem 
Addressed 

The Comprehensive Agrarian Re- 
form Program (CARP) as provided un- 
der the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform 
Law or R.A. 6657 was formulated, like 
its precursors, out of the need to achieve 
political and socioeconomic stability, 
particularly in the agrarian sector. 

In adherence to democratic princi- 
ples, the Aquino government took into 
full consideration the consent and pref- 



erences of the farmers and farmworkers. 
In some areas, the farmer-beneficiaries 
opted for the stock distribution in the dis- 
position of the lands awarded to them. 
The case of Hacienda Luisita and Del 
Monte are good examples. In the Haci- 
enda Luisita, majority of the farmer-ben- 
eficiaries approved a stock distribution 
plan in two referenda called to hear the 
will of the people. As for the case in Del 
Monte, the farmers' cooperative opted 
to lease the lands back to the multina- 
tional. 

Moving a program of CARP's mag- 
nitude in a democracy meant not only 



The President awards emancipation patents to a farmer in Mindanao. 



r 



1 *' « 




n 



f f 

s fat 

. 4 . 



4 




56 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



reconciling the need for action with the 
need for consultation but also reconcil- 
ing the need for accuracy with cost effi- 
ciency. There had been too many things 
that had to be done at the same time with 
so limited human and financial resources. 
There were also the complicated account- 
ing and auditing systems and the rest of 
the bureaucracy to contend with. Yet, 
with all these limitations, CARP became 
a reality and represented a major im- 
provement over previous land reform 
laws. 

The government instituted the most 
comprehensive and the most radical 
agrarian reform this country had ever 
seen. From 822,000 hectares of rice and 
corn lands under the previous program, 
the CARP coverage was expanded to 
10.3 million hectares of public and pri- 
vate agricultural lands, including the re- 
settlement and Integrated Social Forestry 
(ISF) areas. 

The fast-track implementation of the 
CARP, particularly in land distribution, 
had further made the Program irrevers- 
ible. The Department of Agrarian Re- 
form (DAR) and the Department of En- 
vironment and Natural Resources 
(DENR) distributed 1.96 million hectares 
or 67 percent of the targets to about one 
million farmer-beneficiaries. The back- 
logs during the previous administration 



which consisted of Operation Land 
Transfer (OLT) lands and landed estates 
were likewise absorbed under RA 6657. 



Land Distribution Performance 

JULY 1987 to JULY 1991 
(Areas in Hectares) 




GOVT 210.233(10 7%) PAL 62 380 (3 2 ; '=) 



The number of beneficiaries in- 
creased from 16,750 in 1986 and 26,570 
in 1987 to 627,304 in 1991. The actual 
farmer-beneficiaries of the program to- 
talled around 1.04 million farmers in- 
cluding those with land titles; and those 
who benefited from production and 
profit-sharing, stock distribution option, 
leasehold operations, and ISF lands. 

Through the Land Bank of the Phil- 
ippines, CARP provided PI 0.36 billion 
in credit. CARP also delivered such other 
support services as postharvest facilities, 
extension services, and small water im- 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



57 



pounding projects through the Depart- 
ment of Agriculture (DA); farm-to-mar- 
ket roads through the DPWH; commu- 
nal irrigation systems through the Na- 
tional Irrigation Administration (NIA); 
common service facilities through the 
DTI; formation of self-reliant organiza- 
tions through the Department of Labor 
and Employment (DOLE); access trails, 
impounding dams, and soil conservation 
structures through the DENR; and infor- 
mation and education programs, organi- 
zation-building, and skills enhancement 
trainings through the DAR. 

Environment And Natural Resources: 
Strategy For Sustainable Development 

Realizing the extent of environmen- 
tal ruin it inherited and its consequent 
adverse effejct on the country's natural 
resources, the Aquino administration 
adopted a strategy that integrated natu- 
ral resource utilization and environmen- 
tal protection. Such strategy was insti- 
tuted into what is known as the Philip- 
pine Strategy for Sustainable Develop- 
ment (PSSD). 

Government embarked on a number 
of policy reforms and programs that 
sought to address the problems and is- 
sues relating to the environment and the 
exploitation of natural resources. These 
included: 



1 . Forest Protection. Logging was 
banned in all old-growth forests thereby 
shifting logging operations to residual 
forests. All virgin forests were also placed 
under a protected area status. Likewise, 
a no-log-export policy was adopted re- 
ducing log exports from a volume of 
295,912 cubic meters (cu.m.) to 2,358 
cu.m. in 1991. 

The drive against illegal logging and 
other enforcement activities was intensi- 
fied. This resulted in the confiscation of 
around 383,251 cu.m. of logs and lum- 
ber. In addition, 169 sawmills were ei- 
ther closed or suspended. Timber License 
Agreements (TLAs) were cancelled such 
that in March 1992, there were only 55 
TLAs from the 242 TLAs in 1986. 

These combined forest protection ac- 
tivities resulted in the deceleration of the 
deforestation rate from a high of 21 0,000 
hectares per year in 1969 to 1988 to 
88,000 in 1991. 

2. Forestation. In 1989, around 
3,356,363 individuals or 5.5 percent of 
the total 1990 population were residing 
in forests. To improve the tenure and live- 
lihood opportunities of these forest set- 
tlers, a number of forestation programs 
were implemented. The biggest of these 
programs was the National Forestation 
Program (NFP). 



58 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Integrated Social Forestry Pro- 
gram (ISFP) provided tenure and liveli- 
hood to 200,000 families in the uplands 
with the awarding of 1 60,458 Certificates 
of Stewardship Contracts (CSCs) and the 
development of 241,393 hectares of 
agroforestry plantations. 

Under the Community Forestry Pro- 
gram (CFP), some 33 CFP projects were 
established with 33 NGOs undertaking 
community organizing and providing 
technical assistance. 

The Industrial Forest Plantation 
Management Agreement allowed a quali- 
fied person to occupy and possess for a 
specified rental fee any forest land of the 
public domain in order to establish in- 
dustrial forest plantations. A total of 47 
Industrial Forest Plantation Lease Agree- 
ments were issued covering an aggregate 
area of 150,586 hectares. 

A milestone in the drive to ensure a 
clean and healthy environment was the 
passage of Republic Act No. 6969, on 
Toxic and Hazardous Wastes. The law 
prohibited storage, transport, collection, 
processing and disposal of hazardous 
wastes in a manner that would present 
potential risk of injury to health and en- 
vironment. 

A Rivers Revival Program for Metro 
Manila was also undertaken. The pro- 



gram aimed to dredge and clean major 
river systems such as the Tenejeros- 
Tullahan-Navotas-Malabon water sys- 
tem. 

In the mining sector, a significant 
accomplishment was the passage of 
the People's Mining Act or RA 7076. The 
law provided for greater access of small 
miners to the country's mineral re- 
sources. 

To correct historical injustices and 
to ease the tension in the uplands, 
59 Certificates of Ancestral Land 
Claims (CALCs) which covered a total 
area of 661,290 square meters were is- 
sued. It benefited 2,483 families from 
seven cultural communities in five prov- 
inces. 

Trade And Industry: Backbone Of A 
Developing Country 

Simultaneous to efforts in reestab- 
lishing democratic processes and institu- 
tions, the Aquino government began the 
gargantuan task of extracting the coun- 
try out of the economic rubble. 

For the period 1985 to 1988, the pov- 
erty incidence was significantly lowered: 
from 44 to 32 percent in the NCR; 55.9 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



59 



to 50 percent in the Luzon area; a high 
71.2 to 59 percent in the Visayas area; 
and 63.1 to 51 percent in the Mindanao 
area. 

The implementation of structural 
reforms in the economy and the tremen- 
dous amount of goodwill generated 
by the historical events of February 1986, 
which restored business and consumer 
confidence, pushed real growth in the 
Gross National Product (GNP) from 4.2 
percent in 1986 to 7.2 percent in 
1988. 

Real GNP growth posted an average 
annual increase of 4.3 percent from 1 986 
to 1991, a turnaround from the 0.6 per- 
cent average contraction recorded dur- 
ing the previous six years. Analysis of the 
sectoral trends showed an impressive 
performance of the construction sector, 
which buoyed up the overall industrial 
performance. 

However, by 1989, macroeconomic 
imbalances due to structural weaknesses 
in Philippine industries, rapidly growing 
fiscal deficit, external debt overhang, po- 
litical instability, and the slowdown of the 
global economy, began to take its toll. 
The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
growth therefore dropped to negative 1 .2 



GNP Growth 

























































Annual average grown 

4.34% 







•6 



1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 



percent in 1991 from an average growth 
'of 4.6 percent in 1986-90. 

Inflationary Pressures, Budgetary Defi- 
cit, and Stabilization Measures 

The inflation rate significantly de- 
clined from 23 percent in 1985 to a sin- 
gle-digit average of 9.1 percent from 
1986-92. As of May 1992, the inflation 
rate was pegged at 9.2 percent. 

To contain inflationary pressures and 
stop speculations on the peso, the Cen- 
tral Bank engaged in open market op- 
erations through the issuance of treasury 
bills while managing more carefully and 
monitoring the growth of monetary ag- 



60 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



gregates to help attain real GNP growth 
targets. 

Stabilization measures initiated in 
1990 called for the raising of reserve re- 
quirements against deposits and deposit 
substitute liabilities from 21 percent in 
March 1990 to 25 percent in December 
1 990 up to the present. This mopped up 
liquidity in the financial system and at- 
tracted the holding of the peso vis-a-vis 
the US dollar. While the short-term re- 
sults meant higher interest rates, the 
stabilization measures and the much im- 
proved performance in government cash 
operations had been able to reduce these 
rates. 

Government financial institutions 
pursued administrative improvement 
programs which enabled them to make 
better collection rates: the Bureau of In- 
ternal Revenue's (BIR) collection ratio as 
a percent of GNP rose from 7.7 percent 
in 1985 to 9.2 percent in 1991; while the 
Bureau of Customs' (BOC) ratio rose 
from 3.0 to 5.1 percent for the same pe- 
riod. 

Overall, the tax revenues of the gov- 
ernment grew annually by an average of 
20.4 percent from P65.5 billion in 1986 
to PI 82.0 billion in 1 991 . As a result, the 
tax effort of the Philippines had steadily 
increased from 10.6 percent in 1986 to 
14.4 percent by 1991. 



Tax Effort Ratio 



% of GNP 



P151.7B P182.0B 



P 122.5 B 



P85.9B 



P65 5 B 



P90 3 B 



1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 



The intensified collection efforts cou- 
pled with cost-cutting measures enabled 
the national government to reduce its 
budget deficit. From a deficit of P30.6 



National Government Deficit 



% of GNP 




1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 199 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



61 



billion in 1 986 or 5.2 percent of GNP, this 
was trimmed down to P26.3 billion in 
1991 or 2.1 percent of GNP. 

Export Development and Promotion 

The period 1986-91 saw a steady in- 
crease in our exports earnings from 
US$4.84 billion in 1986 to US$8.84 bil- 
lion in 1991. 

Aside from the sustained rise in ex- 
port value, a positive development came 
by way of a more diversified export base. 
There was a shift from traditional to 
nontraditional products such as gifts, 
toys, housewares, and fashion accesso- 
ries. From 71.2 percent in 1986, 
nontraditionals constituted 88 percent of 
total exports by 1990. Also, industrial 
manufactures strengthened their share to 
total exports from 36 percent in 1987 to 
49 percent in 1990. 

To sustain the trend, the National Ex- 
port Development Program was imple- 
mented with the following compo- 
nents: 

1. Export Enterprise Development 
Program. This program sought to main- 
tain and improve the competitiveness of 
exporters countrywide through the ex- 
pansion of their product base, increase 



I in productivity, and the improvement of 
management and professionalism in the 
export sector. 

From 1987-91, the Philippine Trade 
Training Center (PTTC) conducted 500 
various training programs/seminars for 
exporters, training more than 20,000 cur- 
rent and would-be exporters as well as 
government personnel involved in export 
promotion. 

On the other hand, the Product De- 
velopment and Design Center of the Phil- 
ippines (PDDCP) which provides export- 
ers product development and design ad- 
aptation, created 21,722 designs for 
26,562 clients. Further, the Center held a 
total of 156 workshops which covered 
not only designs, but also technological 
processes that could improve product 
quality. These workshops benefited 8,578 
exporters and would-be exporters. 

2. Export Market Development Pro- 
gram. This addressed the need to in- 
crease the country's share in target mar- 
kets, reduce deficits in bilateral trade, 
and diversify product and buyer com- 
positions. 

The Foreign Service Trade Corps 
(FSTC) provided commercial intelligence 
reports, country briefs, and product 
trend reports while the Bureau of Export 



62 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Trade Promotion (BETP) developed 
market studies, regional and market 
strategies, product situationers for dis- 
semination to exporters, and trade op- 
portunity reports which were also dis- 
tributed to specific enterprises. 

Since 1989, the FSTC had reported 
21,612 trade opportunities and 2,216 in- 
vestment opportunities. Through its ef- 
forts, 2,644 foreign buyers and 973 po- 
tential investors had expressed interest 
in doing business in the Philippines. 

In addition, the Center for Interna- 
tional Trade Expositions and Missions 
(CITEM) had provided direct buyer and 
market exposure to 15,693 exporters 
which generated export sales of over 
US$825 million. This was done through 
promotional events such as 527 market 
weeks, trade and selling missions and 
trade fairs both here and abroad. 

3. Export Environment Develop- 
ment Program. This program was re- 
sponsible for the strengthening of the pri- 
mary institutions for export in the public 
and private sectors; effecting better link- 
age and coordination between govern- 
ment and private sector in planning and 
implementing export development pro- 
grams and liberalization; and streamlin- 
ing of administrative procedures and 
regulations. 



An essential and necessary compo- 
nent of the economic recovery program 
was the passage of Executive Order 499 
which created an Export and investment 
Development Council. The Council 
was tasked to provide direction, guide- 
lines, and coherence to the development 
and promotion of exports and invest- 
ments. 

Executive Order No. 266, which cre- 
ated the One-Stop Processing Center for 
Tax Credit Duty Drawback, streamlined 
various government agencies documen- 
tary requirements for processing appli- 
cations, thus shortened processing time 
and safeguarded the system from undue 
claims. 

The foreign exchange liberalization 
measures that eased restrictions on the 
repatriation of investments and gave ex- 
porters increased access to foreign ex- 
change at lower costs included: 1 ) the full 
and immediate repatriation and remit- 
tance privileges for all types of invest- 
ments provided they had registered with 
the Central Bank; 2) the liberalization of 
the eligibility of deposits under the For- 
eign Currency Deposit System; and 3) 
the raising of the dollar retention ceiling 
of exporters of commodities from 2 
percent to 40 percent of their export 
receipts. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



63 



Domestic Trade 

Whenever prices of basic commodi- 
ties threatened to escalate such as dur- 
ing the Gulf War and after the 1989 at- 
tempted coup, price ceilings were im- 
posed to protect the consumers. Other 
price stabilization efforts included the or- 
ganization of price monitoring teams 
which assisted in enforcing price controls 
and the setting up of product monitor- 
ing committees and the Bantay Bilihin 
Volunteer Network. The private sector 
was substantially involved in these ef- 
forts. 

External Debt Management 

The Philippine authorities had con- 
sistently maintained a negotiated ap- 
proach in the management of external 
debt to keep international confidence in 
the Philippines as a reliable trading part- 
ner, borrower, and investment area. The 
country obtained financial relief from 
commercial banks and official creditors 
through: restructuring of principal pay- 
ments on both commercial bank and 
Paris Club obligations; interest restruc- 
turing on Paris Club debts; availment of 
new money for developmental financing, 
balance of payments and budgetary sup- 
port; and trade financing under the $3 
billion Revolving Trade Facility. 



Based on the last agreement with the 
Paris Club, capitalization of interest was 
increased to 100 percent from 60 percent 
during the first agreement. Moreover, 
debts previously rescheduled in the first 
three Paris Club agreements were again 
rescheduled on top of the non-previously 
scheduled maturities. An innovative fea- 
ture of the latest agreement was the pro- 
vision, on a voluntary basis, for debt 
swaps (i.e., debt-for-nature, debt-for-eq- 
uity, debt-for-aid, or other local currency 
debt swaps). 

As of 1991, about US$11.3 billion in 
outstanding debt owed to official and 
commercial bank creditors had been re- 
scheduled. 

Complementing these agreements 
was the implementation of various debt 
reduction strategies such as: 

1 ) Reduction of the debt stock. As of 
March 1992, the various debt reduction 
measures reduced debt stock by $3.1 bil- 
lion. In addition, the series of buybacks 
reduced debt by $1 .34 billion in January 
1990, $100 million in December 1991, 
and $1 .3 billion in May 1 992. 

2) Transformation of the Philippine 
creditor profile. There had been a shift 
from a generally more expensive com- 
mercial bank debt to more concessional 



64 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



bilateral and multilateral loans. For the 
period 1986 to 1991, loans outstanding 
which were due foreign commercial 
banks and financial institutions de- 
creased from 58 to 36.7 percent while 
those due bilateral and multilateral 
creditors increased from 11 to 32 per- 
cent and from 17 to 21 .7 percent, respec- 
tively. Other suppliers accounted for the 
9.6 percent by end-December 1994. 

3) Lengthening of the maturity 
structure of outstanding debt. As of end- 
December 1 991 , 1 6.1 percent of the coun- 
try's $29,956 million external debt con- 
sisted of short-term loans in contrast with 
the 33 percent of short-term liabilities at 
the beginning of 1986. 

4) Reduction in debt service burden 
as a result of reschedulings. As a result 
of rescheduling and various debt reduc- 
tion schemes, the average annual debt 
service was cut down to only $3.1 billion 
from $5.4 billion. Likewise, the debt serv- 
ice ratio after rescheduling was scaled 
down to 20.7 percent in 1991 from 35.8 
percent in 1986. 

5) Reduction of debt relative to the 
country's financial capacity. While the 
debt had grown in absolute terms, it 
had been trimmed down vis-a-vis the 
country's domestic gross output. Exter- 
nal debt as a percentage of GNP was 
recorded at 87.9 percent at the begin- 
ning of 1986, down to 67.8 percent in 
1991. 



The implementation of the 1992 
financing package with commercial 
banks is expected to provide further debt 
relief to the country. There are four 
options available under the package 
namely: cash buyback, temporary inter- 
est rate reduction (TIRR) bonds, princi- 
pal collateralized interest reduction 
(PCIR) bonds, and new money bonds. 

Philippine Assistance Program (PAP) 

The Philippine Assistance Program 
(PAP) was designed to effectively mobi- 
lize the international community's finan- 
cial support to the country to achieve the 
objectives of sustainable economic 
growth. 

In July 1989, a total of $3.52 billion 
in pledges were generated, of which $2.8 
billion were in the form of concessional 
loans and grants (ODA) and $0.65 bil- 
lion in commercial loans and investments 
(non-ODA). 

During the second pledging session 
in February 1991, $3.25 billion in ODA 
were pledged by the country's donors 
and creditors. 

Investment Performance 

Savings and Investment 

One of the benefits derived from the 
restoration of democratic institutions and 



BREAKDOWN & STATUS OF 1989 PAP PLEDGES (PAP I) 
AS OF 31 DECEMBER 1991 



Updated Pledges 
$3,516 B 



Non-ODA Pledges 
$0,650 B 



Pledges for 
Proposed/Pipeline 
Projects 
$2,759 B 



Total Committed 
$2,676 B 



ODA Pledges 
$2,866 B 



Pledges for Disburse- 
ments to Ongoing 
Projects 
$0,082 B 



Available Amount for 
Proposed Projects 
$0,020 B 



Pipeline 
$0,063 B 



BREAKDOWN & STATUS OF 1991 PAP PLEDGES (PAP II) 



ODA Pledges 
$3,255 B 









Repledges 
$0,025 B 1 


New Pledges 
$3,230 B 



Pledges for 
Proposed/Pipeline 
Projects 
$3,158 B 



Pledges for 
Disbursements to 
Ongoing Projects 
$0,073 B 



Total Committed 
$2,491 B 



Pipeline 1 
$1,186 B 



Available Amount 
for Proposed 
Projects 
$0,183 B 











Firm 
$1,172 B 


Soft j 
$0,014 B 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



65 



Savings and Investment, 1986-92 
(Ratio to GNP) 




1986 


1987 


1988 


1989 


1990 


1991 
/P 

(Low) (High) 


1992 
/e 


roreign savings 


1 A 


1 A 


1 1 
1 . 1 




D. 1 


2.6 


2.9 


? Q 


Gross Nafl Savings 


12.9 


17.0 


17.4 


18.7 


16.3 


13.3 


16.4 


16.8 


Public Savings 
Private Savings 3 


-1.2 
14.1 


1.6 
15.4 


0.5 
16.9 


0.9 
17.8 


1.2 
15.1 


3.2 
10.1 


3.9 
12.5 


3.9 
13.0 


Gross Domestic 
Investment 


















Public 
Private 


3.2 
13.2 


3.6 
14.7 


3.2 
15.3 


4.1 
18.0 


5.5 
16.9 


5.0 
10.9 


5.5 
13.8 


5.5 
14.3 


Capital Transfers 
from public to 
private sector 4 


0.6 


0.6 


1.0 


1.0 


0.7 


0.9 


1.1 


1.1 


Consolidated Public 
Sector Deficit 3 


-5.0 


-2.6 


-3.7 


-4.2 


-5.0 


-2.7 


-2.7 


-2.7 


Note: Figures may not add up to total due to rounding. 

PPrcliminary. 

Projections. 

^External current account surplus (-)/deficit (+). 



Total revenue less current expenditures of consolidated public sector. 
'Derived as a residual, i.e., includes statistical discrepancy. 
Includes net lending of social security systems. 

Public savings less public investments and transfers to the private sector. 



66 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



the policies adopted by the Aquino gov- 
ernment was the generation of more in- 
vestments in the country. 

The share of gross domestic invest- 
ments in the total output of the company 
increased from 163 percent in 1986 to 
22.4 percent in 1990. Corollarily, both 
public and private investments had in- 
creased their shares to total Gross Na- 
tional Product during the five-year pe- 
riod. Private investments made up the 
bulk of total investments consistent with 
the private sector orientation of the coun- 
try's development thrust. 

Domestic savings mobilization, how- 
ever, had not kept up with the pace of 
investment expenditure as shown by the 
growing savings and investment (S-l) 
gap. This gap was mainly caused by man- 
made and natural calamities along with 
the increasing instability of the economy 
which dampened the drive to mobilize 
savings. As a result, the S-I gap jumped 
to 3.5 percent of GNP in 1989 and fur- 
ther to 6.1 percent in 1990 when 
macroeconomic imbalances were aggra- 
vated by the Gulf crisis. 

Investment Growths 

From P3.8 billion in 1986, invest- 
ments in terms of the Board of Invest- 
ments (BOI)-approved projects remark- 



ably increased by an annual average of 
120 percent to reach PI 08.4 billion in 
1990. 

However, in 1991, investments 
dropped to P83.5 billion. This can be at- 
tributed to the Gulf Crisis, the worldwide 
recession, and the natural calamities that 
befell the country. Cumulatively, invest- 
ments from 1986-91 reached P311. 2 bil- 
lion. 

The boost in investments translated 
into the following benefits: 

o In 1 991 alone, the 2,1 24 new and 
expansion BOI-approved proj- 
ects were expected to create ad- 
ditional 139,168 jobs once fully 
operational. Based on the NEDA 
formula that one direct job opens 
up 1.6 indirect ones, another 
222,669 jobs would have been 
generated. 

o The number of direct and indi- 
rect jobs generated by BOI 
projects from 1986-91 totalled 
1 .23 million and 1 .97 million, re- 
spectively. 

o About 71 percent of all new and 
expansion projects had chosen 
regional locations making 
countrywide investments grow 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



67 




1986 1987 1988 1969 1990 1991 Total 



by an impressive annual average 
of 262 percent, a proof of the suc- 
cess of the strategies adopted to 
make the countryside an attrative 
investment site. 

Investment Strategies 

The increase in foreign and domes- 
tic investments from 1986 to 1991 was 
a result of specific policy measures 
adopted to channel new and incoming 
investments into activities with signifi- 
cant impact on overall economic 
growth. 

Streamlined Procedures for Investments 

Executive Order 226 or the Omnibus 
Investment Code, enacted in 1987, con- 



BOI-APPROVED INVESTMENTS 
No. of Projects 

No ol Projects 

4000 I 




1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 | 

I 



solidated and simplified all laws 
and regulations governing investments. 
The Code established the Council for 
Investments which set up the One-Stop 
Shop Action Center for Investments 
(OSAC). Representatives of govern- 
ment agencies involved in promoting 
and processing investment applications 
were housed in one roof to speed up 
and simplify the processing of applica- 
tions. 

The Code also required the BOI to 
act on investment applications within 
20 working days. Those which re- 
mained unacted beyond the prescribed 
period were deemed automatically ap- 
proved. 



68 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Liberalized investment policies 

To further improve the general busi- 
ness climate, investment-related reforms 
were initiated: 

o The liberalization of the country's 
investment rules was intended to 
attract more foreign investments 
and to reorient the BOI opera- 
tions to give greater emphasis on 
investment promotion rather than 
on incentive administration and 
regulation. 

o The review of equity limitations 
on foreign investments was con- 
ducted with the aim of liberaliz- 
ing these through an increase in 
the maximum allowable foreign 
equity participation in non-prior- 
ity areas up to the limits set by 
law. 

o The set of criteria for the nega- 
tive list of investment areas 
where foreign equity participa- 
tion would be restricted was for- 
mulated. 

These measures served as the bases 
for the passage by Congress of Republic 
Act No. 7042 known as Foreign Invest- 
ments Act (HA). The Act which widened 
the channels of investing in the Philip- 



pines by expanding the areas of eco- 
nomic activity where foreign equity 
was allowed had the following feat- 
ures: 

o Introduction of the concept of 
Negative List, a guide which 
clearly defined the investment ar- 
eas where equity was limited or 
restricted to a maximum of 40 
percent; 

o Liberalization of domestic mar- 
ket access for investment activi- 
ties not restricted by the list; 

o Relaxation of the definition of ex- 
port enterprise to mean at least 
60 percent export-orientation; 

o Reduction of bureaucratic proc- 
esses; and 

o Establishment of stable and 
transparent policies and proce- 
dures. 

Prior to the enactment of the Act, 
enterprises seeking more than 40 per- 
cent foreign equity had to secure the ap- 
proval of the BOI in order to do business 
in the country. With the passage of the 
Act, BOI authority was no longer re- 
quired for enterprises not seeking incen- 
tives. 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



69 



Incentive Schemes for Priority Investment 
areas 

The BOI formulated an annual In- 
vestments Priorities Plan (IPP) to direct 
investments to desired areas such that 
maximum development impact is gen- 
erated through the granting of attractive 
incentives. This would improve the prof- 
itability of investments in these areas. In 
1989, a locational investment policy was 
introduced to encourage investors to lo- 
cate in the regions by removing major in- 
centives to firms locating in Metro Ma- 
nila. As a result of this policy, 71 percent 
of investments from 1986-91 located in 
the countryside. 

Another form of incentives was pro- 
vided under Republic Act No 7369 ex- 
tending until 1994 capital equipment in- 
centives provided under Executive Or- 
der No. 226. This exempted selected im- 
ported capital equuipment from import 
taxes and duties for a period of three 
years thereby lowering the cost of invest- 
ments in productive capital equipment. 

Regional Industrialization 

The development of the countryside 
was one of the major concerns of the 
Aquino administration. To this end, strat- 
egies that brought about balanced agro- 



industrial growth were adopted through 
programs that provided for a better cli- 
mate for the regional dispersal of indus- 
tries, strengthened the small enterprise 
system, and created more jobs. 

In 1989, the DTI launched a program 
to set up Regional Industrial Centers 
(RICs) throughout the country. RICs are 
specific locations in the country's 13 re- 
gions which were envisioned to act as 
growth poles in the countryside. To at- 
tract industries to locate in these centers, 
government focused its resources on 
these sites through the installation of nec- 
essary and vital infrastructures, such as 
roads, bridges, communication, and wa- 
ter supply systems and electrical power. 

As of 1 991 , 1 6 RICs had been identi- 
fied, of which four had been launched. 
These were: 

o the CALABARZON in Batangas; 

o the PHIVIDEC Industrial Center 
in Cagayan de Oro; 

o the Pavia Agro-Industrial Center 
in Iloilo; and 

o the General Santos Agro-Indus- 
trial Center in South Cotabato. 

In addition to the RICs,the planning, 
development, and operation of private 
industrial estates and parks, and special 
processing zones, as well as the improve- 



70 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




IPX 



Aquino views the scale model of the 143-hectare Light Industry and 
Science Park in Cabuyao, Laguna on March 10, 1992. 



ment and expansion of export process- 
ing zones, were pursued. 

To fast track the development of 
these sites, the participation of the pri- 
vate sector was encouraged through 
three alternative schemes, namely: build- 
transfer (BT); build-operate-and-transfer 
(BOT); and build-operate-and-own 
(BOO). The government gave the private 
sector opportunities to participate in the 
development of infrastructural facilities, 
and at the same time, gain access to Of- 
ficial Development Assistance (ODA) 
funds. 



Thus, it was expected that through 
these schemes, the development of the in- 
frastructure needed by industries shall be 
accelerated. 

The Privatization Program: 
Some Highlights 

As part of the government corporate 
reform program, the Aquino administra- 
tion had embarked on a successful pri- 
vatization of government-owned and/or 
-controlled corporations (GOCCs) and 
transferred assets (TAs). Said program 
resulted in some notable achievements. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



71 



1. PNB and DBP Rehabilitation. 
The Asset Privatization Trust (APT) was 
created to conserve and privatize the 
nonperforming assets of the Philippine 
National Bank and Development Bank of 
the Philippines. Following the absorption 
and the subsequent privatization of said 
assets, the PNB and the DBP regained 
solid footing and exhibited highly profit- 
able operations. 

2. Provision of CARP Financing 
Requirements. Proceeds from the sale of 
the TAs were earmarked for the Com- 
prehensive Agrarian Reform Program 
(CARP). As the centerpiece program of 
the Aquino administration, it had been 
sustained by the regular remittances of 
the Asset Privatization Trust (APT) to 
the national treasury. These remittances 
amounted to PI 7.94 billion as of end 
1991. 

3. Divestment to the Private Sec- 
tor. Where before the GOCCs had en- 
tered many economic activities which 
had been the exclusive domain of private 
enterprises, in 1987, however, there was 
a shift in policy with the private sector as 
the main engine of growth and the gov- 
ernment playing a supportive role. 

As a first step, 1 22 GOCCs were ap- 
proved for privatization, 85 of which 



were offered for sale and 71 actually pri- 
vatized by June 1992. Several of these 
disposed corporations had since re- 
corded substantial increases on produc- 
tion and profitability. 

As of December 1991, some of the 
big-ticket items that had been privatized 
included the Philippine Airlines (partial 
P9.64 billion), Nonoc Mining and Indus- 
trial Corporation (P7.ll billion), Meralco 
Foundation, Inc. (P2.12 billion), Philip- 
pine National Bank (partial PI .84 billion), 
Marina Properties, Inc. (PI .78 billion), 
Philippine Plaza Holdings, Inc. (PI .50 
billion), First Philippine Holding Co. 
(PI .21 billion) and Union Bank of the Phil- 
ippines (partial PI .01 billion). 

4. Resource Mobilization. As of June 
15, 1992, privatization had generated 
P58.6 billion in cumulative revenues of 
which P36.7 billion came from TAs and 
P21.9 billion from GOCC sales. These 
proceeds boosted the revenues of the 
government and helped address its 
budget deficit. Likewise, it allowed the 
government to focus its expenditures on 
other priority projects. 

Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) 

SMEs are vital in accelerating the in- 
dustrialization of a country. They gener- 



72 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ate investments, create employment op- 
portunities due to their labor intensive na- 
ture, and provide livelihood programs 
and projects in the rural areas. 

As limited access to low-cost credit 
hampered the development of SMEs, 
DTI continuously networked with 2,000 
NGOs and private voluntary organiza- 
tions (PVOs) to implement innovative 
livelihood programs. These organizations 
acted as conduits to make credit more 
accessible to the SMEs in the countryside. 
These programs were: 

o Tulong sa Tao-Self-Employment 
Loan Assistance (TST-SELA) 

o Nongovernmental Organiza- 
tional Micro Credit Project 
(NGO-MCP) 

o Tulong sa Tao Subcontracting 
Facility (TST-SCF) 

o Micro Enterprise Development 
Program-Countryside Develop- 
ment Fund (MEDP-CDF) 

o Industrial Guarantee Loan Fund- 
Micro Financing Program (IGLF- 
MFP) 

o Cottage Enterprises Finance Pro- 
gram (CEFP) 



o Tulong Pangkabuhayan ng DTI 

(TUNGKOD) 
o Livelihood Assistance for Victims 

Affected by Eruptions of Mt. 

Pinatubo (LAVA) 

From 1987-91, the total amount of 
loans released under the said Programs 
was P628.5 million. Assistance was like- 
wise provided to more than 61,000 ben- 
eficiaries engaged in manufacturing, 
trading, agro-processing, and other re- 
lated business. In addition, a total of 
60,000 jobs were generated. 

Aside from financial assistance, the 
Aquino administration also provided 
managerial, entrepreneurial, and man- 
power skills development and upgrad- 
ing. Over 5,000 skills training programs 
attended by more than 120,000 partici- 
pants and nearly 2,000 managerial train- 
ing programs attended by more than 
52,000 existing and potential entrepre- 
neurs were conducted. 

The Cottage Industry Technology 
Center (CITC) was established to assist 
the SMEs increase their potential to gen- 
erate employment and engage in export 
ventures through skills development and 
technology transfer. The Social Invest- 
ment Program was another component 
where participating companies were 
able to augment the income of 16,035 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



73 



families in 1990, more than double the 
6,895 family-beneficiaries in 1989. 

Employment 

From 1987-91, employment in- 
creased by about 4 percent annually, 
slightly outpacing the 3.4 percent labor 
force growth during the period. Consist- 
ent with the general trend in economic 
growth, the highest year-on-year rate of 
increase in employment was recorded in 
1987 and 1988 during which rose by 6.3 
percent and 5.8 percent respectively. 
However, the slowdown in the economy 
compounded by the string of man-made 
and natural calamities and the US mili- 
tary pullout caused a downtrend in em- 
ployment starting 1989. 

The distribution of the employed by 
major industry group showed that the 
bulk of the employed was still in the ag- 
ricultural sector, although its share had 
been steadily declining since 1986. The 
services sector absorbed the second larg- 
est share, with the level of employment 
growing at an annual rate of 5.5 percent. 

In terms of the unemployment rate, 
the implementation of various long- and 
short-term strategies for local and over- 
seas employment resulted in the reduc- 
tion of the country's unemployment rate 



of 11 .8 percent in 1 986 to 1 0.6 percent in 
1991. 

One of the projects of the government 
was local job placement through the De- 
partment of Labor and Employment's 
(DOLE) network of Job Exchange 
Centers. The number of placements in- 
creased from 20,637 in 1986 to 177,420 
in 1991 or an annual average growth rate 
of 48.5 percent. 

In 1990, the Department of Social 
Welfare and Development (DSWD) or- 
ganized 317 livelihood associations 
which served both as credit and social 
development organizations through the 
Self-Employment Assistance Program. 
Addressing itself to the needs of the 
marginalized poor, this program was es- 
timated to have provided gainful em- 
ployment and/or alternative sources of 
livelihood to some 70,000 people annu- 
ally. From 1986-91, 421,852 people ben- 
efited from the program. 

Another notable program imple- 
mented to address the unemployment 
problem was the Integrated Livelihood 
Program (ILP). The program did not only 
provide income-generating activities, but 
also helped raise the quality of life in re- 
gions lagging behind in development. 
Among the components of the program 
was the Project Mindanao, a turnkey 



74 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT, 1986-1991 





1986 


1987 


1988 


1989 


1990 1 
Full-yr. 


1991 
Oct.P 


1991 a 


LrdDor rorce 


Z 1 jO" 




9144Q 


941 90 
Z*r 1 zu 


9 ^9QD 


9471^ 


add/ y 


eooo) 
















iolcu cinpioyiTierii 


1 ooDD 


zuuou 


Z 1 ZUD 


9 1 Qflft 


9 9Q 1 7 
ZZ^ 1 ^) 


99 ^9 


99£^7 

ZZO D / 


C000) 
















AgricjlturG 


93/6 


9/3U 


9919 


9904 


9981 


1 Ul oo 


i noon 


(% share) 


(49.7) 


(48.5) 


(46.8) 


(45.2) 


(44.9) 


(45.2) 


(45) 


Industry 


zo/9 


2816 


3250 


3501 


3422 


3386 


34UZ 


(% share) 


(13 7) 


(14 1) 


(1 5 3) 


(1 6 0) 


(15 4) 


(15.0) 


14.88 


Manufacturing 


1780 


1904 


2186 


2316 


2236 


2188 


2374 


(% share) 


(9 4) 
\y.tj 


(q z\ 






v i u. i ; 




10.3 


Cnn<;fnirhnn 

v-wu.ni u L u u 1 1 


O 1 7 


6R9 
OoZ 


olio 


Oil 


7UO 


Q74 


1 ni R 

iuio 


(% share) 


(3.3) 


(3.4) 


(3.8) 


(4.3) 


(4.4) 


(4.3) 


(4.4) 


Services 


6901 


7508 


8036 


8500 


8809 


8961 


9082 


(% share) 


(36.6) 


(37.4) 


(37.9) 


(38.8) 


(39.7) 


(39.8) 


(39.7) 


Unemployment 
















Rate 


11.8 


11.2 


9.6 


9.2 


9.4 


8.1 


10.6 


Urban 


17.8 


15.9 


14.2 


12.9 


12.2 


11.7 


14.4 


Rural 

jxurai 


0. 1 


8.3 


8.4 


6.8 


6.0 


5.9 


8.0 














1990 


1991 


Number of 
















Strikes 


581 


436 


267 


197 


183 


167 


162 


Workers Involved 
















C000) 


169 


90 


76 


57 


68 


65 


52 


Mandays lost 
















C000) 


2634 


1908 


1525 


955 


1344 


1225 


933 



Labor force, total employment and unemployment rates are NEDA. full-year estimates which accounted for the absence of the 
April round of the ISH. Labor force participation rate, sectoral employment, and urban/rural unemployment rates are aver- 
ages of only the January, July, and October surveys. 

PPreliminary. 
a Average. 

Sources: Integrated Survey of Households, National Statistics Office; Current Labor Statistics (1992), Bureau of Labor and 
Employment Statistics. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



75 



package of employment resources for 
Regions IX, X, XI, and XII. The Social In- 
vestment Program was another compo- 
nent where participating private compa- 
nies provided income-augmenting op- 
portunities to their employees and /or 
their families in communities where they 
operated. Through the ILP, DOLE and 
participating companies were able to 
augment the income of 16,035 families 
in 1990, more than double the 6,895 fam- 
ily-beneficiaries in 1989. 

i 

In overseas employment, despite j 
considerable drawbacks such as the con- j 
traction of the overseas job market with 
rising competition and shifting skills re- 
quirements, job placements abroad grew 
by an average of 9.6 percent over the pe- 
riod 1986-91 . Notwithstanding the Gulf 
War, 615,019 workers were deployed to 
overseas jobs in 1991 - the highest gov- 
ernment overseas deployment in history. 
Measures to protect overseas contract 
workers particularly those victimized by 
illegal recruiters and exploitative foreign 
employers were implemented. These in- 
cluded temporary and conditional and/ 
or selective suspension of deployment of 
Filipino workers. 

On democratic employment, a more 
conscious and deliberate effort was made 
to improve working conditions including 
wages and occupational health and 



safety. Overall, wages in the NCR in- 
creased from P57.08 in 1985 to P118.00 
in 1991 in money terms, thereby further 
increasing wages in real terms from 
PI 6.22 in 1985 to PI 8.1 2 in 1991. 

The President also approved a P10 
million grant to government workers as 
the Government Workers Cooperatives 
Fund. The money became the seed fund 
for cooperatives organized by employ- 
ees. 

As economic pressures brought on by 
a succession of crises took their toll on 
the industries' ability to comply with 
labor standards laws, DOLE intensified 
its monitoring of establishments regard- 
ing compliance with the minimum wage 
and other terms and conditions of work 
for the greater protection of the workers. 
In 1990, the zonal approach to inspec- 
tion, called the Labor Enforcement and 
Productivity (LEAP) Program was im- 
plemented. In 1 991 , the LEAP made pos- 
sible the restitution of P36.560 million to 
some 56,600 workers. 

Industrial peace was maintained 
during the period with the number of 
strikes continuously on the decline. This 
may be attributed to government efforts 
to improve the lot of the working Filipino 
through a number of wage adjustments 
implemented during the period. In addi- 



76 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



tion, the social compact concept to 
operationalize mutual trust and commit- 
ment among labor, management, and 
government through pledges of sectoral 
sacrifice or contribution to help stabilize 
the industrial situation was adopted in 
1987. In May 30, 1990, an Industrial 
Peace Accord (IP A) was signed. Several 
Tripartite Industrial Peace Councils 
(TIPCs) down to local levels had been set 
up to monitor and ensure observance of 
the IPA commitments and related provi- 
sions. 

The DOLE formulated its Five-Point 
Agenda for Social Justice with the thrust 
of: 

o forging and operationalization of 
a viable Industrial Peace Accord; 



NUMBER OF STRIKES/WORKERS INVOLVED 
1986 -OCTOBER 1991 



7C; 



600 



500 



400 



300 



200 



CO 






□ Actual No. ol Strikes 
-o- Workers involved ('000) 




CO 








o 








169 




CD CO 

*~ 00 CM 






90 


'8 CO 

57 68 52 _ 











1986 

L__ 



<98 7 



1 988 



1989 



1090 



1 991 /p 



O 



O 



o 



o promotion of full employment 
within the country while preserv- 
ing the strides in overseas em- 
ployment; 

greater emphasis on Regional 
and Countryside Development; 
more vigorous enforcement of 
labor standards; and 

full implementation of the labor 
and employment components of 
the 1989-1992 Philippine Devel- 
opment Plan for Women. 

Banking, Finance and Socinl Security 

The financial system experienced ro- 
bust growth during President Aquino's 
term. 

From 5,780 banks and financial in- 
stitutions in 1985, the number had in- 
creased to 7,937 as of year end 1991 rep- 
resenting a 37 percent change. 

The P502.4 billion in resources in the 
financial system in 1985 likewise in- 
creased to P926.3 billion in 1991. 

Where the amount of loans and 
credit provided by the financial system 
was P314.1 billion in 1985, the yearly av- 
erage from 1 986 to 1 990 was P406.1 bil- 
lion, a change going beyond 29 percent. 

But a major achievement was the re- 
habilitation of the PNB and DBP and the 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



77 



performance exhibited by the other gov- 
ernment financial institutions (GFIs) 
which recorded a dramatic turnaround 
during the period 1986 to 1991 . 

Public confidence had been renewed 
in these GFIs which began posting prof- 
its and continued to be financially attrac- 
tive in the capital markets. This marked 
a renewal of confidence and change in 
the perception that GFIs were moribund 
depositories of nonperforming assets 
arising from behest loans granted during 
the previous administration. 

With the advent of the new order, the 
opportunities in the economic environ- 
ment began to unfold. Interest rates were 
relatively low and exchange rates were 
relatively stable. To seize these opportu- 
nities, government displayed resilience 
and determination, firmly laying down 
foundations for longer term viability of 
GFIs and their greater competitiveness 
and effectiveness as instruments of na- 
tional development. 

Government Service Insurance 
System (GSIS) 

Unprecedented since its founding in 
1937, the GSIS more than doubled its as- 
sets under the Aquino administration. In 
1986, the GSIS was suffering from a P4.0 
billion actuarial deficit. This meant that 



I had all government employees died or 
retired at that time, GSIS would have 

i fallen short of meeting all social insur- 
ance benefits due and would have, in 
fact, owed them P3,000 each. Today, the 
needs of 1.7 million members and pen- 

' sioners are adequately met. With its to- 
tal assets up to almost P43.0 billion, hy- 
pothetically, if all government employ- 
ees were to retire, GSIS would be able to 
extend the required social insurance ben- 
efits and may even be able to provide for 
a few more new members who would 

; immediately opt for early retirement. 

I With a "back-to-basics" policy anchored 

i on two objectives - responsiveness to 
members needs and responsibility in 
managing the funds it holds in trust, the 
GSIS continued to: 

o improve actuarial solvency and 
liquidity; 

o upgrade insurance and social se- 
curity benefits; 

o enhance financial assistance to 
members; and 

o improve service delivery. 

Through a combined divestment and 
! recoupment program, non- and low- 
! earning investments and idle or slow- 
' moving commercial and individual loans, 
I accounts like Combank and Hyatt Re- 



78 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



gency were sold, generating P2.4 billion 
in proceeds. Some P349 million more 
were recovered from the disposition of 
514 acquired assets. A condonation pro- 
gram for individual and mass housing 
loan borrowers also generated an addi- 
tional PI .025 billion in revenues. 

Since 1985, the GSIS had more than 
tripled its gross income. The increase 
would have been more, but for the delib- 
erate effort to emphasize the system's so- 
cial commitment by channeling a signifi- 
cant portion of its resources into subsi- 
dized member-oriented lending pro- 
grams. In 1985, only P809 million of 
GSIS resources went into government se- 
curities and a mere P4.0 million in time 
deposits. This represented its capability 
to meet sudden demand thereon, as in 
the case of calamities. In contrast, GSIS 
today has even greater capability in 
meeting sudden demands. 

The GSIS more than doubled its as- 
sets from PI 6.7 billion in 1985 to P43.2 
billion in 1991. By end 1991, loans to 
members comprised the biggest block, 
accounting for 34.6 percent. On the other 
hand, loans to nonmembers dropped to 
a negligible 3.4 percent share. 

In keeping with its commitment to re- 
main responsive to members needs, the 
GSIS upgraded all insurance and social 



security benefits and expanded financial 
assistance to government employees 
even as it was restoring its trust funds to 
good health. In step with increases in ben- 
efits, the GSIS liberalized and expanded 
the loan packages available to its mem- 
bers. 

GSIS Benefits Today 



Average Pension - Up from P421 in 
1985 to P908 

Funeral Benefits — Up from PI ,000 
to P6,000 with introduction of bereave- 
ment aid 

Medicare Benefits - Up by 100 per- 
cent since 1986 

Christmas Bonus to Pensioners - 

Up from PI 00 in 1985 to P500 on 1991, 
equivalent to 1 -month pension of a maxi- 
mum of P3,000 

Survivorship Minimum - Increased 
within a 1 -month period 

Pension - Spouses : P300 to P400 
Children: P60 to P80 

Benefits for Barangay Bayan Offi- 
cials - Up from P5,000 to P20,000 

Benefits for Sangguniang Bayan 
Officials - Up from P3,000 to PI 0,000 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



79 



Dividends to Compulsory Life In- 
surance Policy Holders — From P55 
million to Pll 8 million 

Accidental Death Insurance Cov- 
erage - PI 0,000 with no additional pre- 
mium 



GSIS Loan Packages 



Salary and Other Emergency Loans 
0986-1991) 

P5.0 billion (average disbursed 
yearly) 

90 percent of government em- 
ployees benefited 

P2.6 billion lent to 15,721 bor- 
rowers 

Unified Home Lending Program 

PI. 65 billion released for 
relending to GSIS members 



Social Security System (SSS) 

Another government corporation 
which had made outstanding achieve- 
ments was the SSS. Its membership had 
significantly grown from 1 0 million work- 
ers and 270,000 employers in 1985 to 
13.7 million workers and 380,000 em- 
ployers in 1992. Benefits, as well as mem- 
ber loans, had been remarkably en- 



hanced; its funds had tremendously in- 
creased from P26.3 billion to P80 billion, 
even as they had been utilized to con- 
tribute to the socioeconomic develop- 
ment of the country through its various 
investment programs. 

From February 1986 to April 1992, 
SSS benefit payments totalled P28.983 
billion, surpassing the P9 billion granted 
from 1957 to 1985. This increase could 
be attributed to the periodic adjustments 
in current pensions, improvement in ben- 
efit calculations, provision for new ben- 
efits, and extension of coverage to new 
beneficiaries. 

The highlights of these benefit en- 
hancements were: 

SSS Benefits 



Minimum Pension - Up from PI 20 
in 1985 to P800 for death and disability 
and PI 000 for retirement in 1991 

Disability Supplemental - New 

benefit of P300 starting September 1990 
and P350 for work- related disability 
starting in January 1 991 

Daily Sickness Allowance - 

Maximum benefit up from P25 in 1985 
to PI 25 in 1992 



80 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Funeral Expense - Up from PI ,000 
in 1985 to P8,000 in 1992 

13th Month Pension — New benefit 
granted since 1986 

Medicare for Pensioners and 
Dependents - Starting 1991, contribu- 
tion not required 



From February 1986 to April 
1992, the SSS had extended a total of 
P30.02 billion in subsidized loans to 
members, or more than three times 
the total of P8.81 billion loans granted 
from 1957 to 1985. These member loans 
included salary, educational, stock in- 
vestment, and calamity and housing 
loans. 

SSS Loan Release 



Salary Loan - Maximum loanable 
amount was up from PI, 000 in 1985 to 
PI 0,000 in 1992 

Housing Loan - The maximum 
loanable amount was increased from 
PI 00,000 in 1985 to P375,000 in 1992 
under the Unified Home Lending Pro- 
gram 



House Repair/Improvement - Since 
1988, members were allowed to borrow 
loan up to PI million 



Aside from these loan programs for 
members, the SSS also had a corporate 
housing program for companies offering 
construction of housing units to their em- 
ployees at affordable amortization rates. 
There was also the Apartment and Dor- 
mitory Loan Program to meet the acute 
need for better housing facilities for stu- 
dents in Metro Manila and other urban 
centers. 

Since 1988, the SSS had launched 
lending programs to respond to various 
funding needs. These lending programs 
not only strengthened the financial posi- 
tion of the SSS, more importantly, they 
enabled the System to earn the funds 
needed for the payment and enhance- 
ment of benefits paid to its contributing 
members. 

SSS New Letidmg Programs 

Industrial Modernization and Expan- 
sion Lending Program (IMELP) an- 
swered the demand for long-term fund 
for industrial expansion; 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



81 



Small and Medium Industries Lend- 
ing Program (SMILP) provided entre- 
preneurs the opportunity to expand and 
be more productive; 

Stock Investment Loan Program 
(SILP) broadened public ownership of 
profitable corporations through a wider 
dispersal of stock ownership among SSS 
members; 

Members Assistance for the Develop- 
ment of Entrepreneurship (MADE) pro- 
vided additional income for SSS mem- 
bers by promoting livelihood enterprises 
through community-based organizations 
such as cooperatives; 

Kabalikat sa Pagpapaunlad ng 
Industriya (KASAPI) extended long-term 
financing to export-oriented and rural- 
based small- and medium-scale enter- 
prises; 

Power Generation Program (PGP) 
contributed to the national government's 
power development program. 

There were also programs launched 
by the System to meet special needs: the 
Hospital Financing Program provided 
loans for the improvement of hospitals 
and medical equipment; the Educational 
Institution Fund provided loans for the 
improvement of school facilities and 



equipment; and the Special Financing 
Program provided the needs of voca- 
tional and technical schools as well as of 
science education. 

The SSS also helped fund infrastruc- 
ture-related activities like the water op- 
timization project of the Metropolitan 
Waterworks and Sewerage System which 
was aimed at ensuring the availability of 
potable water in more areas in Metro 
Manila. It also made available a P500 mil- 
lion fund for bus importation to help al- 
leviate the public land transportation cri- 
sis. 

Under a restored democracy, the SSS 
foresaw a period of intensive economic 

I activities ahead. It anticipated the gov- 
ernment's success in its program to cre- 
ate more jobs, mobilize capital markets, 

j and ultimately achieve and sustain eco- 
nomic growth. 

Philippine National Bank 

The Philippine National Bank again 
! posted significant gains in its operations 
j during 1991 as it managed to sustain its 
I record performance in profitability and 
other key operational areas. The finan- 
cial results, among others, showed a 
record net income of P4.02 billion, a 
I growth in total assets of almost 28 per- 



82 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



cent to reach P93.73 billion by yearend 
1991 (P96.54 billion including all subsidi- 
aries); increased volume of foreign ex- 
change remittances by 23.1 percent to 
reach US$1.14 billion, expansion in pri- 
vate deposits to reach P40.0 billion as of 
the end of 1991; and, declaration by the 
Bank of dividends totalling 35 percent in 
1991 with an additional 10 percent in 
early 1992. 



Meanwhile, the substantial expansion 
in private deposits had also enabled PNB 
to attain the number one position in pri- 
vate sector deposits. 

In 1989, several major programs in- 
cluding the campaign to widen private 
deposit base were implemented to pre- 



pare the PNB towards eventual privati- 
zation and at the same time, provide the 
necessary operational support to directly 
compete with private banks. Among the 
more significant accomplishments in this 
regard were the following: 

o Branch Expansion. The Bank 
opened 27 new domestic branches, relo- 
cated 31, and renovated 15 existing ones. 
It also acquired Republic Planters Bank 
with its network of 59 branches and ex- 
tension offices. By the end of 1992, PNB's 
total network including new branches to 
be opened, would have reached 300 
branches, definitely the biggest among 
Philippine banks. 

o Foreign Exchange Operations. 

The Bank opened eight additional over- 
seas offices: Brunei, Kuwait, Paris, Ham- 
burg, Amsterdam, Vienna, Alkhobar, 
and Tokyo bringing the total number of 
overseas offices to 16. It also introduced 
the innovative foreign exchange mobile 
booths where people can convert their 
foreign exchange to pesos at very com- 
petitive rates. To date, 11 such vans had 
been fielded servicing transactions total- 
ling US$117 million since the first van 
was fielded in April 1991 . 

o Allied Undertakings comple- 
mented and widened the range of prod- 
ucts which the PNB offered to its clients. 




The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



83 



The second phase of the Bank's pri- 
vatization program took place in March 
1992 when an additional 13 percent of 
outstanding shares currently held by the 
government was offered in the local eq- 
uities market. The open pricing mecha- 
nism and greenshoe option were first in- 
troduced in the Philippine capital mar- 
ket through this offering. This second 
public offering brought private owner- 
ship base in PNR to 43 percent, raised 
P2.6 billion for the government and 
brought in approximately 19,000 new 
stockholders to the Bank, a large number 
of which were small investors in the prov- 
inces who were being introduced for the 
first time to the equities market. 

The Bank established four subsidiar- 
ies, namely: PNB Securities Inc.; PNB 
General Insurers; PNB Corporation 
Guam; and PNB Credit Card Corpora- 
tion. 

The PNB continued to provide credit 
support to small entrepreneurs and other 
sectors being promoted under the gov- 
ernment's development programs. It ex- 
panded its lending to small-scale enter- 
prises at preferential rates under its 
Pangkabuhayan ng Bayan Loan Pro- 
gram. During 1 991 , the PI .0 billion fund 
earmarked for this program was almost 
fully availed as total credits granted 
reached almost P835 million benefiting 



2,813 small entrepreneurs all over the 
country. 

Other similar socially-oriented pro- 
grams of the Bank included the Small 
Market Vendors Loan, Cutflower Financ- 
ing, the FXT Fund or International Trade 
Financing, and reconstruction loan for 
the typhoon-, volcano- and earthquake 
devastated areas which altogether had 
benefited 55,912 recipients with total 
loans granted of PI .35 billion since the 
inception of all these programs. 

Development Batik of the Philippines (DBP) 

Under the Aquino administration, 
the DBP's primary objective was to pro- 
vide banking services principally to me- 
dium- and long-term financing needs of 
agricultural and industrial enterprises, 
particularly in the countryside with em- 
phasis on small- and medium-scale in- 
dustries. 

DBP's achievements can be placed in 
a better perspective by starting with its 
status in 1986 when DBP was in a "dis- 
mal state". In order to strengthen the 
Bank and enable it to effectively perform 
its development role, the DBP Rehabili- 
tation Plan was set in motion in 1986. The 
Plan focused on organizational, credit 



84 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



process, and values orientation reform 
measures. The tremendous success of 
DBP's Rehabilitation was reflected in the 
Bank's quality portfolio as indicated by 
its low 4.28 percent arrears rate. 

In 1992, the DBP was among the 
leading development financing institu- 
tions in the Asia Pacific Region. It reor- 
ganized and strengthened its program on 
credit policies, financial controls, and de- 
velopment of a corporate culture based 
on the key values of integrity, compe- 
tence, teamwork, and professionalism. 
Its book of accounts was also cleaned up 
with the transfer of nonperforming as- 
sets to the Asset Privatization Trust. 

With these reforms, the DBP more 
than tripled the initial government equity 
investment and more than doubled its re- 
sources in five years. The DBP no longer 
enjoys government subsidies and special 
treatment, but instead contributes to gov- 
ernment income thrpugh its remittance 
of dividends. 

It was the first bank to increase inter- 
est rates on savings deposits in order to 
properly reward even small savers and 
mobilize resources in the countryside. It 
had pioneered the design and issuance 
of the CEBU Bonds which fostered the 
cooperation between local government 
and the private sector in mobilizing 
funds for community development. 



Participating actively in the govern- 
ment's rehabilitation program for calam- 
ity stricken areas, the DBP was involved 
in the launching of the Reconstruction 
Bonds and the Tulong sa Bayan Bonds 
(TSB). 

Part of the Bank's profits was used 
to support the social programs of the 
government for poverty alleviation 
through its Window III lending program, 
examples of which were the Boundary 
Hulog for jeepney drivers, the Aspara- 
gus Contract Growing Project in 
Mindanao, and the Capiz Irrigation 
Pump Project. 

In addition, a Research and Devel- 
opment Special Fund was created to 
spur pre-operation activities that would 
enable industries, specifically agro- indus- 
trial and livestock enterprises, to take 
root and grow to animate the country- 
side. 

The DBP was probably the only fi- 
nancial institution in the country which 
had set aside 30 percent of its annual in- 
come after taxes for countryside devel- 
opment. This was used to support 
projects with distinct development im- 
pact but which were not served by other 
banks mainly because of high risks, long 
gestation periods, or low yields for fi- 
nancing institutions. 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



85 



Land Bank of the Philippines 
(LBP) 

Steadfast to its commitment to chan- 
nel resources and open wider opportu- 
nities for countryside development, the 
Land Bank vigorously pursued its coun- 
tryside credit delivery program. 

The program demonstrated the abil- 
ity of the institution to accelerate the ex- 
tension of the much needed credit in the 
countryside. It also validated the basic 
beliefs that the farmer is bankable and 
that he is capable in participating in a 
cooperative endeavor. 



LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES 
Countryside Credit Delivery Program 



0 



604 




























































2.83 






1 10 / 






0 


07 


011 


O.34I 









1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 



The bank's remarkable growth had 
created very substantial impact in the in- 



come of the small farmers when one con- 
siders that the cost of credit obtained 
from the bank (12 percent to coopera- 
tives; 18 percent to individual farmers) 
was far less than the alternative financ- 
ing offered by traders, middlemen, and 
usurers who charge them more than 200 
percent annually. 

In 1992, there was an increasing 
credit consciousness among farmers who 
had enabled the bank to maintain a col- 
lection rate of 91 percent despite the 
magnitude of growth in financial assist- 
ance extended. 

As Land Bank expanded credit serv- 
ice delivery to the countryside, it had also 
intensified efforts at organizing farmers 7 
groups and established credit relation- 
ships with them. 

Loans to Farmers Cooperatives 



1987 P7.4 million to 20 coopera- 
tives 

1988 P81.7 million to 281 coop- 
eratives 

1989 P412.4 million to 841 coop- 
eratives 

1990 PI. 8 billion to 2,893 coop- 
eratives 



86 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




The President awards an LBP check of P15M to Alay-Tangkilik 
Foundation, one of the most sucessful NGO partners of the govern- 
ment. Cabiao, Nueva Ecija, May 23, 1991. 



1991 P4.87 billion to 6,360 coop- 
eratives 



Rural Banks 

To strengthen the rural credit deliv- 
ery system, a rehabilitation program for 
the country's rural banks was imple- 
mented in 1987 by the Central Bank. The 
program involved two schemes. One, a 
capital build-up and conversion scheme, 
where the arrearages were converted 
into paid-in-capital of the government in 
the form of shares of stock of a rural bank 
in the name of the Land Bank of the Phil- 
ippines and /or a plan of payment of 
arrearages with the CB over a period not 



exceeding 1 0 years. As of December 31 , 
1991, a total of 489 rural banks out of 
526 applications for rehabilitation had 
been approved. 

To further strengthen the rural bank- 
ing system, the CB issued Circular No. 
1183, as amended, which required 
branches, extensions, and head offices of 
commercial and specialized banks out- 
side the NCR to allocate for investments 
in their respective regions at least 75 per- 
cent of their total deposits (net of re- 
quired reserves). 

Rural banks were also allowed to set 
up branches nationwide, just like com- 
mercial banks, to increase the delivery of 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



87 



credit to the countryside. As of 1 992, the 
system was composed of 784 head of- 
fices, 1 82 branches, and 1 01 extension of- 
fices. At the end of 1 991 , the system had 
a combined resources of PI 5.5 billion 
compared to P3.9 billion in 1985. Loans 
amounting to PI 0.5 billion benefited 
535,788 small farmers and entrepreneurs 
for the year 1991. 

The network of rural banks was fur- 
ther strengthened with the implementa- 
tion of the Countryside Financial Institu- 
tion Enhancement Program (CFIEP). This 
program aimed to raise the capital base 
of countryside financial institutions by en- 
couraging existing and new investors to 
infuse fresh equity into said institutions 
and thereby accelerate the government 
economic development effort. Secondly, 
it was meant to reduce the debt burden 
of eligible CFIs and the corresponding fi- 
nancial strain on the government by con- 
tinually assisting them. And finally, such 
program improved the long-term viabil- 
ity of CFIs as an effective means to mobi- 
lize savings and credit. 

Education And Human Resources 
Development Molding The Young 

In July 1989, a survey revealed that 
simple literacy rate had gone up to 89.9 
percent. This represented an increase of 



7.1 percent over its corresponding level 
in 1980. Same survey also revealed that 
73.2 percent was considered functionally 
literate. 

Higher transition rates indicated that 
a greater number of students was able to 
pursue higher studies in state colleges 
and universities. In 1985, the transition 
rate from high school to college was al- 
most 57 percent; by 1990, this was esti- 
mated at 71 percent. The mean years of 
schooling was expected to double, from 
6.6 years in 1980 to about 13 years by 
1992. 

In terms of cohort survival rate, 67 
out of every 1 00 who entered grade I in 
the public schools finished grade 6 in SY 
1991-92, a difference of only one student 
from the 1985 figure of 66, but the par- 
ticipation rate in public elementary 
schools had expanded to 99.3 peercent, 
an increase of about 3 percent yearly. 
This meant 69 out of every 100 finished 
grade 4. Pupil performance in achieve- 
ment tests also showed a 10 percent in- 
crease when comparing 1983 with 1988 
figures. 

To further enhance the educational 
performance in the country, the Educa- 
tion For All (EFA) was launched as a ma- 
jor social development policy and 
program. It set education efforts on a 



88 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




revolutionary course by forming a grand 
alliance among all sectors. The program 
spelled out the directions in four major 
program areas, namely: early childhood 
care and development, universalization 
of quality primary education, eradica- 
tion of illiteracy, and continuing educa- 
tion. 

Two major developments accom- 
plished in the last five years involved the 
implementation of two laws which in- 
creased access to education: 

o R.A. 6655 or the Free Public Sec- 
ondary Education Act of 1 988 which na- 
tionalized all public high schools and 



opened the doors to free education up to 
the secondary levels; and 

o R.A. 6728 which provided Gov- 
ernment Assistance to Students and 
Teachers in Private Education 
(GASTPE). The program included the 
Educational Service Contracting Scheme, 
the Private Education Student Financial 
Assistance, and tuition fee supplement. 

These schemes had increased enrol- 
ment in secondary schools from 3.40 mil- 
lion in SY 1986-87 to 4.21 million in SY 
1991-92. Total beneficiaries from the 
GASTPE reached 3.5 million in SY 1991- 
92. 

From SY 1986-87 to 1991-92, 44,148 
scholars were admitted to the national 
scholarship programs such as the Study- 
Now-Pay-Later-Plan, the State Scholar- 
ship Program, the National Integration 
Study Grant, Program for Rebel 
Returnees, and the Selected Ethnic Edu- 
cational Assistance Program. 

Innovative approaches to education 
were also adopted to reach as many tar- 
get clientele as possible and to improve 
the quality of education. These included: 

o the Program for Decentralized 
Educational Development which aimed 
to reduce the disparity in allocation of 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



89 



educational resources and services. 
Through this program, the textbook-pu- 
pil ratio improved to 1 :2 and the teacher- 
class ratio in the intermediate grades had 
moved from 5:3 to 4:3. A total of 13,500 
depressed schools acquired basic furni- 
ture and classroom equipment. Also, 
48,532 classrooms, 14 regional educa- 
tional learning centers, and 2,608 multi- 
purpose workshops were constructed; 

o the Mobile Text Schools which 
reached ethnic communities in the 
Cagayan Valley Region and contributed 
to reduced cohort survival rates through 
the Instructional Management by Par- 
ents, Community and Teachers (IM- 
PACT) component; 

o the Dropout Intervention Pro- 
gram in Regions IV, V, VI, VII, and XII 
which was expanded to CAR, and to the 
rest of the country; 

o the Accelerated Learning Pro- 
gram for Elementary Schools (ALPS) 
which addressed the needs of the gifted 
and the disabled; 

o alternative educational schemes 
for children; and 

o region-specific projects like: 

- mobile schools which responded 
to the needs of nomadic tribes 



and far-flung barangays in parts 
of Region X and expanded to 
cover the entire region with as- 
sistance from the LGUs and the 
Council of Tribal Leaders 

- educational services, co-designed 
by DECS and the Center for In- 
novative Education for Children 
caught in areas where there was 
high degree of armed conflict 
(e.g., insurgency-vulnerable ar- 
eas) were formulated to redirect 
the educational effort as an inte- 
gral endeavor for the whole com- 
munity 

the Madaris School System, in- 
cluding the Madrasah curricu- 
lum, was strengthened and up- 
graded. 

Nonformal education, continuing 
education programs, and extension serv- 
ices of state colleges and universities, the 
National Manpower and Youth Council 
(NMYC), DA, DSWD, DTI, DOLE, 
DOST, DOH, and DECS continued to 
provide learning opportunities to out-of- 
school youth, women, and unemployed/ 
underemployed adults. The NMYC for 
instance trained 21 7,01 0 persons in vari- 
ous skills. Under the DOLE'S Apprentice- 
ship and Learnership Program, about 
10,290 participants were trained repre- 



90 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




President Aquino receives from public high school students a 
Certificate of Honor for her role in restoring democracy in the coun- 
try and for the implementation of the free secondary education 
program. 



senting 77.9 percent of the target. Mean- 
while, DECS trained 61.7 percent of 
1 79,300 persons targeted for functional 
literacy and 78.5 percent of the 490,800 
target beneficiaries for livelihood devel- 
opment. 

Other key ongoing projects are: 

o Science for the Masses Program 
aimed at attaining a scientific and cul- 
tural literacy among Filipinos, particu- 
larly the out-of-school youth and adults 
in blue-collar occupations. This involves 



a network of science and technology mu- 
seums and centrums, intensified science 
broadcasts, publications, competitions, 
and training 

o Productivity Enhancement of 
Education Project (PEEP) for rural 
barangay folk, through the dissemination 
of gabay (modules) on various life skills 
including self-developmental decision 
making and appropriate technology 

o Farm-Youth Training Camps in 
Region I and possible replication in other 



The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



91 



regions. The camp covers training in val- 
ues reorientation, community organiz- 
ing, leadership development, produc- 
tion-mix technology, handicrafts skills, 
cooperatives management, entrepre- 
neurship, and sharing of skills with peers 

o Balik Pamayanan Project to fill 
the educational needs of returning pro- 
bationers, parolees, and pardonees and 
include both a livelihood and a values 
component 

o Learn and Earn Project whose 
beneficiaries are estimated to be 50,000 
residents in Central Visayas, integrates 
literacy with livelihood training as well 
as capital assistance 

o Magbasa Kita, a successful lit- 
eracy-livelihood project for ODYs in 
Eastern Visayas, for expansion to other 
regions through an NGO-GO network 

o DELSILIFE for marginalized and 
rural women, provides training in basic 
administrative and leadership skills in 
DELSILIFE community councils, includ- 
ing organization of learning groups on 
literacy and livelihood skills. 

o Barangay Legal Education and 
Training aims to remedy and reduce 
instances of denial of justice to 
marginalized sectors - women, children, | 



workers, farmers, urban poor - as a re- 
sult of ignorance of their legal rights, in- 
ability to secure sufficient legal assistance 
and the like 

o Project INA (Integrated Nanays 
Association) pilot-tested in San Francisco, 
Agusan del Sur, for expansion to other 
communities to become an integrated 
educational package for mothers in- 
cludes basic literacy, responsible parent- 
hood, health and nutrition education, 
values education, and entrepreneurial 
skills training. The approach is to organ- 
ize and utilize Nanays associations 
(mothers'clubs) as fora for learning ses- 
sions 

o Tawi-Tawi pilot project provides 
basic education and social services for 
the deprived families of seaweed farm- 
ers in floating villages and islets. This 
scheme involves the establishment, devel- 
opment, and support of a 50-hectare 
food production farm in a CARP area 
for beneficiaries from Marang-Marang, 
Manguyan, and Tawi-Tawi along with 
support infrastructure like a mini ware- 
house, cassava mill and postharvest fa- 
cilities. It also involves the teaching of 
livelihood skills and the Arabic language; 
founded on the theme "Bayan Muna Bago 
SariJi" such as the publication of instruc- 
tional materials on great Filipino heroes 
and the country's diverse traditions, cus- 



92 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



toms, culture and arts; revival of old Fili- 
pino practices; and the return of "Good 
Manners and Right Conduct" to the 
school curriculum. 

These are only some of the many 
educational programs which respond to 
the need to learn and earn. They provide 
an insight into the broad reach of the 
country's HRD initiatives. 

Capability Building for the Youth 

A milestone in government's effort to 
encourage the full, relevant, and genu- 
ine participation and involvement of the 
youth in nation building was the crea- 
tion of the Presidential Council for Youth 
Affairs by virtue of E.O. 274. Mandated 
to function as a staff office for the Presi- 
dent on youth matters, the Council had 
undertaken a number of programs/ 
projects in pursuit of said mandate. 
Among these were: 

o Coordination of the Summer 
Youth Program which was launched in 
1989 to encourage the youth to engage 
in more productive endeavors during the 
summer vacation. The annual program 
which was implemented nationwide 
from March to May had five components 
namely: Government Internship Pro- 
gram, Summer Work Appreciation Pro- 
gram, Program on Culture and Arts, the 



I Summer Youth Sports Program, and the 
Immersion and Outreach Program. 
From 1989-90 some 100,550 young Fili- 
pinos had participated in the program. 

o Coordination of activities for the 
annual Ship for Southeast Asian Youth 
Program, a program sponsored by the 
Japanese government which seek to pro- 
mote and strengthen friendship and 
goodwill among ASEAN and Japanese 
youth. 

Perhaps even more significant than 
the creation of the PCYA was the provi- 
sion in the Local Government Code call- 
ing for the creation of the Sanggu- 
niang Kabataan in every barangay. 
Among others, the Sanggunian was man- 
dated to promulgate resolutions neces- 
sary to carry out the objectives of the 
youth in the barangay and to initiate pro- 
grams designed to enhance the social, 
cultural, economic, political, physical, 
spiritual, and moral development of the 
members. The body was also mandated 
to coordinate with other agencies in the 
implementation of youth development 
programs. 

The Code also provided for the 
Katipunan ng Kabataan to be composed 
of young people aged 15-21 years in a 
barangay. The Katipunan may be con- 
vened as necessary to decide on impor- 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



93 




The Philippine contingent for the SEA Games. Through Aquino's 
vigorous support, the Philippines became a force to reckon with in 
sports in the region, missing the top honor by only a medal to 
perennial champion Indonesia. 



tant issues affecting the youth of the 
barangay. 

Tlie Spirit of Sportsmanship 

To provide unified and coordinated 
direction to the country's sports pro- 
gram, the Philippine Sports Commission 
(PSC) was created in 1989 by virtue of 
R.A. 6847. Its creation provided a big 
boost to the local sporting world. 

Through the efforts of the Council, the 
country hosted and placed second in the 
overall gold standing in the 16th South- 
east Asian Games in 1991. Such feat re- 

vived local interest and enthusiasm even ! ministration gave much emphasis on the 



in the less popular sports such as fencing 
and rowing. More important, the coun- 
try's outstanding performance in the 
Games had helped revive the confidence 
in the Filipino athlete and had, in a way, 
given back to the Philippines its proper 
place in the world of sports. 

The country also hosted the 30th 
Chess Olympiad participated in by 112 
countries, so far the biggest participation 
in history. The Olympiad was also held 
in Asia for the first time. 

Health: Ensuring a Strong Base 

Throughout its term, the Aquino ad- 



94 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




The President cheers up TB patients after inaugurating the newly 
renovated charity wards of the Quezon Institute. 



health needs of the people through in- 
creased accessibility to health facilities 
and services. In 1986, there were only 
about 445 hospitals, or a total of 38,195 
hospital beds nationwide. As of Decem- 
ber 1991, there were 646 hospitals or an 
increase of 45.1 percent, translated to a 
total of 41,338 hospital beds. 

In addition, health care delivery serv- 
ices was expanded through the construc- 
tion of new health centers and barangay 
health stations (BHS). Aside from the 42 
health centers and 25 BHS constructed 
in 1987, an additional 57 health centers 
and 57 BHS had been put up nationwide 
as of December 1 991 . Also, a total of 49 
hospitals, 75 main health centers, and 207 
BHS in the earthquake-affected areas 



were rehabilitated, while nine hospitals, 
37 main health centers, and 103 BHS 
were reconstructed. 

On disease control, the Aquino ad- 
ministration likewise expanded coverage 
and provided better services. Innovations 
and breakthroughs such as the introduc- 
tion of the Multi-Drug Therapy (MDT) 
for leprosy control and the adoption of 
the Short-Course Chemotherapy (SCC) 
for tuberculosis (TB) control resulted in 
the reduction of the prevalence of lep- 
rosy from 7.2 per 10,000 population in 
1 986 to 3.3 per 1 0,000 in 1 991 . Likewise, 
through the government's Immunization 
Program, the rate of fully immunized 
children (FIC) against six diseases before 
the age of one rose dramatically from 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



95 



25.0 percent in 1985 to 86.3 percent in 
1991 . This translates in the full immuni- 
zation of 7.6 million children against TB, 
diphtheria, polio, measles, pertussis, and 
tetanus. In addition, the treatment dura- 
tion for TB had been reduced from 18 
months to six months. Furthermore, the 
prevalence of malaria incidence in en- 
demic areas was lowered from 9.3 per 
1,000 population in 1 985 to 7.5 per 1,000 
in 1991 through increased case findings 
and treatment. 

With regard to environmental health, 
coverage of safe water supply had im- 
proved from 66.9 percent of households 
in 1986 to 71.7 percent in 1991 through 
water inspection and disinfection. Sani- 
tary toilet coverage was also expanded 



I from 69.1 percent of households in 1986 
to 82.2 percent in 1991 through health 
education and community mobilization. 

To combat the spread of the dreaded 
disease - Acquired Immune Deficiency 
Syndrome (AIDS) - the National AIDS 
| Control and Prevention Program was in- 
stitutionalized within the DOH to moni- 
tor the high risk population and to con- 
duct active public education and advo- 
cacy. A vigorous information campaign 
on AIDS using print and electronic me- 
dia, as well as the establishment of an 
AIDS Telephone Hotline Center, had con- 
tributed much in increasing public 
awareness regarding AIDS. 

To ensure the availability and 
affordability of safe, effective, and qual- 



NUMBER OF HOSPITALS 




Babies 
10000 



8000 



FULLY IMMUNIZED BABIES AGED ONE YEAR OLD 
AND BELOW AGAINST SIX CHILDREN'S DISEASES 



6000 




1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 Total 



96 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ity medicines,the human resources and 
technology capabilities of the Bureau of 
Food and Drugs were upgraded and the 
Gamot sa Presyong DOH Program was 
established. Likewise, four herbal 
processing plants were put into opera- 
tion, vaccine and biological production 
was expanded, and the Botica sa 
Barangay Project was vigorously pur- 
sued. 

The administration formulated the 
Philippine National Drug Policy and Pro- 
gram, and allowed the passage of the 
Generics Act, a landmark legislation 
which guaranteed generic prescription 
and dispensing, and the right of in- 
formed choice for consumers. The adop- 
tion of generic labelling, along with a 
package of initiatives designed to pro- 
vide the right information to physicians 
and patients, had ensured the rational 
use of drugs by focusing scarce resources 
on the most essential drugs. It had also 
contributed to control in the proliferation 
of brands in the market as well as greater 
awareness and use of therapeutic prepa- 
rations. 

Children had a special place in the 
Aquino government. It showed special 
concern for them through various efforts. 
Building on the gains from the Early 
Childhood Enrichment Program (ECEP) 



I, the UNICEF-assisted Country Program 
for Children I (CPC I), the government's 
ECEP II reached three million disadvan- 
taged Filipino children by 1987 through 
the following program components: 

o early childhood malnutrition pre- 
vention through community infrastruc- 
tures, such as DSWD's day care services 
and DA's home-based malnutrition pre- 
vention program services; and 

o the systematic integration of early 
childhood principles and methodologies 
into existing government programs such 
as the training curriculum programs of 
DOH, DECS, the NNC, and the Commis- 
sion on Population. 

As a result, these interventions had 
benefited: 

o 5,460 day care workers and 6,000 
parents on proper child-rearing princi- 
ples, techniques, and practices; 

o 3,000 direct service workers on 
home-based health and nutrition services; 
and 

o 167 day-care officers, including 
150 deployed to provinces and cities. 

The Area-Based Child Survival and 
Development Program (ABCSDP) under 
CPC III had already served 53 percent of 
its target children and 67 percent of its 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



97 



ill AHA L JVA1ILNS PANGDL© 




The Choral group of the White Cross Children's Home sings to Presi- 
dent Aquino. With her are PMS Head Chito Sobrepena, DSWD Secre- 
tary Mita Pardo de Tavera, White Cross Director Consuelo Lopez, 
PCSO General Manager Fernando Carrascoso, San Juan Mayor Adolfo 
Sto. Domingo and DECS Secretary Isidro Carino. 



target parents. The Urban Basic Service 
Program (UBSP), on the other hand, had 
reached all its target children and par- 
ents as of 1990. For its part, the Early 
Childhood Care and Development Pro- 
gram (ECCDP), a program aimed to en- 
sure healthy development through day 
care service and other forms of stimulat- 
ing creative experiences of preschoolage 
(3 to 6 yrs. old) children, was also ex- 
panded to capture regional needs in: 1) 
enhancing parents' capability, especially 
in child-rearing; 2) increasing the number 
of trained preschool teachers, day care 



and health personnel; and 3) emphasiz- 
ing the provision of childhood care in a 
manner that will promote physical, psy- 
chological, intellectual, cognitive, adap- 
tive, and values development among 
those 6 years old and below. The total 
program package had reached 19.5 per- 
cent of 12 million children in 1989 and 
25.9 percent by 1991. 

Compared to other ASEAN coun- 
tries, the country's health services were 
at par if not better. For instance, in 1986, 
the country's daily calorie supply per 



98 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



capita was estimated at 2,370 calories 
while it was 2,330 for Thailand, 2,850 for 
Indonesia, and 2,730 for Malaysia. In 
1989, 82 percent of one-year olds were 
immunized in the Philippines while it 
was only 76 percent in Indonesia and 83 
percent in Thailand. Births attended to 
by health personnel in the 1986-88 pe- 
riod was estimated at 57 percent, higher 
than Thailand's 40 percent and Indone- 
sia's 31 percent. An estimated 85 percent 
of the nation's rural population as early 
as 1988 had access to sanitation services, 
compared to Malaysia's 15 percent, 
Thailand's 76 percent, and Indonesia's 
38 percent. 

In urban areas, sanitation services 
were accessible to 85 percent in the Phil- 
ippines, 39 percent in Malaysia, 84 per- 
cent in Thailand, and 40 percent in Indo- 
nesia. As of 1990, only 9.9 million Filipi- 
nos did not have access to sanitation, 
compared to 13.4 million in Malaysia, 
12.4 million in Thailand, and 113.1 mil- 
lion in Indonesia. 

Child Survival Protection, and Devel- 
opment 

The concern of government for the 
protection and development of children 
was manifested in the number of land- 
mark legislations enacted. Among these 
were: 



o RA 6927 or the Day Care Law, 
which mandated the establishment of 
Day Care Centers in every barangay for 
the total development and protection of 
a child through immunization, growth 
monitoring, and other services. As of 
1991, there were 13,700 centers serving 
500,420 preschoolchildren. 

o Proclamation No. 13 dated June 
3, 1 986 proclaimed June 1 986-May 1 987 
as the Year for the Protection of Exploited 
Filipino Children and mandated the for- 
mulation of a national plan of action. The 
objectives of the program were to develop 
a sense of national awareness of the prob- 
lem of child abuse and exploitation and 
to generate a sense of national motiva- 
tion, responsibility, and commitment for 
its prevention. 

o E.O. 56 authorized the DSWD to 
take protective custody of sexually- 
abused children. 

To further respond to the problems 
caused by poverty, urbanization, and 
unstable political situations, among oth- 
ers, the following policies and programs 
for children and youth were imple- 
mented: 

o National Project on Streetchildren 
where inter-agency bodies led by the 
DSWD work together to identify solutions 
to the problems of streetchildren and 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



99 




Presidential eldest grandson Jiggy Cruz assists grandma in distrib- 
uting milk in tetra packs to streetchildren under the care of the 
Daughters of Mary, Help of Christians Laura Vicuna Foundation Inc. 
in Sta. Mesa on her 59th birthday celebration. 



their families. The project is now being 
implemented in 17 cities. One of the ma- 
jor activities of the IACs is the develop- 
ment of street-based, center-based, and 
community-based strategies in meet- 
ing the needs of streetchildren. There 
are now 14 day care centers located in 
key cities which provide alternative 
education to streetchildren in prepara- 
tion to their return or entering the for- 
mal educational system. Seventy percent 
of the children served are now back in 
school. 

o In 1989, President Aquino allo- 
cated P50 million from PSF as a special 
fund for the streetchildren. The 



Streetchildren Fund was managed di- 
rectly by the Presidential Management 
Staff (PMS). Total approvals for this pro- 
gram amounted to P40.4 million, of 
which P30.9 was released to 73 NGOs 
implementing 81 projects. Total number 
of beneficiaries was 34,704 individuals. 

o Bantay Bata Hotline, in collabo- 
ration with some radio and TV stations, 
aims to encourage the public to report 
any case of child abuse, neglect, and ex- 
ploitation by providing a 24-hour hotline. 

o Establishment of Reception and 
Study Centers for abandoned, depend- 
ent, and neglected children. There are 
now 1 2 such centers. 



100 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Housing: Providing More Shelter For 
More People 

As for the housing sector, the five- 
year (1987-92) National Shelter Program 
(NSP), was launched which aimed to 
provide affordable housing financing 
packages. Total housing production un- 
der the program was estimated at 
476,000 units of which 81 percent were 
produced by the private sector and 19 
percent by the government. In terms of 
number of families assisted, 374,668 
families representing 100.2 percent of 
Plan targets benefited from the program. 



TOTAL HOUSING PRODUCTION 

Government (19.09%) 




385.173 Private (80.91%) 



The four major programs under the 
NSP were: 

o Individual mortgages consisting 
mainly of housing loans under the Uni- 



fied Home Lending Program (UHLP). 
This was a long-term buyers financing 
scheme executed by the National Home 
Mortgage and Finance Corporation 
(NHMFC) servicing both members and 
non-members of the funding institution. 
Since 1987, total mortgage takeout had 
reached 147,468. 

o The Community Mortgage Pro- 
gram (CMP) was an innovative concept 
of low-income home financing whereby 
an individual tract of land was acquired 
by several beneficiaries through commu- 
nity ownership. This program had ben- 
efited some 200,000 families since 1987. 

o The NHMFC extended develop- 
ment loan assistance to private develop- 
ers and landowners who were in need of 
fund augmentation enabling them to mo- 
bilize their land and other production re- 
sources for shelter delivery. Assistance 
extended since 1986 produced a total of 
66,133 housing units. 

o The National Housing Authority 
directly undertook the delivery and ac- 
tual construction of low-income housing 
units to the lower 50 percent of the popu- 
lation. A total of 90,855 housing units 
were built all over the country. 

Other supplemental programs such 
as the Apartment and Dormitory Pro- 
gram of the SSS, the Individual and Mass 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



101 




President Aquino views a model of the 'Kaligan' housing project in 
Metro Manila, which is under the auspices of the United Architects 
of the Philippines. The government tapped the NGO for its record- 
breaking shelter program. With her is UAP head Froilan Hong. 



Housing Program of the GSIS, the Group 
Land Acquisition and Development Pro- 
gram of the Pag-IBIG Fund, and the Co- 
operative Housing Program and Interim 
CMP Funding Facility of the HIGC were 
also implemented. 

Social Welfare And Community De- 
velopment: Giving Assistance And 
Dignity 

The damages brought about by the 
calamities that battered the country from 
1 987 to 1 991 prompted the Office of the 
President to orchestrate and to serve as 
the central coordinating point to consoli- 
date the rehabilitation efforts of the dif- 



ferent government agencies involved in 
providing assistance to the victims. 

Typhoon Sisang, 1988 

The government's capability to re- 
spond to calamities was initially tested 
when Typhoon Sisang battered the coun- 
try in December 1987. Immediately, the 
National Disaster Coordinating Council 
was convened to orchestrate the rehabili- 
tation program for Region V. 

Initial activities included the reacti- 
vation of local disaster councils in the af- 
fected provinces and municipalities. A 
P3.0 billion comprehensive rehabilitation 



102 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



program called the Bicol Rehabilitation 
Program was also immediately 
launched. One of the major projects im- 
plemented under the program was the 
Comprehensive Abaca Rehabilitation 
Program. 

Earthquake, July 1990 

The devastation brought about by 
Typhoon Sisang was still fresh in the 
minds of the Filipinos when another ca- 
lamity battered the country in 1990. The 
economy was slowly peaking when the 
July 1990 earthquake occurred bringing 
with it widespread infrastructure, social 
and human costs to Regions I, II, III, and 
CAR. 

A four-pronged rehabilitation pro- 
gram was quickly put in place. These in- 
volved: 1) activation and institutionali- 
zation of operating mechanisms; 2) 
solicitation, sourcing, and funding of the 
P10 billion Rehabilitation and Recon- 
struction Fund (RRF); 3) integration of 
the rehabilitation program; and 4) imple- 
mentation and monitoring of the recon- 
struction plan. 

Prior to all these activities, the gov- 
ernment operated an immediate relief 
program involving the provision of finan- 
cial assistance to the dead and injured 
victims. 



On August 1, 1990 pursuant to 
Memorandum Order No. 31 1 , the Presi- 
dent created the Presidential Task Force 
on the Rehabilitation of Earthquake- Af- 
fected Areas. The Task Force was en- 
trusted to speed up the implementation 
of the rehabilitation program and to un- 
dertake the coordination of all rehabili- 
tation activities of the government at the 
national and local levels. About 20 prov- 
inces and nine cities, representatives 
from some national line agencies, as 
well as NGOs participated in the reha- 
bilitation efforts. 

As a result of all these efforts, a total 
of 13,589 projects was approved by the 
President for funding under the RRF. 
Out of this total, around 8,518 projects 
were completed, a total amount of P10 
billion was obligated, and a total of 
226,782 affected individuals received fi- 
nancial, medical, and livelihood assist- 
ance. 

Eruption of Mt. Pinatubo, 1991 

After 611 years of dormancy, Mt. 
Pinatubo unleashed a series of eruption 
episodes between June 1 2 to 1 7, 1 991 re- 
sulting in the ejection of massive volcanic 
debris. The resulting reconstruction 
needed was greater in scope, magnitude, 
and time span than the earthquake. 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



103 





Presidential Management Staff Head Aniceto Sobrepena presents to 
the President a proposal for the Integrated Livelihood Reconstruc- 
tion Project for Earthquake Damaged Areas for her review. 



Immediately, the President created 
the Presidential Task Force on the Reha- 
bilitation of Areas Affected by the Erup- 
tion of Mt. Pinatubo. It was tasked to un- 
dertake, among others, the coordination 
of all rehabilitation activities of the na- 
tional government, the prioritization of 
projects, and the monitoring of govern- 
ment relief and rebuilding efforts. The 
program required some P28.75 billion. 



needs of the Aeta and the lowlanders. 
There arc now 21 official settlement sites 
located in Tarlac, Zambales, and 
Pampanga. Of these, 10 are upland and 
11 are lowland sites. A total of 4,500 
Aeta families had been resettled. 

The accomplishments under the Mt. 
Pinatubo Rehabilitation Program were 
the following: 



A New Resettlement Program was I - DSWD spent PI 49.755 million 
the most critical activity undertaken by | from its internal sources in its relief op- 
the Task Force which addressed both the | erations benefiting 974,203 persons; 



104 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



- DOLE provided emergency em- 
ployment to 1,170 affected workers 
through 55 community works and em- 
ployment projects amounting to PI. 678 
million; 

- Road clearing activities were con- 
ducted in some 652 km. of road proper. 
All major roads had been made passable. 
Road sections prone to traffic disruption 
during floods notably the Lubao-and- 
Bacolor stretches along the Gapan-San 
Fernando-Olongapo Road, were el- 
evated; 

2,401 L.M. of national bridges 
were reconstructed and 750 L.M. of foot 
bridges were 50 percent complete as of 
June 1992; 

- 34 sabo/check dams had either 
been completed or programmed for con- 
struction; and 

- Of the 4,665 classrooms destroyed, 
2,593 had been reconstructed as of June 
1992. 

Emergency housing assistance in the 
form of temporary shelter and housing 
materials for onsite repair for victims of 
calamities were also provided. Since an 
average of 22 typhoons visit the country 
each year, the DSWD initiated a program 
of providing typhoon-resistant housing 



for those families living in the most ty- 
phoon-prone areas. The houses designed 
for the Core Shelter Project can with- 
stand windspeeds of PI 80 kph. They are 
made of inexpensive local materials and, 
with technical guidance, can be built by 
the beneficiaries themselves. As of 1991, 
1 6,000 such core shelters had been built 
throughout the country and more were 
expected to be built. The houses had so 
far resisted all the severe typhoons that 
visited the country. 

Resettlement sites were also identi- 
fied for the individuals and communities 
permanently displaced by the floods. A 
total of 11,142 families displaced by the 
various disasters were assisted. 

Infrastructure: Timely Public Works In 
Record Time 

The Aquino government provided vi- 
tal infrastructure facilities needed to 
support national development goals. 

For the period March 1986 to June 
1992, a total of P47.ll billion was ex- 
pended by the DPWH for various infra- 
structure projects. Of this amount, P31 
billion (65.8 percent) went to the con- 
struction of 53,425 km. of roads and 
bridges; PI .32 billion (2.8 percent) for 
2,272 portworks; P6.09 billion (12.9 per- 
cent) for 8,169 flood control and drain- 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



105 



age projects; P4.05 billion (8.6 percent) 
for 63,722 classrooms and 5,409 build- 
ings; and PI. 01 billion (2.2 percent) for 
other infrastructure projects such as na- 
tional buildings and preliminary engi- 
neering. 



DPWH Infrastructure Expenditure 
March 1986 to Juno 1992 

1298% 




□ Highways 

E3 SchodbuWings 

□ Others 

□ Water Supply 

□ Portworks 



Insofar as the road infrastructure 
program was concerned, the thrust was 
three-pronged. First, the nationwide ar- 
terial road network was improved and 
maintained; second, complementing ar- 
terial highways, secondary, and feeder 
roads had been developed; third, in ma- | 
jor urban centers, such as Metro Manila, 
the focus was to remove critical traffic 
bottlenecks, through a combination of 
road construction and traffic manage- 
ment measures. 



In this context, DPWH implemented 
the following impact road projects in 
Metro Manila: 

o the six-lane Araneta Avenue; 

o the four-lane Makati-Manda- 
luyong Road from Coronado/ 
San Francisco St.; 

o the five-lane EDSA Extension to 
Roxas Blvd.; 

o the widening of Paranaque-Sucat 
Road; 

o the improvement of Ortigas Av- 
enue Extension; 

o the construction of Circumferen- 
tial Road 5; 

o the construction of Radial Road 
10; and 

o the construction of interchanges/ 
flyovers along main arteries of 
Metro Manila. 

In other regions, arterial road projects 
that would provide better access to ru- 
ral and agricultural areas were imple- 
mented. 

The damage wrought by calamities 
such as the July 1990 killer quake and 



106 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 




v 



FAST TRACK. The President views scale models of three interchange 
projects of DPWH. Secretary Jose de Jesus explains details. 




Mt Pinatubo eruption in 1991 was ex- 
tensive especially to infrastructures. For 
the regions affected by the killer quake, 
a total of P5.323 billion had been ex- 
pended for the implementation of 4,566 
projects. This consisted of 1,672 road 
projects, 378 flood control structures, 
365 water supply systems, 70 
portworks, 2,059 schoolbuildings, and 72 
other kinds of infrastructure. 

All damaged major roads, such as 
the Kennon, Naguilian, and Marcos 
Roads leading to Baguio and the Dalton 
Pass had been rehabilitated and reopened 
to traffic. The Teofilo Sison (Carmen) 
Bridge in Rosales, Pangasinan and the 



Magsaysay Bridge in Dagupan had like- 
wise been reconstructed and opened to 
traffic. 

For the areas affected by the Mt. 
Pinatubo eruption, the following rehabili- 
| tation and reconstruction projects were 
undertaken: 

i 

o For the protection of lives, prop- 
\ erties, and infrastructures, the construc- 
tion of 34 sabo/check dams had been 
i started of which 15 had already been 
completed. Also, desiltation and dredg- 
ing of river channels/outlets were also 
undertaken; 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



107 



o To keep transport systems open, 
about 489 km. of national roads and 1 63 
km. of municipal roads were cleared of 
ashfall deposits. Also, reconstruction and 
rehabilitation of damaged bridges were 
started; and 

o A total of 2,660 classrooms were 
rehabilitated while 98 hospitals and 
health centers, 1 8 public markets, 13 mu- 
nicipal buildings, and 70 other public 
buildings were reconstructed. 

Energy and Rural Electrification 

Through the effective implementa- 
tion of the revitalized rural electrification 



program, 56.0 percent of the rural areas 
were energized, a significant increase 
compared to the 45.0 percent in 1985. 
The generating capacity for electricity of 
5,549 megawatts (MW) in 1985 was in- 
creased to 6,521 MW in 1991, or a dif- 
ference of 1 7.5 percent. 

An increase of 3.9 percent in the 
number of municipalities with electric 
connections was achieved, from 1,255 in 
1985 to 1,304 in 1991. A 26.9 percent in- 
crease in the number of households with 
electric connections was also accom- 
plished, from 2.6 million in 1985 to 3.3 
million households in 1991. Both NEA 



President Aquino turns on a symbolic switch signifying the start of 
regular 24-hour power service for Tawi-Tawi households during her 
visit to the province on May 15, 1989. Behind the President is Tawi- 
Tawi Governor Hadjiril D. Matba. 




108 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



and MERALCO brightened up 5.8 mil- 
lion households nationwide. 

In line with the rural development 
thrusts of the government, the National 
Power Corporation (NAPOCOR) took 
over small island electric facilities from 
cooperatives in far-flung areas and ef- 
fectively reduced cost of electricity from 
P4 per kilowatt-hour (kw-hr) to P2.50 
per kw-hr. 

The energy sector managed to 
achieve an energy self-reliance rate of 
close to 35.0 percent in 1 991 . 

However, the significant achieve- 
ments during the six-year administration 
of President Aquino which will generate 
long-term and far-reaching benefits 
were: 

o Active oil exploration program 
which yielded positive oil and gas dis- 
coveries. The country's largest oil discov- 
ery was the West Linapacan in north- 
western Palawan. Once fully developed, 
it will give the country 50,000 barrels of 
oil per day. 

o Policy reforms which were un- 
dertaken aimed at improving the overall 
efficiency in the provision of electricity 
such as: 



- restructuring of NAPOCOR 
power rates based on the principle of 
long-run marginal cost or LRMC; 

- discontinuation of direct indus- 
trial connection to NAPOCOR in areas 
which were served by franchise utilities; 

- restructuring of MERALCO rates 
through gradual reduction of subsidy to 
small electric consumers; 

- participation of the private sector 
in power generation schemes such as the 
Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT); and 

- reduction on systems losses of util- 
ity firms to improve efficiency and sta- 
bility of power distribution. 

o The full-scale hydro-electric pro- 
gram undertaken during the Aquino ad- 
ministration which had succeeded in har- 
nessing 2,155 MW of hydropower out of 
its potential 8,867 MW. Two hydro-elec- 
tric plants were also completed, the 225- 
MW Pulangui IV in 1986 and the 80-MW 
Aguslinl990. 

o Ongoing projects for the utiliza- 
tion of the geothermal steam which in- 
clude: Bacon Manito I and II in Albay 
with a resource potential of 230 MW; the 
Palinpinon II in Negros; and the Leyte A 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



109 



in the Visayas with a potential capacity 
of 440 MW for commissioning in 1996. 

Various non-conventional energy 
technologies had also been successfully 
tested. The most significant of these were 
the photovoltaic systems applied for 
small village electrification in the islands 
of Burias in Masbate and Verde island in 
Batangas. The other photovoltaic appli- 
cations demonstrated to be economically 
feasible were the battery charging (in- 
stalled in Bulacan, Batangas, and 
Masbate), domestic water pumping 
(Cebu), remote telecommunication 
power supply (PT&T Zambales Station 
and RCPI Marinduque Station), egg in- 
cubation (Quezon), vaccine refrigeration 
(Bohol), and to some extent, irrigation 
pumps (Masbate). 

Transportation and Communications 

The accomplishments of the Aquino 
administration on the transportation and 
communications sector were in the new 
policy directions pursued such as deregu- 
lation, privatization, and decentraliza- 
tion. 

From 1986 to 1992, the transporta- 
tion and communications industries ex- 



perienced various forms of deregulation 
and liberalization. PLDT's monopoly in 
the international communications traffic 
was broken with the entry of Eastern 
Telecoms and Philippine Global Commu- 
nications. As a result, overseas telecom- 
munication charges had dropped by 40 
percent despite inflation. 

The revenue-sharing among local tel- 
ephone companies on the telephone 
charges was also altered in favor of the 
50 or so small telephone operators. 

Also, DOTC mandated the intercon- 
nection of all telephone companies in or- 
der to provide more efficient communi- 
cation networks. 

In order to provide better telecom- 
munication services, two Very Small 
Apperture Telecom (VSAT) operators 
and two nationwide cellular operators 
were authorized to operate. 

The administration also abolished the 
monopoly in Cable Television (CATV) 
which was nurtured before 1986. As of 
May 1992, there were several entities op- 
erating CATV in various parts of the 
country. 



110 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The doors for deregulation had also 
been opened at the ports. Before, the 
policy was one port cargo handling op- 
erator for every port in the country. The 
government allowed at least two cargo 
operators to compete on the basis of 
service in several major ports. The thrust 
toward more competition in the maritime 
industry was also implemented in the 
case of ships servicing particular routes. 
No single operator had been allowed to 
monopolize passenger service between 
two seaports. 

In aviation, the one domestic airline 
policy favoring the Philippine Airlines 
was rescinded in 1988. As such, other 



carriers were allowed to operate with 
or without legislative franchises. 

Privatization efforts were also vigor- 
ously pursued. The most significant of 
these were the disposal of Philippine Na- 
tional Lines, awarding of the Manila In- 
ternational Container Terminal to the In- 
ternational Container Terminal Services 
Inc. for a 25-year service contract, ten- 
der on 60 percent ownership of the Phil- 
ippine Airlines, and the public tender for 
the National Telecommunications Devel- 
opment Program. 

Also, the Postal Service Act of 1992 
(R.A. 7354) was enacted. It provided for 



Increased volumes in trade as shown by Philippine exports (below) 
to the world came at an opportune time when deregulation of cargo 
handling operation was pursued. 



PHILIPPINE EXPORTS TO THE WORLD 



8.8 



(FOB in US $ Billion) 



7.8 



82 



7.1 



5.7 



4.8 



V 



-v 



\_ 
v 

\_ 
\. 

\ 



10 



1986 



1987 



1989 



1990 



1991 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



the incorporation of the postal service 
and its eventual privatization to the ex- 
tent of 55 percent. 

Under the Countryside Telephone 
Program, at least one public calling sta- 
tion will be installed in every municipal- 
ity. As of 1991, public calling stations had 
been installed in 126 municipalities. By 
the end of 1 992, about 300 more munici- 
palities were targeted to be served. 

The Philippine Postal System was ex- 
panded and modernized. The commit- 
ment to fast mail deliveries had been sus- 



tained - 24 hours within Metro Manila 
and three days to other regions. For in- 
ternational links, express mail was ex- 
panded from four to 27 countries and 
money order service from four to 12 
countries. Also, 63 additional post of- 
fices, eight mail distribution centers, and 
127 post office buildings were opened. 

The acquisition of 1,040 buses under 
the Bus Installment Procurement Pro- 
gram (BIPP) responded to the growing 
need of commuters, particularly those in 
Metro Manila, for transportation. The 
Zonal Fare Scheme was adopted by the 



The President puts to test the municipal telephone system when she 
receives a call from DOTC Secretary Nicomedes Prado from a call 
station in Ormoc, Leyte on April 20, 1992. 



112 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Light Rail Transit Authority where a flat 
rate was charged for the last three sta- 
tions. 

Likewise, telegram delivery service 
improved. Telegram posting from deliv- 
ery to receiving decreased to an average 
of 13 hours compared to the target time 
of 1 6 hours. 

The National Telecommunications 
Commission and the Land Transporta- 
tion Franchising and Regulatory Board 
(LTFRB) had reduced their processing 
time for certificates of public conveyance, 
from several months to an average of 30 
days. The LTFRB, through its regional of- 
fices, introduced the mobile franchising 
system to bring the Board closer to op- 
erators by extending services to far-flung 
areas. 

Science & Technology (S&T) Develop- 
ment Programs 

As an indication of the recognition of 
the crucial role of S&T in national devel- 
opment, budget for the sector almost tri- 
pled by the end of the Aquino adminis- 
tration. From P464 million in 1986, its al- 
location reached PI .7 billion in 1992. 

Furthermore, in order to provide 
clear signals to both the public and pri- 



vate sectors on the desired direction of 
S&T in the country's drive to become a 
new industrialized country (NIC), a S&T 
Master Plan (STMP) was formulated. Its 
key strategies to attain said goal were: 1) 
modernization of the production sector; 

2) upgrading of research activities; and 

3) the development of S&T infrastruc- 
ture. 

Modernization of the Production Sector 

To implement the first strategy, a 
massive technology transfer and com- 
mercialization program was pursued. 
Research results were transformed into 
technologies that reached the countryside 
and assisted the rural people. 

In 1991 alone, seven new and 68 ex- 
isting technologies were commercialized 
while 114 new and 400 existing technolo- 
gies were diffused to 17,158 companies 
and technology adaptors. 

Among the most noted technologies 
successfully infused nationwide were: 

o In Agriculture and Aquaculture 

- Rapid composting using Tricho- 
derma created impact in the countryside 
and reduced our dependence on im- 
ported fertilizer. As of February 1992, 



The President's Report 1986-1992 



113 



253 mass production centers had been 
established nationwide covering 4,980 
hectares and benefiting 7,895 farmer 
ad op tors; and 

- Development of the sex reversal 
technology which transforms female 
tilapia to male. As of May 1992, there 
were 26 pilot cooperators for tilapia pro- 
duction in 23 municipalities and 19 prov- 
inces. A dispersal unit at the DOST main 
building pool was also set up where more 
than 5,000 fingerlings had so far been 
sold at nominal prices, thus, promoting 
backyard tilapia culture in Metro Ma- 
nila. 

o In Textile Industry Development 

- Breakthrough in the breeding of 
semi-temperate silkworm varieties led to 
commercial production of hybrid eggs 
with the establishment of multiplication 
centers in Misamis Oriental, La Trinidad, 
and Benguet. 

o In Nutrition 

Preparation of nutritious snacks 
and baby foods helped ease malnutrition 
in depressed areas with the introduction 
of cereal-legume based food products; 
and 

Integrated production of coco 
products such as cheese, nata de coco, 



coconut oil, coco vinegar, and coconut 
shell. 

o In Construction 

- Production of bricks and tiles 
from low-cost indigenous clay materials. 
Each of the 30 production plants estab- 
lished provided employment opportuni- 
ties with gross sales of PI .2 million an- 
nually; and 

- Production of coconut lumber 
broadened the raw material base for 
house construction, furniture-making, 
and other wood products-based ven- 
tures. 

o In Chemicals and Pharmaceuti- 
cals 

- Manufacture of industrial grade 
salt saved the country $4.6 million of im- 
ports in 1989 and $3.1 million in 1990; 

- The local manufacture and com- 
mercial production of drugs from me- 
dicinal plants for the treatment of cough 
{sambong)) urine excretion (sambong); for 
pain relief (yerba buetw)', for diarrhea (tsaang 
gubat) and many other ailments; and 

- Local production of antibiotic 
susceptability disks helped physicians in 
prescribing the appropriate antibiotic 



114 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



against a particular infection or disease. 
This project benefited over 2,000 hospi- 
tals and clinics in the country. Aside from 
saving the Philippine General Hospital 
P50,000 a year with a bench scale price 
rate of 68 percent lower, this technology 
ensured rational drug use through the 
prescription of the right antibiotics. 

o In H igh Technology 

- Development of A-scribe technol- 
ogy, a computer-based system of tran- 
scribing stenographic notes which will be 
very helpful in the judicial and legisla- 
tive systems in the country; and 



- Development of a 256-line Private 
Automatic Branch Exchange (PABX) 
Prototype which used Time Division 
Multiplexing (TDM) instead of the tradi- 
tional crossbar technology. This technol- 
ogy will help to improve the telecom in- 
frastructure by providing a low-cost but 
equally efficient PABX system in small 
offices and rural communities. 

o In Mt. Pinatubo-Affected Areas 

- A special techno-transfer project 
for the recovery and rehabilitation of ar- 
eas affected by Mt. Pinatubo was car- 
ried out utilizing volcanic ash as raw ma- 



President Aquino inspects the processing area of the Cotabato Herbal 
Pharmaceutical Processing Facility in Cotabato City with DOH Sec- 
retary Alfredo Bengzon, November 15, 1988. 




The Presidents Report 1986-1992 



115 



terials for the manufacture of floor and 
wall tiles, low and high temperature 
glaze and ceramic artware, resin bonded 
ash souvenir items, and glass blowing 
which generated 532 livelihood projects 
employing five to six employees in each 
production center. Mushroom growing 
and laundry soap making were also in- 
troduced generating 200 livelihood 
projects for the people. 

The Research and Development Plan 
was formulated to indicate preferred ar- 
eas of research and development under 
the 15 leading edges. The R&D was de- 
veloped by identifying program areas 
based on the following criteria: 1) focus 
on development of local materials; 2) 
high probability of success; 3) potentials 
of developed products /processes in the 
export market; and 4) basically strategic 
in nature. 

Some of the R&D breakthroughs 
from 1986 to 1992 were as follows: 

o In Agriculture, Aquaculture, For- 
estry , and Natural Resources 

- A technology on the use of vesicu- 
lar-arbuscular mychorizza (VAM) which 
involved the use of crops in a symbiotic 
relationship called mychorriza (fungus 
and plant roots association) led to a natu- | 



I ral way of raising crops in sites with low 
» fertility; 

- The bio-assay technique used in 
determining unsafe "red tide"; this tech- 
nique is cheaper and faster compared to 
the one using white mouse in measuring 
the toxicity of shellfish extracts; and 

- A solar lumber dryer which used 
blasting sheet as glazing material for the 
heat collected with charcoal inside. It can 
dry 25 mm(l -inch) thick lumber at a rate 
50 percent faster than drying in the 
shed. 

o In Industry and Energy 

- The technology on the extraction 
of essential oil from local plants will mini- 
mize the country's dependence on im- 
ported essential oil valued at P43.9 mil- 
lion per year; 

- The rice hull gasifier-combustor 
which used agricultural waste as source 
of fuel. The combustor is economically 
feasible to use for food and grain drying 
and also as heat source of a boiler for 
power generation; and 

- Garbage as a vital source of fuel 
in the form of methane and compost fer- 
tilizer was fully recognized. Five landfills 
were constructed to supply a biogas sys- 
tem. The technology on methane genera- 



116 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



tion from controlled landfill would en- 
able foreign savings of approximately 
P30 million per year in terms of im- 
ported oil if 50 percent of the solid waste 
generated annually is converted to 
biogas. 

o In Health, Food, and Nutrition 

- The DOST food dehydration tech- 
nique was developed in response to the 
problem identified in a postharvest study 
that 42 percent of the vegetable produced 
locally are wasted due to improper han- 
dling, absence of processing technology, 
poor distribution, and over supply in 
some areas; and 

- The development of the Electro- 
cardiogram (ECG) Monitor, an inexpen- 
sive monitor in place of the costly XY 
monitors usually attached to the ECG 
apparatus. A related technology was the 
PC-based Electromyogram (EMG) 
which was used for nerve stimulation 
tests, nerve conduction studies, and 
evoked potential analysis. 

o In Advanced Technology 

- A digital/microprocessor-based 
generic software/hardware system was 
designed and developed using an IBM 
PC as a host computer. The design and 



fabrication of the 32-bit Graphic System 
Processor (GSP) prototype was com- 
pleted, including programming of the 
GSP software drier; and 

- Porcelain and aluminum grind- 
ing balls have been developed as substi- 
tute for imported flint balls. This has re- 
duced the cost of importation and pro- 
duction of porcelain chemical crucibles 
by about 20 percent and of varistors by 
50 percent. 

The grant of incentives to R & D ac- 
tivities was included in the Omnibus In- 
vestment Law and guidelines were for- 
mulated to ensure smooth implementa- 
tion. 

Grants-in-aid for research were also 
made available from. various agencies, 
state colleges, and universities. In DOST 
alone, P234 million had been made avail- 
able in 1992 compared to P33 million in 
1991. 

Through the grants-in-aid program, 
a dextrose plant which will commercially 
manufacture cassava starch for dextrose 
was inaugurated in Guimaras, Iloilo. 
Similarly, a P2.5 million Agar Produc- 
tion Plant was set up in Zamboanga City 
which produced 110 kgs. of agar-agar 
per month. • 




> 



construction;- 
lopez- catakauan 

ROAD 




FOR THE RECORD. The Aquino ad- 
ministration may well be known to 
have started fast track infrastructures, 
not only in the city but in the disaster- 
stricken areas. It also built more 
barangay roads each year than the pre- 
vious administration. In photo above, 



President Aquino gives good views 

and hope to people of Q"«? Y«°ez 
ince with the construction of the Lopez 
- Catanauan Road.On her last year in 
office, President Aquino focused her 
attention on Metro Manila. Below, she 
inspects EDSA flyover. 





SOCIAL EQUITY. President Aquino al- tional Conference of Employers to 

ways touched base with the people in push for more economic reforms. Be- 

the provinces, the labor sector, and low, is a graphic illustration of how 

the businessmen. Above, the President President Aquino fared in fighting 

prods leaders and members of the Na- poverty with her personal touch. 



POVERTY INCIDENCE 
By Region 

90 i 




Phil NCR I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII 



I 




The President 
inspects fresh sea 
produce during her 
visit to the Fisher- 
men's Wharf in 
Parahaque. Her 
administration 
loaned billions of 
pesos to small 
farmers and fisher- 
men. 



PERSONAL TOUCH. President Aquino was chided by 
some sectors of the press for being a glamorized 
'promo-girl' when, during her state visit to the United 
States, she personally met with American businessmen 
to ask them to take a second look at the Philippines. 
Below, she meets with a group of US retailer JC Penny 
buyers who responded to her appeal. 





RICH DISCOVERY. President Aquino 
inspects oil sample from the West 
Linapacan presented to her by Alcorn 
and Presidential Adviser on Energy 
Wenceslao dela Paz. With the suc- 
cessful tapping of high-grade quality 
oil deposits during Aquino's term, 
hope runs high that the Philippines 
may end its heavy reliance on im- 
ported oil by the turn of the century. 



DIRECT-LINE. Aquino effected the 
blossoming of NGOs through legisla- 
tion and actual financial support. 
Above, the President with PMS Head 
Chito Sobrepena in a brief respite 
after awarding checks to Kaunlaran ng 
Manggagawang Pilipino, Inc. and the 



Evelio Javier Foundation on Decem- 
ber 11, 1991. Below, the President at 
the Agro-Food Processing Corporation, 
owned and operated by the Federa- 
tion of Farmers' Cooperatives in 
Bulacan. 





ABOVE THE 
ASHES. The Pre- 
sident passes 
through a trellis of 
ampalaya (bitter 
melon) which grew 
abundantly over a 
field of lahar in 
Basa Air Base, left. 



In another demonstration of Filipino 
kabisig spirit, heirs of Don Pepe 
Henson of Pampanga donate a parcel 
of land to the Pinatubo Livelihood 
Center. Josie Henson Suarez, repre- 



senting the family, signs a deed of 
donation. There were seven others who 
donated a total of 38.1 hectares of land 
to help their kababayan start anew. 






Left, President Aquino 
greets young gymnasts 
who participated in the 
SEA Games in 91. Her 
unqualified support to 
sports made the SEA 
Games an outstanding 
success. This was 
followed by the 'near 
perfect' chess Olym- 
piad in Manila. 



The President pays tribute to the Filipino gold medalists of the 16th ' tQ 
east Asian Games on December 6, 1991. In photo are (from lertj. ajn 
Concepcion (Shooting); Jenifer Yeo (Wushu); Akiko Thomson^and tn os 
(Swimming); Lydia de Vega-Mercado (Track and Field); renx d 
(Tennis); Elma Muros (Track and Field); and Samson Co (Wushu). 




REFLECTIONS ON OUR DEMOCRACY 



For the past several months, Cabinet members have been coming to these 
seminars to argue the case for my administration, an administration that has stood 
accused of weakness. 

I must confess I have only glanced at their papers. I have been rather busy 
these past months successfully organizing the succession of what is called a weak 
government. And I had to do it with the very disadvantages that supposedly 
explain its weakness: the lack of political party support; the absence of veteran 
campaigners. Critics called my endorsement the kiss of death. Because of my 
failure to win over the country's biggest political party - touted as the engine of 
victory m the '92 elections, experts pronounced my endorsement as an exercise in 
futility. I must confess that I thought so at times. 

I was left with no recourse but to advise the administration candidate to bring 
his campaign straight to the people. Indeed, in our weakness, we were compelled 
to turn the traditional strengths of politicians against them, dividing their loyalties 
and diluting their commitments to "deliver" rather than respect the votes of the 
people beneath them. By exposing the advantages enjoyed by the traditional 



parties, we were able to turn them into disabling liabilities. The Congress printing 
office comes to mind. 



Thus, I was not able to follow those seminars as closely as I wished. That is the 
problem with being weak: you have to be single-minded in your commitments, 
unflagging in your efforts, and generally successful in the result. You may 
succeed in doing everything, but you can do some things quite well. 

At the end of each day, I take a few moments to reflect on the actions I have 
taken. At the end of a six-year term, I shall need a little more time to arrive at a a 
verdict of my performance. 

flip one who 

In due time, I will plead the entire case for my administration, as tn ^ 
must bear the ultimate responsibility for it. But I think we should bear in ^ 
those who were privy to the threats and opportunities I faced are better p ^ 
appreciate the choices I made. I should be judged as much by the circums 
that defined my choices then, as by the consequences of those choices today. 

Understand that I came to power on the crest of a loose coalition of forces 
Two of them were at mortal odds with each other, the left and the mlllt * ry ul j me 
They would pull me now to one side, now to the other, or simply try to ^ ^ 
down. Some of the centrists, the traditional politicians, tried pulling me 
norms and practices of a past already discredited before martial law. 

on art-irle written in 
Putting my papers in order the other day, I came across an aru 

early 1986 by a Singaporean, Murugaiah Rajaretnam. 

The "multiple parenthood" of my government, he warned, had crea ^ 
conflicting political debts impossible to repay all at once. But, this writer read my 
mind correctly. For I saw my mission as yielding to neither side, but going forward 
to meet the expectations of the vast majority who were the principal authors ot the 
great political changes that had taken place. Expectations of meaningful freedom, 
economic improvement, and social justice. 



Out of this group -by far the largest, yet the least demanding of the citizenry - 
a third force had to be forged, on which to anchor our newly restored democracy. A 
force not only in politics but, I would be surprised to learn, a force even in the 
economy. 

The main threat to my government, and the democracy that shares its fate, 
came from the extremes of the political spectrum. This wasn't my view only but 
that of everyone at the time. Of course, today, we can see things differently and 
discover lost opportunities that none of us can honestly say they saw at the time. 

Then, the only question was whether I would succumb to one force or the other 
- perish in either event. Meeting this dual threat had to be my first and overriding 
priority. 

Few believed I could steer a middle course towards the destination we have 
reached: a peaceful political transition perpetuating democracy. And, of all things, 
a transition protected pvprv C f Q ^ , , 3 6 

urecrea ev ery step of the way by the military. 

by the off" 0 * S f UTprisin§ * at m y first Principal acts should be to tame the insurgency 
ful war it k t d 6306 t0 Feempt the milit ary by a challenge to wage the success- 
nist rebels ^ emanding ' 1 called for a ceasefire and peace talks with the commu- 

killin^acr^th^T W3S that while we were talkin S' we wouldn't be 

talks would soften thetlT/T" T ^ ***** " t,med ^ Christmas " the 
could stomach war a «n„ r Wh ° taSted pea ° e in itS P reeminent se *son 

again, even if reasons for it still existed in their minds. 

own^wX^7e m7a, belief J* * ^ "° faUU ° f ^ 

4 e We moral ascendancy to wage a proper 



war. 



Both the Left and the Rio^f 
Their survival depended onl c ( 8 ™ ^ P ° Wer t0 make the talks fai1 ' 

ible derlinp of ft, ■ 311 the talks did ' Yet ' we can the irrevers- 

iDie decline of the insurgents fm™ 4-v, 

fW , m , ( .... . , s ts trom th e moment the peace talks began, and the 
decline of militarism from the mom^n,« .. „ . ^ 

uie moment the peace talks ended. 



The ceasefire and talks stripped the insurgency of the justification to continue. 
NPA taxation suddenly ran up against stiff resistance. At the same time I knew that 
the total war which the military had always demanded - and which I challenged 
them to undertake - would never be fought even after the failure of the talks. 

Review the military's rhetoric since then. "Total war" vanished from its vo- 
cabulary. The experience of peace in every corner of the land would be addictive. 
Universal peace was not just a dream anymore. It had happened; it was lost; it had 
to be won again. Christmas of 1 986 laid the foundations of peace in all our hearts, 
so that all that remains is to build upon it an all-embracing peace - stone by stone o 
trust. 

That trust, I felt, should be built first in the quintessential culture of suspicion, 
the military. 

Fourteen years of military-backed dictatorship had raised a wall of suspicion 
between civilians and soldiers. And it was a wall of mirrors. Neither side cou see 
through to the other. Each side saw only the reflection of his own fears. 

Among my papers is a 1986 military report; it is, I think, indicative of mi] * a ^ 
opinion then. The report is stamped "secret" and purports to be a study, but it 
a piece of propaganda poorly disguised as analysis. This is obvious from t f*PjJ^ 
tions that compose its so-called analytical framework. Questions like how ar ^ 
communists infiltrated my government, how long could civilian supremac y s ^ 
up under withering military contempt, what was the role of a non-existent e ow 
Army, what would happen when the proposed constitution was rejecte . n , 

. . , j /-^^manHpr-in-Chief who was 
finally, how could AFP unity be achieved under a Commander m u 

expected to view every man in uniform as a suspect in the murder of her husband. 

Within such a framework, what conclusion could be drawn except an order to 
march on the presidential palace. 

I resolved to tear down that wall so that I could bring together the productive 
and protective elements of the commonwealth. 



I asked a colonel if it were true that the military believed I could never forgive 
them. He confirmed it but tried to be understanding by saying that my feelings 
were only natural. The widows of the military felt the same way towards the insur- 
gents. 

I told him that I did not mean to raise myself up unduly, but I was no ordinary 
widow. For I was widowed of a man but remained wedded to his cause - to unite 
the nation and bring it peace. Peace to close the open wound which bled our sons 
and daughters and drained our future of hope. 

The task being large, I set about it in small ways, and proceeded by degrees to 
build the trust which can only grow from within and cannot be ordered from above. 

In Bigay Puso, I brought the wives of Cabinet officials and the wives of military 
officers together in tasks which showed each side's comparative advantage - disci- 
pline and system on the one side, flexibility and networking on the other - as well as 
the identity of their commitment to the common good. "Hindi pala kayo Komunista", 
a military wife joked to a Cabinet wife, who answered back, "Hindi pala kayo fasista". 

I brought PMA cadets and university students together, with deplorable re- 
sults at first. They traded challenges. But in the end, I would stand godmother in 
the first wedding that resulted from these gatherings. 

Peace and Order Councils were chaired by governors but I made the provin- 
cial commanders their vice-chairmen. 

I put disaster relief under the military because it had the reach, the manpower, 
and the best capability to cope with such exigencies on short notice. 

A talk with the officer who was held hostage by the NPA in the Bondoc penin- 
sula led to the extensive use of AFP engineering brigades to open up forbidden areas 
to development. These places had few votes and the general destitution promised 
little payback on the investment that was made. But, I believe we should not look at 
people only from the angle of ROI. 



By giving the military a positive role in development, we were changing the 
attitude that the country was theirs for the taking, to the attitude that they were an 
integral part of the country they were serving. 

I gave the military the understanding that I would trust them to im P r ° v * f ** 
armed forces as they saw fit. But they had to trust me also in the deep an o 
unexpected selection I would make of their top commanders. 

But beyond suspicion, there was also confusion. The military had 
bond with one Commander-in-Chief and couldn't accept that the nex on 



woman. 



The problem is not unique. Last January 17, 500 military o 1 do]ezz& 
extraordinary meeting in the Kremlin". It was, said US defense ana 
Rice, a show of force. It was also a sign of confusion. Former Sovie q[ a 

might wonder to which of several republics they owe the undivided e g 
soldier. Officer after officer stood up to ask, "Whom does this army 

The confusion here was not as great. The choice ^X^fdto^ 
armed government or replace it with the junta the »*W d seven coup 

with the failure of their coup against Marcos. This explains why we 
attempts, two of them among the bloodiest of their kind. 

A on the recommendation of the 

Progress in this area, I admit, was not smooth, un ^ ^ mj]itary 

Board of Generals, I promoted officers on the eve o ^ republic in 

rebellion, and overlooked officers who would rush to the 
its hour of gravest peril. 

f th Batasan to where the chiefs 
But in the end, I could ^^^ZJ on - order them with utter 
of the Armed Forces sat and - m ful country has ever known, 

confidence to guarantee the frees and fa re, e domination of society to the 

We had changed the ambition of the soldier from tne 
service of his country. 



AH this might have been accomplished by a longtime friend of the military. 
That it should have been done by someone the military initially regarded as a foe 
will ensure the endurance of these changes. For these changes come from deep 
within the military soul and will not so easily be uprooted. 

Speaking of the traditional deference of the Soviet military to civilian author- 
ity, Condolezza Rice noted that it is easier for a military to move from non-interfer- 
ence based on loyalty to democratic principles, than it is for a habitually intervening 
military to break the habit. 

Ours, indeed, was the harder task and therefore the greater achievement. 

I knew when I assumed office that poverty alleviation should be the primary 
concern of my administration. I must admit, however, that we didn't have a clear 
idea of how to go about it. I am not embarassed to admit this because those who 
came before us had demonstrated only a remarkable capacity to aggravate mass 
poverty. 

There will be other occasions in which to fully discuss the economic legacy we 
eave behind. In passing, let me say only that I have spent my term repairing the 
amage they made and restoring the international credit they had trashed. I had to 
s ow, in the face of considerable criticism here at home, that a democracy would 
and di ^ C ° mmitments however painful the price. So that when coups were tried 
" lsasters struck, we found to our relief that we had reestablished our solidarity 
with the international community. 

We had to correct the inequities and distortions created by monopolies and 
cronyism, and lift the unnecessary controls on the productive sectors of the economy. 
allowV^^ t0 POlit ' Cal interferen ce in the credit decisions of the GFIs, which has 
owe them to play an important role in the reconstruction of the country. 

h a I , In / latl0n had t0 be P ut under contr ol and the discipline of market competition 
aa to be imposed across broad segments of the economy. I had to move quickly to 
rnrow safety nets under those who would be most severely affected by these austeri- 
ies. It is not surprising, therefore, that our first answer to the problem of poverty 



was to try to throw money at it. The Community Employment Development Pro- 
gram was a massive make-work and pump priming program. We were to throw 
cash down to a cash-starved economy and get things moving again. But the pump 
analogy broke down. Not all the money was going down the pipes, some of it was 
sticking to the hands of officials farther down the line. 

It was clear to me that what assistance government could extend would not go 
far unless a reliable system was found to take it where it was supposed to go. It 
made increasing sense that if assistance could not dependably be brought to the 
communities, the communities must bring themselves to it. Thus arose the NGOs, 
groups of private citizens who had gotten together to help their communities meet 
their needs and realize their potential. 

The NGOs had a bad name under the Marcos regime, especially in the mili- 
tary. They were seedbeds of insurrection. They protested human rights vioiati 
They couldn't be controlled. 

It would be no different under the new government. The NGOs stUl jealously 
maintain their independence and a skeptical reserve towards the mm y- ^ ^ 
the last elections, many NGOs supported a candidate who had been tne 
Armed Forces. 

The most successful school building program was ^ de **l* e J°*^md 
but implemented by NGOs - in record time and with ^ordinary eco^ JT^ 
integrity. We told the NGOs that what money they saved tney nted effi _ 

projects. Remarkably, this did not produce larceny but an unp 
ciency in the allocation and expenditure of public funds. 

etary sense over these projects, so that the lack ot care an 
things, which is the Filipino curse, solved itself. 

This is pump priming as i, should be. A little money going ; a long , way and 
reusing a greater fund of energy, creativity and endeavor. HU I m *e 
end are fwo things: the project and the people's capability to do tt. The second * the 
more enduring and valuable result. 



Working with NGOs is not a bed of roses. Oftentimes, the bond that holds an 
NGO together is a shared experience of neglect or abuse. Thus, there is constant 
suspicion of politicians. There is also, at times, sharp competition among the NGOs 
for government attention, and bitterness over the failure to get it in equal measure. 

It will be hard to change these attitudes. So I hope their only fault can be 
turned to their advantage. Commander Dante's now vast experiment in coopera- 
tive farming - which grew from 500 to 10,000 farmers - is getting stiff competition 
from other NGOs and civic leaders, such as Bitay Lacson in Negros, Fr. Mangahas 
in Nueva Ecija. Women appear to be taking the lead and major part of the more 
successful NGOs. I had expected this from the boost we gave the cause of women 
through the Five- Year Philippine Development Plan for Women. This plan was not 
only integrated in the National Development Plan but has served as a model for 
similar programs the world over. 

Indeed, competition is keen. And if the best NGOs are spurred to improve on 
excellence, so much the better. But it would be better still if they share their experi- 
ences and build their capability to do so. For the concept of NGOs goes hand-in- 
hand with the rationale for pilot projects. Like the all-too-brief national peace of 
1986, an actual experience is easier to replicate than making it up from scratch 
everytime. As they say, it is one thing to know the song, another to do it justice. 

The two leading candidacies in the last elections prove one thing: the people 
are taking over elections. The third force is coming into its own. They can do 
increasingly without the politicians but the politicians cannot do without them. If 
the politicians continue to ignore the people and people's organizations, they will be 
repeatedly punished at the polls until attrition removes the last of them. This last 
election will be remembered for the fresh wind that blew across our country, sweep- 
ing a great deal of traditional politics before it. 

I think this trend will continue. So the politicians should realize that their best 
chance of survival is to go back, in a meaningful sense, to the people who elect them. 

Rather than wait for one or two more elections to transform the nature of 
government with people-powered candidates, it would be better for NGOs and 



politicians to come together now. Otherwise, the politicians will be the losers in the 
long run, but the NGOs will lose in the short term opportunities that the country 
cannot afford to pass up. 



A similar reproach has been levelled at me. Instead of wrangling with the 
politicians in the Congress, why didn't I just join the majority party? Then my every 
wish would be their command. 

But it would not have worked that way always. Just as easily, partisan inter- 
ests could have preempted my own aims, and drawn the final profile of my admin- 
istration. 

You may not agree that I always had the best people in my Cabinet, but I think 
we can agree that my appointments would have been disasters if they mainly re- 
flected the preferences of power groups. I hope you will grant me this, that my 
government shall exit at least with a sense of pride in its fundamental integrity. 

Just imagine the effect of party influence on appointments to the Comelec, and 
compare in your minds what elections would have been with what they were last 
May. Remember the Marcos Comelec. 

Imagine the effect on the Armed Forces of appointments to high commands 
made under the influence of vested interests. And think whether I could have stood 
in the Batasan and ordered the appointees of the politicians in the military to assure 
fair, free and orderly elections? 

Imagine such officers enforcing a gun ban in the elections. 

Could I have advised military officers to stay neutral in the elections? As I did, 
explaining to them that they would lose nothing by staying neutral and maybe gain 
a lot by carrying out their duties well. It was the first time, the officers said, that a 
President had ever told them to stay clean in an election. 

These reflections barely scratch the surface of a large subject. Yet already We 
have consumed so much time. But I think the question implicitly posed at the begin- 



ning of this lecture - Was this a weak government? - has been answered by the 
attainment of its principal goals and by the success of its project of succession. 

And while we're on the subject of succession, let us not take for granted what 
we just experienced. A peaceful, democratic transition in strict accord with a Con- 
stitution. The very closeness of the fight and the longevity of the count have merely 
underscored the stability of the situation. 

What a contrast to the succession envisioned by my late predecessor as early as 
1973. He laid it down in his Political Testament that, should he die, his office would 
devolve on his wife - not by law but according to his opinion. 

SenateP ^ W ™ ds ' the ex " Vice President was "too old and unreliable", the ex- 
"tooold reSldent " had t0 ° man y fin ancial interests to protect", the ex-Speaker was 
touch" inadeciuate "' the serving Foreign Secretary was "too old and out of 
ouc and the Secretary of National Defense would provoke a crisis of leadership 
upon his acrpccir>r. r\ 1 i • 

martial 1 Unl y hls wife was fit for the job, he wrote, and ordered the 

personal 0 WadminiStrat ° r t0 enforce his last wil1 and testament. Succession by 
cordan ° P1 ™° n as °PP ose d to what we experienced: succession by election in ac- 
ee with law and carried out in liberty. 

mocrLT d ^ Sa P pointed ' therefore, when I hear people say, "Well, aside from de- 
what have you done for us lately?" 

democracy 11 But^he 011 Cann0t eat rreedom and Y ou cannot power machinery with 
dictatorship I am •' neither can Political prisoners turn on the light in the cells of a 
- and freedom but^ Saying that you cannot have both light - or economic progress 
ficed for the first a° U kee P in mind tnat the second should never be sacri- 

country discovered in T did in 1972 " Because yOU wiH lose both - As the 

n the economic collapse of the early 80s. 

Perhaps my officials ha 
^ (.v>^^ T aready given a good account of my administration 

in these seminars. I will cnnciH™. u , ■ 
r , „ w '»iuer what they have said m preparing my own full and 

final assessment. But essentially t^i , , j , 

oawinany I do not want others to plead my case for me, in the 



same way as I do not want others to fight to the last drop of my blood - as they 
were often too eager to do. 

I want neither the flattery of friends nor the prejudice of enemies to fix in the 
historic mind the image of the founding years of our new republic. I would entrust 
that task only to those who, with me, tried and sometimes failed, but in decent 
measure succeeded by sincere efforts to help our country. 

The words of Theodore Roosevelt come to my solace. 

"It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how the strong man 
stumbles or where the doer of deeds could have done better. The credit belongs to 
the man in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who 
strives valiantly; who errs, and comes short again and again, because there is no 
effort without error and shortcoming". 

Indeed, the credit belongs to the man "who actually strives; who knows the 
great enthusiasms, the great devotions; who spends himself in a worthy cause; who 
at best knows in the end the triumphs of high achievement, and, at the worst, if he 
fails, does it daring greatly; so that his place shall never be with those cold and timid 
souls who know neither victory nor defeat". 

I have not always won, but, to the very end, I never shirked a fight and did not 
lose the last one. For these successes I thank God and not myself for them; for I often 
thought the day was lost when He gave it to me. In the end, all was accomplished 
by prayer. 

Perhaps you will not listen closely the next time I speak, but it won't matter to 
me so long as I am able, for the record, to say the truth. For if - while I needed 
public support - I never sacrificed the public good for it, what more next year when 
I shall be just one of you and beyond the reach of daily reproach. 

Thank you and good day. 



Speech delivered by President Corazon C. Aquino at the U.P. Public lecture on 
the Record and Legacy of the Aquino Administration on June 18, 1992 



REFERENCES 



I. REESTABLISHMENT OF DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTIONS AND PROCESSES 
Political Freedom 

Basic data were taken from the Commission on Elections and the 1991 State of the 
Nation Address. 

Independent Judicial System 

Data were taken from the Constitution of the Philippines. 
Freedom of Expression 

Sources of data were the report delivered by Press Secretary Horacio V. Paredes for 
the U.P. Public Lectures on the Aquino Administration and the Post EDSA 
Government (1986-1992). 

Restoration of Peace and Order 

Sources of data were the Organizational Transition Reports (OTRs) of the Office of 
the Peace Commissioner, Department of Agrarian Reform, the Department of Interior 
and Local Government, and the Department of Foreign Affairs; the 1991 Accomplish- 
ment Report of the SDA Program; Minutes of the meetings of the Standing Commit- 
tee and the Technical Working Group; the SDA CHICKS Area 1991 Report; and 
President Corazon C. Aquino's speech at the launching of Crimeioatch, January 17, 



II. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND GOODWILL 

The entire section was based on the OTR of the Department of Foreign Affairs, DFA 
Reports on the President's State Visits, Press Releases from the Office of the 
Press Secretary, the 1989 Philippine Yearbook, and reports provided by the NED A 
Secretariat. 

III. PEOPLE EMPOWERMENT 

Basic data were culled from a paper written by President Corazon C. Aquino entitled 
"Le People Power: Les Chemms de L'Espoir" (Lifestreams of Hope and People Power). 



Also used were the Medium Term Philippine Development Plan 1987-1992, NEDA 
Board Resolution No. 2, the 1991 Accomplishment Report of the Special Development 
Area Program, the OTR of the Kabisig People's Movement, documents on the Inte- 
grated Livelihood Reconstruction Program and the New Local Government Code. 

IV. ENERGIZING THE BUREAUCRACY 

Sources used were relevant records and various reports of the Cabinet Secretariat. 
Also used were pertinent issuances of the Civil Service Commission and the 
Department of Budget and Management. 

V. LEGACY OF ECONOMIC RECOVERY 
Agriculture: Towards A Market-Oriented Economy 

Basic data were taken from the OTR of the Department of Agriculture, report of the 
DA for the UP Public Lecture Series, and the DA Report on the Accomplishments of 
the Aquino Administration. The average annual growth rate of the agricultural sector 
from 1986 to 1990 was sourced from the NEDA Agricultural Staff. 

Agrarian Reform : The Land Problem Addressed 

Data were culled from the OTR of the Department of Agrarian Reform, reports of 
the Presidential Agrarian Reform Council Secretariat, and the paper delivered by 
former Secretary of Agrarian Reform Philip Ella Juico on June 9,1992 at the Asian 
Institute of Tourism. 

Environment and Natural Resources: Strategy for Sustainable Development 

Data for this section were culled from the OTR of the Department of Environment 
and Natural Resources. 

Trade and Industry: Backbone of a Developing Country 

Basic data were taken from the 1991 State of the Nation Address (SONA); OTRs of 
the DTI, Department of Finance (DOF), and the Department of Labor and Emploxj- 
ment; Central Bank (CB) Annual Report; the DOF and DTI reports for the UP 
Public Lecture Series; National Accounts of the Philippines, May 1992; "Philippine 
Assistance Program; Investing in the Country's Future" (NEDA), March 1992; 
"Status of the' Philippine Agenda for Groioth" (NEDA), March 1992; the 1991 Sum- 
mary Status Report on Kalakalan 20; the 1992 First Quarter Report of the Joint 



Legislative-Executive Foreign Debt Council; and the Special Transition Reports on the 
External Debt Management of the CB and the DOF. Additional data Were supplied by 
the Rural Banks Department of the CB. The CB also provided statistical inputs. 

Education and Human Resources Development Molding the Young 

This section was based on the 1991-2000 Philippine Plan of Action for -Education for 
All'. Reference was also made from the 1991 SOMA, DECS Accomplishment Report, 
and the "Agenda for Growth" (NED A), March 1992. Also used was the DECS 
OTR. Basic data were also extracted from RA 6847. 

Health: Ensuring a Strong Base 

This section was based on the SON A and the OTRs of the Department of Health and 
the Department of Social Welfare and Development ' 

Housing: Providing More Shelter for More People 

cTnTottT ^ ^ ° TR ° f the H0U5in S and Urhm Devel °Pment Coordinating 
council. Other references were RA 7279 and RA 6846. 

Social Welfare and Community Development: Giving Assistance and Dignity 

^idmmSumm^vZ t PCYA P ™" er ' 2 " 2 Accom P lishm ^ *ep*t on the 
oummer Youth Program and the Local Government Code. 

l ThTs^T e: Timely PubUc Works in Record Thne 

H %hw^lTthToff Ulkd / " WI ° TR ° f the De P artment °f PuUk Work * ^d 
Department of T °^ Energy Affairs, the National Power Corporation, and the 
of President C mnSp ° rtation and Communications; and the "Infrastructure Legacies 
orazon C. Aquino" Part II by DPWH Sec. Jose P. de Jesus. 

Science and Technology 

Th is 

Science'and TeThZo^ ^ 2 " 2 SONA md ^ °™ ° f tHe De P«rtment of 



