.4 Z3ne/ History of the 
Filipino Flag 



BY 



PURA VlLLANUKVA KALAW /;* y 

Aftt&ot otn^o Wllplrio .Women lr> PoMlcO •'Ostn^f^fvoj 
Ncwapnpowmi - (o - PntUQfetft* ''The ConaUnifciV 
Co5po*iiMv* in th<* Philippine*,", "Condlmen- 
toe Indf^ndw" M Tit« Coconut Cook Uook,^ ... 
"Ann Pnicliiliito na 1 PlHpino." Klc 




tANILA 

Of I'ft I " 
1947 



A Bzief Histoiy of the 
Filipino Flag 



BY 

PURA VlLLANUEVA KALAW 

Author of "The Filipino Women in Politics," "Osmena— from 
Newspaperman to President," "The Consumers' 
Cooperative in the Philippines," "Condimen- 
tos Indi'genas," "The Coconut Cook Book," 
"Ang Pagluluto ng Pilipino," Etc. 



| 

\ 



Cbi »8T«ni«l ttuctan e««f 



* 6-47— O. W. 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1947 



f ; 



Copyright, 1947 

BY 

PURA VlLLANUBVA KALAW 



DEDICATION 

O my beloved children 
Maria, Teodoro, Purita, 
and Evelina, I dedicate this 
work, to engrave in their hearts 
a. devotion to serve our country 
and to love her flag. 

Pura Villanueva Kalaw 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Dedication 3 

A Brief History of the Filipino Flag 7 

Different revolutionary flags 8 

The first Filipino national flag 9 

Forbidding the use of the Filipino flag 10 

A new era 10 

The repeal of the Flag Law 1 1 

The Government adopts an official flag 1 1 

The flag of the Commonwealth 12 

The use of the Filipino flag was prohibited—. 13 
Japanese Army forbids use of Filipino flag.... 13 
The flag of the Japanese-sponsored Philip- 
pine Republic ° 13 

The Filipino flag was hoisted again * 15 

The Last American Flag on Philippine Soil 18 

5 



1 



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE 
FILIPINO FLAG 

By PURA VlLLANUEVA KaLAW 



^ 7\ T THE CLOSE of the Nineteenth Century, 
^fcil Spain believed that she still had the men 
— . a nd the might with which to hold the Phil- 
ippines. On the strength of this belief, she 
continued to, commit abuses on a hapless 
people. Intelligent and liberty-loving Fili- 
pinos, among them Jose Rizal, Graciano Lopez Jaena, 
Marcelo H. del Pilar, and the representative to the 
Cortez, Ventura de los Reyes, fought within the limits 
of the law, and tried to win in Madrid liberal reforms 
for their country. k With this aim in view, Jose Rizal and 
Marcelo H. del Pilar founded the "Liga Filipina," an 
association for propaganda. Besides these activities, 
they sought the help of responsible men in Spain who 
could influence and bring about changes in the way 
the Philippines was governed. They published "La 
Solidaridad," a fortnightly paper, and contributed ar- 
ticles to Spanish newspapers on the abuses of the 
Spanish clergy in the Islands. 

Failing to secure the desired reforms, Andres Boni- 
facio, together with Ladislao Diwa, Teodoro Plata, II- 
defonso Laurel and others founded in Tondo 1892 a 
secret society which aimed to put to an end by force the 
Spanish domination. The society was named, "Kataas- 
taasan, Kagalang-galang Katipunan." The' Katipunan 
adopted a flag. This flag depicted a red rectangular 
field with the letters "K.K.K." at the center, placed 



i 



s 



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 



in a row, or arranged as in an equilateral triangle. The 
three "K's" stood for the first three letters of the name 
of the secret, society. The Katipunan flag was un- 
furled in Balintawak on August 26, 1896. From then 
on it followed the valiant rebels into the battlefields 
wherever they went. It became the symbol of our 
people's desire to unite and free themselves from the 
oppressive chains of Spain. The flag of the Katipunan 
had undergone several changes and through this evo- 
lution finally emerged the present Filipino Flag. 

DIFFERENT REVOLUTIONARY FLAGS 

Aside from the Katipunan flag, several others were 
later adopted by the various Filipino military leaders 
that joined the revolt. The flag that Llanera and his 
men used had a black background with skull and cross 
bones and the letter "K" in the middle. Gregorio del 
Pilar, hero of Tirad Pass, chose a tricolor flag, which 
resembles the present Filipino flag. Pio del Pilar's 
flag had a triangle on the left side of a red rectangular 
background. In the middle of the triangle was a sun 
with eight rays and in each of the three corners was 
the letter "K." The women of the Katipunan prepared 
Bonifacio's own standard which had a sun with an in- 
definite number of rays placed above the three "K's." 

On August 30, 1896, the first official change in the 
Katipunan flag was made. The Magdalo revolution- 
ary leaders abolished the three "K's" in the middle of 
the red rectangular flag and substituted the old Tagalog 
letter "I" with eight rays, the letter retaining its original 
meaning in the Katipunan with the eight rays emblem- 
atic of the first eight provinces to revolt, namely: Ma- 
nila, Bulacan, Pampanga, Nueva Ecija, Tarlac, Batangas, 
Laguna, and Cavite. 

The next authorized change in the flag took place at 
Naic Conference on March 17, 1897 when the Military 
leaders, acting as a legislative body, decided that, 
thereafter, the official flag of the Government and its 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW 



9 



p 

forces would be the same as that used by the'Magdalos, 
with the addition of the Sun, symbolizing liberty. 

The Spaniards then realized that they could not con- 
quer the Filipinos. A truce was declared. The Treaty 
of Biak-na-bato was signed by General Emilio Aguinaldo 
and his men on December 27, 1897. The terms of the 
treaty called for the surrender of all arms and for the 
dispersion of the Filipino rebel forces. General Arte- 
mio Ricarte ordered the lowering of the Filipino flag 
and the turning in of all arms. It signified the end of 
the Filipino revolt for the time being. 

THE FIRST FILIPINO NATIONAL FLAG 

The Filipino revolutionary leaders had agreed to 
leave the Philippines and had gone to Hongkong. As 
the Spaniards did not carry out all the terms of the 
Treaty of Biak-na-bato, the exiled leaders formed there 
the "Junta Patriotica," a council whose purpose was to 
organize again the Filipino forces, in order to put an 
end, once and for all, to the Spanish rule. Headed by 
' General Emilio Aguinaldo, the Council devised and 
adopted a new flag to represent an independent Phil- 
ippines. This first Filipino national flag was made by 
Mrs. Marcela Agoncillo, wife of Don Felipe Agoncillo. 
It was brought to Cavite by General Aguinaldo on May 
19, 1898. Aguinaldo said that in designing this new 
flag many considerations were taken into account. The 
white equilateral triangle on the left side of the flag 
had a bursting Sun in the center with eight rays to 
1 represent the first eight provinces that had risen in • 
1 revolt against the Spaniards. The three-five pointed 
stars placed in each corner of the triangle symbolically 
represented the three geographical divisions of the Phil- 
ippines—Luzon, Visayas, and Mindanao. The flag had 
a field of blue and red. Red symbolized the willing- 
ness of the Filipino people to shed their blood in the 
defense of their country, while "the color blue was 
thoughtfully introduced by its designer for the reason 



10 



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 



I' „ t 

of its universality/' During peace time, blue was to 
be placed on top and on days of war, red was to be 
the one. This was the general idea behind the first & 



store the use of the Filipino flag, but all were of no 
1 avail. 

I 



Filipino National Flag. $3 

On June 12, 1898 this flag was formally proclaimed 
political symbol of the Philippine Republic. At the Dec- 
laration of Independence in Kawit, Cavite, to the tune 
of the National Anthem composed by Julian Felipe, the 
officers swore to defend the Republic to the last drop 
of their blood. The flag lost its significance of sover- 
eignty with the end of the short-lived Philippine Re- 
public, but it continued to be the flag of a united people. 

FORBIDDING THE USE OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 

During the early years of American rule, the display 
of the Filipino colors produced such agitation that the 
Philippine Commission, on August 23, 1907, passed Act 
No. 1696, otherwise known as the Fl&g Law, which 
forbade the display of the flag anywhere, even in Fili- 
pino homes. 

When the first Philippine Assembly was formed, 
leaders of the nation, among them Fernando Ma. 
Guerrero, Teodoro M. Kalaw, editor of "El Renaci- 
miento," and Lope K. Santos, editor of "Muling Pag- 
silang," began a campaign for the restoration of the 
use of the Filipino flag. From 1907 to 1914 various 
bills were introduced in the Assembly seeking to re- 



A NEW ERA 

The victory of the Democratic Party in the elections 
of 1914 in America brought a change in the way the 
Philippines was to be governed. Honorable Francis | 
Burton Harrison, a more liberal governor-general, in- 
augurated a New Era. He at once Filipinized the gov- 
ernment of the Philippines. |>c 

B 

< H 

iSFift fa fa fa fa falsi fatfafac fa. fa facfatfai il* fa farfai fac fami fa. fa. fac fa fa. fai fa fa fa 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW 



11 



THE REPEAL OF THE FLAG LAW 

Governor-General Harrison read before the Filth 
Philippine Legislature a message pointing out, among 
other things, the uselessness of the Flag Law. Gov- 
ernor-General Harrison said in effect: 



FIFTH PHILIPPINE LEGISLATURE 
Special Session of 1920 
[Act No. 2928] 



AN ACT TO ADOPT AN OFFICIAL "FLAG FOR THE 
GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS, 



1 



"The time when suspicion and distrust was rile 
among the two races has passed. Act No. 1696 
known as the Flag Law was promulgated when 
feelings ran high, but all that is now gone. I am 
nqw asking you to repeal the Flag Law, so it will 
not be a crime anymore for Filipinos to display E 
their flags. A new generation has sprung up 
among them whose only interest is to see their 
people set up their own government." 

Senator Rafael Palma at once presented a bill in | 
the Senate providing for the repeal of the Flag Law. 
Success came after five days when the said bill was 
signed by Governor-General Francis Burton Harrison. 



THE GOVERNMENT ADOPTS AN OFFICIAL FLAG 

The Philippine flag was displayed again in public p 
offices and buildings on October 30, 1919. The whole | 
nation celebrated the unfurling of its flag. In Manila 
and in every town, even in the remotest barrios, proces- 
sions, feasts, and dances were held to mark the people's 
rejoicing. | 

The same Legislature, in its special session of 1920, 
issued a law adopting an official flag for the Govern- 
ment of the Philippine Islands, prescribing rules for 
its use, and- providing penalties for the violation t of 
these rules. 

This is a copy of the law: 




12 A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 



PRESCRIBE RULES FOR ITS USE, AND PROVIDE 
PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF SAID 
RULES. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representa- 
tives of the Philippines in Legislature assembled 
and by the authority of the same: 

Section 1. The flag commonly known as the Philip- 
pine flag is hereby adopted as the official flag of the 
Government of the Philippine Islands and shall be used 
publicly, in the place next to that belonging to the flag 
of the United States, to represent the Government of the 
Philippine Islands both on sea and on land. 

Sec 2. Whenever the Philippine flag is hoisted in 
public jointly with the American flag, both shall be 
joisted and lowered at the same time. The American 
flag shall be placed above the Filipino flag when both 
are in a vertical line, and to the right of the latter and 
at the same height when hoisted in a horizontal line. 
The Philippine flag shall be accorded the same honors 
and respect which the existing laws and .regulations 
prescribed or may hereafter prescribe for the American 
flag. 

THE FLAG OF THE COMMONWEALTH 

On November 15, 1935, the Philippine Common- 
wealth was inaugurated. The Filipinos elected Manuel 
L. Quezon as President and Sergio Osmena as Vice 
President. When the Commonwealth was well on its 
way, Executive Order No. 23 was issued giving the 
description and specifications of the Filipino flag. 

The flag officially recognized by the Commonwealth 
with its specifications are as follows: 



1. The maximum length of the flag is twice its 
width; the minimum length is twice the altitude 
of the equilateral triangle. 

2. Any side of the equilateral triangle is as long 
as the width of the flag. 

In making these changes our leaders had in mind 
a Filipino flag floating to the left of the American 
flag, hence, similar to it in size and proportion. 



^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW 



13 



THE USE OF THE FILIPINO FLAG WAS PROHIBITED 

The Filipino flag and the American flag were still 
waving over Manila on January 2, 1942. The Imperial 
Japanese Army entered Manila on that day and these 
flags were hauled down. As a symbol of its victory; 
the Rising Sun was raised over the land. 

On April 22, 1942 the following news item appeared 
in the Tribune: 

[JAPANESE] ARMY FORBIDS USE OF FILIPINO FLAG 

Military Ordinance No. 3 

(April 22, 1942) 

Ordinance concerning prohibition of use of the 
Philippine flag. It is hereby prohibited to hoist 
the existing Philippine flag for the time being. 

Commander-in-Chief of the 

Imperial Japanese Forces 



Upon being questioned that evening, Jorge B. Vargas, 
Chairman of the Executive Commission, explained that 
the order was only temporary, in compliance with the 
order of the Japanese Supreme Command. He said 
further: "I understand the reason behind the order is to 
prevent misunderstanding such as what happened in 
the occupied parts of China, and also because the Fili- 
pino flag was used by the USAFFE against the Japanese 
Army." 

THE FLAG OF THE JAPANESE-SPONSORED 
PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC 
On June 16, 1942, Premier Hedeki Tozyo announced 
before the Imperial Diet the desire of the Imperial will 
to grant the Philippines its independence within the | 
year. To carry out this eventuality, the Supreme Com- 
mand appointed a Commission to draft the Constitution 
of the coming Philippine Republic. On September 12, 
this Commission announced that the flag to be used by 
the Philippine Republic, in size and design was to be 

£3 



14 



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 



i 

S like that hoisted at Kawit by General Emilio Aguinaldo 
I in 1898. 

Hon. Jose P. Laurel, President-elect of the Republic, 
appointed a special committee of women leaders headed 
1 by Mrs. Pura Villanueva Kalaw to prepare the flag to 
be unfurled on the inauguration of the second Philip- 
pine Republic. More than 100 women contributed 
towards the making of this Filipino Flag. Upon 
its completion, the women presented it to President 
Laurel, accompanied by the following letter: 

"The Hon. Jose P. Laurel 
"President of the Philippine Republic 

"Your Excellency: 

"With all our hearts we present to Your Excel- 
lency the flag to be unfurled on the inauguration of 
the Philippine Republic. In the making of this flag 
women from different regions and of different 
faiths united together ' like sisters, heeding the ex- 
ample that its shadow is cast equally upon every- 
one, discriminating against none. 

"This flag was made through their voluntary 
contributions as the expression of the noble aspi- 
rations of the Filipino women. In making this 
symbol of our love for our country, we are con- 
scious of the great obligation as well as the great 
honor granted to us. Happiness, power, respect, 
inherent in the flag of any nation were translated 
directly into the hopes, the love, the deeds, and 
the sacrifices that make our well-being. 

"The Filipino women busied themselves night 
and day, heedless of recompense, in order to help 
give success and happiness to the land. In a 
short time, our country will take her place among 
the nations of the world, thanks to the foresight 
and greatness of your Commission. The Consti- 
tution which they have drafted grants equal rights 
and privileges to man and woman alike. For this, 
the women of the Philippines will always be 
grateful. 

"Feelings pure and sincere will always remind | 
us of this great kindness which shines in your life 



! 



«___ __„ „_„^. 



General Douglas MacArthur and President Sergio Osmeria at the in- 
auguration of the Philippine Commonwealth at Taclohan, Leyte, on Oc- 
toher 23, 1945 when tlie Filipino Flag was unfurled for the first time 
after the liberation. 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW 



and attracts like a lodestone. At this moment, we 
are aware of deep emotions and souls overflowing 
; with happiness and hope. We staunchly believe 

in our future and we shall face it united, proud, 
and unafraid. 

"Never have we been forsaken by God in our 
endeavors. And we pray God that our Republic 
may succeed and that this holy Flag given by 
this group of women may float forever, alone, over 
this land, as long as the world shall stand. 



"PURA VlLLANUEVA KALAW 

"Chairman, Women's FJag Committee' 

THE FILIPINO FLAG WAS HOISTED AGAIN 

On October 14, 1943 the second Philippine Republic 
was inaugurated. La Vangua'rdia, a daily in Spanish 
reporting on the occasion, had this to say: 

"General Emilio Aguinaldo, President of the first 
Philippine Republic at Malolos, and General Ar- 
temio Ricarte were given the honor to hoist the 
Filipino Flag with the assistance of Marina Y. Var- 
gas, wife of the Chairman of the Executive Com- 
mission, Aurora Aquino, wife of the Speaker of 
the House of Representatives and Pura Villanueva 
Kalaw, Chairman of the Women's Flag Committee. 
While the flag was being hoisted, the Philippine 
National Anthem was played. 

"The flag which had not been seen for two years 
was slowly raised into the calm blue sky, with 
the early morning sun overpowering emotion 
gripped the hearts of the thousands of people 
who had come to witness the occasion. Many 
cried openly. Women, magistrates, and officials 
wiped surreptitiously the tears that had somehow 
escaped from their eyes. The hymn died down 
and the flag calmly waved again before their 
eyes." 

As many as 50,000 small Filipino flags had been 
distributed for the occasion, but not a single torn flag 
was found on any roadside thrown by careless hand. 



16 



A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FILIPINO FLAG 



In the two years that they had not seen their flag, the 
Filipinos had learned to love it deeply and well. 

On October 20, 1944, General Douglas MacArthur 
with President Sergio Osmena returned to the Phil- 
ippines. How they landed in Leyte after fierce bloody 
battles with the Japanese armies occupying the Island 
is now history. The victory of the American forces 
with the help of Filipino guerrillas will be told in song 
and story. Three days later the civil government was 
inaugurated at the Capitol Building in Tacloban and. 
the Philippine Commonwealth was restored after three 
years of exile. On that occasion, with solemn and ap- 
propriate ceremonies, the Filipino flag was hoisted 
again, side by side with the American flag. From 
Leyte, the two flags went side by side to liberate places 
until the whole country was free again for the Filipinos. 

The real historical date for our flag was July 4, 1946. 
On that glorious day, promised us by the United States 
of America, the Philippines achieved Independence. 
As a symbol of this freedom, the ceremonies to in- 
augurate the new Republic included a descent of the 
Star Spangled Banner and a hoisting of the Sun and 
Stars, now and forever, God willing, destined to fly 
alone in liberty. 

Naturally, the American and Filipino flags which 
were going to be used on that occasion would have 
significant value and meaning. This it was appro- 
priately planned to have fitting ceremonies held in 
connection with the confection of those flags. 

The American flag, the last to fly over the Philip- 
pines, was made of silk taffeta. The red and white 
stripes of the flag were sewed together by represen- 
tative American women. The 48 stars representing 
the 48 states of the nation were left undone for the 
Filipino women to finish them. On a sunny afternoon 
at the Malacanan Reception Hall at the call of the First 
Lady of the Land, Mrs. Trinidad de Leon Roxas, 



1 



i 

j 




Photo taken b\i X'or 

The Filipino Flag as it waved alone on the Inauguration of the Republic ot 
the Philippines, on July the 4th, 1946. 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW 



17 



lay 



gathered Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon, Mrs. Sergio Osmena, 
Mrs. Jose Avelino, wife of the President of the Senate, 
Mrs. Eugenio Perez, wife of the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives, and the presidents of different 
women organizations to sew few stitches placing the 
symbolical stars on the American flag. It was my good 
fortune to be chosen a member of this group in re- 
presentation of the League of Women Voters of the 
Philippines. Truly, it was a very solemn occasion. 

The Filipino flag used on our Independence Day 
was made by the management of the United States 
Department and brought over here by Ambassador 
Paul V. McNutt as a gift of the United States Govern- 
ment to the people of the Philippines. 

On the great day itself, July 4, 1946, at the climax 
of the ceremonies at the Luneta, the Filipino flag was 
hoisted by President Manuel Acuna Roxas to the tune 
of the Philippine National Hymn which somehow 
seemed doubly more beautiful and thrilling, playing 
as it was for a real Philippine Republic, hoped for 
and awaited by millions of Filipinos for generation, 
fought for and died for by Filipino blood in the fields 
of battle. The gun salute that followed made the 
occasion more impressive. 

The Filipino flag has at last achieved its destiny. 
At last, and forever, God willing, it will be flying alone 
and free. 



6 — 47- 



-2—0. W. 




THE LAST AMERICAN FLAG ON 
PHILIPPINE SOIL . 

By PURA VlLLANUEVA KALAW 

J NOON of June 26, 1946, I was surprised 
by a messenger from .Malacanan Palace, 
bringing me a square envelope with the 
official seal of the Philippines. I opened 
it with curiosity. The contents read: "Mrs. 
Roxas requests the pleasure of the company 
of Mrs. Pura Villanueva Kalaw at tea on Sunday, the 
30th at 5 p. m., at Malacanan Palace to assist in the 
making of the American flag to be furled on July 4, 
1946." 

I was flattered by the honor. The flag was going 
to be the last to fly over the Philippines. It was to 
descend after having flown over this country for almost 
half a century. Vice-President Elpidio Quirino had 
told me a few days before that the three First Ladies 
who had presided over Malacanan Palace, Mrs. Manuel 
L. Quezon, Mrs. Sergio Osmena, and Mrs. Manuel 
Roxas, assisted by several representative Filipino 
women, were to give the finishing sewing touches to 
the silver stars on the last American flag. After the 
ceremonies of the inauguration of the Philippine Re- 
public, this historical flag was to be sent to the United 
States as souvenir from the loving Filipino people. 

I went to Malacanan on the appointed day. Dr. En- 
carnacion Alzona came a little afterwards,, and soon 
after her, Mrs. Jose Avelino, wife of the President of 
the Philippine Senate. Mrs. Roxas, smiling sweetly, 
met us at the entrance of the Reception Hall. There 
was a huge American flag spread over the table at the 
center of the room, right under the chandelier. As it 
18 



PURA VILLANUEVA KALAW' 



19 



i 



was a dark cloudy afternoon, the red of the flag did 
not seem as bright as it should be. On the small tables 
scattered in the room were conveniently placed cut- 
out stars ready for sewing. More women came in, 
among them Mrs. Eugenio Perez, wife of the Speaker 
of the House of Representatives, Mrs. Hermenegildo 
Atienza, wife of the Representative from the South Dis- 
trict of Manila, and Mrs. Jose Zulueta, wife of the Sec- 
retary of the Interior. 

Mrs. Roxas now took some silver thread and began 
embroidering on one of the stars. At her right sat 
Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon and at her left Mrs. Sergio 
Osmena. The three ladies, seated in a row, seriously 
and busily sewed on for some time. The guests stayed 
in the background and watched them perform the sym- 
bolical gesture of affection for America. Several photo- 
graphers started taking pictures. The charming mother 
of the President, Mrs. Rosario Acuna Picazo, was also 
present. She looked young and strong in spite of her 
76 years. She was anxious to do her bit for the flag, 
too. Everybody was busy. 

It was discovered that the supply of needles was 
not enough. I had to wait quite a while for my tum 
at sewing on the historical stars. Mrs. Roxas seemed 
oblivious of the crowd. Although she was courteous 
and amiable to all, her attention was on her sewing. 
As the Newsreel cameramen could not take pictures 
inside tha room because it was already dark, the sew- 
ing group had to move out towards the Malacafian 
veranda, facing the Pasig River. It was a most lively 
gathering. The three First Ladies, the wives of sena- 
tors and representatives, the presidents of various 
women's organizations, women leaders, and educators 
were gathered to do honor to America and were very 
glad about it. When the finished stars were placed in 
their positions on the flag, Mrs. Roxas took me over to 
see it in all its beauty. It was made of silk taffeta. It 
looked so beautiful that I stayed a little longer near it, 

B 



20 THE LAST AMERICAN FLAG 



looking at it in retrospect of how my country has ad- 
vanced and progressed under the shadows and shelter 
of this flag. When the American flag was first raised 
over the Philippines in 1898, the Filipino wompn were 
not allowed to enter, much less to stay within the walls 
of Sto. Tomas University, then the only university in. 
the Philippines. 

Now, what a change! In the hall sewing earnestly 
|v were Mrs. Francisca Tirona Benitez, President of the 
Philippine Women's University, Mrs. Natividad Almeda 
Lopez, woman judge of the Municipal Court of Manila, 
Mrs. Asuncion Perez, Director of the Welfare Bureau, 
several women lawyers, writers, newspaperwomen, 
pharmacists, and doctors. It is a blessing from America 
that the women have been allowed the same educa- 
tional opportunities as the men, and it is also a credit 
to the Filipino women that they have overcome their 
backwardness in education and have achieved in 48 
years what it took other women from other countries 
centuries to achieve. 

The momentous occasion was concluded with a lavish 
merienda for the tired ladies. President Manuel Roxas 
himself came in fcr a few minutes to thank everyone 
for her work. All of us answered him in our hearts: 
It was a pleasure and an honor. 



o 



At Malayan Palace— Mrs. Gonsuelo Salazar Perez, Mrs^Mta^lIuterie 
,nd Mr, Pur. V.l.anuevn Ka.au seWlng .he stars of the .as. American 
Flap on Philippine soil. 




Photo taken by X'or 

he American High Commissioner Paul V. McNutt at the Flag Ceremony 
the Inauguration of the Republic of the Philippines on July the 4th. !94<j. 



