jH TT .T, » THE EXECUTIVE COMMISSION 
A RO VINCE OF LEYTE 
IACLQBAH 



Office of the Governor. 



INSTRUCTION NO. 3- 
(a. r ovine ial) 

September 17, 1S42 



Sira? 

Immediately after receipt hereof please commence 
registration of all the families and the persons living 
with each family in your municipality. For purposes oi 
this registration the following rules and regulations 



must be observed; 



1. Every family in the municipality must be 
visited. 

2. The family identification certificate must 
be accomplished at the time that each family 
(include all persons living with family such 
as relatives, boarders, servants, etc.) is 
visited, after which the identification card ^ 
must be issued to each and every member oi the 
household (this includes servants, maids, re- 
latives and every person living with the 

family) . . . 

3. All inhabitants in the municipality must 
register not later than October 15, 1S^2. 

4. The identification card must all times be 
carried in the person of every individual. 

Those who fail to bring in his person the 
identification card v/ill be subject to de- 
tention or investigation and he may oe con- 
sidered an enemy. This card must oe shown 
upon demand by any peace officer or soldier. 

5. Those who fail to register within the period 
above stated may lose their rights as citizens. 

6. If a family moves to another house due notice 
* must be given to the Mayor. 

7 If any member of the family or of the ^ouse 
hold moves to another place a notice must also 
be riven to the Mayor. For instance, rf a 
servant etc., is dismissed or goes away such 
fact must be reported to the Mayor. 

8. any new member of the family or household who 
arrives and intends to live with the fail! 1/ 
must also be reported to the Mayor. 

9. In all the cases stated in numbers 5, 6, and 
7 the Mayors must make an e ^ y ^cancel 

an entry or making a new entry as the case 
’ may be) in the corresponding family lder.tifi 
cation certificate. 



10. After registration all certificates must be 
kept at the municipal building and class- 
ified according to the nationality of the 
families, that is, the identification cer- 
tificates of Filipinos, Chinese, Spaniards 
etc. must be kept separately. 

11. After the completion of the registration, 
the Mayor will submit to this office a 
resume of this census giving total number 
of population, total number of houses and. 
families . 

12. The purpose of the registration is to iden- 
tify all law-abiding citizens in the commu- 
nity. 

13. For every family identification certificate 
and each identification card issued the 
nominal fees of 10 centavos and 5 centavos 
respectively must be collected. The amounts 
so collected shall accrue to the provincial 
and municipal funds equally. 

14. Registration must continue even after the 
expiration of the period above stated. That 
is after October 15, 1942. This allowance is 
made to those who cannot register due 
circumstances . 

15. 



16. 



Those who loss their identification cards must 
at once report to the Mayor who may issue a 
copy of the card upon payment of a £.50 fee. 

Identification card is non-transf erable . In 
the event of transfer Doth the transferor and 
transferee shall be subject to pay a fine of 
£5.00 each and in case of insolvency isasxMex 
both shall suffer an imprisonment of 10 days. 



C 



/ 



J ( C L } ~ ^ 

■'1TAHD0 TORRES 
i'rovincial Governor 




't f 



TO ALL MUNICIPAL MAYORS, 
xROVINCE OF LEYTE. 

AV3-LBva. 

Rote: Children below 10 years are exempted from paying 
the 5 centavos identification certificate. Do not issue 
anymore said personal card to them. Bur they must be in- 
cluded in the Family Identification. 

If there are more than six members in tfee family 
use 2 or 5 family identification certificate. But all of 
these must bear the same serial number. Only 10 centavos 
shall be collected. 



