
^Jl%is ^3~ssue — 



me K^omwionwea 



Itk fibber 



EXCLUSIVE 



United Nations Congratulate 
Commonwealth on Eighth Year 

pages 14-15-16-17 

Congress Passes Resolution 
Continuing Quezon In Office 

page 7 

Osmena Tells Why He Urged 
Changing Terms of Constitution 

Page 9 



FOR VICTORY 




BUY 

UNITED 
STATES 

SAVINGS 
BONDS 

AND STAMPS 




'uuentif-five cents a copy 




VOLUME I 
NUMBER 8 




NOVEMBER 
1943 



AM INDEPENDENT PHILIPPINE NEWSMAGAZINE 



DICK FITZPATRICK 

EXECUTIVE EDITOR 



DIOSDADO M. YAP 

EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 



J. C. Dionisio, Pacific Coast Representative 



CAYETANO C. NAGAC 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR 

P. C. Morantte, New York rw^o j t « r Totaan, Chicago Reps. 

Bernardino D. Arado, Benny O. Escobido and Do m ^ C ° rresponden t Nemssio M. Sa'.azar, Jose B. Totaan, 

M - Callado. Territory of Hawaii Representatives 



Zrront douer 

* The coat of arms recognizes the Philippines' 
three cultures: the native, represented by the 
stars; the Spanish, by the castle of Castile and 
a sea lion of Aragon; and the American, by the 
watchful eagle. The colors have the same sig- 
nificance as those of the flag. 



BATAAN is an independent newsmagazine of Filipino- 
American and United Nations affairs. Its goal is to 
increase understanding between the peoples of these 
two countries and other United Nations. 

To do this, it will report, interpret and appraise the 
news to stimulate discussion and thereby gain full 
understanding. 

The editors of BATAAN believe that now, more than 
ever before, winning the future for democratic culture 
requires plain, clear and intelligent discussion on all 
subjects, including Pacific and Filipino - American 
problems, which this publication emphasizes. 



fled Wontk 



On the eve of the second anniversary of 
Pearl Harbor, BATAAN will publish its special 
number dedicated to the Filipinos in the Armed 
Forces. The issue will contain special articles 
and messages from America's top military and 
naval leaders. 



page 

President Quezon Backs U. S. Resolution 

Giving Filipinos Complete Freedom Now 5 

Editorials 6 

Congress Passes Resolution Keeping Quezon 

and Osmena In Office For Duration 

Former Teacher In Philippines Calls 

Islands Vital Part of Fight For Freedom 

Philippic Vice - President Osmena Explains 

Action In A Message To Filipinos 

Bataan Writer Reveals Off-Record Interview 

With Jap Who Urged Union of Orientals 

Quezon Hails General Mac Arthur 

As "Man of Faith" At Ceremonies 

United Nations Salute Philippine Common- 
wealth On Eighth Anniversary 14-15-16-17 

Repatriates From lap Imprisonment 

Scheduled To Reach New York Dec. 2 18 

Philippine Post-War Planning Board 

Created By President Quezon ^ 

Jap Advisor Admits Neither Threats 

Nor Flattery Gain Filipino Friendship 20 

Naval Airpower Played Major Part 

In Munda Campaign Against Japs 21 

Colonel Romulo Named To War Cabinet 

As Secretary of New Information Dept 23 

Senator Tydings Urges U. S. Take 

Mandated Isles From Japs After War 25 



BATAAN IS PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT WASHINGTON, D. C. EDITORIAL OFFICES AT 1300 NATIONAL PRESS BUILDNG ADVERTSING 
AND CIRCULATION OFFICES AT 424 LAMONT ST., N. W., WASHINGTON, D. C. SUBSCRIPTION RATE- $3 00 FOR ONE YEAR — SINGLE 
COPIES 25 CENTS "ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER APRIL 16, 1943, AT TH? POST OFFICE AT WASHINGTON, 
D. C UND-R THE ACT OF MARCH 3, 1879." COPYRIGHT 1943 BY DIOSDADo" M YAP EDITOR AND PUBLISHER. 



4. 



£a 



OUR READERS WRITE 



aan 



THE EDITORS WELCOUp 
COMMENTS FROM THE READERS 



"It was kind of you to send us a copy 
of the August edition of BATAAN, and 
we have read the article on the post-war 
position of the Philippines with consider- 
able interest. With every good wish for the 
success of your magazine." 

The Editors 
The Reader's Digest 



"Your special issue of President Quezon's 
anniversary number is very interesting and 
objective. I am passing the copy around 
to the Filipino solcliers in Camp Kohler, 
and all enjoy reading. It is a good and 
informative publication. The news stories 
and articles are alive with facts. They are 
timely, concise and clear to the point." 



Julius B. Ruiz 
Camp Kohler, California 



"I received copies of BATAAN and am 
more than delighted over them. Have read 
them both from cover to cover, and they 
have truly been a comfort and inspiration 
to me, as I am sure they must be to every 
parent who has a son interned, as mine is, 
in the Philippines. I am recommending 
your splendid magazine to every one I 
meet who I think might be interested in 
our prisoners of war, both Americans and 
Filipinos." 

Mrs. Ida L. Hamblin 
Mesa, Arizona 



"It gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
inform you that, at our last meeting, you 
have been elected as an Honorary Member 
in the American Bataan Clan. I am here- 
with enclosing our song, together with your 
Honorary Membership Certificate. In this 
connection, we wish you to know how 
much we appreciate your magazine, BA- 
TAAN, and feel we learn a great deal of 
interest of the Philippines and its people 
through your splendid publication." 

Catherise M. McArthur 
American Bataan Clan 
Villa Park, Illinois 



"A fellow student here at Northwestern 
University subscribes to your informative 
newsmagazine. BATAAN. I became very 
much interested in the two copies and I 
wish to make a comprehensive study of the 
publication. As a student in the Medill 
School of Journalism, my professor sug- 
gested that you would be kind enough to 
send me back copies of BATAAN so that 
I would have enough material for mv study 
of your publication. I assure you that the 
journalism librarv will benefit by a new 
magazine in its files, after 1 have completed 
my projected study of it." 

Marjories Gu iter man 
Chicago, Illinois 



New Far Eastern Mail 
Regulations Issued 

A cable received from the 
International Red Cross Com- 
mittee, Geneva, late in August 
transmitted new mail regula- 
tions by the Japanese govern- 
ment for prisoners of war held 
by Japan, to take effect "after 
the present communication has 
been received." 

The most specific regulation 
now advised is that letters 
must not be more than 25 
words in length. The request 
made previously that letters be 
typewritten or printed is now 
established as a regulation, 
with the printing to be "in cap- 
ital letters clearly legible." 
Letters not complying with 
these regulations, or those 
which are not correctly ad- 
dressed, it is stated, will not 
be forwarded by the Japanese 
military authorities. An en- 
deavor will be made to have 
the Japanese government lib- 
eralize this ruling, but it should 
be observed pending further 
instructions. 

The cable also stresses that 
"letters to prisoners of war 
must contain only personal or 
family news, and that they 
must positively not contain 
any military or political infor- 
mation or opinions." 

Mail to civilian internees 
held in Japan or "overseas 
Japanese territories" is not re- 
stricted to 25 words in length, 
and it is not explicitly required 
that such mail be typewritten 
or written in capital letters. 



"We compile a quarterly H st of npw 
periodicals for our Bulletin of Bibliogra- 
phy" which is mailed to public and colleee 
libraries in the United States and England 
We understand that .you are publishing a 
new periodical, BATAAN, and we re 
spectfully request a sample copy that the 
title may be included in our next list " 

Mary ABATES, Editor 

Bulletin of Bibliography 
Boston, Mass. 



"Many of us here have be^n 
for a medium of news dealing searc 1 hl, J g 
with the Japanese phase 0^1"^ 
FA AN furnished it admirably iT ^ 
a step toward adjusting our L' 1 Provide* 



siep toward adjusting our bri^n — 
nd the subjected Fifipinosr to "^1 t gg 

Mrs. R. b. Wn ihmc 



their release.' 



a subscriber to vr>n,-* i r i 
BATAAN, and ? n ,«^ 



"I am a 

magazine. b.\ i t\t , ; ; 

much. I have a son in the P^r & ° 

(Prison Camp No. 1), and of ,-, , ' P P 

• j i . «/r «**»u t.M course I am 

interested in anything about the Philip- 



pines. 



... M- H. Hurt 
I it she gee, Alabama 



. '' The October issue is very goo d I en- 
joyed reading the report of General George 
C Marshall. I hope that, in the future 
issues of your publication, 'we can enlarge 
its pages for domestic news about the F fi- 

{ime'n-r'v y nUed StatGS a "3 their war- 
time activities. 

Jose. B. Totaan 
Chicago, Illinois 



"Today we received a copy of your won- 
derful publication, BATAAN We have 
reviewed it carefully an d found it to be 
immensely interesting and informative. The 

w P 2 ye ?/- f th l5 cor P° r ation are publish- 
ing the Victory News Letter which is being 
mailed to the boys "over there" free You 

fnfJLl 1? l ?; USe anything you find of 
interest in the News Letter/' ' 

G. L. Campbell, Vice-President 
Akerite Chemical Works 
Chicago, Illinois 



AVE N G E 
BATAAN 



my 

lAJar (J3oricls 



Vjouember, 1943. 



5 



President Quezon Backs U. S. Resolution 
Giving Filipinos Complete Freedom Now 

Commonwealth leader outlines history of American - Filipino relations. Says immense 
majority of people continue to keep faith with U. S. Lauds proposal for establishment 
of joint commission. 



Philippine President Quezon, in a statement to the United States Senate 
Committee on Territories and Insular Affairs, pleaded strongly and earnestly 
for the speedy approval of the Senate resolution to bring immediate independence 
to the Philippines. Due to illness, the President's statement was read by Major 
General B. J. Valdes, one of his cabinet officers. 

"I approve this Joint Resolution, word by word, and I hope that it will be 
adopted exactly as it is written. All 
the officials of the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines are 
in full accord with me," the statement 
began. 

"Mr. Chairman, I have been deeply 
concerned over the effect upon a por- 
tion of my people of the pseudo-inde- 
pendence that Japan will grant the 
Philippines. This offer of independ- 
ence is coupled with deceitful propa- 
ganda to the effect that America and 
Great Britam are beaten beyond re- 
covery and that this war is be ! ng fought 
to free the Orental peoples from An- 
glo-American 'domination.' 

MOST WILL KEEP FAITH 

"That the immense majority of the 
Filipino people will continue to keep 
faith with America, I have not the 
slightest doubt. But we must make 
sure that not even a handful of Fili- 
pinos will be deceived, cajoled or 
frightened into siding with Japan 
when we return to expel the Japanese 
and liberate the Philippines; for that 
would be the greatest tragedy in the 
history of my people. I would not 
want to live to see it. The prompt ap- 
proval of this Jcrnt Resolution will 
prevent such a tragedy, I am sure. 

"America and the world know what 
the Filipino people, their Government 
and their Army, have done in defense 
of the American flag and of their own 
freedom. I need not dwell on the Fili- 
pino battle record. It is written in 
blood— American and Filipino blood — 
on Bataan and Corresidor, in Luzon 
and Visayas and Mindanao, and 
throughout the Philippines. 

FOUGHT BECAUSE TREATED FAIRLY 

"But I do wish to emphasize this: 
There was only one reason why the 




vs 



Filipino people, of their own free will 
and initiative, fought side by side with 
the United States — only one reason 
why more than twenty thousand of my 
countrymen gave up their lives on the 
battlefields -only one reason why many 
more are fighting and dying this verv 
day in the towns and plains and moun- 
tains and jungles of the Philippines. 
That reason is because you, America, 
have treated us justly, because you 
have helped us to become a self-gov- 
erning nation, and had already set the 
date when the Philippine Republic 
would be established. You won our 
eternal gratitude and affection. And, 
in t' e fateful hour when your flag was 
assailed and our country was attacked, 



our deeds spoke better than our w r ords," 
the President's statement continued. 

"Long before the Japanese attack, as 
I saw the war clouds gathering in the 
sky, I called the Philippine National 
Assembly to a special session. I asked 
it to authorize me to place at the dis- 
posal of the United States, in case of 
war, all the men and material resources 
of our country. This is our duty, I 
said, not only because by law we owe 
loyalty to America, but primarily be- 
cause she has been just and even gen- 
erous with us. She has given us the 
opportunity to fulfil our destiny, and 
has helped us to become an independ- 
ent and self-governing nation. 

TOLD FDR OF DETERMINATION 

"The National Assembly, by unani- 
mous vote, enacted sweeping legisla- 
tion authorizing me to do everything 
necessary to make our manpower and 
resources available to the United 
States. Thereupon I telegraphed the 
President, reassuring him of the grim 
resolve of the Filipino people to stand 
by the side of the United States, in 
case of war, to the bitter end. 

"Seven days before the Japanese 
bombs fell on Manila. I addressed a 
mass meeting of all the faculties and 
students of all the universities in Ma- 
nila, on the campus of the University 
of the Philippines, a government insti- 
tution. I said: 'As it looks to me. 
there is a very serious and imminent 
threat against our peace and safety. 
At any time, war may break out be- 
tween Japan and the United States, 
and, of course, we shall be the first 
victims. The first news about the war 
may be the falling of bombs on this 
very spot where we stand. 1 still pray 
that, bv God's mercy, we may be 
spared the horrors of war, but if such 
a terrible conflict may not be averted, 
we shall have the opportunity to fight 
bv the side of America, and to risk 
everything in defense of her flag and 
. . . continued on pag? 27. 



6 




Is A Puppet Republic Free? 



Today the Philippine Islands are ruled by the Japanese. 
They are controlled by the sly, scheming enemies of free- 
dom. Through force, they were able to kill many of the 
American and Filipino defenders of the Islands. Through 
force, they kept additional soldiers coming to the defense 
of the Islands. Force kept the needed food and supplies 
from reaching their destination. 

Force characterizes the Japs' conquest of the Islands. 
It takes many troops to keep the Islands. In fact, the 
chief Jap thug, Tojo, once reported that his troops were 
engaged in full military operations with guerrillas in 
the hills. 

It is hard to maintain things by force. But gangsters, 
whether they are of the former Chicago, the Nazi, or the 
Jap variety, try to keep their control in, what appears to 
be an entirely respectable, appropriate and fair manner. 

The Japs have taken this step in respect to the Philip- 
pines. They have established a Japanese-controlled Philip- 
pine Republic. Then, a Jap-controlled election took place, 
which selected Japanese-dominated Jose Laurel as presi- 
dent. 

Laurel was a justice of the Philippine Commonwealth 
Supreme Court. Why he chose to serve as the tool of the 
Japanese, which is what he is, we may never know. But 
it is worth examining the possibilities. 

When Laurel was put in office, he made a plea that 
the United States should not make it difficult for his ad- 
ministration. No free nation sent him congratulations — 
only Germany, other puppet administrations in the Far 
East, and Axis-unofficial partner Spain, had greetings for 
him. 

President Roosevelt's message said in substance that 
a puppet is still a puppet and that the United States was 
never in favor of puppets — even a Filipino puppet, much 
as Americans like their Filipino brothers. 



The threat of death may have made Laurel agree to 
be the one who would carry out the orders of the Jap 
generals in the Islands. The orders of the generals are 
outlined in Tokyo by Premier Tojo. Thus, Puppet Laurel 
becomes an executive assistant to the man hated by every 
American and every Filipino. 

Death is a better state than being the living servant 
of evil. 

If it was not this that made Laurel the Charlie Mc- 
Carthy of the Japs, it may have been a desire for personal 
glory. It is highly possible that Laurel wanted his name 
to go down in history as the leader of the great nation 
of Filipinos. It will, but as a traitor — if that was his 
motive. 

Or Laurel may have thought that less harm would 
come to the Islands if he was the one who was to carry 
out the orders of the conqueror. If he did, then he cannot 
be accused of treachery. He is guilty only of stupidity. 

Laurel has only to look to France to see how collabo- 
ration with beasts— Jap or German variety — works. It 
was the legal government of France that chose to give 
up and let the iron heel run over the once glorious France. 
Lven when their true government did, the freedom-loving 
people of France did not give up. They assassinated Nazis, 
helped British and American airmen escape, derailed trains. 
and ble w up factories. 

Filipi nos love freedom. They love America and their 
own leaders who came to America to help wage war against 
the enemy and free the Philippines. Laurel is not a legally 
elected leader of the Philippine people. The legally elected 
Jeacler of the Philippines Manuel L. Quezon, is in Wash- 
ington. 11 

We advise Laurel to watch for assassinations, sabotage 
and anything else which will hinder his cooperation with 
Japanese. I n the history of the world, helping an enemy 
who wants to deprive a nation of its freedom has never 
met with approval. Laurel's actions will not either. 



Nations United 



This issue of BATAAN is dedicated 
to the Philippine Commonwealth and 
the United Nations. Eight vears ago 
the Commonwealth was established. 
I hat same government signed the At- 
lantic Charter and became one of the 
I nited Nations. 

November 15, 1935, was important 
in Philippine history, in American his- 
tory, and in world history, because it 
was the culmination of a new experi 
ment in world affairs. The United 
Slates, since the occupation of the Is- 
lands in 1898, had begun to train Fili- 
pinos in their duties of government 
which would be entrusted to them. 



The transfer of duties began in 1916 
and has steadily increased since until 

£ W T V t f turned over 

to the Islanders and they elected their 
own president. The Republic o~ 
to be established, when the U 
invaded the Islands. * It P l «* 

This intrusion of the J aps into thp 
affairs of Filipinos brought the Com- 
monwealth into that group Q f 
ernments, the United Nations. enviV 
ioned by Presulent Roosevelt 
Prime Minister Churchill I act 

I • * lj ast year 

at simple ceremonies m the W nit 
House President Quezon added the 
name of his country to the ever-grow 
ing impressive list of nations that will 
fight aggression aru | tnat f f f ™ J 



dom of speech and religion, and strive 
for freedom from fear and want. 

The Philippines as one of the United 
[Nations has pledged itself to work to 
make this world a better place to live 
in. By signing the Atlantic Charter, it 
has called the world to witness that 
Filipinos want to speak freely, to wor- 
ship God, to be able to sleep peare- 
f Lilly knowing that they are free men. 
and to know that they wall have enough 
to eat to assure their being useful to 
the world in which they live. And 
Filipinos, like citizens of the other 
['nited Nations, want to know others 
living in the brotherhood of man un- 
der the fatherhood of God will enjoy 
these Four Freedoms, loo. 



fjommLr, 1943. 



/ 



Congress Passes Resolution Keeping Quezon 
And Osmena In Office For Duration 

President and Vice President to remain in charge until successors have been elected 
' and qualified by terms of constitution after victory is won. 



Steps to continue the present elected heads of the exiled Philippine Govern- 
ment in office until the Japanese have been driven out of their homeland were 
passed by Congress, with White House approval. 

The action was instituted to resolve a dilemma presented by a constitutional 
provision under which Manuel L. Quezon, Commonwealth President, would be 
obliged to retire from oflice on November 15. 

Since Japanese occupation of the islands make it impossible for the Filipinos 
to install Quezon's successor according 



to their own law and constitution, the 
Government of the United States, in the 
role of protector, is disposed to keep 
President Quezon and his Vice-Presi- 
dent, Sergio Osmena, on the job for 
the duration of the emergency. 

EXILES IN WASHINGTON 

President Quezon, Vice-President Os- 
mena and members of their War Cab- 
inet have been in residence in Wash- 
ington since the Japanese occupation. 
They came here at the request of Pres- 
ident Roosevelt. 

Legislation to maintain the govern- 
mental status quo until Jap rule of the 
Philippines is broken was introduced 
simultaneously in the Senate and House 
by Senator Tydings (D.. McU and 
Representative Bell ( D., Mo.), chair- 
men of the Senate and House Insular 
Affairs committees, respectively. 

The identical resolutions set forth in 
a preamble that the welfare of both the 
United States and the Philippine Is- 
lands "requires" the continuance in 
office of the present elected government 
•'until the enemy is driven from the 
land he has seized and until the Fili 
pino people can reconstitute their gov- 
ernment as they desire." 

TO REMAIN ON JOB 

To that end it is proposed that: 
"Notwithstanding the provision of 
Section 5, Article 7. of the Amended 
Constitution of the Philippines, the 
present President and Vice-President 
of the Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines shall continue in their respective 
offices until the President of the United 
States proclaims that their successors 
have been duly elected and qualified 
in accordance with the Constitution and 
the laws of the Philippines." 



Along with the resolution. Senator 
Tydings submitted a brief on the sub- 
ject of Congress' authority to enact 
statutes in conflict with the Constitu- 
tion and laws of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth. He called particular at- 
tention to a provision of the United 
States Constitution which states that 
"Congress shall have power to dispose 
of and make all needful rules and resr- 



ulations respecting the territory or oth- 
er property belonging to the United 
States.'' 

PHILIPPINE ACT CITED 

The Senator also supplied citations 
from the Philippine Act of Independ- 
ence of 1934 and from decisions of the 
Supreme Court, showing that this coun- 
try has retained sovereiontv over the 
Philippines until 1946, the year when 
the Commonwealth is to come into full 
independence. 

In this connection it will be recalled 
that resolutions now are pending to 
grant independence to the islands as 

. . . continued on page 26 




president CJuezo 



Vice president 

a 



'dmena 



1^ 



8 

Former Teacher In Philippines Calls 
Islands Vital Part of Fight For Freedom 

Bertha Charles, in shortwave broadcast urges many friends and ex- 
pupils to continue their faith in America. 

Miss Bertha D. Charles, teacher in the Philippines for 35 years, in a recent 
shortwave broadcast urged her many Filipino friends to continue to maintain 
faith in America. 

"Our voices may sound too far away from you now. You may even come 
to think that with the presence of the enemy at your door we shall not be able 
to go ahead with what we started to accomplish. But the desire to live in a 
truly tree atmosphere knows not the 



limits of time or distance." Miss 
Charles said. 

''I am looking forward to the time 
when we can continue our work to- 
gether. My long and happy life there 
among you made me feel that I am 
one of you and that your country is 
my home. And some day I am sure 
we shall be reunited." 

ISLANDS SYMBOL OF FREEDOM 

"Little did I think when I arrived 
in the Philippines 35 years ago that 
your country would become one of the 
hallowed grounds in this worldwide 
struggle for man's freedom." she ad- 
ded. 

Miss Charles returned to the U. S. 
in 1940 for a visit, planning to go back 
and continue her work there. 

In 1909 she took her first post as 
high-school teacher in Orani, Bataan. 
where her brother was principal of 
the school. Gabriel Manalac. Under 
Secretary of Public Instruction in the 
Philippine Commonwealth before the 
war, was an associate teacher in Orani. 
Among her pupils was Eulogio Rodri- 
guez, later to become Director of the 
Philippine National Library, 

As dean of Hugh Wilson Hall, well- 
known women's dormitory, for ?2 
years Miss Charles was well known 
and loved for her interest in educating 
Filipinos. Later she took charge of 
Cosmopolitan Hall and taught at Bord- 
ner School in Manila. 

SOMETHING BIGGER WILL COME 

"While the battle of Bataan was be- 
ing waged, and the principles upon 
which we based our friendship were 
brio- tested, somehow I felt that even 
if that battle would be lost the greater 
victory would come to von."" she broad 
east to her man) friends in the Philip 
pines. "Something came cut of your 



hunger and thirst there— and above all 
out of your very death in Bataan — 
something bigger, indeed, than the 
mere physical form of dying. Out of 
your sacrifice, your patriotism was 
born anew, from your rendezvous with 
your enemy's bayonets and the ene- 
my's prison bars you learned more 
surely the meaning of freedom. 

"Japan will not be able to destroy 
the things we have built together, the 
numerous long bridges of good will 
we were able to span across many a 
troubled water. The enemy cannot so 
soon obliterate in your minds the mem- 
ory of classrooms and free thought." 

Natives' Interests Guarded 

President Quezon assured his coun- 
trymen in the United States that their 
interests will be safeguarded by him 
in connection with the Philippine inde- 
pendence joint resolution pending in 
Congress. 

President Quezon's message, in full 
states: 

"In reference to the Independence 
Joint Resolution now pending Con- 
gress, I desire to assure the Filipinos 
in the United States that as long as 
I live and I am President of the Phil- 
ippines, the interests of the Filipinos 
in the Philippines, in the United 1 tales 
or wherever they may be. will be sife 
guarded by me as far as I can do it. 
I have, therefore, taken into consider 
ation the future of the Filipinos resxl 
ing in the United State- and have 
deemed it essential in justice t > the n 
and in recognition of the loyalty shown 
to America by our Government an i 
our people in the Philippines, that 
they be given the right to become citi- 
zens of the United States. 1 am l^k : iii 
steps to this effect." 



cicin 



President Chiang Kai-Shek 
Pays Tribute To Fili pinos 

President Chiang Kai-shek told Pres- 
ident Manuel L. Quezon of the Philip 
pines that in their resistance against 
he Japanese the Chinese have found 

• a V r uT* S ° UrCe ° f ene °uragement 
in the fight your countrymen are still 
carrying on against the invaders." 

Chiang Kai-shek's tribute to the Fili- 
pinos was embodied in a m e 
thanking President Quezon fortius 
greetings on the anniversary of the 
Republic of China. 

Full text of President Chiang's mes- 
sage, made public recently by the 
Philippine Department of Information 
and Public Relations, follows- 

"My warm thanks for the message of 
congratulations you sent me on the oc- 
casion of our National Day. J n ou r 
resistance to Japanese aggression, we 
have found an unfailing source of en- 
couragement in the fight your country- 
men are still carrying on against the 
invaders. The sacrifices we share to- 
gether will undoubtedly enhance the 
traditional friendship between our two 
countries rnd lay an unshakable foun- 
dation for future cooperation, without 
which peace in the Pacific would be 
but an empty dream. I take this op- 
portunity to renew to you my fervent 
wishes for I he early liberation of your 
country." 

Quezon Praises Mexicans 

President Quezon of the Philippines, 
in a message to the people of Mexico 
on the occasion of the 12nd anniver- 
sary of the Second Pan-American Con- 
ference convened in Mexico City, 
named Franklin D. Roosevelt as "the 
one man in America today who has 
given life and meaning to the Good 
Neighbor Policy." 

President Roosevelt "is the same 
dynamic leader and far-seeing states- 
man to whom we in the Philippines 
owe our charter of liberty," President 
Quezon added. 

President Quezon's message to the 
Mexican people was read by his aide- 
de-camp, Col, Manuel Nieto, before the 
"Club de las Americas," which staged 
a "Mexican Night" program to mark 
the historic Pan - American occasion. 
President Quezon's message was in 
Ppanish. 



4 



WovemLr, 1943 . 9 

Philippine Vice President Osmena Explains 
Action In A Message To Filipinos 

These are not normal times, he says, and consents to allow President Quezon to continue 
in office for the duration of the present war. 



. Vice President Sergio Osmena of the Philippines, in a message to all Fili- 
pinos i n flj e Philippines and abroad, gave his reasons for initiating the move that 
to the enactment of a Congressional resolution to keep President Manuel L. 
Quezon in office for the duration of the war. 

Mr. Osmena. who would have succeeded President Quezon on November 15. 
s **3 that he relinquished his right because the interests of the United States and 
lne Philippines in the war could be 
ne st served by keeping President Que- 
ZOn in ofliee. ' 

full text of Mr. Osmena's message 
follows: 

My Countrymen: — A joint resolu- 
tion was passed by Congress continu- 
ln g President Quezon in office for the 
duration of the war. Under this reso- 
lution, which has been approved by the 
President of the United States, my 
r i-ht to succeed to the presidency on 
November 15, 1943, has been post- 
poned until constitutional processes 
shall have been restored in the Philip- 
pines. 

REQUESTED CONGRESS' ACTION 

"Congress acted on this matter upon 
request of the Philippine Government 
in exile and this action of the Philip- 
pine Government was taken on my 
own initiative. I owe it to my people 
who gave me their confidence in the 
last elections to state the reasons for 
my action. 

"If we were in normal times, mv 
duty would be clear and simple: 1 
would have to assume the presidency 
on the 15th of this month as a matter 
of right. But these are not normal 
times. Our country not only is at 
war, but also is occupied by the enemy. 

"Under these circumstances, our 
principal concern and primarv con- 
sideration is to win the war, liberate 
our people from the invaders, and es- 
tablish the independence of our coun- 
try. The question naturally arises: 
What is the best thing to do in order 
to help accomplish these aims? 

QUEZON'S LOT TO LEAD 

"It is unnecessary for me to remind 
YOU that President Quezon was the 
head of our government at the time 




dmena 



of the outbreak of the war and that 
it was his lot to lead our people by 
the side of the United States, Faith- 
fully and courageously, he has com- 
plied with his duty, even with his 
health greatly impaired. His voice 
continues to encourage our people to 
resist the enemy and to keep faith with 
the United States. It was he who 
signed for us the Declaration of the 
United Nations. Due to his efforts, 
the Philippines has been given a seat 
in the Pacific War Council. 

"Moreover, those responsible for the 
prosecution of the war on the part of 
the Uni'ed States have expressed to 
me their concern over the possible 
effect of the change of leadership at 
this tune. They said that the enemy 
would take advantage of President Que- 
zon's retirement from active leadership 
DY telling the Filioinos that President 
Que-o'i had withdrawn from the fight 
and that he was no longer interested 



in this war. They added that the 
morale of the Filipinos still fitting 
the enemy in the mountains of Luzon. 
Visayas and Mindanao and receiving 
inspiration from him might weaken it 
President Quezon retired. further- 
more, they told me that in their opin- 
ion, based on recent information from 
the front, the unity of our people m 
general would be better maintained and 
secured with the retention of President 
Quezon in office, since that would mean 
that both of us would continue work- 
ing together. 

SUCCESSION NOT DOMESTIC MATTER 

"The presidential succession, there- 
fore, ceased to be a domestic matter 
i'.: vol vine onlv our own interests and 
desires. ' Related, as it was. to the war 
il became a matter that concerned not 
ourselves alone hut also the United 

"With the redemption of our coun- 
try uppermost in mv mind and with 
the conviction that this ob|ective can- 
not be achieved without the full sup- 
port, much less without the leadership, 
of the United States. I prepared the 
letter which the Philippine Govern- 
ment approved and sent to Congress. 
In that letter, the matter of the presi- 
dential succession was placed before 
Congress with the request thai thev 
review the whole situation and iaH 
such action as in their wisdom will 
best serve the interest of the F llipino 
people, their constitutional government 
and the government of the United 
States during this emergency, 

MOVE SAFEGUARDS INTERESTS 

"Congress, after thorough consider- 
ation, passed the joint resolution pro 
viding for the continuance in office of 
President Quezon for the duration of 
the war. This resolution expresses the 
eonsidered judgment of the American 
people, T accept it without reserve 
and 1 urge every Filipino, whether in 
the homeland, in continental United 
States, in Hawaii, or am where else, to 
. . . continued on page 26 



to 



With Greetings and Best Wishes 
of a Friend of 
B A T A A N 



Read B ATA AN MAGAZINE 

• For authoritative articles discussing the Philippines — its Present and its 
Future! 

• For news about the Philippines: the Facts — the Significance — the Long 
Range Meaning of the News! 



INTERESTING INFORMATIVE 



ENTERTAINING 



BATAAN MAGAZINE is only eight months old, but already thousands 
have acclaimed it. 

See for yourself! Send for a free sample copy today! Use coupon on page 2, or write to 
BATAAN MAGAZINE - 1300 NATIONAL PRESS BUILDING WASHINGTON, D. C. 



BY THE COPY 

25c 



SUBSCRIBE NOW SS t eS& a m3« 



1943. 



Bataan Writer Reveals Off -Record Interview 
With Jap Who Urged Union of Orientals 

Reporter convinced that only confidence not worth keeping is Japs confidence. Attitude 
of man who represented Nipponese in Manila as Consul is good example of what nation 
is up against. 

By J. C. Dionisio 

BATAAN Pacific Coast Ctirrtsfrmdent 



This is an interview that was never published. 

A version appeared in the Philippines Frees Press for Jul\ '111. 1935, head- 
lined: "A Believer in 50-50 . . . Kiyoshi Uchiyama, Who Will Be Japan's 
New Consul General In the Philippines. Is Not 'Diplomatique/ [)ut He Likes 
His Jokes." 

Newspapermen do not violate confidences. I have never revealed this off- 
the- record conversation with Uchiyama 
and would not have done so now had 
Uchiyama not heen a Jap. and had 
not Pearl Harbor convinced me, as it 
did the whole civilized world, that one 
is making a sucker of himself to keep 
a Jap's confidence. 

In May, 1935, I interviewed Consul 
Uchiyama at the Japanese Consulate 
in Seattle, as a correspondent for the 
FREE PRESS. Al that time, its man- 
aging editor was Fritz Marquardt, au- 
thor of the interesting and informative 
book, "Before Bataan and After," and 
at present on the editorial staff of the 
Chicago Sun. A brief UP dispatch 
from Manila, published in the Seattle 
Times, which stated that Uchiyama 
was to take the place of Atsushi Ki- 
mura as Japan's consul general in the 
Philippines, was the reason for the 
interview. 




oni5Lo 



HAD POLITE MANNERS 

A short, mustached, bespectacled, 
wise - cracking native of Yokohama, 
Uchiyama had a disarming smile and 
pleasing, polite manners. He gave me 
the impression that he regarded the 
interview with some importance, for 
when his secretary ushered me in, 
Uchiyama told the functionary that 
he was not to be disturbed. It was, 
therefore, perhaps pardonable for me 
to tell him as 1 did that I represented 
the leading weekly magazine in the 
Philippines. He smiled and offered 
me a cigar. 

Uchiyama was correctly diplomatic 
in his language. To all my questions 
dealing with the political situation in 
the Far East, and especially wMi re- 
gards to the Philippines and Japan, 



Uchiyama shook his head politely, but, 
laughing, expressed the hope "to see 
you in Manila when you go home so 
that I might be able to give you the 
sensational statements I know you 
want." Then he gave me a prepared 
statement which said, among other 
things, that he opened the Japanese 
consulate (later made into a legation) 
in Havana, Cuba, and was its Charge 
d'Affairs for eight months. 

I wasn't getting anywhere. Uchi- 
yama knew that there were burning 
questions I wanted to discuss with 
him: the so-called Japanese Asiatic 
Monroe doctrine, the "China Incident" 
and what it might portend to the other 
countries of East Asia, most particu- 
lar! \ of course, to the Philippines. 



WON'T ANSWER ON FREEDOM 

I said: "Mr. Uchiyama. is Jcipan in 
sympathy with the independence aspi- 
rations of the Philippines?" 

I tried again. "'Japan has millions 
of pesos invested in the Philippines. 
As a matter of fact, Japanese interests 
control the hemp industry in Davao. 
Don't you think it was quite reckles? 
for the Japanese capitalists to invest 
huge amounts of money in a country 
where the political situation is uncer- 
tain?" 

Uchiyama laughed. "How about 
golf courses?" he asked. "Can I play 
golf in Manila? In Seattle there are 
public (he underlined the word public) 
golf courses on which Japanese are 
not allowed to play." The smile had 
faded from iiis lips. 

JAPAN WANTED PEACE 

"Japan," I pursued, after informing 
him that he could play golf in Manila, 
"avowedly wants to preserve peace in 
the Orient. This may seem paradoxi- 
cal, but in the light of past events, 
does that mean that Japan would go 
to war to preserve peace therein?" 

Uchiyama took off his glasses and 
wiped them, but said nothing. 

I determined to make this mv last 
question. "Mr. Uchiyama," I said, 
isn't this the core of Japanese policy in 
the Orient: that she must, even if she 
has to use force, unite all the countries 
therein under her banner? Doesn't she 
regard this as her 'Manifest Destiny'? 

It was then that Uchiyama loosened 
up a bit. He spread out his hands. 

USED COMMON RACE APPEAL 

"Look at those hands," he said. 
"Now look at yours. Aren't they of 
the same color? Isn't it quite natural 
that people of the same color or race 
should be— intimate? I ask you — Do 
continued on page 24 



/2 



THE FILIPINO EXECUTIVE COUNCIL OF WASHINGTON, D. C. 

extends its greetings and best wishes to 
BATAAN for its Special Commonwealth 
Number in commemoration of the 
Eighth Anniversary o f the 
Establishment of the 

PHILIPPINE COMMONWEALTH 



OFFICERS 

Mr. C. T. Elbo— President 
Mr. Emilio Butuyan — Vice-President 




OFFICERS 

Mr. Nolasco S. Icarangal — Treasurer 
Miss Edith Lagundo- -Secretary 



MEMBERS 

THE FILIPINO CLUB, Inc. 

Emilio Butuyan 
Pablo S. Mamaril 
Ted Reyes 

THE VISAYAN CIRCLE, Inc. 

Cayetano C. Nagac 
Francisco Villanueva 
Diosdado M. Yap 

FILIPINO CENTER, Inc. 

Osmundo Reynante 
Francisco Solis 
Nicanor Donesa 

PHILIPPINE -AMERICAN 

C. T. Elbo 
Florentino Calabia 
Bernardo De Guia 



MEMBERS 

THE RISING BOHOLANO, Inc. 

Eugenio Lapura 
Silverio Madelo 
Pilagio Rana 

FILIPINO CATHOLIC ASS'N 

R. Lagundo 
Edith Lagundo 
Eustaquio De Leon 

TAXICAB DRIVER ASS'N 

Justiniano Ferrer 
Manuel Sakdalan 
Al Bautista 

FILIPINO STUDENTS CLUB 

Nolasco Icarangal 
Benvienido Santoi 
Esmael Lazo 



V/oi/etnber, 1943, 




Sin? «! ( f, ener ^. 1 Dou ^aB MacArthur and Manuel L. Quezon. Pres- 
ides 01 the Philippines, taken in Manila befora the hostilities. 

Quezon Hails General MacArthur 
As" Man of Faith" At Ceremonies 

Bust of Allied Commander-in-Chief in Southwest Pacific presented to 
University of Tennessee. Speech of Philippine President read by 
General Valdes. 

At the presentation of a bust of General MacArthur to the University of 
Tennessee at Knoxville, President Quezon called the commander-in-chief of 
Allied forces m the Southwest Pacific "the man of faith." 

"General MacArthur is the one man today who stands like a towering wall 
between the Japanese and total victory in the Southwest Pacific," said President 
Quezon. He s standing in their way and blocking them, exactly as he stood 
in their wajr and played havoc with 

President Quezon's address was read 
by Maj. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, veteran 
of Bataan and Corregidor, Chief of 
Staff of the Philippine Army and Sec- 
retary of National Defense in Presi- 
dent Quezon's War Cabinet. 

Representing the Philippines at the 
MacArthur bust presentation ceremo- 
nies, besides General Valdes, were Mrs. 
Manuel L. Quezon, wife of the Presi- 
dent of the Philippines; Miss Zeneida 
Ouerron, daughter of the President; and 
Lt. Antonio Madrigal, aide to the 
President. With the Philippine party- 
was Mrs. Arthur MacArthur, widow of 
the brother of General MacArthur. 

"Only those are fit to live who are 
not afraid to d ; e for their country." — 
Gen era! Mac A rth u r. 



— . . 8', J AT ««VUU Willi 

their time-table in the Philippines, He 
has won spectacular victories, one af - 
ter another, with the limited means at 
his command. But there i s only one 
victory that Douglas MacArthur. the 
man of faith, wants to achieve. He 
wants to redeem his pledge made upon 
his arrival in Australia from the Phil- 
ippines more than one year ago: 4 T 
broke through and I shall return.' 

"For to him Bataan is more than a 
symbol. Bataan is a fact — as large as 
life, as bitter as death. Bataan is a 
grim story of brave men fighting 
against terrible odds, of men who be- 
lieved fiercely in the cause for which 
they were fighting, and in that faith 
were not afraid to die. Bataan is the 
storv of men who gave of themselves 
in the fullest measure, and Douglas 
MacArthur is not forgetting them." 



J3 



Pearson Praises Quezon 

Writing in the Washington Merry- 
Go-Round which is printed in more 
than 600 American newspapers. Col- 
umnist Drew Pearson pays high trib- 
ute to President Quezon of the Phil- 
ippines. 

Pearson says: 

"It's bad news for the Japs that 
President Quezon of the Philippines is 
back in Washington. They knew — 
though it was not generally realized in 
Washington — that Quezon had suffered 
a relapse of his old illness, tubercu- 
losis, which has plagued him off and 
on for twenty years. 

"Quezon was a well man at the time 
of Pearl Harbor. But confinement in 
the dampness of Corregidor. during 
the Jap attack, brought the illness 
back again. That was one reason 
MacArthur urged him to return to the 
United States in a submarine. When 
he came to Washington, Quezon was 
advised to take things easy. Instead 
he rushed into the official activities of 
Philippine Commonwealth aflairs. not 
sparing himself. 

His physicians advised him not to 
remain in Washington during the sum- 
mer of 1942, nor last winter. But he 
remained nevertheless. Result was that 
last spring he suffered a further re- 
lapse. 

"Specialists were summoned, and 
Quezon was given the stern advice that 
he would have to get out of the humid 
climate of Washington immediately if 
he wanted to live. Yielding to pres- 
sure, he went to Saranac, N. Y., and 
submitted himself to a rigid discipline 
<hi rino- most of the past summer. 

"Quezon led the life of an invalid, 
sitting in the sunshine in a wheel chair, 
listening to the radio, or to his nurses 
as they read to him. Result of this 
regime was that the tuberculosis was 
arrested and Quezon gained 12 pounds. 

"When the Japs heard of his relapse, 
they were ready to say to the people 
of the Philippines, where Quezon is 
still highly popular, "Look, this is the 
skeleton you pin your hopes to." 

"But today. Quezon is back on his 
feet and back at his desk, still hoping 
to realize his one great ambition, to 
see United States and Philippine forces 
march into Manila." 

"In the Sea of Intellectual Progress 
there's room for even sail." -Robert 
(>. fngersoll. 



United Nations Salute Philippine C 



I am happy to send 
a message of goodwill 
to BATAAN, whose 
November issue, dedi- 
cated to the United 
Nations, appears on 
the eighth anniversary 
of the founding of the 
Philippine Common- 
wealth. 



As the drama of 
war moves to its cli- 
max, we of the United 
Nations may begin to 
look beyond the blood- 
shed and suffering of 
these times to the day 
when the forces of the 
Axis, east and west, 
will be driven from 
lands they won by treachery and hold by violence. 

It is by unity that we shall win on that day; and this 
same unity is our best, indeed our only, hope of dealing 
successfully with the grave problems which will arise as 
soon as the war is ended. United for the liberation of 
the peoples, the Nations must remain united for the tasks 
of peace. 

Lord Halifax 

British Ambassador 




Lord Halifax 

British Ambassador 




The New Zealand Government welcomed the foun- 
dation of the Philippine Commonwealth in 1935 as 
an important step in the development of the Pacific 
It was. therefore, with the greatest indignation thai 

I 10T1 an r le u nied ln theSe dark da vs of Decem- 
ber 1941, of the invasion of the Philippine Islands 
by the Japanese. We in the South Pacific who 

have in this war, as 
in the last, sent our 
men overseas to fight, 
watched with mounting 
admiration the gallant 
struggle which t h e 
Philippine people 
mrde in the battles of 
Hataan and Corregidor 
and we are proud that 
in this hour of the 
world's history we are 
fighting side by side 
with such gallant peo- 
ple as those of the 
Philippine Common- 
wealth. 




Walter Nash 

Minister of New Zealand 



Walter Nash 

mntster of New Zealand 



President Manuel L. Quezon and his War Cabinet pos 
partment heads the negotiations leading to President R 
advance the date of Philippine independence previousl 
Romulo, Secretary of the Department of Information Gt| 
Lt. Col. Andres Soriano, Secretary of Finance; Vice-P*©j 
to the President; President Quezon; Resident Commissi^ 
Chief of Staff and Secretary of National Defense; \ 



When war in the Pacific broke out there must have been 
who could have foreseen the rapid, and for a time, apparent! > 

From December 7 and the succeeding days, when Japan »t 
sula, and in the Commonwealth of the Philippines, until Semp te t 
of success. 

During that period the aggressor had engulf- 
ed an enormous Oceanic empire which includ- 
ed Malaya, Burma, the Netherlands Indies, the 
Philippines, and many British and American 
island outposts. 

On September 16, 1942, the tide of Japans 
southward advance faltered and broke. Then, at 
foribaiwa Ridge, 32 miles from Port Moresby, 
the Japanese were thrown back to taste what 
would prove to be, in later months, but the 
first of a series of military disasters in Aus- 
tralian Papua and New Guinea, and in the 
Solomons. 

Dark as the prospect appeared in the open- 
ing months of 1912. no invader landed upon the 
so ? l of our continent. The enemy failed to reach 
Port Moresby, the last outpost of our defenses 
between the Japanese and Continental Australia. 
Our troops halted them and turned them back. Sir Owe 

But amid the successes that have followed and Australia. 




ttimonwealth On Eighth Anniversary 

' :< fP'y.<.i ;.' v :< - • V' v;y vc'^Y "^'^'•^llpii:^^ On this eighth an- 




-<* for this photograph after he had reported to his de- 
°sevelt's message to the Congress asking for powers to 

1H S D f ° r * uly 4 ' 1946 * Left to right: Co1 ' Carlos P * 
jVi ^Hc Relations; Auditor-General Jaime Hernandez; 
>l aent Sergio Qsmena; Col. Manuel Nieto, aide-de-camp 
loaguin M. Elizalde; Maj. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, 
nd Dr. Arturo B. Rotor, Secretary to the President. 




On this eighth an 
niversary of the found 
big of the Philippine 
Commonwealth, the 
hearts of all freedom- 
loving peoples will feel 
the urge to express 
their admiration to the 
valiant and courageous 
Filipino men and 
women who so glori- 
ously fought against 
overwhelming odds in 
defense o f freedom 
and independence. 

The Philippine Com- 
monwealth has joined 
the United Nations, all 
of whom are pledged 
to fight shoulder to 

shoulder against oppression, enslavement and imperialism. 
This mighty association of people whose only aim is to 
regain their birthright of freedom, now unites them re- 
gardless of distance under the banner of democratic jus- 
tice, on which is inscribed the right of ever) individual 
to he free. 

At this time the Polish people, whose destiny it has 
been so often to fight for their independence and for that 
of others, feel especially close to the brave people of the 
Philippines who. like the Poles, are continuing their gal- 
lant fight against a ruthless oppressor. 

J. ClECHANGWSKl 

Ambassador of Poland 



J. Ciechanowski 

Ambassador of Poland 



few people among the many countries and races of this vast area 

irresistable, character of the Japanese advance, 
tacked almost simultaneously at Pearl Harbor, in the Malay Penin- 
nber, 1942, Japanese conquest had an almost unbroken period 

in the advances made in the campaigns now 
being fought, we cannot forget the courage of 
those who held out to the last in those earlier 
hopeless conflicts in Malaya. Java and on Ba- 
taan. Their sacrifice was not in vain. 

As the Allied armies, navies and the air 
fleets slrike northward and daily bring closer 
the final liberation of the Pacific, the gallant 
resistance of the heroic people of the Philip- 
pines is remembered. 

The sacrifices and hardships of these years 
will. 1 am confident, lay the basis of a firm 
understanding between all democratic peoples 
in the Pacific, an understanding which, I be- 
lieve, will be shared by the people of the Com- 
monwealth of Australia and the people of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 



On the occasion of the eighth anniversary of the 
founding of the Philippine Commonwealth it gives me 
pleasure to use this opportunity of conveying to the 
Philippine people the 
admiration of the Dan- 
ish people of the vali- 
ant resistance put up 
by them in their fight 
against the ruthless in- 
vaders. Both nations 
stand aligned on the 
side of the forces com- 
batting aggression, and 
both believe that com- 
plete victory can only 
be won thru the united 
efforts of all free and 
democratic peoples, as 
expressed in the United 
Nations" Declaration. 




l Dixon 

Minister 



Sir Owen Dixon 
Australian Minister 



HENIRIK k.U FFMAN 
Minister of Denmark 



Henirik Kauffman 

Minister of Denmark 



16 



^taan 




Luis F. Guachalla 

Ambassador of Bolivia 



On the eighth anniversary of the 
founding of the Philippine Common- 
wealth, it is both an honor and a 
privilege to salute the Philippine peo- 
ple, who, at Bataan and Corregidor, 
earned so magnificently the right to 
occupy a high and respected ° place 
among the free, independent nations 
of the world. 

Luis F. Guachalla 

Ambassador of Bolivia 



In this vast conflict for the freedom 
and the peace of the world, the people 
of the Philippines and the peoples of 
Belgium are fighting in the front line. 
Both neighbors of an aggressor state 
they have been brutally invaded, and 
m spite of a heroic resistance, over- 
whelmed by superior forces. ' Todav 
they are oppressed by a cruel enemy, 
but both have not ceased to resist the 
occupant and they are looking with 
confidence to the day when, with the 
aid of their powerful Allies and the 
other United Nations, they will drive 
the enemy from their soil an d regain 
tneir rightful place in the world. ° 

On the occasion of the eighth anni- 
versary of the founding of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth, I am pleased to 
have the opportunity to express my 
admiration for the valiant resistance 
of the Philippine people and to send 
tbem mv best wishes for an early lib- 
eration, 

STRATEN - PONTHOZ 

Belgian A mbassador 



The President's pledge to redeem the Philippines is certain of fulfillment. His 
message to the Congress on October 6, 1913. recommending that authority be 
granted to him to proclaim the legal independence of the Islands as soon as feasi- 
ble and to provide measures for their protection and rehabilitation is but a step 
in that direction. 

It is worth while to recall briefly how the Filipinos fared before the Japanese 
invaded their homeland. Freedom, independence, and sovereignty of the Filipino 
people were a foregone conclusion from the time the flag of the United States was 
raised over the Islands. After November 15, 1935, the Filipino people enjoyed the 
true substance of freedom, for Filipino officials elected by the Filipino people car- 
ried on the internal affairs of the Philippines. American authorities remained in 
the Islands on a temporary basis and enjoyed happy and harmonious relations 
with the Filipino authorities and people. The armed forces of the United States 
labored shoulder to shoulder with their Filipino comrades solely for the protec- 
tion of the Filipino people themselves. 

In contrast to the freedom which the Fili- 
pinos knew before the Japanese invasion, the 
Filipino people became enslaved — forced by 
guns to do the bidding; of the enemy. Japan 
not only coerced the Filipinos but also del- 
uged them with propaganda, blandishment and 
cajolery. No one knows better than the Fili- 
pinos themselves that so-called independence 
at the hands of the Japanese, whose one 
thought is to stifle Filipino initiative, to stunt 
Filipino culture, and to mold the Filipino 
people to Japan's purposes of empire and 
self - aggrandizement, denotes independence 
only in name. The Filipinos know, and we all 
know, that the Japanese, until they are driven 
from the Islands, will continue their attempts 
to control all principal aspects of Filipino 
life — spiritual, educational, financial, eco- 
nomic and personal. They will continue their 
efforts through debased idealogies and false 
values to reach into the very minds of the 

Filipinos and to change the Filipino way of thinking and of living. 

Remembering their life before Japan came, the Filipinos will not forget 
their rightful heritage and will wonder how Japan, itself the slave of its own mili- 
tary, could hope to grant real independence to another people. 

As the Filipino people recall what the Japanese enemy has clone and is doing 
to the natives of Formosa, of Korea, of China, of Thailand, and of Burma, and of 
all the areas overrun and invaded by Japanese, it will be apparent to them, and 
to all of us, that Japan will never voluntarily withdraw from the Philippines, but 
rather will put forth its utmost effort to remain there for the purpose of exploiting 
those areas and those peoples in the sole interest of the Japanese government. 

They will not remain. They will be driven out. 




Cordell Hull 

Secretary of State 



Cordell Hull 

Secretary of State 



I am glad to join the Philippine people in the celebration of the anniversary 
of the founding; of their Commonwealth. My Government and fellow citizens in 
Guatemala look forward with confidence to the restoration of freedom and pros- 
I erity to the Philippines and their brave people. 

Adrian Recinos 

Ambassador of Guatemala 



ouember, 1943. 



17 




Julian R. Caceres 

Ambassador of Honduras 



The anniversary of the founding of the 
Philippine Commonwealth becomes this year 
more important, and carries a more vivid 
international significance. 

All in the world who love liberty and 
independence have admired the brave Fili- 
pinos who, with General MacArthur at their 
head, valiantly withstood the Japanese on- 
slaught. From now on, the names of Bataan 
and Corregidor will not disappear from the 
unbreakable marble of glory. The American 
soldiers, the Philippine soldiers, who there 
died defending the land of the Commonwealth, 
and saving the honor of the country, will live 
forever in the conscience of a free world. 
The graves of those heroic soldiers stand now, 
and forever, as another great beacon on the 
Road of Liberty. As, in the lofty phrase of 
President Lincoln, "they have not died in 
vain." 

The Japanese traitors have written, with their treacherous attack on Pearl 
Harbor and with their invasion on the Philippine Commonwealth, a shameful 
page in their own history. That blot branded them forever. It is true that 
these aggressors have occupied the Philippine territory, but they have not de- 
stroyed the spirit of Liberty; and the Philippine Commonwealth has become right 
now the cornerstone of the liberation of the Philippines from the ominous Japa- 
nese yoke. 

No one doubts that the days of the Japanese Empire, like the days of Hit- 
lerism, are counted. Not without impunity can be broken the rules of Interna- 
tional Law and the commandments of human decency. 

Julian R. Caceres 
Ambassador of Honduras 

On the occasion of the eighth anniversary of the Proclamation by the United 
States Government of the Philippine Commonwealth, I take pleasure in conveying 
to the Philippine people through your magazine, BATAAN, the most heartfelt 
congratulations of the French Committee of National Liberation. 

The relations between the Philippine Islands and France date back almost 
to their discovery by the Spaniards and offer an uninterrupted chain of friend- 
ship : the French families established in the Philippines have always, as you 
know, evinced an unflinching loyalty to the Filipino people whose spirit of hos- 
pitality is universally recognized. Relations with our French Indo-China have 
always been both culturally and materially profitable to our two countries and 
I hope they will grow stronger and closer after the war when peaceful and 
harmonious cooperation will flourish among all Asiatic nations under the sign 
of collective security and world understanding. 

Under the sterling guidance of America, and the able leadership of states- 
men like President Manuel L. Quezon and Vice-President Sergio Osmeno, the 
Philippine Islands have witnessed during these last forty years an era of prog- 
ress political, cultural and economic. They are ready for complete independ- 
ence and we are looking forward to the day when the Philippine Republic will 
take her place among the nations of the world. Soon the invader who has 
bludgeoned his way gangsterlike into your peaceful country will be ousted by 
the victorious USAFFE. Then the Philippines will live again for peace, justice 
and progress. 

This is the most fervent hope of the French people whom the common test 
or invasion has brought still nearer, as it were, to the Philippine Islands. 

Henri Hoppenot 

I- reach Committee of National Liberation 



I have the honor to inform vou Dr 
Diosdado M. Yap, Editor and Publish- 
er of BATAAN, a Philippine news- 
magazine, that His Excellencv Ambas- 
sador Carlos Martins wishes to express 
his congratulations at the occasion of 
the eighth anniversary, November 15th 
this year, of the founding of the Phil- 
ippine Commonwealth. 

His Excellency is glad to join the 
representatives of all the United Na- 
tions in the commemoration of a date 
so auspicious for the Philippine people. 

Fernando Lobo 

Minister Counsellor, Brazilian Embassy 

% 

"Today, Commonwealth Day, all Fil- 
ipinos, wherever they may be, should 
remember that it marks the establish- 
ment of their own government under 
the aegis of America, preparatory for 
the day when they shall become com- 
pletely independent. In these days, 
when aggressor nations trample upon 
freedom and are trying to efface human 
rights with the bayonet, it is well for 
those who believe in democracy to 
commemorate historic events such as 
the birth of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines, in order to draw vigor and 
inspiration from them and bolster up 
resistance against the invader. 

"The Commonwealth of the Philip- 
pines and the future Philippine Repub- 
lic is a beacon light of human free- 
dom that will forever inspire all lib- 
erty-loving people. Today let us grate- 
fully turn our thoughts to our revered 
heroes who fought and bled to make 
our people free. Let us also today 
pledge ourselves to carry on the fight 
against totalitarianism until total vic- 
tory has been achieved, our heroic dead 
of Bataan and Corregidor avenged, 
and the cause of human liberty vindi- 
cated." 

Manuel L. Quezon, 
President of the Philippines. 

Filipinos settled in America around 
1710. They arrived in Louisiana, and 
were known as Malays, but their de- 
scendants today still claim to be Fili- 
pinos. One of their settlements, not 
far from New Orleans, has long been 
known as Manila Village. 



18. 



£a 



Repatriates From Jap Imprisonment 
Scheduled To Reach New York Dec. 2 

Some are reported ill, but Grisholm has full medical staff. Jap 
exchange vessel to unload supplies in Philippines. 

Carrying persons returning from the Far East in the current exchange of 
American and Japanese nationals, the Gripsholm departed from the exchange 
port at Mormugao, Goa, Portuguese India on October 22 and. according to the 
terms of its safe conduct, is scheduled to arrive in the United States on De- 
cember 2. 

A few cases of illness have been reported among the repatriates from the 
Fa r East and the next-of-kin in the 
United States have been informed by 
the Department of State. The inter- 
ested relatives in this country will be 
promptly notified if further reports 
pertaining to illness among the pas- 
sengers are received before the Grips- 
holm returns to New York. The Grips- 
holm has a complete medical depart- 
ment fully equipped to care for all ac- 
tual and possible needs of the passen- 
gers. 

The Japanese exchange vessel Teia 
Maru, carrying Japanese repatriates 
from the Western Hemisphere, departed 



from Mormugao on October 21 and is 
scheduled to arrive at Yokohama on 
November 14, calling en route at Sin- 
gapore from November 1 to 3 and at 
Manila from November 7 to 8. 

The full quantity of mail and relief 
supplies provided by the American and 
Canadian Red Cross and other organi- 
zations for Americans and other na- 
tionals of the United Nations under 
detention in Japan and Japanese-occu- 
pied territory which was taken from 
the United States on the Gripsholm, 




Chicago's Mayor Edward J. Kelly (right) received an award of distinguished 
service from the Philippine guerillas of Bataan organization from the group's 
commander, Jay J. McCarthy. In the center is Juliet Ruiz in traditional 
Filipino costume. The presentation took place at the first banquet and ball 
at the Drake Hotel early this fall. More than 1600 persons attended the affair. 
Miss Dorothy Andrews of the American Red Cross. Mayor Kelly and Illinois 
Secretary of State Edward J. Hughes, also spoke. The association received 
greetings in behalf of President Roosevelt from Major General Edwin M. 
Watson of the President's staff. A letter accepting honorary membership in 
the association was received from General Dwight D. Eisenhower, Com- 
mander-in-Chief of the Allied forces in the Mediterranean. General Eisen- 
hower wrote: "I share with you and your members the hope that in the 
not too far distant future we shall drive the Japs from the Philippines in 
the course of completely crushing Japan. 



was transferred to the Teia Maru at 
Mormugao. 

Arrangements have been made for 
the distribution of this relief cargo 
to prisoners of war and civilian in- 
ternees in Japanese hands throughout 
the Far East under the auspices of the 
International Red Cross Committee. 
There have additionally been placed 
on board the Teia Maru at Mormugao 
some relief supplies provided by the 
Indian Red Cross. 

Yap Hits Japan's Pretext 
Of Aiding Nations Of East 

At the Rotary luncheon in Keyser. 
West Virginia, Dr. Diosdado M. Yap. 
noted Philippine - American authority, 
called attention to the tendency of the 
average reader to stress sports and so- 
ciety rather than current happenings 
in his reading. Dr. Yap briefly out- 
lined the insidious advance of the Jap- 
anese throughout the Pacific area. 

"Japan tried to be friends with the 
Chinese on the pretext of driving out 
Communism; while at the same time 
the Nipponese war lords were stabbing 
the Chinese in the back," stated the 
speaker. Pointing out that Japanese 
propaganda of "Down with the white 
man who saps the vitality of a race" 
succeeded in part in dividing the Chi- 
nese, Dr. Yap stated that not until 19% 
and the attack on Manchuria did the 
Chinese unite in a common effort un- 
der the leadership of a national head. 

"The United States established a 
sphere of influence in the Orient be- 
cause she convinced the people that 
she had no territorial ambitions. The 
Philippines, however, were the first to 
accept our offers and to show the first 
real progress. With the planting of the 
American flag came teachers and ex- 
perts who brought Western civilization 
to the East in the form of cultural, 
economic and political improvements," 
emphasized the speaker. Dr. Yap 
closed his address with the statement 
that the American people have dealt 
fairly, squarely, and honestly with the 
Philippines who now, down deep in 
their hearts, have a longing for Ameri- 
can ideals and principles. 

Dr. Yap was also the principal 
speaker at the special convocation of 
the Potomac State College in Keyser. 



govern Lev, 1943. 



19 



Philippine Post- War Planning Board 
Created By President Quezon 

The creation of a Philippine Post-War Planning Board by President Manuel 
L Quezon was made public- recently by the Philippine Department of Informa- 
tion and Public Relations. 

The board will study and recommend plans for relief of the population 
immediately after occupation of the Philippines: the rapid rehabilitation and 
reconstruction of Philippine economy; post-war trade and other relationships of 
the Philippine Republic and other 
countries, and security of the Philip- 
pines after Japanese defeat. 

President Quezon appointed Vice 
President Sergio Osmena chairman of 
the newlv-created Post-War Planning 
Board. Other members appointed are: 
Joaquin M. Elizalde. Resident Com- 
missioner of the Philippines to .the 
United States: Andres Soriano. Sec- 
retary of Finance; Maj. Gen. Basil io 
J. Valdes. Secretary of National De- 
fense, and Jaime Hernandez, Auditor 
General. 

THE EXECUTIVE ORDER CREATING BOARD 

The executive order creating the 
Post-War Planning Board follows: 

"Whereas the wanton invasion of 
the Philippines by Japanese armed 
forces, together with the subsequent 
military occupation of the nation by 
the enemy, have disrupted the normal 
development of peaceful progress; and 

"Whereas the problems of relief, 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of the 
Philippines afler the Japanese are driv- 
en out will be great and manifold, and 
require lengthy study and careful 
planning ; and 

"Whereas it appears necessary and de- 
sirable that such study and planning - 
and, wherever possible, preparatory ac- 
tion-be carried out at once in the 
interest of the people of the Philip- 
pines; 

"Now, therefore, 1, Manuel L. Que- 
zon, President of the Philippines, by 
virtue of the powers vested in me by 
law. do hereby create and constitute 
a Post-War Planning Board whose 
functions are hereunder detailed: 

BOARD'S FUNCTIONS 

"1. To study and recommend plans 
for relief of the population immedi- 
ately upon re-occupation of the Philip- 
pines, and to formulate proposals for 
the restoration of public and private 
property. 




president Cju 



"2. To study and recommend plans 
for the rapid rehabilitation and recon- 
struction of the Philippine economy, 
including agricultural, labor, indus- 
trial, financial and commercial re- 
habilitation and reconstruction; and to 
prepare plans for the development and 
improvement of Philippine natural re- 
sources, agriculture, trade, industry, 
shipping, public works, education, pub- 
lic health and nutrition amid the new 
conditions that will exist after the de- 
feat of the Axis. 

"3. To study the post-war trade and 
other relationships between the gov 
eminent of the Philippine Republic and 
other governments, with particular ref- 
erence to the United States and to the 
neighbors of the Philippines in the 
Far East. 

"4. To study and recommend plans 
for the security of the Philippines after 
the defeat of Japan. 

"5. And. in general, to survey, col 
lect data on. and analyze all post-war 
problems of the Philippines and to 
recommend plans and programs for 
the wise solution of these problems. 



Ex-Scouts' Officer Heads 
Army War College 

Col. William X. Todd. Jr.. until re- 
cently deputy commander ot the 
Army's services of supply in Central 
Africa, has been appointed post com- 
mandant of the Army War College in 
Washington. 

Born September 8. 1895. at Easton- 
Leavenworth, Kans. ? Colonel Todd has 
been a Cavalry officer since 1917. 
Among his various Army duties was 
assignment to the Philippines where he 
served with the Twenty-sixth Philip- 
pine Scouts until 1911. when he was 
detailed to the Fourth Cavalry Brigade 
headquarters. In 1912 he was sent 
to Africa. He assumed his present 
rank in August, 1912. 



ki The Post-War Planning Board shall 
consist of: Hon. Sergio Osmena. Vice 
President of the Philippines. Chairman: 
and Hon. Joaquin M. Elizalde. Resi- 
dent Commissioner of the Philippines 
to the United States: Hon. Andres 
Soriano. Secretarv of Finance: Majoi 
General Basilio J. Valdes. Secretarv 
of the National Defense, and Hon. 
laime Hernandez, Auditor General, 
members. The Board shall prepare 
such rules and regulations tor its 
operations as mav be necessary, 
shall have the authority, with the ap- 
proval of the corresponding head oi 
chief, to Obtain the assistance ol offi- 
cers or members of any department 
bureau, or office of the government 
which it mav consider necessary toi 
the proper performance of its duties. 
The Board shall appoint and have a 
secretary who shall also act as Us ad- 
ministrative officer. 

'The Board, within the limits ot 
such funds as ma> be created or ap- 
propriated for the purpose, nun em- 
ploy the necessary personnel and make 
provisions for necessarv supplies, fa- 
cilities, travel, and services. The (.hair- 
man and members of the Board shall 
serve without compensation in such 
capacity. 

"Done at the City of Washington. 
District of Columbia, I nited States oi 
America, this 15th da\ of September, 
in the year of Our Lord. Nineteen 
Hundred Forty-Three, and of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, the 
Eighth." 



20. 



-(i3ataan. 



Jap Advisor Admits Neither Threats 
Nor Flattery Gain Filipino Friendship 

Nippon "Expert" blames Island's people for "backward situation." 
Philippines lag behind other conquered regions in economic recon- 
struction, he says. 

The Japanese again admit that the Filipino masses still refuse to collaborate 
with them, despite all sorts of Nipponese threats, blandishments and flatteries. 

Shozo Murata described in Japanese radio broadcasts as "the highest adviser 
of the Japanese Military Administration in the Philippines," blames the Filipino 
people for the backward situation" in the Philippines. He reportedly has just 
come from an extensive tour in neighboring Japanese-occupied territories, where 
he round reconstruction' going on ac- 
cording to the Japanese schedule. 

OTHERS COOPERATE WITH JAPS 

"The Philippines lags behind other 
sections of the Southern regions in 
economic reconstruction," Murata said 
upon his return to Manila. "During 
my inspection tour I found that com"- 
plete peace and order now prevail. In 
Djawa (Java) and Sumatra the people 
are collaborating fully with the Jap- 
anese authorities ... 

m"i C ° mparing the conditio » in the 
Philippines with some of the other 
parts of the Southern regions, it can 
not be said that economic reconstruc- 
tion in the Philippines is farther ad- 
vanced." 

Murata pointed out that "almost ev- 
erything produced in the Philippine*" 
including abaca, a longtime Philippine 
monopoly, is now produced in a larger 
quantity than in the Philippines. "Su^- 
ar is produced in Djawa in larger 
quantity and at lower production cost 
he said. "The first-year output 
r-opra m the Philippines is bettered 
many other districts." 



of 
by 



Blow gently— soft Pacific winds, 

Across the jungles of Bataan — 
Where grasses 'round white crosses twine 
And palms extend their friendly span — 
Watch tenderly— Pacific moon, 

Upon those lonely soldier graves, 
i ntil a happy peacetime noon 
Shall light a realm that knows no slaves. 

Shine tenderly— Pacific stars, 

I pon Manilas bomb-wrecked halls, 
Our legions yet shall break the bars 

Of your confining fortress walls. 
Sweep gently— O Pacific tide 

Upon Corregidor's cold strand— 
"here liberty icas crucified 
Veneath a modern Pilate's hand. 

tiest easy then— brave Bataan dead, 

ten million hearts still beat for Thee— 
Above ihy graves again shall spread, 

l by Flag of love and liberty— 
Breathe gently— Thou Incarnate God 
L pon that soil with lifeblood wet, 
c . P ed Se Thee to regain that sod. 
And promise them— Well not forget. 

Daniel Maurice Robins, 
In Lansing (Mich.) State Journal 



HITS LACK OF COLLABORATION 

"This backward situation can not 
placed at the door of the Philippine 
Administration alone," Murata de- 
clared. 'If the Filipinos forgot about 
peace and order and had offered 
T ™T re ardent collaboration with 
the Military Administration, as did 
the other parts of the Southern regions 
greater progress would have been 'made 
m the reconstruction of the country." 

The economic preeminence of the 
pre-war Philippines in her corner of 
the world is well known. The fact 
that "the highest adviser of the Japa- 
nese Military Administration H the 



Philippines now bewails that the coun- 
try lags behind other Japanese-occu- 
pied regions, can be noth'ng else but 
the result of an extensive, organized 
Filipino resistance and opposition to 
elaborate Japanese plans and programs, 

GUERRILLAS OFT2N MENTIONED 

In their propaganda broadcasts, the 
Japanese have often mentioned the un- 
ceasing activities of Filip'nos, whom 
they call "guerrillas," in disrupting 
communications and destroying store- 
houses besides killing and otherwise 



Japs Seek To Increase 
Islands' Food Production 

Recent Japanese broadcasts stress 
the "phenomenal progress" m a d e 
toward self-sufficiency in t h e "New 
Philippines," particularly in food- 
stuffs. The military administration 
claims that the present food supply is 
only 20 per cent short of the country's 
requirements. The all-important rice 
crop, allegedly, fell but 3 per cent be- 
low domestic needs in 1942, and with 
increased plantings, complete sufficiency 
is expected this year. Cotton lands — 
considerably expanded by the Japa- 
nese ar e to be planted between sea- 
sons to rice, corn, soybeans, and sweet 
potatoes, and the cultivation of wheat 
is said to be receiving serious atten- 
tion. Although admittedly labor is 
inexperienced and climatic conditions 
unfavorable, trial plantings of wheat 
will be made this year. 

Meanwhile "government officials" 
press the program for greater food 
production by individuals. Officials 
returning from the country districts to 
Manila report that every province now 
has a Foodstuff Production Increase 
Council. Small truck farms in Luzon 
alone are said to number more than 
68,000, and it is claimed that one-third 
of' the total cultivated lands in the 
Islands is now planted in essential food 
crops. 

Nor have beverages been overlooked 
by the Japanese planners. A record 
harvest of coffee in Mindanao, and in- 
creased domestic production of wine — 
to supplant former imports — is receiv- 
ing encouragement, with the Filipinos 
urged to consume more grape wine, 
both as nourishment and as a tonic. 
According to recent broadcasts, "in- 
dependence punch," with which the 
"freedom" to come will be celebrated, 
is already popular in Mania. 



annoying the invaders. More than 16 
months after the fall of Corregidor. 
the Japanese still are complaining 
about these recalcitrant elements. 

Murata's complaint comes signifi- 
cantly at a time when the Japanese 
propagandists a re enthusiastically 
boasting about the Japanese grant of 
"independence" to the Philippines as 
a reward for her "collaboration" with 
the Gre-ter E*st Asia Coprosperitv 
fphere. 



fjoi/emler, 1943 



21 




Filipino Women's Club of Washington. D. C. with 
Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon as its honorary president. 

Naval Airpower Played Major Part 
In Munda Campaign Against Japs 

Daily bombing softened enemy defenses as foe loses 358 aircraft. 
Thousand tons of explosives pave way for advance; weaken Jap 
morale. 

Naval aviation played a major role in the Munda campaign, which resulted 
in the capture of the key Japanese airfield there after a 37-day assault. 

Reports from the South Pacific theater reveal that in the period from June 
30 — date of the initial landing on Rendova — to the final capture of the Munda 
airfield on August 7, American fliers practically eliminated enemy air opposi- 
tion by downing 358 Japanese planes, and cleared the way for the drive of the 
ground forces on Munda by daily 



bombing attacks that greatly softened 
the enemy defenses. 

Navy and Marine Corps planes, the 
reports indicate, made up about two- 
thirds of the forces employed in these 
air operations, which were on a scale 
unprecedented in that area. 

358 TAP PLANES DESTROYED 

The destruction of the 358 Japanese 
aircraft— 259 fighters, 60 twin-engined 
bombers. 28 dive-bombers and 16 float 
planes — wa s estimated to have ac- 
counted for all but 20 or 30 of the 
total enemy planes in the Solomons 
area. It was achieved at a cost of only 
93 United States planes, of which 71 
were fighters and 22 were bombers. 
Many of the American pilots were 
rescued by the Consolidated Catalina 
patrol planes, which have helped the 
to establish an outstanding rec- 
ord in rescue operations. 



Greatest blow at the enemy air 
forces was struck in the first two days 
of the action, when 125 Japanese craft 
were shot down, against a loss of 25 
American planes. So crippling was 
this first blow to the Japanese forces 
that they subsequently avoided large- 
scale attacks on American ' formations 
and positions, and attempted only har- 
assing actions. 

AIR, GROUND COOPERATION 

While inflicting this heavy damage 
on the enenrv air forces, the American 
pilots tarried out offensive operations 
in close co-ordination with the ground 
forces. Daily bombing raids were 
made on Munda and the nearby Jap 
bases at Ballale Vila and Kahili, often 
under unfavorable weather conditions. 

The assaults on Munda. in which 
1.000 tons of explosives were dropped 
(in enemy installations, paved the \\a\ 



Filipino Women 
Hear Mrs. Quezon 

The Filipino Woman's Club of 
Washington. D. C held its first meet- 
ing on October 6. 1943, with Mrs. 
Manuel L. Quezon, wife of the Presi- 
dent of the Philippines as its guest 
speaker. A record crowd of Filipino 
and American women heard Mrs. Que- 
zon speak on what the Filipino women 
can do for the general welfare of the 
Filipinos in the United States, and 
more so. what can be done in the war 
effort and to help our war-stricken 
countrymen in the homeland. 

One of the purposes of the club is 
"to make the Filipino women in this 
part of the country a potent and effec- 
tive factor in the uplift and social de 
velopment of the Filipinos in the Unit- 
ed States." 

The officers of this new club are: 
Mrs. Florentino Calabia. president: 
Mrs. Macario Balco. vice-president: 
Mrs. Solomon Y. Arnaldo. secretary; 
and Mrs. Ismael Mathay, treasurer. 
Members of the board of directors are: 
Mrs. Eusebio Orense. Mrs. Manuel 
Adeva. Mrs. Alfredo GaudieL Mrs. 
Jaime Hernandez. Mrs. Mateo Perez, 
Mrs. Velecio Vera and Miss Remedios 
C. Vergara. 

for the advance of the ground forces 
through the difficult jungle territory 
by destroying defensive positions and 
supplies, and by weakening the morale 
of the Japanese troops. Raids on the 
supporting bases made it difficult for 
the enemy to provide proper air sup- 
port or reinforcement for tie forces 
cornered at Munda. 

In these attacks, all the weapons of 
the air were used. High level, medium 
altitude, dive and glide bombing were 
employed in carefully co-ordinated op- 
erations under strong fighter protec- 
tion. The bombing attacks were gen 
erallv carried out by Navy Douglas 
Dauntless dive bombers and by Grum- 
man Avenger torpedo bombers equip 
ped for land assaults. 

PATROL MISSION ACCOMPLISHED 

In addi'ion to the severe blows aimed 
at the opposing Japanese air forces 
and the punishment rained on the en- 
emy bases, the \merican pilots flew 
long-range patrol missions which av- 
eraged 2,200 miles of (h i > d* 1 1 and 
greatlv assisted the American com 
rnanders in keeping posted on enemy 
troop and shipping movements, and 
made man a attacks on eneim shipping. 



22. 



CI L CI CM 



Quezon Backs Resolution 

. . . continued from page 5 



of our homeland. America and the 
whole world would then see that our 
protestations of gratitude to the peo- 
ple of the United States were not mere 
lip service.' 

NEITHER U. S. OR ISLANDS READY 

''The zero hour came. Neither the 
United States nor the Philippines were 
prepared for the war thus sudden!) 
forced upon us. It did not take me 
long to realize that, with all our faith 
in America's strength, no help could 
come in time to save our men — your 
American soldiers and our Filipino 
soldiers — from being destroyed, and 
my own homeland from being overrun 
by the enemy. 

"On the 24th of December. 1941, 
General MacArthur asked me to go 
with him to Corregidor. Those first 
weeks in Corregidor. Mr. Chairman, 
were anxious ones for me. The Phil- 
ippine Army, which constituted the 
bulk of the forces on Bataan, consisted 
of men whom I had called to the col- 
ors in order to fight by the side of 
your own Army under the supreme 
command of General MacArthur. This 
was the best of our manhood. There 
were moments when I asked myself 
whether I had the right to sacrifice 
them in this unequal fight, the end of 
which was for them a foregone con- 
clusion — death or capture. 

FDR SENDS MESSAGE 

"On December 28, 1941, the Presi- 
dent of the United States addressed a 
proclamation to my peoule. saying, 
among other things: 

" 'News of your gallant struggle 
against the Japanese aggressors has 
elicited the profound admiration of 
every American. As President of the 
\ nited States. I know that I speak for 
all our people on this solemn occasion. 
. . . The people of the United States 
will never forget what the people of 
the Philippine Islands are doing these 
days and will do in the days to come. 
I give to the people of the Philippines 
my solemn pledge that their freedom 
will be redeemed and their independ- 
ence established and protected. The 
entire resources in men and materials 
of the United States stand behind that 
pledge. 1 



"{ caused this proclamation to be 
widely distributed throughout the Phil- 
ippine Army and the civilian popula- 
tion. - 1 urged them to stand by Amer- 
ica and to keep their faith in America. 
These were my words: 

QUEZON ALSO SENDS WORD 

" 'The President of the United 
States, speaking for the Government 
of the people of America, in a recent 
proclamation addressed to the people 
of the Philippines, solemnly pledged 
that the freedom of our country will 
be redeemed and our independence 
protected. He asserted that behind that 
pledge stood all the resources of Amer- 
ica in men and materials. You are. 
therefore, fighting with America be- 
cause America is fighting for our free- 
dom. Our salvation will depend upon 
the victory of American and Filipino 
arms. 

" 'America will not abandon us . . 

" T am aware of your sufferings, 
your privations, your sacrifices, and 
the dangers to which you are exposed. 



All these weigh heavily upon my mind, 
but I am consoled by the fact that I 
am sharing with you your trials and 
sacrifices. Indeed, right now bombs 
are falling near me, just as they must 
fall around you. But we cannot allow 
them either to daunt our spirit or to 
weaken our determination to continue 
fighting to the bitter end. 

PEOPLE TOLD TO STAND BY 
" 'We must stand by our plighted 
word, by the loyalty that we have 
pledged to America, and by our devo- 
tion to freedom, democracy and our 
liberty. We are fighting that the Fili- 
pino people may be the masters of 
their own destiny and that every Fili- 
pino, not only of this generation bin 
of the generations to come, may be 
able to live in peace and tranquillity 
in the full enjoyment of liberty and 
freedom. Your duty— our duty — is to 
firrht and resist until the invader is 
driven from our land. You must not 
<rive up a foot of ground when the bat- 
tle is joined. You must hold in place 
—and hold— and hold."' 



Dku VUag Vo Vohyo ? 

Speculating on strategy is a pleasant pastime- -as long as it remains 
a pastime. When that ceases, and it is put in the form of a book, the 
result is no longer pleasant. < o- i 

Armchair Strategist Joseph Rosenfarb has outlined m_ Highway to 
Tokyo" (Little. Brown. $1.25) how to beat the Japs. Briefly this lS 
the plan: 

Allied forces should capture Rabaul. Using this as an air base the 
Jap naval base at Truk should either be immobilized o else be made 
unusable for all practical purposes by Jap ships Then, Allied forces 
should retake the' Philippines. 1 Then, with *e Ph.liPP"-s a. an air 
base, we could soften up Japan by bombing. After a time, we could 
send a fleet up to take the Jap isles. 

The unfortunate thing about Rosenfarb's plan is that the airplane 
which could do all those things is not yet in production It still, report- 
edly, has many kinks to be ironed out which may take a considerable 
period of time. Washington military writers say that land air bases 
on the Chinese mainland appear to be the only feasible way to bomb 
Tokyo regularly. 

Strategist Rosenfarb brings into his discussion little side questions 
which hav<e nothing to do with the problem of his book. His book, 
although it is only 117 pages in large type, is too long if it is merely 
to set forth his plan. If it is supposed to be a handbook on strategy for 
the Pacific, it is much too short. 

Reading "Highway to Tokyo" strengthens his reviewer s contention 
that strategy books should be written by the Professional soldier or 
the professional military writer, of which this books autho, is neither,- 
Lick Fitz patrick. 



ouem ber, 1943. 



23 



Colonel Romulo Named To War Cabinet 
As Secretary of New Information Dept. 

Former aide to MacArthur is well known in journalistic fields. Holds 
Silver Star and Purple Heart decorations. Latest book published 
this month. 

President Quezon of the Philippines announced the appointment of Col. 
Carlos P. Romulo as a member of his war cabinet as Secretary of the Depart- 
ment of Information and Public Relations. 

Colonel Romulo. aide-de-camp to General MacArthur in Bataan, Corregidor 
and Australia, holds the Silver Star for gallantry in action I awarded him by 
General MacArthur in Bataan), two Oak Leaf Clusters, and the Purple Heart 
(awarded by Lieutenant-General Wain- 

wright in Corregidor). American cities and delivered 364 lec- 

Before the war he was editor and fcures. He was recalled by President 
publisher of the Philippine Herald Quezon to active military duly Octo- 
ber. 1943. 



"The President invited me, on De- 
cember 31, 1911, to come to the United 
States and to function here as the head 
of the Government of the Common- 
wealth in exile and as the symbol of 
the redemption of the Philippines. My 
life, the life of my wife and all my 
children, were in daily danger. I was 
ill. The tunnels of Corregidor were 
well-nigh unbearable. But I stayed 
on Corregidor in order to keep up the 
morale of our soldiers and the civilian 
population. And I did not leave the 
Phil ippines until General MacArthur 
had been ordered to go to Australia. 
At his request, I followed him. Then 
I came to Washington in compliance 
with the earlier invitation of the Presi- 
dent of the United States." the Quezon 
statement explained. 

"The President, from the day of my 
arrival in Washington, has regarded 
the Government of the Commonwealth 
as possessed of the attributes of sov- 
ereignty. The approval of this Joint 
Resolution will merely confirm this 
policy and set up formally the Re- 
public of the Philippines. 

"You will be interested to know that 
I am in constant communication with 
the people of my country, both sol- 
diers and civilians, who are still fight- 
ing the enemy. I know from them 
that two things are uppermost in the 
minds of our people: first, the free- 
dom and independence of the Philip- 
pines, and second, the complete defeat 
OI Japan — as soon as possible. 

ON ROAD BACK TO MANILA 

"This Joint Resolution will give them 
the first. As for the second, the latest 
development in all fronts show that 
we are on the road back to the Philip- 
pines, and on to Tokyo. 

"There is one very important pro- 
vision in this Joint Resolution: the cre- 
ation of a joint American - Filipino 
Commission to study all the post-war 
problems of the Philippines, including 
trade, defense, and future American- 
Filipino relations: and to submit its 
recommendations to the Congress. Here 
is an act of statesmanship of the first 
magnitude. 

"In conclusion,'" the statement reads, 
"let me sav tna t the approval of this 
Joint Resolution will make the Filipino 
people feel that their sacrifices in blood 
and treasure have not been in vain. 
This is a war measure of the highest 
and most urgent importance. ' 




and allied newspapers in Manila, and 
managing director of two radio sta- 
tions MCZRM and KZRF). He won 
the Pulitzer Prize "for distinguished 
correspondence" in 1941, the first tmie 
this prize in American journalism was 
awarded to one outside continental 
America. He is the author of the 
best-seller. ''I Saw the Fall of the Phil- 
ippines." His new book. "Mothe ■ 
America." will be published on No- 
vember 5th. 

APPOINTMENT EFFECTIVE OCT. 1 

He arrived in America from Aus- 
tralia July last year and has been on 
a speaking tour in which he covered 
60.000 miles, visited 2B9 different 



The executive order creating the De- 
partment of Information and Public 
Relations, was made public later in the 
month. 

TAKES PLACE OF OSS 

Under this order, the Office of Spe- 
cial Services was abolished, and "the 
powers, functions and duties, as well 
as the personnel, appropriations and 
properties of the Office of Special Serv- 
ices, Office of the President of the 
Philippines." were transferred to the 
new department. 

The executive order. No. o-\\ . slates: 

* k Bv virtue of the powers vested in 
me by law. and in accordance with the 
unanimous opinion of the W ar Cabinet. 
I. Manuel L. Quezon. President of the 
Philippines, do hereby order the or- 
ganization of the Department of In- 
formation and Public Relations effec- 
tive October 1. 1943. 

"The Department of Information and 
Public Relations shall be charged with 
the duty of collecting, collating and 
disseminating information about the 
Ph I ppines and the Commonwealth 
Government." 

"Our estimate is the Japanese are 
losing combat and merchant ships at 
a much faster rate than they can re- 
place them. If that is true, they are 
having increasing difficulties with their 
lines of communication."" Secretary 
of the \ary Kno.x. 



24. 



^atctcw, 



Interview With Jap 

. . . continued from page 11 

I look like a Filipino?" He stopped, 
and when he resumed, he was smiling. 
"You know," he said, "the Japanese 
people emanated from two strains — 
the Mongoloid, like the Koreans, and 
the Malayan, like the Filipino. Per- 
haps I am a Malayan myself!" 

Somehow or other the conversation 
touched on Spengler's book, "The De- 
cline of the West," which was said to 
be popular with the Jap militarists. 
Uchiyama was talking. 

"... But the decline of the West," 
he said, "does not necessarily mean 
the rise of the East. It may mean that 

both East and West may decline. Or 

East and West may be, shall I say, 
level? For my part I have always 
held to the principle of what the 
Americans call 'fifty-fifty'." 

That was all that was "on the rec- 
ord." But either Uchiyama found me 
interesting enough to talk to or that 
he thought I was worth spending his 
time on as a possible convert and ad- 
vocate of the "New Order," for he 
suddenly dropped his smiling, "diplo- 
matic" pose and became serious. 

WANTS REPORTER'S PLEDGE 

"Mr. Di— Dionisio," he said, "all 
the previous conversation you can pub- 
lish if you wish. I find that you are 
intensely interested, and rightly so. in 
the problems of the Far East, and I 
feel that you will not violate confi- 
dences if we pursue our conversation 
henceforth on that basis. Am I justi- 
fied in that feeling?" 

I nodded. 

"Mr. Dionisio," Uchiyama resumed, 
fixing me with an intense gaze, "the 
problems of the Far East are many 
but they can be solved, and solved 
amicably only by the peoples of the 
*ar East themselves! They can never 
he solved if the Western nations are 
permitted to intrude. 

"You asked me a while ago if it 
was Japan's 'Manifest Destiny 5 to unite 
the peonies of Asia. The answer is 
yes. There are many things that are 
common to the peoples of East Asia, 
and the most outstanding of these is 
color. The colored peoples have al- 
ways been oppressed by the whites. 
There are millions of us in East Asia, 
hundreds of millions, and we should 



unite together and prosper together 
so that not only can we be on a level 
with the West but even rise above it! 
Japan feels that she should be the 
leader in this crusade because, as you 
will admit, she is the strongest." 

HAD NO LOVE FOR JAPS 

I had sat up in my chair. Here was 
what I had been waiting for and could 
not print it! I never did have any 
love for the Japs, and in my part of 
the Philippines I was sure nobody did 
either. We liked the Chinese — inci- 
dentally they controlled more than 
90% of the retail trade there — but we 
never went out of our way to be 
friendly with the Japs. I think it was 
because we seemed to have an instinc- 
tive fear of them. No one wants a 
leader that he fears instead of loves. 

"But suppose," I told Uchiyama, 
"that some of the East Asian peoples do 
not want to unite together under Ja- 
pan's leadership. Take China—" 

"Ah, there you are!" Uchiyama in- 
terrupted me. "The Chinese people, 
some of them, do not understand Ja- 
pan's true aim. Japan wants to unite 
China, to make her a strong, prosper- 
ous nation. Japan is a true friend of 
China. Japan wants to help China 
improve herself for her own good as 
well as the good of all East Asia. The 
countries of East Asia are like the 
hngers of your hand. If one of your 
angers is ailing, the whole hand will 
slso be ailing. It will not do for one 
East Asian countrv to be prosperous 
and the others not." 

JAPS WOULD GIVE FREEDOM 

But suppose some of these countries, 
say the Philippines, do not want to be 
told by Japan what to do; suppose 
they want to be free to make their 
own choices as to the friends they want 
to make and keep? You would grant 
that freedom, wouldn't you?" 

Uchiyama was firm. "We must se1 
it down as fact," he said, hitting his 
desk with the butt of his pencil, "that 
the whole Orient is ailing. I ask 
you— it you were a doctor and your 
patient wouldn't take the medicine 
which you knew would cure h : m. what 
would you do?" 

"I see your point," I said. "Ram 
it down his throit, I suopose. But 
your analogy is dubious, for your ar- 
gument that Japan's medicine is the 
best for the patient in this case is 
debatable. At any rate, if I may 
pursue your point, in cases where there 



is doubt as to the nature of a patient's 
ailment, a good doctor usually calls in 
other good doctors for consultation. 
This, I am sorry to say, Japan failed 
to do in China." 

COUNTRIES MUST UNITE 

Uchiyama's voice was scornful. "A 
good doctor," he said, "does not con- 
sult other doctors when he knows that 
they are interested not in keeping the 
patient alive but in hastening^ his 
death! And as for your other *point. 
there is no other medicine for the ail- 
ing Orient. The countries of East 
Asia must unite together if it mus t 
do away with white exploitation and 
economic slavery! We must fight for 
equality with the West!" 

Uchiyama paused and I made no 
effort to say anything.^ "Take your 
own personal case here," he said. "You 
are attending the University of Wash- 
ington. Do you, in your heart, feel 
that you are a part of this University? 
Do you enjoy fully its social life? Af- 
ter you are graduated, are you confi- 
dent that you can get a job in your 
chosen profession here?" He smiled, 
a faintly sarcastic smile. "Ah, you are 
silent. And yet you belong to Amer- 
ica. And because of that you should 
talk as loudly as the others about 
American 'democracy'. If America is 
attacked, you will fight for America, 
not because you want to — mark this, 
my friend — but because you have to. 
Your enthusiasm for American democ- 
racy is only on the surface. You can- 
not be truly a part of America be- 
cause America is a white man's coun- 
try! You — " 

PHONE BELL ENDS TALK 

Just then his private telephone rang, 
and Uchiyama indicated that the inter- 
view was over. 

"I am very glad to have met you," 
he said, rising and offering his hand. 
"T hope to see you in Manila where 
we can discuss these things in, shall T 
hope, less hostile surroundings?" 

"I hope so," I said simply, as 1 
shook his hands and went out the door. 

Some day I hope I'll see Uchiyama 
again. Then I can tell him that the 
21.000 Filininos who lie in nameless 
graves in Bataan. fought for America 
and American democracy, not because 
thev had to, but because thev were 
defending their right to be free to 
choose the kind of life they wanted to 
live. ?nd the friends they wanted t<-> 
make and keep. 



fyjouember, 194 

Senator Tydings Urges U. S. Take 
Mandated Isles From Japs After War 

Chairman of Senate Committee on Insular Affairs says Philippines 
will want America to have land, sea, and air bases nearby. 

To guarantee the future security of both the Philippines and the United 
States in the Far East, Senator Tydings, Democrat, of Maryland, declared this 
Government should take possession of the Japanese mandated islands in the Pacific 
after the war. 

Speaking in the National Radio Forum, arranged by The Star and broad- 
cast over the Blue Network, the Senator charged that Japan is using all her 
mandated islands as "anchored airplane 
bases to hold our Navy at bay." 

"We should own these islands for 
our protection in the Pacific," he said. 
"Japan now owns or has mandated to 
it. the Marianas Islands which are 
strung out north and south between 
Hawaii and the Philippines. It like- 
wise has control over the Caroline and 
Marshall Islands, which He about half 
way between the Philippines and Ha- 
waii. . . . They are really advance 
islands of Hawaii. 

EXPECTS PHILIPPINE CONSENT 

"Likewise, the Philippines, I am 
sure, will want us to have suitable 
land, naval and air bases in the Philip- 
pine Islands from which we could in 
the future stop any attack across the 
pacific toward the United States, and 
these Philippine bases would likewise 
be a protection for the independence 
of the Philippines as well. We should 
secure these bases from the Philippines 
only with their mutual consent, which 
] a m sure they will gladly give." 

Predicting that the Japanese would 
be driven out of the Philippines and 
orderly democratic processes of law 
an d order and election restored be- 
fore July 4, 1946," the Senator said 
it was proposed "to give the Filipinos 
their independence then and there. 

This would be authorized in legisla- 
tio n already pending, but the Senator 
r edicted that further legislation soon 
Jvould be introduced dealing with bases 
jn the Philippines, with the matter of 
gecuring reparations for the property 
the Japs have damaged in the Philip- 
pines, for sound trade relations be- 
[^een the Philippine Islands and the 
United States and for the security of 
an independent Philippines as well as 
for the security of the United States." 




^Senator 'DifdingS 



QUESTIONS CONSIDERED 

"The whole subject of the Philippine 
matter, both present and future," Sen- 
ator Tydings said, "has been consid- 
ered by President Roosevelt, President 
Manuel Quezon of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth, now living in Washing- 
ton; various department of our Gov- 
ernment interested in the Philippines 
and by Congress." 

Japanese radio propaganda is being 
directed against the United States in 
the Philippines, the speaker said, ad- 
ding: 

"They are now treating the Filipinos 
with great kindness, flattering them and 
continually, day after day, making 
propaganda to win them away from 
American affection." 

Asked by Edward Boykin, who pre- 
sided during the forum radio pro- 
gram, what the Japanese were telling 
the Filipinos, Senator Tydings ex- 
plained : 

"The Japanese say the United States 
never intended to give the Filipinos in- 
dependence, that we are insincere, that 
we only want to exploit and use the 



Filip inos, that w r e never had any busi- 
ness there in the first place. 

FOSTER PREJUDICE 

"The Japs say to the Filipinos: "You 
are a brown people, we Japs are yel- 
low. We are both colored races. The 
Americans are white/ Further, the 
Japs say: 'Your islands lie close to 
Japan. We produce different things, 
not the same things. What you pro- 
duce we need. What we produce you 
need. As we are races living together 
in the same section of the world and 
our trade is beneficial to each other, 
why don't you join with us in driving 
the white man out of Asia. We are 
all Asiatics. The white man is here 
to exploit Asia. Join with us now 
while we have a chance. Kill the 
Americans; they are your real enemies, 
not your friends.' " 

Such propaganda has not been suc- 
cessful up to the present, the Senator 
indicated. "Fortunately, our record is 
so unselfish toward the Filipino peo- 
ple," he said, "that our friendly rela- 
tions with them of the last 40 years 
furnish a concrete example that these 
Japanese statements are lies. The over- 
whelming masses of the Filipinos like 
the United States are loyal to the Unit- 
ed States and appreciate that the Amer- 
ican Government has scrupulously kept 
its word, have helped them and have 
treated them as equals. All this past 
history is standing us in good stead 



now. 



First Army Chief Began 
Career In Philippines 

Lieutenant General Hugh A. Drum, 
commander of the Eastern Defense 
Command and the First Army, who has 
recently been named chairman of the 
Inter-American Defense Board, is an- 
other of America's military leaders 
who began their military careers in 
the Philippines. Lieutenant General 
Drum was awarded the Oak Leaf Clus- 
ter to the Distinguished Service Medal 
for his work as commander of the 
Eastern Defense Command and the 
First Army. 

General Drum was born at Fi ! 
Brady, Michigan, in 1879. He received 
his commission as a second lieutenant 
of Infantry in the Regular Army in 
1898. the year in which his father. 
Captain John Drum, was killed in the 
battle of San Juan. Santiago. Cuba. 

continued on page 26 



26. 



taafi> 



Osmena Explains Action 

. . . continuad from page 9 

accept this congressional action which 
is intended to safeguard the best inter- 
ests of the two peoples. 

"As for me, I consider it my ines- 
capable duty to continue giving to 
President Quezon's leadership my ut- 
most support and cooperation so that 
the Commonwealth Government now 
in Washington may render the great- 
est service to the Philippines and the 
Filipinos. It is my desire to assist 
the Commonwealth Government in its 
endeavor to make every Filipino, 
wherever he may be, feel that he is 
close to his government, which is al- 
ways solicitous of his interest and wel- 
fare. 

"Fellow Countrymen: These are 
critical days for individuals as well 
as nations. Our sense of responsibil- 
ity as a people and the strength of our 
national solidarity have once more 
been rented. We have again proved 
our unity. With this action, we have 
shown the world that when the free- 
dom of our country and the. validity of 
our commitments are at stake, there 
are no differences among us and selfish 
considerations carry no weight in our 
decisions." 



First Army Chief 



continued from page 25 



Assigned to the 12th Infantry he 
served at Jefferson Barracks, Missouri 
and Fort Riley. Kansas, until Febru- 
ary, 1899, when he sailed with his 
regiment for the Philippine Islands. 
He participated in many successful 
battles. He learned about' war by be- 

,Ilg l n Vai V nd he learned quickly 
and well. During the course of a 
campaign against Aguinaldo in North- 
ern Luzon Lieutenant Drum was "cit 
ed in orders" for the capture of an 
insurgent band in Zambales Province 
f\ mo ? th * later he was with Gen- 
eral Frank D Baldwin, fighting the 
Moros in Mindanao. Following the 
battle of Bayan he was awarded the 
Silver Star for gallantry b action. 
His lather, Captain John Drum had 
once been the recipient of this award 
The son was prompt in emulating his 
father's example. 



Quezon-Osmena In Office 

. . . continued from page 7 

soon as war conditions will permit, in- 
stead of requiring them to wait until 
July % 1946. 

The problem of the Philippine Pres- 
idency arises in this way: 

President Quezon was elected in 
1935 for a term of six years. At his 
own insistence the length of the term 
was fixed constitutionally at six years, 
with a prohibition against a second 
successive term. 

QUEZON FOR 8-YEAR LIMIT 

Later the Filipinos amended the con- 
stitution to make the term of office 
four years and to permit a second 
term. Quezon opposed this change, 
but when it appeared to be inevitable 
he insisted upon insertion of a pro- 
viso that no President should serve for 
more than eight years, or two terms. 

At the expiration of his first term of 
six years, Quezon was re-elected for a 
four-year term, but he served notice 
during the campaign that he would 
serve only two of those years — a total 
of eight years. Not only that, he con- 
ditioned his candidacy upon an under- 
standing that his vice-president, Mr. 
Osmena, be re-elected and that he be 
designated to serve out the last two 
years as President. 

Removal of the Philippine Govern- 
ment to Washington after the Japanese 
occupation disrupted the entire plan 
and President Quezon took the prob- 
lem to Congress and the White House. 



Philippines To Join 
Relief Association 

President Quezon has notified the 
State Department that his government 
•'is ready to sign at the earliest pos- 
sible moment' the drait agreement for 
a United Nations Relief and Rehabili- 
tation Administration. 

"The Philippine government i s pre- 
pared to sign the agreement without 
any reservation," President Quezon 
wrote Secretary of State Cordel] Hull- 
Vice President Sergio Osmena will 
sign the agreement for the Philippines 
in the White House on or about No- 
vember 9. 

Pres'dent Quezon has designated Joa- 
quin M. Elizalcle, Resident Commis- 
sioner of the Philippines, as the Phil 
ippine representative on the Council 
of the United Nations Relief and Re 
habilitation Administration. Dr. Ar- 
turo B. Rotor, Dr. Urbano A. Zafra, 
Sebastian Ugarte and Amando Dalisav 
have been appointed advisers and as- 
sistants to Commissioner Elizalde. 



In letters dispatched today to Sena- 
tor Tydings and Representative Bell, 
President Quezon, Vice-President Os- 
mena and members of their war cabi- 
net said they were submitting the whole 
matter for review and "such action as 
in their wisdom will best serve the in- 
terests of the Filipino people, their 
constitutional government and the Gov- 
ernment of the United States during 
this emergency." 



The effects of the desperate resistance offered by the Philippine 
Army and United States forces on Bataan, holding as they did a 
sizeaMs portion of Japanese strength, were now being felt 

The major miscalculation of the Japanese was the apparent ex- 
po- tation that the Russian Army would collapse under the German 
grand assault then underway against Moscow, which ended in the 
first winter fiasco. Also unanticipated was the prolonged defense 
of the Philippine Islands, which upset their timetable for other offen- 
sive operations in the Southwest Pacific, including Australia. — 
General George C. Marshall, Biennial Report, 1941 to 1943. 



Vjoveinber, 1943 



27 



PHILIPPINE 
NATIONAL BANK 

New York Agency 



2 5 BROADWAY 

NEW YORK CITY 



Planes will be tailored to measure in the 



In this war, there are scores of different 
types of planes, each designed for a par- 
ticular kind of service. Among them are 
huge United transport planes, flying 
routes in this country and overseas on 
strictly military missions. . . . Other 
United planes, the famous Mainliners 
^e flying over the Main Line Airway] 
providing the fast, dependable passenger, 
mail and express service so vital to our 
fight for Victory. 

How big will tomorrow's planes be? 
How many people will they carry? Mow 
fast will they travel? How far will 
they fly? 

You will answer these questions. For 
planes will be built to suit your needs 



and serve your purposes . . . practically 
"tailored to measure." Along the Main 
Line Airway, for example, there will 
probably be four basic types of service 
for passengers, mail and express. 

There will be de luxe transcontinental 
flights between New York and the Pacific 
Coast, with huge airplanes making only 
one or two stops en route. Another type 
or coast-to-coast plane will serve major 
intermediate cities. 

A third type will supply "feeder" 
sen-ice from nearby territory to division 
points along the Main Line Airway. 
Other planes will be especially designed 
to carry only cargo. 

Present LTnited Mainliners are, in a 
sense, tailored to measure for they rep- 



resent the product of 17 years of air- 
line experience. Their splendid wartime 
performance both at home and abroad 
attests the policy of building the plane 
to do the job at hand. And the steady 
advances in aircraft development which 
are taking place today will make trans- 
port planes even more efficient in the 
coming Age of Flight. 

* Buy War Bonds and Stamps for Victory 

UNITED 

AIR H LINES 



THE MAIN LINE AIRWAY 




EXCLUSIVE 



Filipino Fighters Saluted 
By Quezon, U. S. Leaders 



page 17 



Roosevelt Declares Filipinos 
Fully Earned Independence 



page 13 



Islands Join United Nations 
In Relief, Rehabilitation Work 



pages 14 - 15 



FOR VICTORY 




BUY 

UNITED 
STATES 
SAVINGS 
BONDS 

STAMPS 




Speeding Reconquest of the Philippines 



DiUGnttf'j^ivG cenU 



a co. 



n 



£a 1 



jcilcicin, 



r^TT"D DP flPiPD Q "WDTTT the editors welcome 

UUil il LaIWJ Hi 11 O Will 1 JL COMMENTS FROM THE REAI 



READERS 



"I have been very much interested in 
your magazine, and feel that it is fulfilling 
an important role." 

Col. Robert H. Offley 
Commanding Officer, ist Filipino Infantry 



"For the past several months I have 
been reading and obtaining much good in- 
formation and comfort from vour news 
magazine BAA AN. This informative and 
truly great publication has been praised by 
several professors here at Northwestern 
I niversity and is being talked about in 
more than one class. 

Miss Lucille Marty 
Sorthzvestern University, Chicago 



'I have certainly enjoyed reading vour 
interesting magazine, B ATA AN. Vour ar- 
ticles on the guerrilla fighting give me 
hopes that my son is among them, as he 
is listed as 'missing in action.' Mav be in 
some future article you can explain that 
slogan Remember the Philippines" Ours 
as members of the Bataan Relief Organiza- 
tion, is 'We will not let them down.' " 
Mrs. Alta G. Sapp 
Chicago, Illinois 



BATAAN is a splendid magazine and 
should be in every school library in the 
United States. ^ our previous editions have 
given us valuable information about the 
Philippines and the great work which your 
puohG officials are doing in Washington to 
help accomplish the ultimate realization of 
those who fought and died in Bataan and 
U>rregidor-the establishment of your Re- 
public. 

Mrs. Madalynne Young 
I. os Angeles. California. 



1 he fnne appearance and most informa- 
tive a "vGles which appear in your publi 
cation, BATAAN, impels me to enter my 

here* uh. With every good wish to you 
t<>] the success o| VO ur great service to 
vour people and country/' 

James M. r 0S s 
•\^c )'ork City 



pou should be congratulated m this 
splendid publication, BATAAN. 1 am con 
fideni that such a vehicle of information 
which IS vitally needed at this crucial pe- 
riod <>! Philippine-American history win 
continue to keep going because 1 am sure 
thai it has a distinct place in keeping th'- 
friendly and proper relations alive between 
the Philippines and the United States." 

S, I- Paulus Director 
School Assembly Service, Chicago 



"I salute you (men of the Fili- 
pino Infantry) with my hand and 
with my heart ... for now you 
are the guardians of the high 
trust so bravely horn by your 
countrymen during the glorious, 
desperate days on Bataan and 
Corregidor last year. You are 
dedicated here to continue to 
wage that good fight until the 
enemy is driven out of our coun- 
try and the Axis are beaten down 
to their knees." — President Man- 
uel L. Quezon. 



"We enjoy immensely reading your very 
interesting and informative magazine, BA- 
TAAN. We hope that even- American 
mother in this country who has a son who 
fought in that part of the world will have 
the opportunity to read your splendid pub- 
lication." 

Mrs. Opal BarthoLF 
Missoula, Montana 



"May I express to you my sincere con- 
gratulations for the great service you are 
rendering to your people and to vour 
country in publishing BATAAN. This mag- 
azine has certainly opened our exes to the 
seemingly unbreakable tie that* binds us 
together— specially after the tragic events 
recorded in the foxholes of Bataan." 

Mrs. Josephine Fontana 

Pence, Wisconsin 



To BATAAN Subscribers 
Have You Moved? 

If so, please let us know your 
new address. When writing, 
give us your OLD address as 
well as the new one, and do 
not forget the Postal Zone Num- 
ber if you live in a city. 
Your cooperation will be ap- 
preciated and will give you 
better and faster service. 

Circulation Department 
BATAAN MAGAZINE 

424 Lamont St., N. W. 
Washington, D. C. 



Quezon Praises Youths' 
Role In Fighting War 

President Quezon of the Philippines, 
in an International Students' Day state- 
ment, declared that "it is youth that 
is fighting this war and it is youth 
that is keeping the flame of resistance 
burning in the occupied countries. ' 

President Quezon's message reads: 

"To turn our reverential thoughs to- 
day to all those students the world 
over who have paid with their lives 
that freedom may not perish from the 
earth is a sacred duty. It is youth 
that is fighting this war and it is youth 
that is keeping the flame of resistance 
burning in the occupied countries 
through the total blackout of totalita- 
rian invasion. There is indeed a vast 
surging of resistance behind the enemy 
lines which has merely been dammed 
m and which I have no doubt will 
rush down in a torrent of defiance 
when the opportune moment comes. 

"That moment is coming soon. Soon 
this source of stored-up strength and 
passion will be tapped to the full. Soon, 
in Europe, in the Far East, in the 
Southwest Pacific, our allies every- 
where will arise to strike the invader 
from behind while he stands up to 
meet the thrust of our counter-attack- 
in of forces. Well do the Japanese and 
Germans know the cruelties they have 
inflicted and the devastation thev have 
wrought on the peoples of the United 
Nations. 

"The thousands in Bataan and Cor- 
regidor and the many other thousands 
in other war fronts who gave up their 
lives in the defense of their country 
and of freedom, must be avenged. A 
great number of them were students 
who put aside their books, when war 
was declared, to shoulder a gun. I" 
their memory and that of the hundreds 
of thousands all over the world who 
have fallen victims to the attack of 
the aggressor powers, let us render 
today our tribute of admiration and 
as an earnest of our gratitude, pledge 
to them the best that there is in us 
that victory may specdilv be achieved." 



VOLUME I 
NUMBER 9 





DECEMBER 
1943 



AN INDEPENDENT PHILIPPINE NEWSMAGAZINE 



DICK FITZPATRICK 

EXECUTIVE EDITOR 



DIOSDADO M. YAP 

EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 
CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 

CARLOS BULOSAN and CAYETANO C. NAGAC 



J. C. DIONISIO, Pacific Coast Representative 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR 



Nemesxo M. Salazar and Jose B. Totaan, Chicago Representatives 
Bernardino D. Arado, Benny O. Escobido and Ang^l P. Pingpong, Territory of Hawaii Representatives 



FRONT COVER — Shows the Big Three of Philippine - American 
Affairs . . . President Roosevelt, President Quezon, and General 
MacArthur. 



(^Lridinal, 1943 



Christmas, 1943, is different from any other Christ- 
mas in the first nineteen hundred odd years since its 
institution. We realize, of course, that it is the anni- 
versary of the birth of the Son of God ; but this year 
it has more meaning than usual. 

When we pause to think, this Christmas, 1949. as 
on all others, we see the Christian virtues of Faith, 
Hope and Charity are not dead but live anew. 

We have Faith, not only in the greatness of God, 
but in the final success in the cause of the Four Free- 
doms — which are Christian freedoms. 

We have Hope, not only in Salvation, but in the 
ability of men to live together in Peace. Particularly 
since the Son of Man, whose birth we remember, was 
the Prince of Peace. 

We know that Charity, not only for the poorest 
here, but for the millions who suffered under the re- 
incarnation of the Devil — totalitarianism — will be car- 
ried out in the spirit of Christ. 

Faith, Hope and Charity are part of the code which 
assures us of Victory and permits us to carry out the 
difficult tasks that confront us. 

Yes, Christmas, 1943, has special significance, and 
the greetings of this year are more sincere and heart- 
felt than any other in the past! 

DICK FITZPATRICK. 



Jku Wontk 

Our Readers Write 2 

Bataan Will Be Avenged 5 

Editorials ' ........... 6 

Philippines Join Other United Nations 

In Relief and Rehabilitation Program 7 

Aircraft Carrier Bataan Signifies 

U. S. Pledge to Redeem Philippines 8 

Coop Savings Plan Offers Filipinos 

Chance to Aid Islands' Reconstruction 8 
Filipinos in U. S. Army Set Records 

For Hard Work in Learning War 9 

Japs Jockeyed Into Weak Positions 

Face Dilemma In Southwest Pacific 10 

General MacArthur Needs 500 Planes 

To Take Philippines, Chandler Says 11 

Quezons Tells Philippines 

He'll Return With MacArthur H 

State Dept. Publication Reveals Hull 

Expected Jap Aggression in 1937 12 

FDR Says Filipinos Fully Earned Freedom 

In Commemorating Comomnwealth's 8th Year 13 
Future Peace In Pacific Depends on Close 

Cooperation Between U. S., Islands — Quezon 17 
Filipino Soldiers Get Bolos, Prefer 

To Carve Up Invading Japanese 18 

Filipino Soldiers Ready to Stamp Out 

Japs From Islands, Soldier Says 19 

Attack on Japan From India May 

Start at Ceylon, Col. Lanza Predicts 20 

General Valdes Says Filipinos in Jap Regime 

Are Loyal, Merely Make Best of Bad Situation 21 
Hawes Recalls Officials' Pilgrimage 

To Witness Commonwealth's Birth 22 

Cash To Be Sent Island 

Internees, U. S. Reports 23 

Mister Bulosan Comes to Washington 23 

Osmena Pays High Tribute 

To United States Goodwill 26 



BATAAN IS PUBLISHED MONTHLY AT WASHINGTON, D. C. EDITORIAL OFFICES AT 1300 NATIONAL PRESS BUILDNG. ADVERTSING 
AND CIRCULATION OFFICES AT 424 LAMONT ST., N. W., WASHINGTON, D. C. SUBSCRIPTION RATE: S3.00 FOR ONE YEAR — SINGLE 
COPIES 25 CENTS .... "ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER APRIL 16, 1943, AT THE POST OFFICE AT WASHINGTON, 
D. C UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3, 1879." COPYRIGHT 1943 BY DIOSDADO M. YAP, EDITOR AND PUBLISHER. 



4 



Filipinos Train For Combat 

The U. S. Army is proud of the First and Second Filipino 
Regiments — touch fighting men of the same mold as the 
32,000 Filipinos who saw action under General MacArthur 
on Bataan, in Corregidor, and elsewhere in the Battle of 
the Philippines. 

The Filipino regiments are an outgrowth of a special 
Filipino battalion erected by the War Department in 
February, 1942. 

The original Filipino battalion rapidly grew in size and 
soon expanded into the First Filipino Regiment. Subse- 
quently, as more and mere Filipinos came into the serv- 
ice, the Second Filipino Regiment was activated. 




U. S. Signal Corps Photos 




In the two regiments are serving a number of Filipino 
veterans who were among the 92,000 Filipino troops who 
fought beside General MacArthur's 14,000 Americans 
against the Japanese invaders of the Philippines. Typical 
of these veterans of the Philippine Campaign is Sergeant 
Eustacio Corpuz, who was wounded and crossed the 
Pacific to the United States on a hospital ship with both 
legs in plaster casts. 

Fifty Filipino commissioned officers are on duty with the 
regiments, among them a number of West Point graduates. 

— U. S. War Department Bureau of 
Public Relations 



December* 1943. 



5 



Bataan Will Be Avenged 

General Valdes, Philippine Secretary of National Defense, describes heroism of 
Filipinos and Americans who died for liberty as a feat that will live forever in the 
annals of gallantry. 



By Major General Basilio J. Valdes * 
Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 

On December 7, 1941, without warning, at Pearl Harbor, Midway and in the 
Philippines — Japan attacked. Only 16,000 American troops were in the Philip- 
pines when the Japanese attacked 300,000 strong. Pearl Harbor lay shattered, 
a smoking, twisted mass of wreckage. The Japanese believed that the conquest 
of the Philippines would be a simple matter of a few days, strenuous only to the 
extent of wiping out a handful of Americans. Then, they believed, the conquest 
of the entire Southwest Pacific would 



proceed apace — there was Australia 
and New Zealand ahead, and later 
Hawaii, and then — who knows? — per- 
haps the American mainland. 



The effects of the desperate resist- 
ance offered by the Philippine Army 
ond United States forces on Bataan. 
holding as they did a sizeable portion 
of Japanese strength, were now being 
felt . . . Also unanticipated was the 
prolonged defense of the Philippine 
Islands, which upset their timetable for 
other offensive operations in the South- 
west Pacific, including Australia. 

— General George C. Marshall. 



FILIPINOS LOYAL TO AMERICA 

But a bitter surprise was in store 
for them. The devotion of the seven- 
teen million Filipinos linked them sol- 
idly with America. Ninety-two thou- 
sand Filipino soldiers leaped to the 
side of the Americans, all under the 
command of that great soldier, Gen- 
eral Douglas MacArthur. Overnight, 
the Filipinos became a world - wide 
symbol of hard-hitting, clogged cour- 
age. Twenty thousand Filipino sol- 
diers were killed in the Battle of the 
Philippines, and lie today in their jun- 
gle graves beside their American fel- 
low-heroes. For months that battle 
raged, and when it was done the Unit- 
ed States and the United Nations had 
been given a precious respite in which 
to mobilize their far-flung Pacific de- 
fenses. On the bloodstained peninsula 
of Bataan had been fought one of the 
greatest delaying actions in all mili- 
tary history. 

Those are the facts, simple, undeni- 
able, understandable. They are the 

♦ Reprinted with permission of The Cavalry Journal 



answer to those who do not have faith 
in international cooperation. They 
are an answer written in blood of the 
Filipino and American martyrs to the 
cause of human freedom. 

As President Quezon has said: "The 
Filipino people fought back because 
they knew that America had made a 
promise and that she would keep that 
promise. When we fought for your 
flag, we knew we were fighting for our 
own freedom. When we resisted the 
invasion of our country, we did so 
because we knew the Philippines was 
our country, not only de facto but de 
jure. And we were loyal to you, to 
your flag, and to your country, not be- 
caue under international law we owed 
you that allegiance, but because you 
have won our undying friendship and 
affection — because you did by us what 
no other colonizing power has done 
by the people who had fallen under 
their sway. The presence of your 
flag in the Philippines was a symbol 
of our freedom. It was there only to 
allow you to finish the work you had 
started to do — to help set up an in- 
dependent Philippine Republic." 

When the Filipino people resisted 
the Japanese invaders with their very 
lives, they gave final proof that there 
was a nation fit to be respected as the 
equal t Q any on earth, not in size or 
wealtK but in the stout heart and na- 
tional dignity which are the true meas- 
ure of a people. 

— Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

HEROES OF BATAAN HONORED 

Much has been said and written 
about the magnificent stand made by 
the combined forces of the American 



and Philippine Armies in Luzon. Ba- 
taan, and Corregidor. I saw those 
boys fight, and they deserve fully ev- 
ery bit of the praise that has been 
given them. 

The Congressional Medal of Honor 
was awarded to Sergeant Jose Calugas, 
Battery "B," 88th Field Artillery Phil- 
ippine Scouts. The action for which 
the award was made took place near 
Culis. Bataan Province, Philippine Is- 
lands, January 16, 1942. A battery 
gun position was bombed and shelled 
by the enemy until one gun was put 
out of commission and all of the can- 
noneers were killed or wounded. Ser- 
geant Calugas, a mess sergeant of an- 
other battery, voluntarily and without 
orders ran 1000 yards across the steel- 
swept area to the gun position. There 
he organized a volunteer squad which 
placed the gun back in commission and 
fired effectively against the enemy, 
although the position remained under 
constant and heavy Japanese artillery 
fire. 

Paralleling Sergeant Calugas' gallan- 
try on land were the exploits in the 
sky by Captain Jesus A. Villamor of 
the Philippine Army Air Corps, who 
was awarded the Distinguished Service 
Cross. In the face of heavy fire from 
strong enemy air forces he led his 
flight of three pursuit planes into ac- 
tion against attacking Japanese planes. 
His flight routed the attacking planes 
and prevented appreciable damage to 
material at this station. 

On another occasion, during an at- 
tack on the airdrome at Batangas by 
approximately fifty - four Japanese 
bombers. Captain Villamor led six pur- 
suit planes and engaged the enemy. 
By this action against enormous odds, 
part of the attacking planes were driven 
off and one of the enemy planes was 
destroyed b) fire from Captain \ ilia 
mor's plane. 

There is also the story of two Q- 
boats of the Offshore Patrol, which 
were on duh in Manila Bay off the 
east coast of Bataan when a group of 
nine enemy dive bombers appeared 
and began attacking nearby shore ob- 
. . . continued on pace 12 



-d3a,taa,n> 




Filipino Fighters 

A Filipino soldier occupies a most 
unique position in the whole United 
States army. Whereas members of 
other American fighting units abso- 
lutely need re-orientation program to 
give them an insight into the causes 
of war and reason for their beino; in 
the army, Filipinos can do away with 
such a program without impairing the 
least their fighting determination. 

For more than any other American 
soldier, Filipinos feel the effects of war 
most directly and most deeply, since 
their own homeland has been and still 
is being ravaged by a ruthless and im- 
placable enemy. And not until this 
enemy is driven away from the Islands 
will Filipinos everywhere feel peace in 
their minds and in their hearts. 

They do not need to be told what 

L^w 6 ! 6 ^^ for; the ^ alread Y 

KINUW about it many months asro. 

Bolo News, Camp Beale, Calif. 



Congratulations! 

The editors of B ATA AN agree 
wholeheartedly with the views ex- 
pressed in the editorial above, reprint- 
ed from the Bolo News. 

The editors of this publication wel- 
come this opportunity in the first an- 

tTaxi Ppine Arm >' numbei ' of BA- 
1AA1N to express the appreciation and 
gratitude of the Filipinos the world 
over for the part being played in this 
war by the two Filipino regiments in 
the United States Army and other Fili- 
pinos in individual units of the Ameri- 
can armed forces. 

The Filipino fighters are carrying 
on the traditions of their land. When 
they pass on in years to come, they 
want the men who died on Bataan and 
Corregidor to grasp their hands and 
say, "Well done"! 



There is singleness of purpose among 
Filipinos today. Their aim in life is 
to do everything that will help speed 
the liberation of their homeland. Noth- 
ing, not even personal safety or profit, 
can come before this. 

The young men in the United States 
Army typify this spirit. Read the 
story in this issue on page 9 which 
tells that Filipinos are so interested in 
learning how to become effective fight- 
ers that they do not even know when 
to stop to eat. Read the story of Cor- 
poral Julius B. Ruiz which tells why a 
young Filipino is so interested in this 
worldwide struggle for freedom. He 
predicts on page 19 that Filipinos will 
make good account of themselves just 
as Philippine Army Chief of Staff, 
General Valdes, assures us on page 5 
that Bataan will be avenged. 

These articles should give one an 
idea of what the Filipino fighter wants 
and how hard he is striving to accom- 
plish that goal. 

Readers are urged to carefully study 
the story written by BATAAN's Pacific 
Coast correspondent, J. C. Dionisio, re- 
porting a speech of General Valdes in 
Stockton a few weeks ago. It contains 
some information that will be new to 
most people. 

We feel sure that readers of BA- 
1AAN, after looking at the above ar- 
ticles, will feel privileged, as do its 
editors, to congratulate the men in the 
Armed Forces of the United States 
who are working constantly so that 
many of us can return to our home- 
land and that thousands of Filipinos 
daily suffering from the presence and 
deeds of Japanese can once again en- 
joy freedom. 



"The loyalty and courage of 
the Filipino people are an asset 
of incalculable value in the strug- 
gle for freedom which the world 
now witnesses. I think it espe- 
cially fitting that the soldierly 
qualities of the Filini nos in the 
United States are thus to be rec- 
ognized. I am sure they will am- 
ply justify the confidence which 
we are reposing in them." — Pres- 
ident Franklin D. Roosevelt. 



Policing The Pacific 

Everyone in the world hopes for 
peace. This is particularly true of 
Filipinos, who were trained by Ameri- 
cans in the meaning of freedom, only 
to have it smothered by the Japs. But 
it is certain that Filipinos who are de- 
voting all their energy to regaining 
that freedom will work equally hard 
to prevent any foe from again depriv- 
ing them of that which they most clear- 
ly love — freedom. 

It is evident that there is a need to 
police the world. Had there been a 
world police force to stop the Japs 
in Manchuria in 1931, the world would 
not be plagued with a global war to- 
day. The Japs were the first to ag- 
gress. The Japs were the first to keep 
representatives of other countries from 
inspecting the lands that were man- 
dated to them as a result of the peace 
treaty. Had there been definite infor- 
mation that the little isles under the 
control of the Japanese were being 
made into impregnable fortresses, steps 
could have been taken to stop them 
then. 

Now, however, post-war planners 
must be discussing the question of po- 
licing the Pacific after this war. Many 
nations have interests in that body of 
water. The main independent nation 
in the Pacific after July 4, 1946— 
perhaps even before — will be the Phil- 
ippine Republic. 

The Philippine nation will be vi- 
tally interested in maintaining peace in 
that part of the world. Thus, we feel 
that the Philippines should have an 
important role in deciding the policies 
of keeping peace in the Pacific and in 
the actual policing of that area. 

Filipinos are proven fighters. 

It is their very life that another war 
would crush. Filipino leaders saw, 
long before this war came, the great 
need for defending the Philippines. 
They received only partial cooperation 
from those who were responsible for 
the program. 

Sea and air power are the prime 
forces in patroling. Thus, with some 
planes and ships which the Philip- 
pines would buy outright or obtain 
under some kind of lend-lease or re- 
habilitation agreement, Filipinos could 
be instrumental in maintaining the 
peace w r hich they so warmly desire. 
They are the natural ones for the job. 



1943. 



7 



Philippines Join Other United Nations 
In Relief And Rehabilitation Program 

Vice President Osmena sees Islands gaining definite quota of relief 
supplies and then aiding in reconstruction of neighboring areas. 

t Vice President Sergio Osmena, after signing for the Philippines the United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration agreement at the White House, 
stated that two significant developments are expected to arise from the activities 
of this new international body. 

"The first," said Vice President Osmena, "is that our country will be assured 
f>f a definite quota of relief materials that will be urgently needed in the areas 
to be reoccupied in the process of re- 

lstration activities, our own plans for 
relief and rehabilitation will be co- 
ordinated with the plans for the read- 
justment of agriculture and industry 
now being formulated under the Phil- 
ippine Postwar Planning Board. 

WILL AFFECT ISLANDS' ECONOMY 

"For, after all, it must be recognized 
that any international policy on relief 
and rehabilitation will necessarily in- 
fluence the measures and policies for 
the long-run development of agricul- 
ture and industry in our country". We 
have every reason to expect, therefore, 
that anv form of collaboration with an 
international organization on relief will 
tacihtate the readjustment of Philip- 
pine economic and social life after the 
war along the lines of international 
amity. 

"We Filipinos are happy to have 
Had this opportunity of taking a re- 
sponsible part in bringing into being 
an international organization which has 
tor its primary purpose the relief and 
rehabilitation of peoples and areas af- 
lected by the war. We look forward 
with hope and confidence to the salu- 
tary results of the future activities of 
the United Nations Relief and Reha- 
bilitation Administration. We take 
pnde in sharing with the other mem- 
bets of the United Nations the rights 
as well as the responsibilities of this 
international body." 



gram was devoted to a discussion of 
Philippine - American relations. The 
Congressman had as his guest. Dr. 
Diosdado M. Yap. authoritv in the 
field. 



taking the Philippines. 

"In the second place, the Philip- 
pines will be able to make its own con- 
tribution as soon as practicable for 
the relief and rehabilitation of neigh- 
boring areas or of other countries that 
will be reoccupied by the United Na- 
tions forces." 

COMMONWEALTH HAS BEEN PLANNING 

The text of Vice President Osmena's 
statement follows: 

"As one of the signatories of the 
United Nations Relief and Rehabilita- 
tion Administration agreement, the 
Philippines looks forward to a com- 
prehensive program of relief and re- 
habilitation. Of course, the Philip- 
pine Government here in Washington 
has been busy drawing up plans of its 
own in regard to relief and rehabilita- 
tion of the Filipino people. 

"Under the agreement just signed, 
however, we have to coordinate our 
own relief and reconstruction activities 
with the policies decided upon by the 
Council of the United Nations Relief 
and Rehabilitation Administration. Two 
significant developments are expected 
to arise from the activities of the Unit- 
ed Nations Relief and Rehabilitation 
Administration. 

ISLANDS WILL GET RELIEF QUOTA 

"The first is that our country will 
be assured of a definite quota of re- 
lief materials that will be urgently 
needed in the areas to be reoccupied 
in the process of retaking the Philip- 
pines, 

"In the second place, the Philippines 
will be able to make its own contri- 
bution as soon as practicable for the 
relief and rehabilitation of neighboring 
areas or of other countries that will 
he reoccupied by the United Nations 
forces. 

'"Under the scope of the United Na- 
t : ons Relief and Rehabilitation Admin- 



Randolph Hails Hole Of 
)inos On Broadcast 



American appreciation for the great 
courage of Filipino guerrilla fighters 
was expressed In Representative Jen 
nings Randolph, Democrat of West Vir- 
ginia, in one of his weekly radio 
broadcasts over station WAJR, Mor- 
gantown, West Virginia, The pro- 




l$e pre tentative f^anclofpL 

"The examples of Filipinos," Con- 
gressman Randolph said in the course 
of the broadcast, "on Bataan is a 
source of encouragement to us Amer- 
icans when faced with difficult tasks." 

Dr. Yap outlined the history of Phil- 
ippine-American relations and praised 
the ability of the two nations to get 
along together. He advocated send- 
ing additional equipment to General 
Mat-Arthur and the bombing of Japan 
as soon as feasible. 

The Filipino authority urged that 
Japan be made to give up the islands 
that were mandated to her after the 
last war; that the ordinary Japanese 
be re-educated in the meaning of free- 
dom and that the Jap nation be dis- 
armed and her military leaders pun- 
ished. 

Concluding the broadcasting, Repre- 
sentative Randolph said that to people 
in America "the Far Fast may seem a 
long way distant. But today we citi- 
zens of West Virginia are citizens of 
the world. Our neighbors and fellows 
are not only in the states that border 
Wesl Virginia but are the soldier in 
Russia, the farmer in China, the fac- 
tory worker in England and the busi 
ness man in the Philippine-."" 



8. 



-i3ataa,n> 



Aircraft Carrier Bataan Signifies 
U. S. Pledge to Redeem Philippines 

Vice President Osmena says new ship is symbol of freedom lost and 
is an enduring monument to civilization and lasting American and 
Filipino friendship. 

Following is statement by Vice President Sergio Osmena at the commission- 
ing of the aircraft carrier, U. S. S. Bataan, at Camden, New Jersey: 

"The commissioning of their aircraft carrier named Bataan is meaningful. 
It is evidence not only of America's mounting output of all the needed arraa- 
SfS? *? ut also of America's determination to fulfill her pledge to redeem the 
Philippines. 

"For Bataan is no longer a mere geographical expression without meaning 
in terms of human value. Bataan is 



now an enduring monument to civili- 
zation, a symbol of freedom lost, a 
battles round where Americans and Fil- 
ipinos sealed with blood a lasting 
friendship and gave expression to the 
supreme determination of our two peo- 
ples to fight together until the enemy 
is crushed and lost freedom regained. 
HEROISM DISPLAYED ON BATAAN 

"I can never forget the gaunt but 
courageous faces of the men left on 
Bataan and Corregidor, the valor and 
heroism which they displayed even in 
the face of certain doom. When Pres- 
ident Quezon and I left Corregidor to 
continue here the struggle agamst the 
invaders, we did not give up hope 
that somehow reinforcements would 
come soon and save those beleaguered 
men. 

"What a difference it would have 
made in the Battle of the Philippines 
had airplane carriers like this suc- 
ceeded in getting near Bataan in tho<=e 
fateful days! Who knows if with a 
score of planes the tide of battle would 
not have turned in our favor! 

FORCES OF FREEDOM UNCONQUERABLE 

"But the Epic of Bataan is not the 
end. It is only the beginning. The 
forces of freedom are unconquerable. 
Iney are no longer on the defensive. 
Kvery day now, in the Pacific as in 
the other theatres of war. the enemy 
is reeling under the mighty blows of 
our forces on land, on sea and in the 
air. 

"The commissioning of the U. S. S. 
Bataan is therefore being made under 
(he most auspicious circumstances. 
Soon it will be joining our mighty of- 
fensive against the enemy. Even now 
we can visualize the brave fliers of the 



U. S. S. Bataan, inspired by the name 
which their carrier bears, winging 
their way to the Philippines on a mis- 
sion of revenge and liberation with 
the ringing watchword ,On to Bataan.' 
Let us wish the U. S. S. Bataan god- 
speed." 



Japs Plan to Reorganize 
Islands' Sugar Industry 

The reorganization of the Philippine 
sugar industry, which has been under 
consideration by the Japanese military 
administration since last year, will be 
carried out soon, the Japanese radio 
announces. 

Under the new 'rationalization" plan, 
the 70 existing sugar-refining mills are 
to be reduced to less than half that 
number. Some will be amalgamated, 
others will the utilized solely for the 
production of alcohol and butanol, 
while the remaining sugar mills will 
be converted to other purposes. 

The increased production of alcohol 
and butanol under the new scheme is 
expected to go a long way toward as- 
suring a self-sufficiency of liquid fuel 
in the Philippines. 



Coop Savings Plan Offers Filipinos 
Chance To Aid Islands' Reconstruction 

BATAAN presents questions and answers about system which will 
assure secure economic foundation for Philippines alter the war. 

The Cooperative Savings Plan, sponsored by Manuel A. Adeva, Nationals 
Division Assistant to the Philippine Resident Commissioner, and approved by 
President Manuel L. Quezon, opens the opportunity to every Filipino abroad to 
help in the post-war reconstruction of the Philippines. It offers every Filipino 
not in uniform a direct way to serve his country and the United Nations by 
converting his savings into United States War Bonds. It assures him capital 
for the foundation of his economic se 



curity in the Philippines after the war. 

What is this Plan? The Phil ippine 
Government in Washington will receive 
for safekeeping United States War 
Bonds owned by Filipinos who volun- 
tarily agree to deposit these with the 
Philippine Government for the dura- 
tion. After the war is over and peace 
is restored in the Philippines, the Phil- 
ippine Government, through its proper 
department, will help the depositors or- 
ganize a corporation in the Philippines 
whose object is to develop certain in- 
dustries or engage in agriculture. 

What is the main object of the Plan? 
It is to give every Filipino in the 
United States and Hawaii an opportu- 
nity to share in the building of the 
Philippine Republic through the use 
of his savings. 

Who may participate in the Plan? 
All Filipinos. 



Can the depositor send money f or 
deposit? The Philippine Government 
will accept for deposit United States 
War Bonds only. 

To whom will the War Bonds be sent 
for deposit? Participants in the Plan 
should send their War Bonds to the 
Philippine National Bank, 25 Broad- 
way, New York, New York, accompa- 
nied by a form letter which may be 
obtained from the Office of the Philip- 
pine Resident Commissioner, 1617 
Massachusetts Avenue, N. W., Wash- 
ington 6, D. C; the Western Division, 
Office of the Philippine Resident Com- 
missioner, Suite 1108-1110, 405 Mont- 
gomery Street, San Francisco, Cali- 
fornia; The Philippine Center. 131 
West 72nd Street, New York City: or 
the presidents of Filipino communities 
or Filipino Nationals Councils. 

• • . continued on following page 



2)ece/nl>er 



1943. 



Can a Filipino send hu War Bond 
to the Philippine National Bank in 
New York for deposit for the dura- 
tion, without participating in the Plan? 
Yes. 

Can the depositor withdraw any or 
oil of his War Bonds before the end 



of the 



war? Under this Plan, the de- 



positor may not cash his bonds be- 
fore the war is over, except in extreme 
cases of emergency, such as sickness 
or death in the family, in which case 
he will be permitted to cash as many 
of his War Bonds as are sufficient to 
defray such expenses. 

What will happen to the War Bonds 
should the depositor die before the 
end of the war? His bonds will be 
held in the name of his beneficiary. 

What will the Philippine Government 
do with the deposits after the end of 
the ivar? The Philipping Government 
will help the depositors organize a 
corporation to engage in business or 
agriculture in the Philippines. Each 
depositor will be entitled to shares of 
stock in the corporation corresponding 
to the total of his United States War 
Bonds deposits. That will be his in- 
vestment in the reconstruction of the 
Philippines. 

Who ivill determine the nature of 
business which the proposed corpora- 
tion, will engage in? It will be de- 
termined by the depositors themselves. 
The Philippine Government, through 
its proper department, will, of course, 
lend assistance in the selection of 
an enterprise in which Filipino capital 
can be most profitably employed. 

Will the Philippine Government par- 
ticipate financially in this enterprise? 
The Philippine Government will make 
no financial investments in the corpo- 
ration. It will however, guide the 
depositors in the organization of the 
corporation and extend to them all 
the governmental facilities toward that 
purpose. Once it is organized, the 
Philippine Government will leave the 
whole administration and supervision 
of the corporation to its duly elected 
officers. 

Who will bear the expense in carry 
ing out this Plan? The Philippine 
Government will bear all expenses in- 
curred in carrying out this Plan. Not 
one cent of the depositors' money will 
be used to defray expenses in receiv- 
ing and keeping the War Bonds for 
deposit. 



Filipinos In U. S. Army Set Records 
For Hard Work In Learning War 

Activated 18 months ago, First Filipino Regiment called "hardest 
working troops in the army" by their officers. 

Camp Beale, Marysville, Calif. — The United States Army's hardest-working 
bunch of potential Jap-fighters is now training here — striving to live up to their 
regimental motto "Laging Una" which, translated from their" native Tagolog dia- 
lect, means "Always First." 

They are the members of the 1st Filipino Regiment, formed almost a year 
ago at Fort Orel, Calif., and sent up Camp Beale, Calif., on the edge of the Sac- 
ramento Valley for training. 



Training constantly to absorb and 
utilize new techniques learned by U. S. 
armed forces in combat, the Filipinos 
are termed by officers as the hardest- 
working troops in the Army. 

NEVER KNEW WHEN TO QUIT 

'"They never know when to quit," 
one officer said, '"When the 5 o'clock 
whistle blows other troops have a tend- 
ency to drop everything for the day. 
Not these boys, though. They spend 
their evenings in study, and work just 
as hard during their hourly 10-minute 
rest periods as they do during the rest 
of the hour." 

The Filipinos take more pride in 
their uniform than do most troops, it 
seems. A visitor to their barracks is 
impressed by the spotlessness of their 
clothing and its knife-edge creases. 

Naturally very self-reliant, they fit 
right in with the Army's training pro- 
gram for infantry troops, which places 
a premium on men who can work sin- 
gly or in small groups. 

When can one begin sending War 
Bonds for deposit in connection with 
the Plan? Any Filipino interested in 
the Plan may send his War Bonds for 
deposit to the Philippine National Bank 
ni New York City now. 

Are receipts issued for deposits 
made? Every deposit will be acknowl- 
edged by the Manager of the Philip- 
pine National Bank. 

The Philippine Government aims, 
through this Plan, to enable Filipinos 
to invest their savings in the Philip- 
pine Republic. After the war, great 
opportunities for agricultural and in- 
dustrial development will be open to 
all, and Filipinos abroad should pre- 
pare themselves now to be able to help 
materially in the rebuilding of their 
country. 



TRAIN FOR COMBAT DUTY 

The men are training for combat 
work at the present time, with particu- 
lar emphasis being placed on jungle 
tactics and close-in fighting. They are 
eager to get into combat, as proven by 
an incident which occurred shortly af- 
ter the regiment was formed. 

The men underwent a short indoc- 
trination period, and then were issued 
a few rounds of rifle ammunition which 
they fired in order to familiarize them- 
selves with their weapons. Unaware, 
at that time, of Army channels, most 
of them there sent letters to President 
Roosevelt, telling him they had been 
in the Army and had fired their weap- 
ons so please was it not possible lor 
them to be sent to a combat zone im- 
mediately. 

SERVED IN PHILIPPINES 

A small percentage of the regiment's 
officers are Filipinos, and some of them 
have seen service in the Philippines as 
recently as the fight put up on Bataan 
by American and Filipino forces. 

On the non-military side, the Filipi- 
nos have set a record unequalled by 
other groups in the Army. 

Well over $20,000,000 worth of gov- 
ernment insurance has been purchased 
In members of the regiment. Contri- 
butions to the recent Red Cross drive 
by members of the regiment set a new 
high record for donations by members 
of a single regiment. 

Members of the 1st — well over 90 
per cent of them — are represented still 
in the Philippines by relatives. Which 
may explain the record they have set 
up during their training period here 
and which they are sure will continue 
when they get into active combat. 



10. 



Japs Jockeyed Into Weak Position 
Face Dilemma In Southwest Pacific 

General Sewell writes that Japs eye New Guinea but fear thrust of 
U. S. fleet from West Central Pacific. American strategy holds Nip 
fleet at Truk. 

By Brigadier-General Horace S. Sewell 
Military Analyst for British Information Services 

carriUlf Japs * re y e P°rted to be persisting in their attempts to reinforce their 

out ^SJ^l 8 ?^^ I™ 61 ' 15 6Very indication th ^t they intend to fight it 
out on the island and that the fighting will be bitter. 

Heavy attacks by General MacArthur's air forces have also been kept up on 
Japanese advance base at Rabaul and other enemy installations on the island of 
Aew Britain, 250 miles west of Bougainville. 

the AT* 7 °c U i S T' t de ? tr °y ers and subma rines have frequently been attacked in 
toe harbor of Rabaul, but up to now 
there has been no report of enemy 



capital ships or aircraft carriers hav- 
ing moved south from Truk, the great 
Jap island base 830 miles north of 
Kabaul. The movement of Jap mer- 
chantmen from Truk to Rabaul is not 
regarded as an offensive measure but 
as a desperate effort by the enemy to 
restore its defensive position at Rabaul. 

JAPS NOW IN WEAK POSITION 

The Japs have been jockeyed into 
a weak position by General MacArthur. 
v ° ui rSt threatene d New Britain from 
\inschhaven, and while the Japs had 
the-r eyes on New Guinea, effected his 
surprise landings on Choiseul and Bou- 
gainville Islands behind their backs. 
1 his Jap dilemma is further compli- 
cated by the fear of a drive by Admi- 
ral Nimitz from the West Central Pa- 
cific. Consequently, thev are reluctant 
to move the bulk of their naval forces 
-with attendant aircraft carriers — 
southward from Truk. 

For months the Japs have been los- 
ing landbased aircraft in New Britain, 
and recently they have suffered losses 
in Bougainville. This situation will 
continue to grow worse for them, and 
though they may succeed in moving 
men into Bougainville by driblets, they 
cannot alter their strategic position, 
which is basically weak. 

EVENTS SHOW WE HAVE INITIATIVE 

The island fighting of the last few 
months has shown how completely the 
initiative has passed to General Mac- 
Arthur. For more than a year, the 



defensive. It was an active defensive 
consisting of local protective attacks, 
but the general strategy was defense. 

Now the nature of the war in the 
Southwest Pacific is changing. All the 
Japanese can hope for is to prolong 
the island fighting and put off the time 
when they will have to lose face and 
abandon their outposts. It is proba- 
ble that they also hope, as Germany 
does, that the Allies may make some 
mistake which will enable them to re- 
trieve something of the losses they 
have suffered in position and prestige. 



Madame Lim Lauds U. S. 
Role In Philippines 

The gratitude of Filipinos to the 
United States for their liberation from 
Spanish rule and for the benefits they 
enjoyed under the protection of Uncle 
S*m before the Japanese invasion was 
voiced by Mme. Vicente Lim, in a 
talk before members of the Washing- 
ton, D. C, Women's National Demo- 
cratic Club. 



r 



Mme. Lim, wife of Brig. Gen. Lim 
of the Philippine Army, and the first 
president of the Philippine Federation 
of Women's Clubs, spoke eloquently of 
America's part in bringing prosperity 
and progress to the people whose 
7.000 islands in the Pacific had been 
exploited bv Spain for 300 years. Ex- 
tending credit to the Spaniards for in- 
troducing Christianity to the Filipinos 
Mme. Lim said, "We are the onlv 

/"M- •_ k.1 • ..1- _ r\ • . rrvi . -> 



most important difference between the 
Filipinos and other Orientals. The 
Japs cannot forcibly place Shintoism in 
our homes and with a swish of the 
sword and a stroke of the pen, elimi- 
nate our religion." 

Dressed in a picturesque native cos- 
tume, the speaker presented a striking 
picture as she told in fluent English of 
the struggle of her people for freedom. 

"Every time my country raises its 
head above a certain level, some un- 
foreseen occurrence lays it down," she 
commented. "But you can never keep 
a good people or a good country 
down," she added. 

"I've felt it my duty to tell Ameri- 
cans what a glorious achievement theirs 
has been in the Orient," she continued. 
"The United States has been the only 
nation which has founded and devel- 
oped a democratic government in the 
Orient. I want every American to see 
what has been done in the Philippines 
so out of that picture you can take 
courage and go ahead with this libera- 
tion task you've begun. It won't be 
easy. And even after victory is won, 
and I'm sure it will be, your task will 
be more than heavy. If you should 
fail, there'll be no hope in the world," 
she concluded. 



Southwest Pacific forces were on the Christians in the Orient. That is the 



Quezon Issues Thanksgiving 
Day Message For Islands 

President Quezon issued a Thanks- 
giving Day proclamation wihch was 
broadcast to the people of the Philip- 
pines. 

He enjoined his people "to pray to 
Almighty God . . . for the prompt 
liberation of our unhappy people from 
the invader, and the restoration of 
peace, happiness, prosperity and lib- 
erty to our country." 

The text of the proclamation includ- 
ed President Roosevelt's Thanksgiving 
ftay statement: 

"I deem it proper that the day be 
also observed in the Philippines as in 
the United States, and accordingly en- 
JOtti all the inhabitants of the Philip- 
Pines to pray to Almighty God on that 
dav for the prompt liberation of our 
unhappy people from the invader, 
and the restoration of peace, happi- 
ness, prosperity and liberty to our 
country," President Quezon said. 



^cem&er, 1943. 




yeneral W/ac^4,-tl u , 



General MacArthur Needs 500 Planes 
To Take Philippines, Chandler Says 

Kentucky Senator who toured world battlefronts wants intensification 
of Pacific campaign and wants definition of British role in that theater 

Gen. Douglas MacArthur needs 500 bombing planes, more men, and more 
h}™ guns if he is to be enabled to carry out his desire to return to the Philippines, 
-enator A. B. Chandler, of Kentucky, said in Chicago recently. 

If MacArthur can reduce Rabaul and Wewak, he can go to Mindanao and 
cut Japanese supply lines to the Southwest Pacific, the Senator said. 

Senator Chandler, who was a member of the senatorial committee of five 
which made a tour of battle fronts on 
which American troops are fighting, 
recalled that in a recent raid on Ra- 
baul, MacArthur had only 60 bombers. 

Senator Chandler said the decision 
of the joint chiefs of staff to minimize 
the war in the Pacific was a grave and 
serious decision, and expressed hope 
that the forthcoming meeting of Presi- 
dent Roosevelt, Prime Minister Church- 
ill, and Premier Josef Stalin would re- 
sult in a decision from Russia to aid 
the United States in fighting Japan. 

WANTS BRITISH COMMITMENT 

He also wants a definite commitment 
fiom Churchill on what part Britain 
will play in the Pacific should Ger- 
many be knocked out of the war. 

"Four ways are open to MacArthur 
to carry the war to Japan," Senator 
Chandler said. "These are through 
the Aleutians, through the mid-Pacific, 
from bases in China and through the 
limited offensive which MacArthur now 
is carrying on." 

"So long as the Japanese were in 
the Aleutian Islands our Hawaiian na- 
val base at Pearl Harbor was immobi- 
lized. Elimination of the enemy from 
Attu and Kiska has opened the way 
for us to fight an offensive war in the 
Pacific, limited as it may be. 

DELAY BRINGS DIFFICULTIES 

"Delay in carrying the battle to Ja- 
pan now may make this \var much 
more difficult and conceivably make it 
impossible to win." 

"This war is beino- nin by civilians 
end I feel that a Senator who voted 
for war and for taxes to support a 
war should walk as closely as possible 
to the soldiers who are fighting it," 
Chandler said. "Generals in the field 
request what they need in men and 
material and when it is not forthcom- 
ing they ask once more. Then they 
need someone to speak for them. That 
is all T have been trying to do." 



Quezon Tells Philippines 
He'll Return With MacArthur 

President Quezon, in a message 
broadcast to the people of the Philip- 
pines on the Comonwealth's anniver- 
sary, said that he had it "on good au- 
thoritv that General MacArthur will 
soon have the men and material he 
needs for the reconquest of our home- 
land." 

He assured his people "that the Gov- 
ernment and people of the United 
States have never forgotten their obli- 
gations to you. He said that "General 
MacArthur has been constantly asking 
for more planes, supplies and mate- 
rials in order that he can carry out his 
one dream, which is to oust the Japa- 
neses from our shores." 

ENCOURAGES FILIPINO GUERRILLAS 

President Quezon reviewed the cen- 
turies-long fight of the Filipinos for 
their freedom up to now. He again 
sent words of encouragement to "our 
armed forces, who are fighting in the 
hills, mountains and jungles of the 
Philippines." He told them, "You are 



writing with your sacrifices another 
chapter in the history of the Philip- 
pines that, like the epic of Bataan, will 
live forever in the hearts of lovers of 
freedom everywhere." 

"I have felt your sufferings so deep- 
ly and have constantly shared them 
with you that I have been a sick man 
since "I arrived in Washington, and for 
the last five months I have been actu- 
allv unable to leave my bed," President 
Quezon continued. "But sick as I am, 
I have not for a moment failed to do 
my duty. As a matter of fact the 
conference which resulted in the mes- 
sage of President Roosevelt was held 
practically in my bedroom." 

President Quezon referred to Presi- 
dent Roosevelt's message to Congress 
asking for authority to advance the 
date of Philippine independence, pre- 
viously set for July 4, 1916. 

BATAAN SHOWED HERITAGE 

"In Bataan we showed the world 
once more our heritage of heroism. 
By every nation's first duty of self- 
defense and self-preservation, we took 
up arms and fought the invader. No 
self-respecting nation could have 
shirked the challenge of that treacher- 
ous attack that started in Baguio on 
December 8, 1941. To have avoided 
that challenge or to have cowered be- 
fore it would have been to ^se all 
pride and dignity, to have suffered a 
bottomless humiliation ... 

"I know that Japan has granted a 
so-called independence to the Philip- 
pines. How unreal and meaningless 
that independence is, you and I know. 
The real purpose of this pseudo-inde- 
pendence is contained in the text of 
the military pact ratified by the Na- 
tional Assemblv October 18, accord- 
ing to a Manila-datelined Domei re- 
port broadcast by Tokyo, which says 
that 'the high contracting parties shall 
closely cooperate on matters political, 
economic and military for the success- 
ful prosecution of the war of Greater 
East Asia.' " he pointed out. 

"1 want to give you my assurance 
that the Government of the Philip- 
pines will provide amply for those who 
fought in this war. for their orphans 
and their dependents. 

ASSURES U. S. SUPPORT 

"I realize how sometimes you must 
have felt that you were being aban- 
doned. But once again I want to as- 
sure you that the Government and peo- 

continued on page 22 



12 



^ataaii 



State Dept. Publication Reveals Hull 
Expected Jap Aggression In 1937 

U. S. Secretary of State told envoy that he proceeded on "theory that 
Japan definitely contemplates securing domination" over hundreds 
of millions in Far East, Pacific. 

The State Department revealed recently that Secretary of State Hull had 
concluded before the bombing of the United States gunboat Panav in 1937 that 
Japan intended by any means in her power to dominate half the world. 

Hitherto unpublished details of Japan's relentless march from one act of 



Bataan Will Be Avenged 



continued from page 5 



United States, Japan: 1931-41, Volume 
1. A second volume is expected in 
a few weeks. 

Scattered throughout the record are 
repeated indications by the Japanese 
that they had no intention of acceding 
to American wishes, particularly in re- 
gard to aggression in China. 

The^ volume contains the following 
quotation from a statement by Hull to 
iOQQ reign di P lomat on September 21, 

"Since August of a year ao 0 I have 
proceeded here on the theorf that Ja- 
pan definitely contemplates securing 
domination over as many hundreds of 
millions of people as possible in east- 
ern Asia and gradually extending her 
control through the Pacific Island* to 
the Dutch East Indies and elsewhere 
thereby dominating, in practical effect 
that one-half of the world." 

He was convinced that "she is seek- 
ing this objective by anv and every 
kind of means." 

"At the same time," he said, "I have 
gone on the theory that Germany is 
equallv bent on becoming the dominat- 
ing colossus of continental Europe." 

The story begins with the occupation 
ot Manchuria by the Japanese in 1931 
at which time Nelson T. Johnson', 
American Minister in Peiping. cabled 
the State Department that a week be- 
fore the Mukden incident he had been 
warned by John C. Ferguson, an Amer- 
ican who was then an adviser to the 
Chinese Government, that Japan would 
occupy Manchuria within three 
months. 

(Mr. Ferguson, since retired, is a 
repatriate on the Gripsholm due in 
New York December 2.) 



Mr. Johnson concluded, he reported, 
that the incident was an aggressive act 
long planned by Japan. 



The 
though 



JAP HAND REVEALED 

Japanese got away with it, 
their action brought them un- 



der sharp American criticism. 

By July, 1937, the Japanese were 
ready for another venture and invaded 
North China after the incident at Mar- 
co Polo Bridge near Peiping. 

Of the 947 pages of the volume, 240 
are devoted to correspondence relating 
to the bombing of American civilians 
by Japanese forces and other acts en- 
dangering the lives and welfare of 
American nationals in China. This 
part of the volume includes the Panay 
documents. 

The volume disclosed that Joseph C. 
Grew, Ambassador to Japan up to the 
time of Pearl Harbor, informed the 
Japanese government on September 13, 
1940, that 230 instances of bombing 
of American property had been brought 
to his attention. 

By November, 1938, Japan was ready 
to show her hand. She had joined 
the anti-Comintern pact with Germany 
and Italy, and Premier Prince Fumi- 
maro Konoye declared that "Japan is 
determined also to co-operate in the 
re-establishment of world order, guided 
by a common view of the world"— the 
Axis view. 

In February, 1941, Japanese attacks 
on American property were so fre- 
quent that Mr. Grew told the J apanese 
Foreign Office it was impossible to be- 
lieve that the Japanese authorities in 
China were endeavoring to avoid new 
incidents. 



jectives. The commander. Captain Na- 
varrete, maneuvered the boats of his 
squadron at high speed to positions 
from which he could attack the hostile 
planes. When subjected to dive-bomb- 
ing attack, he continued the fire of his 
machine guns with such accuray that 
at least three of the hostile aircraft 
were hit and badly damaged, and the 
enemy forced to discontinue the attack. 
MacARTHUR CITED IGOROT SOLDIERS 

And then there is the story of that 
memorable battle of February 15, 1942. 
in which the Filipino soldiers from the 
Mountain Province especially distin- 
guished themselves. General Mac Ar- 
thur's communique reads: 

"During a recent enemy offensive, 
the 20th Japanese infantry made an 
attack on a position held by a single 
Igorot company. To a man, the Igo- 
rots died in their fox-holes without 
flinching or thought of retreat but ex- 
acting a tremendous toll from the. Jap- 
anese. To restore the situation, our 
high command ordered an immediate 
counterattack by a tank unit, supported 
by the infantry. The infantry soldiers 
were Igorots, eager to even the score 
of their lost tribesmen. 

"The bamboo jungles and the heavy, 
irregular terrain of the section of the 
front -were almost impenetrable and ap- 
parently made it impossible for the 
tanks to operate. Without a word the 
Igorot commander hoisted his men to 
the tops of the tanks in order that 
they might guide the machines through 
the matted morass of underbrush, thick- 
ets and trees. The exposed Igorot sol- 
diers on top of the tanks served as 
the eyes of the American drivers. Each 
guide signalled his driver with a stick, 
and as the unit closed in on the enemy, 
the Igorots fired continuously with their 
automatic pistols. Bataan has seen 
many wild mornings, but nothing to 
equal this. No quarter was asked and 
none was given. Always above the 
din of battle roared the fierce shouts 
of the Igorots as they rode the tanks 
and fired their pistols. When the at- 
tack was over, the remnants of the 
tanks and of the Igorots were still there 
but the 20th Japanese Infantry was 
completely annihilated." 
as they rode the tanks and fired their 
. . continued on page 20 



2) ecemver. 



.13 



FDR Says Filipinos Fully Earned Freedom 
In Commemorating Commonwealth's 8th Year 

Presidential message read by U S Supreme Court Justice Murphy on radio program 
saluting anniversary Former High Commissioner predicts that if Japs are in Islands 
next November 15, their days will be numbered. lianas 

President Roosevelt, in a message to the people of the Philippines read 
over the radio by Justice Frank Murphy, declared that "we work and fight 
for the day of your liberation — for the day when your government shall be re- 
stored to Manila — when you shall enjoy the true freedom and independence and 
national dignity which you have so fully earned." 



Telegram : 



THE WHITE HOUSE 
WASHINGTON 



November 15, 1943 



Honorable Frank Murphy 
Supreme Court of the United States 
Washington, D. C. 

Today, on this anniversary, and on every day that shall pass until the 
Japanese enemy is finally and totally defeated, the American people send mes- 
sages of hope and faith to you, the gallant people of the Philippine Common- 
wealth. We work and we fight for the day of your liberation— for the day 
when your Government shall be restored to Manila — when you shall enjoy the 
true freedom and independence and national dignity which you have so fullv 
earned. 4 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 




Justice Murphy, last Governor Gen- 
eral of the Philippines and first Ameri- 
can High Commissioner, was the prin- 
cipal speaker in a program, broadcast 
by NBC at 7:30 P. M ' commemorating 
the eighth anniversary of the Philippine 
Comomnwealth. He was introduced by 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary of 
the Philippine Department of Informa- 
tion and Public Relations. 

"That message, Justice Murphy said, 
in referring to the telegram printed 
elsewhere on this page, was written by 
the President of the United State who 
sponsored and approved the establish- 
ment of the Philippine Commonwealth. 
He is the same President who has sol- 
emnly vowed that the freedom of the 
Philippines will be redeemed. You need 
only know his integrity and uncompro- 
mising tenacity of purpose to realize 
that this promise to the Philippine 
people will be kept. 

250,000 SAW CEREMONIES 

"Eight years ago today, November 
15, 1935, a quarter million people 
gathered before the Legislative Build- 
ing in Manila witnessed a momentous 



and heart-warming event. They saw 
the inauguration of a new democratic 
government established by and for a 
nation of 17 million Filipino souls 
with the aid and wholehearted approval 
of a nation of 132 millionn Americans. 
They saw a great world power (the 
United States) forswearing the fruits 
of conquest, commend the destiny of 
a rich and matchless archipelago into 
the hands of the Filipino people. Be- 
fore their eyes, a commonwealth was 
born. Participating in that event as 
the last Governor-General of the Phil- 
ippines and relinquishing the reins of 
government to a president of their 
own choosing was a privilege that I 
shall always deeply cherish. 

"Today we mark the eighth anni- 
versary of the establishment of the Phil- 
ippine Commonwealth. It is the sec- 
ond to be observed by the Filipino peo- 
ple under the hostile surveillance of a 
Japanese army of occupation. It may 
not be the last. But I have a strong- 
conviction if on the next fifteenth of 
November the Japanese are still in the 
Philippines, their days in the Islands 
will be of brief number. For in the 




South Pacific the avenging hosts of 
the Allied armies and navies are mus- 
tering for a sweep to the North, backed 
by all the power and might of this 
great country. Their gaze is fixed on 
Manila, and beyond Manila lies Tokyo. 

JAP EFFORTS FAIL 

"It is nearly tw r o years since the Jap- 
anese completed their military con- 
quest of the Philippines. But their 
brief victory is one of arms alone. 
Their real struggle to conquer the Phil- 
ippines — their fruitless effort to win 

the loyalty of the Filipino people 

continues to this clay. How desper- 
ately the invaders are trying to propa- 
gandize their victims can be seen in 
the news which is doled out every day 
over the Manila and Tokyo radios. 
Japanese speakers proclaim the slogan 
that the Filipino people are Oriental, 
not Occidental. Therefore, it is ar 
gued. the Filipinos should cast their 

. . . continued on page 25 



LEADERS CONGRATULATE FILIPIN 



"It gives me great pleasure to send this message to all Filipinos in the 
armed forces through BATAAN. I am sure that you are eager to go over- 
seas and face the enemy. I feel equally sure that you will acquit your- 
selves and fight to die or win. In this war the Filipinos have already won 
world renown for their bravery in the field of battle. The Filipino forces 
who died in Bataan and Corregidor handed down to you the unfinished 
task, which is, to redeem our homeland. I know you will not fail them. 
All of us must continue to keep faith with them and fight the enemy until 
complete victory is won. I wish you Godspeed." 

MANUEL L. QUEZON, 

President of the Philippines. 



"I am happy to send through the BA- 
TAAN my cordial salutations to all Filipinos 
in the United States armed forces and those 
engaged in essential war effort. 

"We Filipinos have shared and continue 
to share in the supreme task of winning this 
global war. From the beaches of Aparri and 
Lingayen, from the plains of central Luzon 
to the hills of Bataan and the tunnels of Cor- 
regidor, our people once withstood gallantly 
the mighty onslaughts of a vicious enemy. 
Overwhelmed and outnumbered, we had to 
bow in the end. But we were never outfought, 
loday, in many an isolated town and barrio 
m some remote mountains and hills in Luzon' 
Visayas and Mindanao, brave Filipinos con- 
tinue resisting the enemy. 

"This is the undying spirit of all Filipinos 
everywhere. With the Lord's blessings and 




with America's help, we know 
His blessings on us all!" 



Sergio Osmena 



that it will carry us to victory. May God shower 



r/ . Sergio Osmena 

Vice President of the Philippines 



m the defense of their homeland 

"Marines know the Philippines well: for 
tor many years we have seen service there. I 
served at 0 ongapo in 1903 and 1905 and re- 
member well the many pleasant associations 
there. When the tension of 1941 became ap- 
parent the 4th Marines were sent from China 
to the Philippines. This historic regiment 
served with distinction during the trying days 
of Bataan and in the defense of Corregidor. 
1 am sure that those who served in the 4th, 
could they but voice their thoughts, would 
have nothmg but the highest praise for the 
heroic resistance of the Filipinos. 

Ihe present trend of the action in the 
racinc gives us hope that soon the Philippine 
Comonwealth will be able to assume her cho- 
sen place in the family of nations." 

T. Holcomb 

t tr~i v Lieutenant General, U.S.M.C 

T. Holcomb The Commandant, V. S. Marine Corps. 





1 1 



Filipinos in three branches of 
posing in front of the PhiliPPir 
field over the blue), typify 
able Philippines. Left to right 
of the U. S. Naval Academy; Eo 
U. S. Coast Guard, and Lt. t 
Army A 




Troops of the 1st FiliP in ° **t^ 
for anticipated action agam st 



P FIGHTERS IN U.S. ARMED FORCES 




\e United States armed forces, 
e Hag in battle-display (the red 

fighting spirit of an unconquer- 
are: Midshipman Sergio Molano 
isign Enrique S. Estevanez of the 
eon J. Harnandez of the U. S. 
ir Forces. 



"The loyalty and eagerness of the Filipinos whom I have the honor to com- 
mand can only fill one with confidence as the final outcome of this struggle: a 
complete crushing of the Axis, and a free Philippines. Mabuahay ang Kalayaan 
nang Filipinos!'" 

Col. Robert H. Offley 
Commanding Officer. 1st Filipino Infantry 



"Through this medium I greet the gallant 
Filipinos who are fighting shoulder to shoul- 
der with all those who are opposed to the 
common enemies of freedom. 

"Those still in the Philippines, who craft- 
ily wage war against the Japanese invader, de- 
serve grateful recognitnon. True independ- 
ence will not be guaranteed to any nation 
until the glorious day when the Axis yields 
to overpowering Allied strength — a day grow- 
ing ever nearer. 




"Until that day dawns, we fight side by- 
side, unfaltering in our purpose." 

Frank Knox 
The Secretary of the Navy 



Frank Knox 




u. s. signal cdrps phdtd 



try Battalion train in California, 
the invaders of their homeland. 



"The gallant resistance of the heroic peo- 
ple of the Philippine Commonwealth can only 
fill with admiration the hearts of all free- 
dom-loving peoples. 

"The President of the United States has 
pledged the resources of our country to the 
end that Philippines' "freedom will be re- 
deemed and their independence established 
and protected." 

"Filipinos are working shoulder to shoul- 
der with other nationals of our Allies on ships 
of the United States Merchant Marine, help- 
ing to maintain the flow of ocean commerce 
so essential in our pursuit of victory. In 
the armed forces of the United States Fili- 
pinos are fighting toward the day when the 
common enemy will be driven from lands 
won by treachery. 

"The Philippine Government is a signatory 
of the declaration of unity bv the United Nations. As such it has participated 
in Allied Pacific war councils. It has participated in the United Nations' con- 
ferences on food and agriculture. It will be represented in those conferences 
which will plan a world of peace, when invaded lands are restored to rightful 
owners, and products of those lands will be sold in the markets of the world. 

"The people of the United States are fully aware of what the Filipinos, their 
government, and their army have done in defense of the United States flag and of 
their own freedom. The day is not too far distant when Bataan and Corregidor, 
names that will remain forever great in the annals of heroic causes, will be re- 
gained for the people who so nobly defended them. 

Rear Admiral E. S. Land, I .S.N. Refd. > 
Chairman, U. S. Maritime Commission, and 

M ar Shipping Administrator 




E. S. Land 



IF IT'S INSURANCE, 
WE HAVE IT — 

Aircraft 
Automobile 
Fire, Theft 
and Collision 

Liability- 
Disability 
Workmen's 
Compensation 
Burglary 
Steam Boilers 
Elevator Liability 
Products Liability- 
Plate Glass 
Common Carriers 
Team and Vehicles 
Malpractice 

Title 

Surety 

Credit 

Mortgage 

Fire 

Inland Marine 

Ocean Marine 

Sprinklers 

Use and Occupancy 

Fire and Extended 

Coverage 

War Risks 

Life 

Annuity 

Endowment 

Ordinary 

Health and Accident 
Miscellaneous 



PDRFIRID G. FLANDES 

INSURANCE BRDKER 
SAN FRANCISCO - CALIFORNIA 



1916 PINE STREET 
Telephone: walnut 17B4 



Fellow Countrymen: 

I am happy to announce that Insurance Companies which 
I represented in Chicago, Illinois, for the past ten years, 
through the R. N. Crawford & Co., Inc., a direct American 
representative of Lloyd's of London, England, have now extended 
my connections to their respective Branch in their Pacific Coast 
Department, San Francisco, California. 

The Insurance Department of the State of California has 
also given me full authorization to transact, negotiate, or effect 
insurance of all kinds and forms in the State. 

This is indeed for the first time in the history of Filipinos 
in the State of California that their interests are now being 

egitimately represented to the legal reserve Insurance Companies 
m the country to have the full coverage from any unforeseen hazard, 
property damage and liability. 

My service is yours for the asking! For full particulars, 
Please call or write to the above address, and I will see to it 
that attention is given to you promptly. 



With kindest personal regards to you and yours, I 



am 




Yours very truly, 




PORFIRIO G. FLANDES, 



FORMERLY ASSOCIATED WITH R. N . CRAWFORD & CO.. INC., CHICAGO 



1943. 



.17 



Future Peace In Pacific Depends On Close 
Cooperation Between U. S., Islands — Quezon 

In a speech to New York Herald-Tribune Forum, Philippines President predicts great 
part for Filipinos in Asia's future and important contributions for modernization of 
Far East. 



President Quezon of the Philippines, in an address before the Herald-Tribune 
Forum in New York, declared that "in the interest of both the United States 
and the Philippines there should always be a very close relationship and co- 
operation between the American and Filipino people even after they have become 
politically independent of one another." 

"The security of both the United States and the Philippines, and perhaps the 
future peace of the Pacific, will de- 



pend very much on that relationship," 
added President Quezon. 

President Quezon's address was de- 
livered in his behalf by Col. Carlos P. 
Romulo, Secretary of Information and 
Public Relations in the Philippine War 
Cabinet. 

AMERICANS CHOOSE FREEDOM 

"The Treaty of Paris." President 
Quezon said, is an important milestone 
in the history of America. In fact, 
it is as if the day it was signed, Amer- 
ica was placed on the crossroads of 
a new destiny. What road were the 
American people to take — the road to 
imperialism or the road to human lib- 
erty and freedom? 

"It is interesting to look back in 
retrospect now. from a vantage point 
that is free from the bias and preju- 
dice of those earlier years, and see 
how, from the very beginning, Ameri- 
can thought has been unerring and 
rectilinear against any imperialistic 
incursions and in favor of self-gov- 
ernment of the peoples that had fal- 
len under American influence and pro- 
tection — the peoples of Cuba, Puerto 
Rico and the Philippines. 

"President McKinley emphasized 
from the start: 'The Philippines are 
ours not to exploit but to develop, to 
civilize, to educate, to train in the 
science of self-government.' 

"Later, William H. Taft, the first 
American civil governor, epitomized 
American policy in the Philippines in 
that famous sentence, 'The Philippines 
for the Filipinos.' 

AMERICA WAS GUIDING HAND 

"From that time on, as one reviews 
Philip pine- American history, it is strik- 
ing to note that every step taken by 



America in the Philippines conforms 
strictly to a blueprint that seemed to 
have been prepared in advance, the 
main feature of which is the political, 
social, and economic development of 
the Filipino people under the guiding 
hand of America. 

"On the solid foundation of our 
Christian faith and Latin culture which 
make up our Spanish heritage, Amer- 
ica built in the Philippines an endur- 
ing monument to Western culture and 
civilization. Spain had brought the 
Christian faith more than four hun- 
dred years before. American demo- 
cratic ideals and the American way of 
life had been deeply ingrained in the 
Filipino. A truly Oriental people who 
have preserved some of the best cus- 
toms and habits of life of their an- 
cestors had been westernized in faith 
and political ideology by a happy com- 
bination of the Spanish and American 
cultures. 

NEW SCHOOLS OPENED 

"Schools w r ere opened by the Ameri- 
cans from the first days of American 
rule. American teachers were brought 
to the Philippines and sent all over 
the islands, roads were built, sanita- 
tion was improved, the standard of 
living was raised, and the economic 
development of the people was fos- 
tered and accelerated. It must be 
stated, in passing, that contrary to the 
belief of some people, all this was 
paid for, and gladly, by the Filipino 
taxpayer. 

"America then has answered the 
challenge hurled at her by Whitelaw 
Reid when on February 13, 1899, dis- 
cussing the purport of the Treaty of 
Paris in Chicago, he said : 

" 'If we are unequal to a manly and 
intelligent discharge of the responsi- 



bilities the war has entailed, then let 
us confess our un worthiness, and beg 
Japan to assume the duties of a civi- 
lized Christian state toward the Phil- 
ippines, while England can extend the 
same relief to us in Cuba and Puerto 
Rico. But having thus ignominiously 
shirked the position demanded by our 
belligerency and our success, let us 
never again presume to take a place 
among the self-respecting and respon- 
sible nations of the earth that can 
ever lay us liable to another such task. 
If called to it. let us at the outset ad- 
mit our unfitness, withdraw within our 
own borders and leave these larger 
duties of the world to less incapable 
races or less craven rulers.' 

MUTUAL FAITH BASIS OF RELATIONSHIP 

"It is a record of accomplishment, 
founded on mutual faith and respect 
which the two people had for each 
other, which thev carried out with the 
greatest cooperation. In this thereto- 
fore unparalleled treatment of a sub- 
ject people by a sovereign nation, be- 
lief in racial superiority began to give 
way to the more humane and correct 
philosophy of equality, regardless of 
color or race. 

"The first organic law for the gov- 
ernment of the Philippines enacted by 
the Congress of the United States, was 
in truth the Magna Charta of the Fili- 
pino people's liberties. Later, under 
President Theodore Roosevelt, the Phil- 
ippine Assembly was created, and for 
the first time in their history the Fili- 
pino people were represented in the 
lower house of the legislature. 

"When Wooclrow Wilson assumed 
the presidency, the Filipinization of 
the government service was accelerated. 
He appointed Governor General Harri- 
son to carry out this policy and sent 
the following message to the Filipino 
people: 'We regard ourselves as trus- 
tees, acting not for the advantages of 
the United States, but for the benefit 
of the people of the Philippine Islands. 

continued on page 19 



18 



Filipino Soldiers Get Bolos, Prefer 
To Carve Up Invading Japanese 

War Department approves order allowing Filipino units to carry 
native knife, eighteen inches long, with razor-like blade. Business 
groups donated them. 

you seen a Filipino bolo knife? If not, you probably have heard 



Have 
about it. 

You have heard that it is a deadly weapon used by Filipino-American braves 

ancl Philippine campaigns. The weapon 



against the enemy in Bataan. Corregidor, 
is offensive, as well as defensive. 

Many Filipino soldiers are wearing 
standard GI equipment. They were 
donated as a gift by the Los Amreles 
Chamber of Commerce. 

Uncle Sam's brown skinned Filipino 
soldiers are loyal to the Army and to 
the democratic tradition. But they had 
expressed one grievance: they did not 
have enough bolos. 

KNIFE UESED FOR MAKING LIVING 

In peace time, the knife is used 
mostly for cutting through underbrush 
tor building shelter, for making a liv- 
ing, and as the all-around standby. As 
a fighting weapon, the Filipino soldier 
would rather trade his rifle and bayo- 
net for it. 

Early stages of Filipino history saw 
the bolo as being the law. With "it the 
Filipino kept peace with his neighbors 
and maintained order. When he was 
aggrieved, he resorted to the bolo to 
right the wrong. 

Umvelcomed visitors from all parts 
oi the world have invaded the Philip- 
pines from time immemorial and it 
was with this weapon that the Filipino 
drove them off his shores, or he went 
down with his hands clasing the hilt of 
his trusted weapon. 

BOLO MADE FOR FIGHTING 

There are many kinds of bolos, ac- 
cording to their uses, shapes, and tem- 

1 » f ;V he u Ste T elblacles - The bolos do- 
nated by the Los Angeles business men 
are strictly made to order for fightino 
and received approval from the United 
Mates War Department and WPB for 
manufacturing. 

Honed to its traditional razor-erW 
keenness, the blade is about 18 inches 
in length, and nearly three inches in 
width at its broadest dimension. The 
blade tapers from the middle toward 
the shaft and also toward the point, 
very much resembles the ancient sword 



their bolos, additional weapons to the 

And by the way, the Japs don't relish 
this weapon any too well. 

It is not double-edged, but it tapers 
from a thick back to an extremely 
keen edge. The scabbard usually is 
made of native wood and covered with 
carved designs. 

SETS OFF JIU JITSU 

In the hands of a Filipino cam- 
paigner, the enemy would not know 
whether the Filipino will throw it or 
unge with it. Unlike the bayonet, 
tne bolo can come from within any di- 
rection where the Japs' jiu jitsu is in- 
effective. The Japs, too, know that a 
1 Uipino would rather chop his enemy 
to pieces than shoot him with a rifle. 
. Tinie alone will tell the score. Jud-- 
m from the enthusiasm of the Fili- 
pino soldiers, it is evident that the Los 
Angeles Chamber of Commerce has 
made a good investment. It donated 
a gift that will live for a long future 
in the memories of the proud, stalwart 
Ji ipino soldiers. They are truly grate- 



It. 



Colonel Offley Defines 
Leadership 

"Leadership may be said to be the 
ability to handle men. Certain quali- 
ties must be acquired and displayed 
ln order to exercise this all-important 
art. 1 

"What are these qualities? 

"Let us remember ten of them. Count 
them on the finger tips and recite them 
daily. To memorize them alphabeti- 
cally is probably the simplest method. 
Here they are: bearing, courage, de- 
pendability, endurance. enthusiasm, 
initiative, judgment, justice, knowl- 
edge, and tart. 




Cot &U J4. OffL 



"Without knowledge there can be no 
leadership, so let us consider that qual- 
ity first. We must strive to know our 
job. There is no place for the bluffer. 
He is soon caught and his respect is 
lost. This quality must be tempered 
with judgment, which is nothing more 
than good common sense and the abil- 
ity to make correct decisions. Tact 
goes hand in hand with this quality- 
To be tactful is to have an under- 
standing of human nature and a con- 
sideration for the feelings of others. 
The faculty of seeing what needs to 
be done, of making a wise decision, 
and of taking action without hesita- 
tion is called initiative. 

In other words, we must accept re- 
sponsibility. Loyalty is the essence 
of dependability. Orders are sacred 
to the dependable soldier, and he car- 
ries them out to the letter, in spirit 
and fact. A leader must have the 
ability to stand pain, fatigue, distress 
and hardship; otherwise he has no en- 
durance. Absence of fear is not cour- 
age. Courage is self-control which 
causes us to accept responsibility, and 
to act in a dangerous situation. One 
must avoid partiality to be just. Ju s ~ 
tice calls for firmness and consistency. 
The leader must be an example or 
smart appearance. Bearing involves 
cleanliness, neatness, dignity and the 
control of one's emotions. Last, but 
not least, is the condition of feeling 
called enthusiasm. Great odds are over- 
come by spirit and morale. If we be- 
lieve in ourselves and are convinced 
we won't be beaten, we can't he beaten! 



ecembei\ 1943 



19 



Filipino Soldiers Ready To Stamp Out 
Japs From Island, Soldier Says 

Considering what U. S. has done and all advantages of the Philip- 
pines, youthful fighter predicts that they will give good account of 
themselves. 

By Cpl. Julius B. Ruiz 

Filipino soldiers have a great stake in this war. The majority of them were 
born in the Philippines, but came to America to repare themselves for leadership 
in their homeland. Only three years away from independence, they will be ready 
to return home when Uncle Sam gives the signal to stamp out the enemy. 

The great American melting pot has afforded them the opportunity to be 
brought closer together, for the majority of them rejoined their buddies on the 
Pacific Coast. They come from all 
over the United States and territories 
and possessions — Hawaii, Alaska, 
Guam. 

With their country under the heels 
of the invaders, the Filipinos are per- 
haps the only soldiers in the world 
who can be loyal to two nations at 
once. They are loyal to the United 
States, where they have been living, 
and they are just as loyal to the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines and their 
exiled government with headquarters 
in Washington, D. C. 

NATIONS CLOSELY LINKED 

They can be that way because the 
United States and the Philippines have 
been closely linked for more than four 
decades. To them, the two nations 
are almost one. 

Filipinos have been under the United 
States' jurisdiction, but they have been 
permitted to rule themselves and to 
choose their own leaders. That's de- 
mocracy — and it means as much to 
them as it does to Americans. 

The people of the Philippines had 
a good, long chance to learn what life 
is like without democracy, to learn 
how some ruling nations treat outlying 
colonies. That was an almost 400-year 
stretch under Spanish rule. 

Then the Americans came along at 
the turn of the century and gave them 
public schools, modern sanitation, good 
roads, bridges, including all modern 
facilities common in America. 

MOST OCCIDENTALIZED RACE 

All these, plus the four centuries of 
Spanish regime, have Occidentalized 
the Filipinos, perhaps more than any 
other people in the Far East. They 
have been Americanized in education, 
ideas of government, economics, and 
ideals. They have learned to think 
and to feel like average Americans. 



Everything the United States stands 
for, the Philippines stand for, too, be- 
cause it was a "small United States" 
of the Far East before the Japs moved 
in. 

These Filipinos believe that the des- 
tinies of the United States and the 
home nation are linked together for 
a long future. These soldiers feel their 
people have earned — by their showing 
in this war, on Bataan and Corregidor, 
if by nothing else — the recognition as 
Uncle Sam's partners in the task at 
hand. 

And they promise to continue being 
mediators for Far Eastern policies of 
the United States. 

COMPLETE INDEPENDENCE 

When the fighting is won, the Philip- 
pines will stand on their own. For 
America has promised complete inde- 
pendence — no strings attached — and 
the Filipino soldiers are looking for- 
ward to that. 

With all this to fight for, the Fili- 
pino soldiers are going to give quite 
an account of themselves before this 
war is finished. They are anxious to 
return home, too, because they have 
relatives and friends to rescue. 



Future Peace In Pacific 

. . . continued from page 17 

Every step we take will be taken with 
a view to ultimate independence, and we 
hope to move toward that end as rap- 
idlv as the safety and the permanent 
interest of the Islands will permit/ 
FILIPINOS OPPOSE JAP MOVES 

'The Filipinos are Malays. No Fili- 
pino is prouder than I am of my race, 
nor of the fact that we belong to the 
Orient, geographically and racially. 
We have preserved what is best in 
Oriental habits and customs. But none 
will be found more determined to fight 
and oppose this Japanese propaganda 
than I am. For I am firmly convinced 
that the Filipino people, being Orien- 
tal and at the same time products of 
the West in their culture and Christian 
faith, have a distinct and important 
role to play in the future of the Asi- 
atic peoples in their relationship with 
the people of the Occident. 

"After a conference in which I fully 
and freely expressed my views as to 
the role that the Filipino people should 
play in the future, K. M. Panikkar, a 
great Indian patriot and statesman, 
wrote in the 'Calcutta Review' of July, 
1013. published by the University of 
Calcutta: 

"Tt is my firm belief that the Fili- 
pinos, an Oriental people with a Euro- 
pean and Christian civilization, with 
their race rooted deeply in the East 
and their culture rooted by three hun- 
dred years of contact with the West, 
have a great part to play in the Asia 
of the future. To the modernization of 
Asia they have a great contribution 
to make.' 

"That is the great destiny of my peo- 
ple." the Philippine president declared. 



(ik&Lik JL.-yfvjfc 





Filipino Fighting Men in training at Camp Beale, California. 



20 



} ataan 



Attack On Japan From India May 
Start at Ceylon, Col. Lanza Predicts 

Military authority points out possibilities in land campaign against 
Nippon foe. Japs will be handicapped, he says. 

By Col. Conrad H. Lanza 
Contributor of the Field Artillery Journal and a Recognized Military Authority 

An oversea expedition against Japan, initiated in India, would start from 
Calcutta ° r S ° me P ° rt °" CaSt C ° aSt ° f India between Ce >' lon aiu] 

The Allies now have ample shipping to carrv trnmvc QJ »i 

ing ciaits. ine only serious difficulty is now to nrovide air 1 !• 

Japanese-held territory. And th : s diffi- P rovl de air cover for landings on 



culty is due to the distances involved 
JAPS PHOTOGRAPH HARBORS 

Japan is now regularly and fre- 
quently sending planes to Ceylon and 
East India to photograph harbors The 
human eye may err, but cameras make 
no mistakes. Their record of what 
ships are in the harbor gives the Japa- 
nese good information as to a proposed 
oversea expedition. Calculations will 
show about how many troops could be 
loaded on the shipping discovered. 

The Japs would not be able to tell 
when the expedition was to sail, nor 
where it would go to. This informa- 
tion would only come from observing 
the course of the ships after they had 
sailed. As Calcutta is 500 miles from 
the Japanese-held Burma coast, and 
Ceylon is 1,200 miles away, the Japa- 
nese would have time to concentrate 
strong air forces against an invasion 
before it could reach its destination. 
I heir submarines and planes would 
probably discover the sailing of an in- 
vasion force shortly after it left port 
. here , are a nu 'nber of possible ob- 
ectives for an invasion force comin- 
from India. If this be Burma, an op- 
eration leading to the eventual capture 
of the great port of Rangoon would 

directly there a,r cover for it would 
have to come from aircraft carriers as 
the nearest Allied airfields are wd 
over 300 miles away. 

ALTERNATIVE SUGGESTED 

It would be confronted with nu- 
merous Japanese-held fields on land 
close by and would have to pass "the 
Japanese-held Andaman Islands, which 
contain more Japanese air fields An 
alternative would be to land behind the 
present Japanese land line, which 
reaches the coast near Akyab. using air 



fields behind the British line. If suc- 
cessful, new landings might be made 
m the rear of any new line the Japa- 
nese might occupy. 

This type of operation would be a 
step by step advance, would probably 
take very long and would involve fight- 
ing in a most difficult area of swamps, 
streams and jungles, but is feasible. 
BIG NAVAL FORCE NEEDED 

The difficulty about securing air cov- 
? f r f° r landings could be ameliorated 
it the Allies held the Andaman Isl anas, 
these are 250 miles away from the 
Burma coast, which is far for furnish- 
ing fighter protection. Still they would 
°e a great aid, even if they only re- 
moved the possibility of the Japs using 
them to attack Allied ships going by 

lo capture the Andamans would re- 
Quire a naval force superior to what 
Japan has in that area. It would 
seem that this could be clone For 
ne initial attack, air cover would have 
to come from planes on aircraft ear- 
ners. Not much is known of the Jap- 
anese strength on these islands. 

Whatever it may be, it would seem 
that the huge forces in India could 
supply a superior number of troops 
to attack. Once the Japanese air and 
naval forces are overcome, the islands 
would presumably sooner or later be 
captured, as has happened on other 
islands which General Mac Arthur's 
forces have taken. 

—Copyright, 1943, by the Chicago Tri- 
bune. Reprinted with permission. 



Bataan Will Be Avenged 

. • • • continued from page 



12 



Pistols. When the attack was over, 
the remnants of the tanks and of the 
Igorots were still there but the 20th 



Japanese Infantry was completely an- 
nihilated." 

DEEDS CALLED BREATH-TAKING 

In recounting the story of the battle 
to a group of his officers, General Mac- 
Arthur said, "Many desperate acts of 
courage and heroism have fallen un- 
der my observation on many fields of 
battle in many parts of the world. 1 
have seen forlorn hopes become reali- 
ties. I have seen last-ditch stands and 
innumerable acts of personal heroism 
that defy description. But for sheer 
breath-taking and heart-stopping des- 
peration, I have never known the equal 
of those Igorots riding the tanks. Gen- 
tlemen, whenever you repeat this story, 
stand in tribute to those gallant Igo- 
rots." 

The young Filipinos and Americans 
who died on Bataan and elsewhere 
were brothers-in-arms in a battle that 
will live forever in the annals of gal- 
lantry. 

I saw those men fight. I was with 
them through their terrible ordeal. I 
saw untrained Filipino soldiers, hardly 
out of their teens, turn into veteran sol- 
diers overnight. I saw your American 
boys, most of whom had never been 
under fire, fighting like heroes. I saw 
the wounded suffering quietly, and the 
Japanese bombs dropping viciously on 
the field hospitals clearly marked with 
the red cross of mercy. I saw the 
Japanese planes roaring continuously 
overhead, and the shells from the Jap- 
anese artillery crashing everywhere, and 
the snipers' bullets whipping through 
the underbrush. 

AMERICANS AND FILIPINOS D!ED 
FOR FREEDOM 

Twenty thousand Filipinos and three 
thousand Americans died for freedom 
on Bataan and other Philippine battle- 
fields. Our Filipino soldiers willingly 
made their sacrifice for liberty — for 
they were the youth of a people who 
had tasted freedom and were deter- 
mined never to give it up. 

If democracy is to remain a living 
ideal, we must follow their example in 
our acts and in our thoughts. Unless 
we are wise in planning for a better, 
safer world — unless we apply, through- 
out the world, some of the lessons of 
America's relations with the Philip- 
pines, all of the fighting, suffering, and 
dying of this terrible war will have 
been in vain. I believe that we will 
meet that challenge, and that the he- 
roic fight waged in the Philippines 
was only a prelude to ultimate victory 
— our victory. 



ecember, 1943 — " 

General Valdes Says Filipinos In Jap Regime 
Are Loyal, Merely Make Best Of Bad Situation 

Philippine Ws Chief of Staff pays ^J^^^^f^f^t 



and Cooke in Stockton Speech. He reports that 
training, they have gained nothing but praise". 

By J. C. Dionisio 

B ATA AN Pacific Coast Correspondent 

"] went you mv compatriots, to continue to do the best that you can to 
help the war effort. If vou are working in defense jobs contmue doing so. I 
you are working in agriculture, continue working in agriculture. Food is as vital 
to victory as ammunition. Above all. save. Invest m War Bonds as much as 
you possibly can. for every dollar so invested will hasten victory and the re- 

demption of our Motherland 

"To the Americans who are assembled with us in this auditorium, I'd like 
to say a word or two: You can de- 
pend " on the loyalty of the Filipinos, 
both those in America and in the Phil- 
ippines. I want to say to you that 



those who are occupying high positions 
in the present Japanese puppet gov- 
ernment in Manila are all loyal to 
America. They are only making the 
best of a bad situation for the sake of 
the people. And why are the Filipinos 
loyal? They are loyal because what 
America has done for them, no other 
power in the world has done for the 
peoples they have subjugated!" 

1500 ATTEND GATHER T NG 

Thus spoke Major General Basilio 
J. Valdes, Chief of Staff of the Phil- 
ippine Army and member of President 
Quezon's War Cabinet, to a crowd of 
some 1500 Filipinos and Americans 
gathered together at the Civic Memo- 
rial Auditorium in Stockton, Califor- 
nia, Sunday, November 21. General 
Valdes' appearance in Stockton— larg- 
est "Filipino town" in the U. S.— was 
arranged by the Filipino Community 
of Stockton & Vicinity, Inc., through 
Dr. Jose F. Imperial representative of 
the Philippine Resident Commissioner s 
Office, Western Division. 

While the city of Stockton did not 
send an official representative to the 
<ratherino;. the U. S. Army accorded 
General 1 Valdes full honors. The 
Stockton Air Base provided a guard 
of honor and a band to escort the 
party from the Stockton Hotel to the 
auditorium six blocks away. Air Base 
Commanding Officer Colonel Lloyd TuIJ 
and Lt Col. E. J. Nolan, his assistant, 
sat on the auditorium stage. The ges- 
ture of courtesy was a bit extraordi- 



nary, for the Army does not ordina- 
rily accord anyone such honors on 
Sundays. 

General Valdes paid tribute to the 
Filipino soldiers training in Camp 
Beale and Camp Cooke. "The Philip- 
pine government is highly proud of 
the Filipino Regiments," he said. 
"Wherever they have been in training, 
they have gained nothing but praise. 
This is not new. The Filipino has al- 
wavs been a good soldier." 




Flags of Freedom displayed in the Is- 
lands before the Japanese Inversion. 

TELLS OF BATTLE FOR ISLANDS 

The audience sal in breathless silence 
as the general told a running story of 
the heroic and tragic battle of the 
Philippines, He told of the bombing 
of Camp John Hay in Bagnio, of Ap- 
pari, then Manila, then Davo. Of the 
fiery enthusiasm of the youth of the 



Philippines to enlist in the army. Of 
the 250 students at the Munoz Agri- 
cultural school who had nothing but 
R.O.T.C. training but who volunteered 
as a body and was sent posthaste to 
Tarlac to hold a wavering line— and 
did. Of the withdrawal into Bataan— 
"one of the most brilliant delaying ac- 
tions in military history." Of the bat- 
tle of Abucay where the Japs lost a 
tremendous number of men. "When 
the wind blew toward us, the stench 
from decomposing Jap bodies was al- 
most unbearable," the General recalled. 

The Filipino and American forces in 
Bataan suffered death in thousands of 
ways, General Valdes said. There were 
diseases and no medicine, hunger and 
no food. "After three weeks in Ba- 
taan. the troops ate not canin but lo- 
gao" was the way he phrased it Ca- 
nin is rice cooked dry; logao is rice 
porridge. You get more logao out ot 
a cup of rice than can in- 

JAPS BOMB PIER 

The o-overnment's escape into Cor- 
residor was dramatically described by 
General Valdes. "After General Mac- 
Arthur had declared Manila an open 
city President Quezon and High Com- 
missioner fayre had no choice but es- 
cape to Corregidor or be captured 
The party was supposed to have sailed 
on the S. S. Mayon at 9 A. M. on De- 
cember 24, but the captain wouldn t 
sail because his engineer hadn t come 
back. So we had to wait. At 2 P. M. 
the japs bombed the piers. And there 
we were riding at anchor in Manila 
Bay! If the Japs had known who 
were in that ship. I wouldn't be here 
now! Am how. we sailed without the 
engineer at I P. M. and arrived in 
Corregidor two hours later. The com 
manding general told us we were lucky 
we hadn't arrived at 4:00, and pointed 
to a ship burning fiercely in the har- 
bor. The Japs bombed us at 1:00,' 
he said simply 

In Corregidor, the ailing President 
was placed in the hospital tunnel and 
his condition became worse. One day, 
. . . continued on paq? 24 



22 



''atcian 



Hawes Recalls Officials' Pilgrimage 
To Witness Commonwealth's Birth 

Former Missouri Senator who organized party says there was no 
similar ceremony in world history. 200,000 Filipinos and leaders of 
nations were on hand. 

(The editors of BAT A AN are pleased to print below the remarks on a short- 
wave broadcast of Harry B. Hawes. who ivas a United States Senator from Mis- 
souri tor several terms One of the outstanding authorities on Philippine- Ameri- 
can relations. Senator Halves is retarded as the Lafayette of the Philippines. He 

eZoh^TcT^nt^ 1 ; 1 ^ a ' ld iUtr0dUCed l "" *~ Z ™ 

By Harry B. Hawes 
farmer L. S. Senator from Missouri ' 
In the summer of 1935 President pWh n,, fl , 
pilgrimage to the Philippines of our WheJ? S ^ ^ t0 3 

both branches of Con^rei SecLri^£ f, "'l ^ d re P res entatives from 

of the principal commhtees. P thaIrmen <™« vice chairmen 

officia^t^S tit theThoreTof" A ^ """"^ of United States 

was represented by the Secretary PreSK,ent ^osevelt, unable to go.. 

vers call it a "puppet government," but 
the man on the street and the Filipinos 
in America and Hawaii refer to it jok- 
ingly as the "puppy government" and 
as the stool pigeon" selected by the 
Japanese not as puppets but as'pup- 
pres. 11 

WORTHLESS MONEY IS USED 

The Japanese are supposed to be 
spending money freely, but you must 
know that this money is valueless; that 
it is not worth the paper it is printed 
hat " s only use in the future 
would be for wall paper. 

Jl you want real money that will 
Pay tor your homes and your dam- 
ages, ask them to give it to you in 

Z e i u nd , g °} d > not m wa ste paper 
which has back of it nothing but paper 
and a printing press. 

For a time— and it will only be for 
a short trme— it may be wisest and 
best to bow with fortitude to the pres- 
ent Japanese domination, but as surely 
a? * f un rises ' Quezon, Osmena and 
MacArthur will return. 

FLEETS WILL BRING JUSTICE 

Mussolini has been defeated in Italy, 
he Italian fleet has joined the fleets of 
the Allies. The French fleet has also 
joined, when the representatives (the 
choice of the Filipino people, duly 
elected) return, they will have been 
preceded by the fleets of the nations 
ot the world— the American fleet, the 
English fleet, the Italian fleet and what 
is left of the Chinese ships— all will 
be there not only to restore but to 
bring justice. 



fZ' 5 e u Vl £ e Preside "t in person 

(the second highest official), and the 
Speaker of the House took the long 
tnp of seven thousand miles to testify 
by their presence to the unity of all 
branches of the American Government 
in establishing a government controlled 
exclusively by Filipinos, leaving only 
a period of ten years f Gr adjustment 
helore final independence in 1946 

Throughout all the pages of our his- 
tory no similar enterprise has been 
undertaken. Two hundred thousand 
rilipinos, it is estimated, watched with 
approval the inauguration ceremnies of 
President Quezon. In addition to this 

W V,h °™ W6re re P res <*tatives 
fom al the great nations of the earth 
and in front of the platform/were Fili- 
pinos from ever section of their nation. 
SINGLE JAP WATCHED 

Japan had nothing to do with this 
promise of complete independence and 
ts one representative occupied but 

S nh'l m the solem » ceremnSI 
a s m 5 ' TT g ' Ja ' )an deli vered 
a suipnse attack on the Philippine 
Commonweal*, which then carr e 7 he 
flag of the United States and Z Phil 
■ppme Commonwealth. Unprenared 
F H-inos made a defenTe X ' 
will stand out i„ history i n all tin," 
" hlc £ rang Aronghout the world an ] 
has been acclaimed by all the ]et 

of the world. Asiatic, European, and 
American. 

Mow the Japanese claim to have set 
up an Independent Philippine Govern- 
ment. Scholars and international law- 



Hitler had hoped for different peace 
proposals, but he is confronted by unit- 
ed demand from all his enemies, the 
United States. Russia, England, France, 
and all the smaller nations, and that 
demand is, "Unconditional surrender." 

ALLIED FLAGS IN JAPAN SOON 

The Allies have bombarded Berlin 
and all the great cities of Germany. 
The American flag is flying in Italy 
and the Allied flags of the nations of 
the earth will soon be flying in Japan. 

Your Commonwealth will be rees- 
tablished with President Quezon and 
Vice President Osmena. Your Assem- 
bly and the other administrative 
function. These are the real rulers, 
branches of the Government will again 
elected in a democratic way, who will 
be restored to office, and if you want 
independence more quickly in 1946, it 
will be given to you. 

That is the question that the re- 
stored Commonwealth, having heard 
the voice of its people, will decide. 

Be brave of heart. Mabuhay! 

MacArthur Needs 500 Planes 

continued from page 1 1 

pie of the United States have never 
forgotten their obligations to you. Gen- 
eral MacArthur has been constantly 
asking for more planes, supplies and 
materials in order that he can carry 
out his one dream, which is to oust 
the Japanese from our shores. That 
not more has been done so far is due 
to the fact that it was simply a mat- 
ter of inability to do more up to the 
present time. The situation has now 
changed. I have it on good authority 
that General MacArthur will soon have 
the men and material he needs for the 
reconquest of our homeland . . . 

"My fellow countryment, I am proud 
of you. I know that you have been 
wielding against the enemy two potent 
weapons: Filipino unity and faith. 
Stronger than any arm of destruction, 
your weapons are of untold and ter- 
rible power. Stronger than a thou- 
sand sheets of steel, with them you are 
invincible. Carry on. and today. I 
repeat to you with conviction what Gen- 
eral MacArthur said when he arrived 
in Australia from Bataan : 'I broke 
through and I will return.' 

In conclusion President Quezon de- 
clared. "People of the Philippines. I 
will return with General aMc Arthur. 
Our day of redemption is at hand." 



2)ece/nJ?er ; 1943. 



.23 



Cash To Be Sent Island 
Internees, U. S. Reports 

The State Department announced 
recently that arrangements had been 
made through the Swiss Legation at 
Tokyo to send monthly remittances to 
civilian interment camps in the Philip- 
pine Islands. 

The funds will be used to purchase 
relief supplies and extend financial as- 
sistance to the 4,081 American civilians 
being held in Philippine camps. 

The department said $50,000 had 
been sent to Santo Tomas at Manila, 
where 2,300 civilians are held, and ar- 
rangements had been made to send 
$25,000 monthly to this camp. 

Other remittances have been sent to 
other camps, it said. 

The announcement said information 
gathered from repatriates on the ex- 
change vessel Gripsholm concerning 
Americans remaining in the Philip- 
pines will be made available to next 
of kin and other interested persons. 

According to information so far re- 
ceived by the Department, American 
civilians are now being held by the 
Japanese authorities in internment 
camps in the Philippines as follows: 

Bacolod 81 

Baguio 414 

Cebu 89 

Davao 230 

Iloilo 60 

Los Banos 800 

Santo Tomas (Manila) 2300 

Tacloban 19 

Tagbilaran * 

Total Philippines 4081 

The persons on the exchange ves- 
sel Gripsholm who returned to the 
United States from the Philippine Is- 
lands are being interviewed by repre- 
sentatives of the Department of State 
with a view to obtaining and correlat- 
ing such information as the repatri- 
ates may have concerning Americans 
remaining in the Philippines. This in- 
formation will be made available to 
next of kin and other interested per- 
sons in the United States as soon as 
the information shall have been re- 
ceived in the Department. 




idter J3iA,losai% 



ome$ 



By P. C. MORANTTE 



The most exciting thing that has hit the office of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippines in Washington lately was Carlos Bulosan. foremost Filipino short 
story writer in the United States. He came to Washington at the request of 
President Manuel L. Quezon, w } 10 W anted to meet the dynamic little guy who 
not only has broken into the Saturday Evening Post with his famed article F ree- 
dom from Want and split the sides .of the New York magazine readers with his 
series of funny stories, but also has stirred the American intelligentia by the force 
of his poetry and social ideas. 

Bulosan is a cute bundle of dynamo, eighty-five pounds avoirdupois. Though 
he's only five-foot one. frail-bodied, lame and coffee-brown, he's an impressive 
character. As you look into his glowing eyes and arrow-shaped nose and plow- 
like mouth, you detect at once the TNT stored in his shaggy head. Bulosan s 
voice is pedestrian, but if you think his words follow the traffic rules, you're mis- 
taken. His English is always jaywalking, and precipitates being run over by 
his own extravagant accounts. But the wonder of it is that he always comes 
off unscathed. I suspect he's always convoyed by a gremlin or his guardian angel. 

WRITER IS INTENSE INDIVIDUAL 

When Bulosan gets serious, which comes at periodic intervals as a fitting 
punctuation to his bouncing impishness, his voice changes and his eyes become 
fiery. His brow turns into a railroad track and the corner of his mouth forms 
acute angles. This is the Bulosan with whom our Philippine President talked, 
the Bulosan whose social ideas for the masses seem in danger of bursting out 
of his being like measles. ?i 

His lighter moments are always a mosaic of fun. "What for? How come. 
This line is an index to the good mood he is in. And then he would proceed 
to wipe off his face an imaginary string of perspiration, a peculiar mannerism 
expressive of his constant search for fun. 



FORGETS DATE, PLACE OF BIRTH 

Bulosan was born in a little town in either Pangasinan province or in 



the 

DUlOSail Wclfe uuiu in el nine Luvvii in ^iinc;± x r i 

Iloco region. He prefers to forget where he was born and when he was Porn. 
Sometimes he likes to identify himself as belonging to "the Ilocano nation 
whatever the significance means. He would rather give you the impression that 
he was cracked out of a jug of win by a man who claimed him as his son and 
who had become a wealth of story material for him. "My father is ? dead, lie 
told me several times, "but I'm getting rich making fun of his ghost. 

To Bulosan his father is a gold mine, and out of his stories about him lie 
has already realized a dozen pairs of made-to-order shoes, half a dozen expensive 
suits plus a house in swank Beverly Hills, California, which is populated by a 
lone black cat whom he calls "My Soul." He maintains an office in the Wall 
Street section of Los Angeles, with three telephones and no secretary. He used 
to have a bunch of secretaries, mostly blondes; but on one occasion a Los 
Angeles cop came up to his office and tried to arrest the puny guy on charges 
of maintaining a harem. 

TOLD TO FIRE SECRETARIES 

He was told to dismiss his cute secretaries and warned that he should not 
monkey around with Hollywood models if he knew what's good for him. So. 
Bulosan, being amenable to suggestion, especially if there's nothing he could 
do about it. told his blonde helps they were free. But accustomed as he was to 
female company, he engaged a lady of twilight age to be his secretary, his nurse, 
his mother, his banker and his guardian angel and promised to pay her faith- 
fully w'ith love, poetry and roses. Their business relationship is quite ideal, he 
confided to me. . . continued on following page 



24 (Oa taan 



Ea 



When you come across verses that seem to sear your heart and soul and 
spine as though you were suffering from lumbago, the chances are that you are 
reading Bulosan. For his poetry is like a saw cutting across your social con- 
sciousness. You can't read Bulosan without feeling that a man who has known 
all the sufferings of the underdog is crying out to be heard. 

HAS THREE BOOKS PUBLISHED 

His three published volumes of poetry, namely, Letter From America, Chorus 
For America, and Voices of Bataan, are commentaries loaded with depth charges 
of revolt against the smugness of the bourgeoise, the tyranny of dictators, the 
cruelties of scheming capitalists. Having gone through the Workers' School on 
the Pacific Coast and steeped in Karl Marx's Das Kapital, he knows his masses 
and his dialectics Sometimes he brushes his teeth in Hegelian ways, inverting 
his toothbrush by force of habit. ° 

There are three things that Carlos loves next to God and the people, and 
they are: Women, Wine, and Liteurature. He is full of stories of his drunken 
adventures, his romantic escapades, and his dealings with writers who know Sa- 
royan Hemingway, Dreiser, Steinheck, Morantte. Yap and Villa Sometimes he 

are'd^ied^ ntt YoTare made 'XVt^ST, "4 ^ 

their works intimately. d a " yWa >' S that he knows them and 

HAS NO SERIOUS PRETENSIONS 

^ttaJtss^si: js zrt <* rr^ ■* that ' s 

his money for the fun he gets out 0 f i fc ThJ* fond of splurging, throwing 
tensions, and you can't accuse him 2 I • ™fr , he has no ser,ous i 3re ' 

up without a ceiW He L V bem g/<? nc e,ted, though he plays himself 

They are always inflated but hev ,1 Y °- U nCS and , anecdotes that entertain. 
land. Onlv his character* I, f Y \ ma S inatlve fuths like Alice in Wonder- 

His humor h^£^£j^ h ^^^ ™ and Bulosan himself - 
r> n ]_ 7 a o cllIL J ana tneies where his charm lie^ 

his phys^aTtor^eTweittln ^ }™* l ° ^ them as thou § h 

were already prepared to senJ ^ P ' n ? f u a S ° cial u P heavaL " M y doctors 
science, but' i' fooled tl em t 7 r^' 1 °t J ° hnS H °l* ins as the P r0 P ert y of 
lots of Hollywood offer m A nJ P t n 3m f fam0US wliter ' And 1 S ot 
I have dreamed i all mv lil t Pr « 8ldent Quezon has asked to meet me. What 

BuIosaTis Sill v? i 35 been m ° re than full y realized." 
Saroyan yet. } but glVe him a chance < he might become another 



ence^sTandsifa^Sai; ^ ?0rC,id accounte " f ^ttle experi- 

I Simon and Schuste? f oV^hi^ ^ \ bo <t is " G " 
of clear thinkin* keen l\ \ • possesses the happy combination 

muitaxig, keen observation and a light narrative style. 

in AusiaUa andNet GuT^l? ft "T tmthful acco "" t «* «*J life 
ouss the taclic^and strat " \ ""t been T"^ He d ° CS ^ 
of the trip "down under " *u Y?. r '. but s,m l lI y relates his impressions 
Guinea. the odd,t,e s of Australia and action on New 

Life on New Guinea at 
half modern. But even the f2 * Strange , miXture ' half P™itive, 
the Jap, and Hi hfnllv 1 A ™?V-™**J native favored the Yanks over 
over t he in u rZ tra U J ? d * if Upplies aml oarriad the mounded back 

1/ oS Ywks were the tou S hest of all."— If ir&m 



Filipinos Are Loyal 

. . . continued from page 21 

the President sent for General Valdes. 

"General," said the President. "I am 
going to die." 

General Valdes protested: "But, Mr. 
President, vou mustn't — you can't — die 
now!" 

PRESIDENT'S COTTAGE DEMOLISHED 

At any rate it was agreed that liv- 
ing in the tunnel would surely kill 
Quezon. It was decided to place him 
and his family in a cottage about five 
minutes' walk from the tunnel. One 
day when no one was in the cottage, 
the Japs shelled Corregidor from Ca- 
viite. The cottage was demolished. 

From Corregidor the President and 
his party were evacuated by submarine 
to the Visayan Islands, still unoccupied 
by the Japs. 

"The first two hours under the water 
was all right, but after six hours the 
heat became so oppressive that I told 
myself if I died I surely would go to 
heaven because I've been in hell al- 
ready!" Gen. Valdes laughed. "I can 
afford to laugh that one off here!" he 
added soberly. 

The submarine landed them at San 
Jose, Antique, and from there the party 
commandeered a boat for Negros. They 
hid the boat in San Carlos harbor, but 
the Japs saw it and blockaded Negros 
Island with a cruiser and a destroyer. 
They escaped from Dumaguete in Lieu- 
tenant Bulkeley's P. T. boat, and for a 
thrilling account of this escape to 
Mindanao, the General refers the read- 
er to W. L. White's book, "They Were 
Expendable." 

BOAT ALMOST BLOWN UP 

General Valdes, however, thinks 
Lieutenant Bulkeley's account was on 
the whole an understatement. "There 
we were, bouncing at terrific speed in 
a rough sea, in that quivering boat 
made of plywood. Then suddenly there 
was an explosion. The sailors were 
tense. President Quezon's family sat 
huddled around him. Lieutenant Bulke- 
ley jumped from the bridge, ran below 
decks and soon was back. Tt's all 
right now, Mr. President,' he said. I 
asked the President what was all right. 
The President explained. It seemed 
that the bouncing of the boat had 
caused the torpedo firing machinery to 
function and one torpedo was half way 
out in the water while the other half 



1943. 



.25 



Filipinos Are Loyal 

. . . continued from preceding page 

got stuck inside the boat. Only a 
matter of minutes and it would have 
exploded — and I wouldn't have been 
here with you today. I pay tribute to 
the coolness and efficiency of Lieuten- 
ant Bulkeley." 

From Lanao, to Bukidnon, to Aus- 
tralia, and to America was compara- 
tively uneventful. 

General Valdes said that General 
MacArthur's heart is in the Philippines, 
and that his present campaign of con- 
quering Japan's chain of island out- 
posts northward from Australia is 
part of the plan directed towards the 
reconquest of the Philippines. Gen- 
eral MacArthur, General Valdes re- 
vealed, has already told President Que- 
zon his timetable for that reconquest. 

"General MacArthur has pledged to 
President Quezon that he would not 
stop fighting until the day when they 
both shall march into Manila and Pres- 
ident Quezon into Malacanang Palace 
again! It is our duty — everyone of 
us — to back General MacArthur fulfill 
that pledge," General Valdes concluded. 

Filipinos Earned Freedom 

. . . continued from page 13 

lot not with the Americans but with 
their brother Orientals, the Japanese. 

"There are few Filipinos who will be 
misled by a contention so obviously 
fraudulent. It is true that the Philip- 
pines are geographically a part of the 
Orient. But it is not geography alone 
that has determined the spiritual and 
political character of the Philippine 
nation. That character is a composite 
of two Western civilizations. From 
sixteenth century Spain there came to 
the Philippines the Christian religion 
and the advanced culture of the richest 
and most powerful nation of Europe. 
And from the United States, American 
administrators of the twentieth century 
brought the precepts and ideals of 
American political democracy. The 
result was the only Christian nation, 
the only democratic state in the Far 
East. This is the nation that is now 
asked to join hands with the feudal 
autocracy of Imperial Japan. 

JAPS FOR "ERSATZ" REPUBLIC 

"In furtherance of this program, the 
Japanese have advanced the claim that 
the Filipinos failed through years of 




Governor-General Frank Murphy and President Manuel L. Quezon 
entering the grandstand during the Commonwealth Inaugural ceremony 
in Manila eight years ago. 



struggle, to win their freedom from 
the United States. And to complete 
this attempted hoax, the Japanese, to 
whom republican government is utterly 
foreign, have established an "ersatz" 
Philippine Republic with all the ex- 
ternal trappings of legitimate self- 
government. Let those who may be 
in doubt look beneath this mask and 
they will find the sinister outlines of 
the Japanese military machine. They 
will find no genuine freedom or inde- 
pendence but the brute power with 
which Japan in years past has fastened 
a harsh imperial rule on Korea, Man- 
churia, and the unhappy provinces of 
China. During this same period the 
American people were developing dem- 
ocratic institutions in the Philippines 
and providing in law for their real in- 
dependence in 1946, both economic 
and political. This was a covenant 
openly arrived at— not under the pres- 
sure of wartime expediency but in the 
leisurely days of peace. 

"People of the Philippines, this cov- 
enant will be kept. We in America 
are determined to retake by force of 
arms that which our soldiers in com- 
pany with yours so bravely defended 
and lost on Bataan and Corregidor. 
We shall not falter or slacken our 
efforts until this defeat has been fully 



avenged. Our victories in Africa and 
Europe will be matched by further vic- 
tories in Asia, leading to eventual de- 
liverance of those who are now the 
unhappy and unwilling victims of Jap- 
anese aggression and treachery. we 
shall not rest until our colors are 
again joined with yours and the in- 
vader is driven from Philippine soil. 

FLAG TO BE SYMBOL OF FREEDOM 

"And when our flag is restored it 
will not be merely as a symbol of au- 
thority. It will be a final sign of 
liberation and a symbol of freedom. 
Our task will then have been com- 
pleted. At that juncture, the Philip- 
pine people, already versed in the or- 
deal of war, will take over the privi- 
leges and responsibilities of sovereign- 
ty, a sovereignty which will belong to 
them as a matter of natural right and 
Divine law. 

"On that auspicious day, too, they 
will extend the hand of welcome to 
their gallant President, Manuel Que- 
zon, and their distinguished Vice Pres- 
ident, Sergio Osmena, who have been 
continued in their respective offices by 
the Congress of the United States until 
constitutional processes and normal 
functions of government shall have 

. continued on next page 



26 



Filipinos Earned Freedom 

continued from preceding page 



been restored in the Philippines. The 
people of the Philippines, having wit- 
nessed the destruction of their political 
institutions, will be cheered by this 
action of the Congress. For it was an 
action both of these patriotic states- 
men approved and recommended in 
the belief that it would speed the day 
of victory. And it is victory, and the 
restoration of their homeland, that the 
Filipino people desire above all else. 

GREAT FUTURE AHEAD 

"A great future lies before you, peo- 
ple of the Philippines. Already your 
President, although physically racked 
with illness, is zealously working and 
preparing for your economic rehabili- 
tation and your defense in the days 
after victory is won. These measures 
are tangible evidence of the God-given 
freedom that will soon be yours. 

"One day in the not-far-distant fu- 
ture,^ the High Commissioner conclud- 
ed, you will see the American fleet- 
Stars and Stripes afloat— sailing proud- 
ly into Manila Bay. It will be final 
assurance that the story of the quest 
tor Philippine independence did not 
end in the blasted tunnels of Corri- 
dor. The enemy has written a few 
tragic pages. But, as we praved and 
hoped on the 15th day of November, 
1*15, the Divine Author yet will brin<* 
the saga to a happy ending. And on 

1 t;l th ^V vi11 be - in for the Peo- 
ple of the Philippines a chapter more 
fair and full of promise than an v that 
has yet been written." 



Osmena Pays High Tribute 
To United States Goodwill 

verllrv * ° Smena ' in a » anni- 

S%fc T ncan broadcast ' «m 

lm? P1 "°' A T. rican comradeship 
n this war Is nothing new. It is but 

he continuation of many vea 
< - and corclial reoperation between 
the two peoples . . . Raving shared 
Wi h America the fortunes of war as 
well as the blessings of peace, we shall 
work with her in the establishment of 
the post-war world of freedom, justice 
and security." 



Vice President Osmena said in part: 
"I am happy to address America's 
radio audience tonight to commemo- 
rate the eighth anniversary of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines. 

HAS SEEN BOTH WAR AND PEACE 

"The Philippine Commonwealth was 
born on November 15, 1935. Only 
eight years old, it has seen the dark 
clays of war as well as the bright days 
of peace. Its first six years were de- 
voted to the thorough preparation for 
the responsibilities of independent na- 
tionhood. Among the problems we 
faced were national defense, stabili- 
zation of the nation's economy, ex- 
pansion of the educational system, 
improvement of the lot of the" com- 
mon man, a vast public works program, 
and development of agriculture, indus- 
try and commerce. 

"We were peacefully engaged in this 
work of preparing for our independ- 
ence when war suddenly came on De- 
cember 8, 1941, and' the climactic 
event in Philippine- American relation- 
ship happened. The Filipinos stood 
to the death by America's side. In 
the epic of Bataan, which lasted for 
tore than four months, Filipino and 
American soldiers sealed with their 
blood eternal friendship. 

NO ACCIDENT THAT WE FOUGHT 

"It was no accident that twenty-one 
thousand Filipino soldiers died by the 
side of three thousand American sol- 
diers in their determined stand against 

he invaders. Neither is it an accident 
that today,, after almost two years of 
Japanese military occupation, stron- 
guerrilla resistance against the enemy 
is still going on in the mountains and 
remote towns of Luzon, Visayas and 
Mindanao. For Filipino - American 
comradeship in this war is nothing 
new. It i s but the continuation of 
many years of close and cordial co- 
operation between the two peoples. . . . 

, As soon as organized Filipino re- 
sistance was overcome, American sol- 
diers laid down the rifle and became 
teachers. American doctors took up 
the task of eradicating epidemics and 
diseases, while American engineers 
built roads and bridges. 

U. S. SHOWED GOODWILL 

''With this evidence of goodwill, it 
did not take long for America to win 
over the Filipinos. In 1901. the Fili- 
pinos participated in the first munici 
pal elections held under the American 



flag. However, it was not until 1907, 
when the Philippine Assembly was es- 
tablished, that the Filipino people de- 
cided upon a policy of complete co- 
operation with the United States. As 
the Speaker of this first representative 
assembly in the Philippines, it was 
my responsibility to lead the Filipino 
participation in the government. 

"America's altruistic policy in the 
Philippines reached the climax in 1934 
with the passage by Congress of the 
Philippine Independence Act, provid- 
ing for the establishment of the pres- 
ent government of the Commonwealth 
of the Philippines under a constitution 
of their own making and setting the 
date for independence, July 4, 1946. 

"The assumption by the Philippines 
of a semi-independent status did not 
weaken its politcial ties with the Unit- 
ed States. That the Filipinos wanted 
independence was well known; that the 
Americans would give it to them was 
bevond doubt. But even with eventual 
political separation of the Philippines 
from the United States already settled, 
the tender but firm attachment of one 
to the other during the transitory pe- 
riod became even more cherished, and 
Filipino-American cooperation went on 
as before." 



Hernandez Says Jap Lies 
Won't Influence Filipinos 

Jaime Hernandez, Auditor General 
of the Philippines, in a Philippine 
Commonwealth Day address in New 
York, declared that the destiny of the 
Filipino people "as the spearhead of 
democracy and freedom among Ori- 
ental peoples shall reappear more re- 
splendent after the most trying and 
dreadful ordeal in their history." 

The Philippine official said that "all 
the misleading propaganda used by the 
Japanese to cajole the Filipinos into 
adandoning their w a y of life and 
adopting that of Japan will not influ- 
ence us in the least." The Filipinos 
who are free, he added, "can see dis- 
tinctly the evil and far-reaching con- 
sequences that will result from abdi- 
cation of our culture and democratic 
principles." 

Hernandez was the main speaker at 
the banquet given by the Filipino com- 
munity of New York under the aus- 
pices of the Filipino National Council 
and the Philippine Center at the Me- 
Alpin Hotel. 



December, 1943. 



27 



PHONE PLAZA 1054 



FELIX V. G0LDSB0R0UGH, Jr. 

Special Agent 



NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
1008 Keyser Building 
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 



MY BEST WISHES FOR A VERY MERRY 
CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR 
TO ALL MY FILIPINO FRIENDS 



JACK KLEIN 

Asparagus Grower 
STOCKTON, CALIFORNIA 



Our sine eves t Christmas Greetings 
and Best Wishes for The New Year to our 
Filipino Friends 



May 1 944 bring you all — and all of us — 
peace on earth and to all men 
Good-will, Freedom and Happiness ! 



JAMES TOZZI & CO. 

Growers & Shippers 
CALIFORNIA FRUITS AND VEGETABLES 

Stockton, California 







m 




A Very Merry Christmas and a Victorious 


1944 


to our Filipino Allies! 




QUONG FAT C 


o. 


IMPORTERS 




Philippine and Chinese Products 




Wholesale - Retail 




1009 Grant Ave. San Francisco, Calif. 



YULETIDE GREETINGS AND BEST WISHES 
FOR 1944 TO ALL! 



M 



From the Officers and Members of the 

Gagayan Valley Association 

of Stockton and Vicinity 

1943 - ' ! i OFFICERS 

I'KKNANDO A. TAGCAOA. I > A iM \SO c. I'AMINSAX. 

Pre ident Treasurer 
DIONISIO Y. VENTURA, 

Vice President 
FELIPE G ALICIA, Secretary 
(tlliis BERNAL. 

Assistant Secretary 
216 So. EI Dorado St. 



VALENTIN GOZE, Auditor 
JOSE SUM HAT. Adviser 
EUGENIO COSTA LBS, 
Serjeant-at-Arms 

Stockton, Californii 



PHILIPPINE 
NATIONAL BANK 



New York Agency 



2 5 BROADWAY 

NEW YORK CITY 



ALL OF US CAN FREE OUR COUNTRY BY 

PURCHASING WAR BONDS. 

— President Quezon. 




. . NO. 10 JANUARY. 1944 WASHINGTON D. C. 



VOL. I 



lacs4rtkur 
-Anniversary ft^L 



COMPLETE TEXT 



Osmena Outlines Postwar 
Role Of U. S. In Philippines 

Writer Reports Gen. MacArthur 
Rates High With Australians 

SPECIAL REPORT 

Repatriates From Islands Say 
Morale Is High, Food Low 



FOP VICTORY 



UNITED 
STATES 
SAVINGS 
DS 
AND STAMPS 




^Owenty-j^ive cents a copy 



A CHALLENGING ARTICLE 




FILIPINOS ASK ABOUT THE FUTURE! 



OUR READERS WRITE 



THE EDITORS WELCOME 
COMMENTS FROM THE READERS 



"We here in Missoula, and I may say all 
Of the State of Montana, admire your 
splendid magazine, BATAAN. Montana 
had many sons in the Philippines. Yes, we 
do remember the Philippines — we shall 
never forget. 

"I have had the honor of reading many 
of the splendid articles of interest to all 
those who had sons or relatives in the Is- 
lands. We shall always honor our men 
who fought shoulder to shoulder with their 
sister republic, and her glorious stout- 
hearted men who will never accept defeat. 
We who had sons sent down to Manila 
before the war, unprepared and under-sup- 
plied and then left and forgotten are bit- 
ter now. We shall always continue to be 
so. Not the people of the Philippines, nor 
their leaders, but bitter at our own poli- 
ticians . . . We admire the stout hearts 
of all the Filipino people. We are forever 
on your side." 

Joe Gamacbe, Sr. 
Missoula, Montana 



" . You may rest assured that all of 
us in the Second Filipino Infantry feel as 
you do about December 7 and the heroic 
part played by the Filipino people in this 
war. I send you our best wishes and per- 

vT r\t fv issue of your fine maga- 
zine, BA I A AN, we may be able to 
ticipate. 



par- 



Charles L.Clifford 
Colonel, Infantry 
Commanding, 2nd Filipino Infantr 
Camp Cooke, California 



"May 1 express to you sincere congratu- 
lations tor your fine magazine. BATAAN 

S H v Radi ™ George T. Bur- 
nuge, L . S N.. was on Corregidor at the 
hme of capitulation and is novv a prisoner 
in the Philippines, so my family eaeerlv 
awaits each issue of your magazine for anv 
possible news from the island!. I intend to 
save all the copies of BATAAN for mv 
son when he returns, and let us hone the 
c ay will soon be here when our boys and 
he people of the Philippines will again be 
able to live happy, peaceful and coSed' 

Mrs George II. Burridge 
Andover. Mass. 



"I am receiving BATAAN and enjoying 
it very much. Am interested in anything 
about the Philippine Islands, as my son, 
Robert Farrell, was there two years — was 
taken prisoner when Corregidor capitulated, 
and died in a Japanese prison camp. Do 
you think that when this war is all over 
that I could go over and find his burial 
place and bring him home?" 

Mrs. G. J. Farrell 
West Plaines. Missouri 



"The November issue of BATAAN is, 
in my opinion, the best issue. It is in- 
tensely interesting and makes very fast 
reading extremely informative material 
from cover to cover. I and my friends 
here enjoyed reading the whole magazine. 
Moping for a bigger, better, and more pow- 
erful BATAAN." 

I. R. Cabatit 
Seattle, Washington 



" I hank you for your wonderful and in- 
spiring magazine, BATAAN. Bataan has 
become a world shrine where a new free- 
dom star was born. The stronghold of 
Corregidor fell, but free, unconquered men 
survive." 

Mrs. F. A. Ashbern 
Bridgeport, Conn. 



Commander Fcrustino C. Dacanay 
of the Filipino Post No. 509, The 
American Legion, Dept. of Illinois, 
passed away Monday evening, Jan. 3, 
1944. He had been sick for a week. 
His comrades will give him a military 
funeral Thursday morning at 10. He 
has been a devoted member of the 
Roman Catholic Church and as such 
will be carried by his comrades to 
the Saint Mary's Church by the Lake. 

Commander Dacanay was serving 
his second term as Commander since 
September. 



THE ACTS oWnGRESS n^trx^h CIRCULATION, ETC., REQUIRED BY 

B Of Bataan. published month. f 2r U AUGUST 24 ' 1912 ' AND MARCH 3, 1933 

^5o^\? k ^^ 5 ^ y »* ashin * ton ' D c - for ** .* 

?u iM &jfe ^ th0 State and ^unty aforesaid, personally appe, 

the Editor-Publisher of Sl laS 1„ 8WOrn according to law, deposes and says that h 
knowledge and belirf u ™ ****** Magazine, and that the following is. to the best of 

IWnp'^h in »-> •» ~ a. „ c ii r 



ed 



■ , , * uuiifciier OI tho 1-intn.m A/f • "*» w '"w, wt:i.»ust^> ami says tiuiu iij ir> 

knowledge and belief, a true ^SSSnUf'S % * nd the foll °wine is. to the best of his 

publication for tho date shown it tZ \hn ^ership, management, etc., of the aforesaid 

as amended by the Act of March f l?M . re <» ui "* by the Act of August 24, 15)12, 

1 That th embodied in section 537. Postal Laws and Reirula- 

v ana ^nr a, ; e:C ^^^ d lS^^l l K 0t ^ > * RfiP 1 ^ editor, managing editor, and business 
) ap. 1300 National p rc . S s £ m Y - ap ' N ^nal l 3 ^ss Hldg. ; Editor. Diosdado M. 

Bldg. : Business Manager" Dios krln M SP™* jj 4 ^ Diosdado M. Yap, 1300 National Press 

I! 32 Z known taSFSP * ~ m R W " WaShinCt0n - ^ C 

, per cent o, mte of tot., a^t iKSan^^^ornS^JSSSSa 3Sf*lfS. ,,, * ih - 

Sworn to an,, BulfrSfwo"o ™'J?%L TTi ITT* Owiier. 
(SEAL) e th,s 2 ' lh day of September, 1948. 

FRANCIS L. NEUHECK, Notary Public. 
— — . — _____ (My commission expires Sept. 15, 1946.) 



From Japan: 

W, ties 



Zentsuji War Prison Camp 
January 26, 1943 

Dear Folks: 

I will take advantage of the first 
opportunity to write to you I have 
had for nearly a year. I wrote you a 
letter last February while in Bataan, 
but doubt that it ever got through. I 
hope that everyone is well and thai 
everything is going smoothly at home. 
I am anxious to know what Vincent 
is doing — I hope he got a better deal 
than I got. I sure wish I could be 
home to see the activity and the 
changes the war has caused, also to 
lap up some of the old home cooking. 
I hope the war has not caused you 
any hardship. I am glad to say that 
I am unscratched and well. My ex- 
periences during the war were not too 
horrible and I was not exposed to 
much danger, being in the rear areas 
most of the time, doing various kinds 
of engineering work. I was one of a 
large group of war prisoners moved to 
Jap & an & from the P. I. last November. 
We are quartered in large two-storied 
barracks, sleep on mattresses with 
plenty of blankets and have plenty of 
room. There are English, Australian 
and New Zealand war prisoners in- 
terned here, also some American sail- 
ors and Marines from Guam and Wake. 
These fellows have treated us swell 
since we arrived here. They are all 
in °-ood spirits, healthy and optimistic, 
and our morale has risen considerably 
since our association with them. We 
have received toliet articles, sewing 
kits, tobacco and some food from the 
American and Canadian Red Cross. 
The Japanese army gave us overcoats 
and additional clothing to supplement 
our light tropical clothing. It gets 
quite cold here during the winter, the 
temperature going below freezing. I 
hope to hear from you soon. 

Filipinos settled in America around 
1710. They arrived in Louisiana, and 
were known as Malays, but their de- 
scendants today still claim to be Fili- 
pinos. One of their settlements, not 
far from New Orleans, has long been 
known as Manila Village. 



VOLUME I 
NUMBER 10 




d:ck fitzpatrick 

EXECUTIVE EDITOR 



JANUARY 
1944 

AN INDEPENDENT PHILIPPINE NEWSMAGAZINE 
DIOSDADO M. YAP 

J. C. DIONISIO, Associate Editor 



EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 

CHIEF. PACIFIC COAST BUREAU 

CARLOS BULOSAN and CAYETANO C. NAGAC 

CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 

Nemesio M. Salazar and Bennie C. Cas, Chicago Representatives 
Bernardino D. Arado. Benny O. Escobido and Angel P. Pingpong. Territory of Hawaii Representatives 



BATAAN MAGAZINE IS PUBLISHED MONTHLY. EDITORIAL OFFICES: 1300 NATIONAL PRESS BUILDING WASHINGTON 4, D. C. ADVER- 
TISING AND CIRCULATION OFFICES: 424 LAMONT STREET, N. W., WASHINGTON 10, D C . . . PACIFIC COAST OFFICE: 
239 SO. EL DORADO STREET, STOCKTON 4, CALIFORNIA . . . SUBSCRIPTION' RATES: $3.00 A YEAR; SINGLE COPIES 25 CENTS. 
ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION . . "ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MATTER APRIL 16, 1943, AT THE POST OFFICE AT 
WASHINGTON, D. C UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3, 1870." . . . COPYRIGHT 1943 BY DIOSDADO M. YAP, EDITOR AND PUBLISHER. 



(general l^?]ac~y4rtLur ^4tvardecl 

IWMofMc 



onor 



Citation accompanying the award of the Congressional 
Medal of Honor, the nation's highest decoration, on 
March 25, 1942: 



GENERAL DOUGLAS MacARTHUR, command- 
ing general. United States Army Forces in the 
Far East, for conspicuous Leadership in prepar- 
ing the Philippine Islands to resist conquest, for 
gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the 
call of duty in action against invading Japanese 
forces, and for the heroic conduct of defensive 
and offensive operations on the Bataan Peninsula. 
He mobilized, trained and led an army which has 
received ivorld acclaim for its gallant defense 
against tremendous superiority of enemy forces in 
men and arms. His utter disregard for personal 
danger under heavy fire and aerial bombardment, 
his calm judgment in each crisis, inspired his 
troops, galvanized the spirit of the Filipino peo- 
ple and confirmed the faith of the American peo- 
ple in their armed forces. 



DL Wontk 

Our Readers Write 2 

General MacArthur Affectionately 

Called "Great White Father" By Aussies ... 5 

Editorials 6 

United Nations' Leaders Agree To Wipe Out 

Japan's Militarists, Aggressive Elements .... 7 
Far East Will Gain By 

Joining World Bank ? 

Vice President Osmena Calls For American 

Bases in Philippine Islands After the War. . 8 
United Nations' Plan To De-loot Japan 

Praised by Philippine President 13 

Repatriated Journalist Charges Japs 

Sell Relief Parcels Sent to Internees 14 

Filipinos Who Still Enjoy Freedom Wonder 

What Future Holds in U. S.; At Home 15 

4,000 American Prisoners of Japs 

In Philippines Lack Medical Supplies 17 

FEA Predicts Japs Can Increase Production 

Of Arms in '44, But Face Crisis In Shipping. 19 
American Internees Display Splendid Morale 

But Are Now Facing Critical Food Shortage 20 
Marine General Says Japan Hopes 

U. S. Will Quit Before Complete Victory 22 

15 Newspapermen Initiated 

At Sigma Delta Chi Dinner 22 

Admiral Halsey Hails Victories of 

Small U. S. Forces Against Heavy Odds ... 23 
Russian Journal Says Japanese War 

Strategy Has Been Faulty 24 

General Godfrey Calls Airdrome Need 

Urgent In Offensive Against Japs 25 

U. S. Due to Get Japan 's 

Mid -Pacific Islands 26 



Colonel 
Carlos P. 

Romulo.. 

FAMOUS AUTHOR OF 
THE BEST SELLING BOOK 

/ Saw the Fall of 
the Philippines . . 

is steadily becoming one of the outstanding 
figures of the war. He has just been ap- 
pointed to the War Cabinet of President 
Manuel L. Quezon of the Philippines, and, 
in addition, has written a new book that is 
a challenge to America's future. 

In MOTHER AMERICA Colonel Romulo answers the question of 
what is to be done with the muddle of nations and races in the Far 
West. He faces the problem squarely, and not only suggests what 
can and must be done to stamp out Japanese aggression and propa- 
ganda in the years to come, but 
warns of the pitfalls that lurk in 
the path to peace. This is a 
crusading book! — a book that 
America badly needs — a book 
that is destined to be one of the 
great best sellers of 1944! 





What the Leading 
Authorities Said About 

I Saw the Fall of the Philippines 

"One of the valid and moving docu- 
ments of the war."— W. L. WHITE. 
"Fairly rocks with the crash of bombs." 
- ORVILLE PRESCOTT, N.Y. Times. 
"There is no finer exponent of democ- 
racy anywhere in the world today." 

—HENRY C. WOLFE, 
Saturday Review. 



Order on 
coupon 
below 
$3.00 




?£W Fill in the coupon below, today, and take it to your book seller. If more con- 
cenient mail it with your check or money order to Doubleday, Doran and Com- 
pany, Dept B-l, Garden City, N. Y., and your book(s) will be sent to you a t once. 



TO YOUR BOOKSELLER or 
Doubleday, Doran and Company, Dept. B-l 
Garden City, N. Y. 

Gentlemen: Please send me the following book(s): 

copy(ies) of MOTHER AMERICA @ $2.50 per copy. 
_ copy(ies) of I SAW THE FALL OF THE PHILIPPINES @ $3.00 
per copy. ^ Send CCD. □ Remittance herewith 



1 



Name 
Address 



January, 1944 



General MacArthur Affectionately 
Called "Great White Father" By Ausies 

Canadian editor says U. S. Commander in Southwest Pacific theater 
is colorful personality, energetic, sure of himself and well-liked. 

by Arthur R. Ford 

(The following story of an off-the-record conference with Gen. Douglas Mac- 
Arthur at his headquarters was written for the Canadian Press by Arthur R. Ford* 
editor of the London (Ontario) Free Press and president of the Canadian Press. 
He has been in Australia since November 7 except for a side trip to New Vealand.) 

General Douglas MacArthur, commander in chief of Allied forces in the 
Southwest Pacific, gave an interview of one and one-half hours to the Canadian 
newspaper party visiting Australia. 

He talked to us off the record and in English as masterly and as vigorous 
as the style of Prime Minister Churchill. He gave us his views of the prosrres^ 
and strategy of the war, both in Europe and in the Pacific, and his ideas of what 
should be done to bring the war to a 



What Democracy Means 
To Peoples In Far East 



successful conclusion. 

Gen. MacArthur also touched on the 
delicate subject of United States poli- 
tics and wound up with his philosophy 
of war and life in which he quoted 
the Bible, Adam Smith and Abraham 
Lincoln. 

The general's utterances will have to 
remain the secret of the newspaper 
delegation which had the opportunity 
of interviewing the man whom the peo- 
ple of Australia, as a term of affection, 
call "The Great White Chief." 

CABINET MEMBER USES TERM 

In our plane flying to headquarters 
was an Australian cabinet minister 
from Canberra. He quite seriously told 
me that he intended to see the "Great 
White Chief." The people of Austra- 
lia are not hero worshipers. They are 
just the opposite. 

But Gen. MacArthur landed in Aus- 
tralia at a time when the country was 
in desperate plight. The flower of the 
Australian Army and Air Force, with 
all their equipment, were in Britain or 
the Middle East. The Japanese were 
marching southward. It seemed as if 
nothing could stop them. Australia 
feverishly prepared to meet the enemy, 
but realized the outlook was dark. 

Then came General MacArthur, hero 
of the Philippines, the man who had 
rallied that country to hold up the 
progress of the Japanese. Australia 
views the United States through the 
eyes of Hollywood and he was every- 
thing that Hollywood painted an Amer- 
ican hero. He was handsome. He was 
dominating. He was masterful. He 
was courageous. And he was an orator. 



CHEERED BY PEOPLE 

Australia accepted General MacAr 
thur with enthusiasm. The people 
cheered him and the government co- 
operated with him. 



all 



We found General MacArthur 
the Australian people said of him. 

He is more than 60, but looks 50. 
He is tall erect, alert, handsome and 
soldierly looking. His hair is thin- 
ning, but there are no signs of gray. 

He received us cordially as Canadi- 
ans and paid tribute to the fighting 
qualities of Canadian soldiers, whom 
he learned to admire in France in the 
last war. He is a native of Arkansas 
and knows the Dominion well. 

On the wall of his office behind his 
desk was a fine picture of Washington 
and facing him was an engravin- of 
Lincoln. On the side wall was a pic- 
ture of the fathers of the republic sign- 
ing the Declaration of Independence^ 

After introductions I asked him if 
he woud give us his views on the prog- 
ress of the war and explain the strate- 
gy in the Pacific. Making it clear that 
he would only talk off the record he 
launched into an hour and a half of 
intimate and revealing discussion of 
the whole situation. 



He 



COVERED ENTIRE WORLD 

started 



with Europe and kept 
moving eastward until he had covered 
the whole world orbit. A leading ques- 
tion on American politics started him 
off on that subject and he finished with 
a digression on philosophy, a subject 
with which he admitted he was not 



Mother America 



By Carlos 
Dor an.) m 



P. Romulo. ( Doubledar. 



Col. Romulo champions the cause of 
all the Far Eastern peoples long under 
the sway of Western imperialism. In 
his best-selling book. "I Saw the Fall 
of the Philippines." he portrayed Fili- 
pino vindication of America's altruistic 
policy toward a subject people. He 
now advocates that a similar policy be 
extended to all the peoples who tempo- 
rarily will be returned to European 
powers after the war. 

The Filipino author presents a clear 
and forceful exposition of what the 
Filipinos' neighbors. Indonesians. Ma- 
layans. Burmese. Indo-Chinese and In- 
dians, are fighting for — a chance to 
share the democracy and freedom which 
the United Nations have been so articu- 
late about since the promulgation of 
the Atlantic Charter. The Filipinos 
had had democracy and freedom under 
Mother America, and no people has 
shown more eagerness to fight for de- 
mocracy and freedom than the Fili- 
pinos. 

Col. Romulo pleads that the other 
peoples of the Far East be given the 
opportunity that the Filipinos enjoyed 
as soon as they are freed from Japa- 
nese domination. He believes that the 
old - fashioned Western imperialism 
would be an unwelcomed and poor 
substitute for even Nipponese imperial- 
ism, much more so for the concessions 
astutely granted by Tokyo. 



altogether familiar. He amazed us with 
his command of English. Not even Mr. 
Churchill has a wider vocabulary or a 
better use of words. 

At times when he warmed up to his 
subject he spoke with both eloquence 
and vigor. He has a logical mind. He 
has courage as his military record 
shows, and he has unusual powers of 
expression. 

He is a colorful personality with dy- 
namic energy, sure of himself and con- 
fident of his ability to defeat the enemy 
providing he gets the necessary sup- 
port. 

It is not hard to understand how he 
caught the imagination of the Austral- 
ian people and how General MacAr- 
thur is to them "The Great White 
Chief." 




(^ditoriald 



Promise Of '44 

This year of 1944 is a year of prom- 
ise. In 1941, on December 7 — a day 
of infamy, as President Roosevelt so 
aptly called it — Japanese planes and 
submarines struck a crippling blow 
a.sainst forces of the United States. 
The following year, America prepared. 
August. 1942, saw American Marines 
land on Guadalcanal to meet the Japs 
face to face. The initiative was taken 
from the enemv in the Pacific in the 
year 1943. 

As 1944 opened, General Eisen- 
hower predicted that we w^ould beat 
the Germans in this year of promise if 
everyone devoted his full efforts to 
winning the war. A few days later, 
Admiral Halsey said that the Japs 
would feel new and more powerful 
blows from United Nations forces this 
year. 

The extreme problems that we face 
in the Pacific can be seen from the 
fact that we have reconquered only 
1500 of the 1,366,000 square miles that 
the Japs have overrun. The enemy 
has had time to fortify its new terri- 
tories and if we use Tarawa as an 
example, she has fortified them well. 
Reconquering the many islands that 
Japan holds is complicated bv the fact 
that airpower can be called from many 
points to any point that is attacked. 

We know that we will not defeat 
Japan in 1944. However, if the Axis 
partner in Europe is defeated this year 
thousands and thousands of planes and 
millions of tons of shipping will be 
released for the final blow against the 
Nipponese. 

Victory will be ours— the only ques- 
tions is, When? ' 1 



General MacArthur 

The editors of BATAAN are proud 
o dedicate this issue to General Doug- 
las MacArthur. defender of the Philip- 
pines. 1 

It is well known to Americans and 
Filipinos alike that General MacArthur 
is a true gentleman and officer in the 
finest tradition of America's fighting 



men. The General's military career 
even before he came to the Philip- 
pines in 1936 was a distinguished one. 
Educated at West Point, General Mac- 
Arthur served his country brilliantly 
in the first World War, and a few 
years before coming to the Islands 
served as Chief of Staff of the United 
States Army. 

He was loaned to the Philippine 
Commonwealth to organize its de- 
fences. He worked unceasingly to make 
the Islands a fortress which could with- 
stand assault. With the men, money 
and material that were available to 
him he built the best defences possible. 

We know that had the words of 
General MacArthur been followed more 
closely the Islands might well have 
been saved. We realize that this is 
no time to think about might-have- 
beens. But we wish to point out that 
what MacArthur did for the Philip- 
pines has won him a prominent place 
in the history of the Filipino people, 
notwithstanding the fact that he is an 
American. 

General MacArthur left the Philip- 
pines reluctantly. When he did, he 
vowed that he would return. As Com- 
mander-in-Chief of Allied Forces in 
the Southwest Pacific theatre, we know 
that one of the things he wants to do 
most is to retake the Islands. 

The dedication of an issue of a mag- 
azine to a man as great as General 
MacArthur is small tribute indeed. But 
it is the highest honor that BATAAN 
can give to anyone. We feel sure that 
General MacArthur will understand 
that this issue is respectfully dedicated 
to him in behalf of Filipinos the world 
over who gratefully and affectionately 
look to him as the epitome of manhood 
and leadership, with the knowledge that 
men of his high type receive their real 
reward from Almighty God in the 
hereafter. 



Filipinos Think 

The editors of BATAAN were par- 
ticularly gratified when they received 
the story printed on page 15 of this 
issue from J. C. Dionisio, chief of our 
new Pacific Coast news bureau. Fili- 
pinos today are serving in the armed 
forces of the United States, working 
long hours in war industries, devoting 
many hours to volunteer war work. 
The outstanding — and reassuring — fact, 
as shown in BATAAN's survey, is that 
they are thinking of the postwar world. 

This is characteristic of a free peo- 
ple. It shows, too, that though they 



have faith in their government, they 
want to know what steps are being 
taken to assure them of a high place 
in the world of the Four Freedoms. 

It is difficult to express in words 
what this simple fact means. It is a 
perfect example of how w T ell the Amer- 
ican experiment worked. With many 
other things to do, Filipinos could have 
forgotten about the post-war world and 
merely waited for President Quezon 
to announce the plans formulated by 
the Philippine Post-war Planning Com- 
mittee, headed by Vice President Os- 
mena. But Filipinos were trained by 
Americans in the belief that the gov- 
ernment is for the people — not the peo- 
ple for the government. 

Thus, Filipinos are rightly asking 
their government about the future. 
Filipinos want to live in a world that is 
free from the horrors of war. They 
also want to live in a world in which 
they have the social, legal and eco- 
nomic protection that is needed to live 
a complete life as free men. 



Puppet Troubles 

The announcement that President 
Laurel of the Japanese-controlled Phil- 
ippine "Republic" had reorganized his 
cabinet and himself taken over two 
cabinet positions makes very interest- 
ing reading. 

We feel sure that Puppet Laurel now 
knows that working for the Japs ^ in 
their attempts to keep freedom- loving 
Filipinos under the Nipponese heel is 
no easy task. We know that some 
Filipinos think that Laurel is making 
the best of a bad situation, while oth- 
ers think that no free man should serve 
the cause of tyranny. 

While the United Nations has been 
silent on the question of what is to be 
done with the leaders in enemy-estab- 
lished puppet governments, BATAAN 
predicts that Puppet Laurel's name will 
be submitted to the United Nations' - 
Commission Investigating War Crimes. 
Whether this group will clear Laurel 
or have him brought up for trial, we do 
not know. 

The population of the Philippines 
I 18,000,000) is greater than that of 
any country in the Western Hemis- 
phere, except the United States, Brazil 
and Mexico. Its land area (115,600 
square miles) is greater than that of 
the British Isles. 



United Nations 5 Leaders Agree To Wipe Out 
Japan's Militarists, Aggressive Elements 

General Chiang says President Roosevelt agrees with his statement that form of govern- 
ment m Japan should be left for "the awakened and repentent Japanese people to 
decide for themselves." 



Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek told 
dent Roosevelt fully approved at Cairo 
nese militarists must be wiped out and 
every vestige of aggressive elements." 

"This lies in the traditional love for 
people who treat all peoples of the wor 
broad mindedness and far - sightedness 
have led the American Government to 
adopt a just, enlightened world policy 
and to translate that policy into action 
with success." 

REVEALS CAIRO DETAILS 

General Chiang disclosed a hitherto 
unrevealed phase of the Cairo confer- 
ence. 

"In intimate talks I had with Presi- 
dent Roosevelt and Prime Minister 
Churchill at Cairo we considered steps 
for mutual cooperation and agreed up- 
on certain plans for prosecution of the 
war," he said. 

"We also agreed upon the Question 
of the disposal of the enemy after the 
war. One important problem in this 
connection concerns Japan's form of 
government. When President Roosevelt 
asked my views I frankly replied, 'It 
is my opinion that all Japanese mili- 
tarists must be wiped out and the Jap- 
anese political system must be purged 
of every vestige of aggressive elements. 
As to what form of government Japan 
should adopt, that question can better 
be left to the awakened and repentant 
Japanese people to decide for them- 
selves.' 

"I also said, 'If the Japanese people 
should rise in revolution to punish 
their war mongers and overthrow their 
militarists' government we should re- 
spect their spontaneous will and allow 
them to choose their own form of gov- 
ernment.' Mr. Roosevelt fully approved 
of my idea." 

General Chiang declared he returned 
from Cairo "with renewed devotion to 
the ideals of justice and peace." 

"I may tell you that the deepest im- 
pressions I have of President Roosevelt 
are of his unflinching faith, his firm 



the Chinese Army and people that Presi- 
the generalissimo's ideas that "all Japa- 
the Japanese political system purged of 

democracy and freedom of the American 
'Id as their equals," he went on. 'Their 



"The longer Japan has to en- 
trench herself in her conquered 
territories, the more formidable 
will be the military task of dis- 
lodging her. The longer she has 
to utilize her rich booty of war — 
the tin. the copper, the iron, her 
vast supplies of oil and rubber; 
the longer she has to lash the 
whip over the masses of China, 
the Dutch East Indies, Malaya, 
Burma, and the Philippines— la- 
bor that transforms these ran 
materials into guns and planes 
and tanks and ships, the longer 
must be the years of terrible 
fighting, with its cost of Ameri- 
can dead to defeat Japan. 99 — 
Hillis Lory, author of JAPAN'S 
MILITARY MASTERS. 



determination to emancipate all the 
world s oppressed peoples and his sin- 
cere desire to help China become a 
truly free and independent nation," he 
went on. 

The Philippines, after discovery by 
Ferdinand Magellan in 1521 was 
known as Islas del Poniente (Islands 
of the West). In 1543. the archipelago 
was re-named Islas Filipinas (Philip- 
pine Islands) in honor of the Spanish 
crown prince who later became Kino- 
Philip II. In 1935, when the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth constitution was 
adopted, the official name became sim- 
Iy the "Philippines." 



Far East Will Gain By 
Joining World Bank 

Far Eastern countries probably will 
find it advantageous to join any post- 
war world monetary system generallv 
accepted by the West, or at least main- 
tain a connection with the currency of 
the western country with which thev 
are politically allied or have most im- 
portant trade relations, says Dickinson 
H. Leavens, expert on Far Eastern 
currencies. 

Leavens cites the possibility that In- 
dia and China may experience some 
nationalistic desire to break away from 
all dependence on the West and set up 
currency systems that can be manipu- 
lated for their own benefit, but intelli- 
gent self-interest may operate to pre- 
vent extreme measures. He adds that 
in Japan there may be the additional 
urge to keep the exchange value of the 
yen low to aid in the restoration of 
export trade in the face of political 
obstacles. 

Leavens describes as "probable" a 
desire almost everywhere for a stable 
price level "in view of the inflation 
which all of these countries are now 
experiencing, whether to the great ex- 
tent that is taking place in China (and 
also presumably in the occupied coun- 
ties) or to the milder extent in India 
and presumably in Japan." 

Leavens, in a paper published by the 
Monetary Standards Inquiry, says the 
Far Eastern nations can hardly expect 
to have a voice in establishing a post- 
war international monetary system. 

"All the Far Eastern countries to- 
gether, though containing half of the 
world's population, are relatively much 
less important in world economics," 
he says. "In the pre-war years thev 
contributed less than 15 per cent of 
total world trade, or about the same 
as the share of the United States or 
the United Kingdom alone. In many 
cases their banking systems and their 
whole economic structure are Ie$s de- 
veloped than those of the West, or are 
in a subsidiary relation to those of 
their mother countries. 



■7- 



Vice President Osmena Calls For American 
Bases In Philippine Islands After The War 

In speech commemorating Filipino Patriot Rizal, Osmena advocates "adequate naval 
and air bases for mutual protection of the Islands and the United States." 



Sergio Osmena, Vice President of the Philippines, in an 
address before the Filipino Community of Chicago at the 
Hotel Sherman on January 2, stressed the need for strong 
American-Philippine military, cultural and political col- 
laboration after the war. Vice President Osmena delivered 
the main address at the Chicago ceremonies commemorating 
the 47th anniversary of the martyrdom of Jose Rizal Fili- 
pino patriot. 

ADEQUATE SEA, AIR BASES NEEDED 

"The maintenance of adequate naval and air bases 
across the Pacific, anchored in the Philippines and sup- 
posed there by Filipino troops, will assure the mutual pro- 
tection of both the United States and the Philippines, and 
preserve the Pacific Ocean for the peaceful purposes of all 





WE Wiy, ALWAYS FIGHT FOR /y///7/7i// 



SPIRIT OF THE FILIPINOS IN THE CAUSE OF FREEDOM 



the nations," said Vice President Osmena. "To the Philip- 
pines such plans are vital to its security, liberty and growth. 
To the United States such plans should aid greatly in the 
defense of the sea and air approaches to your Western 
shores. In a joint resolution, already passed by the Senate 
and now pending in the House, the President of the United 
States is authorized to enter into negotiations with the Gov- 
ernment of the Philippines for the selection of suitable 
bases in the islands. I have reasons to believe that the 
United States may confidently expect from us full coopera- 
tion in this regard." 

Speaking of Filipino culture, Osmena pointed out that 
the Filipino way of life is Occidental, Christian and demo- 
cratic. "It is then natural that intimate cultural relations 
will continue between the United States and the Philip- 
pines," he added. 

U. S., P. I. COOPERATION IS LOGICAL 

"In the political field," Osmena declared, "cooperation 
between the United States and the Philippines is most 
logical. After having worked together for the building of 
the Philippine Nation, the United States and the Philippines 
can, in the years to come, devote their joint efforts to the 
solution of the manifold post-war problems. As a daughter 
republic of the United States and as a new birth of liberty 
in the Far East, the Philippines can serve as a vanguard of 
democracy and as a beacon of hope in that part of the 
globe. If, through the Philippines, the influence of Ameri- 
can democracy can reach the less fortunate peoples of Asia, 
then the cause of world peace will be greatly served. 

"Moreover." he continued, "the Philippines is pecu- 
liarly qualified to serve as America's bridge of goodwill to 
the peoples of Asia. As the veritable token of America's 
handiwork, the Philippines stand also as a vivid example of 
the success of the policy of trusteeship — the policy which 
the nations of the West can and must follow for all de- 
pendent peoples everywhere. To these dependent peoples, a 
free and independent Philippines symbolizes the goal that 
can be attained not by distrust, bloodshed, and violence, but 
by friendship, understanding and collaboration. Thus, by 
remaining close political allies, the United States and the 
Philippines will make a great contribution towards the 
building of a new world of peace, justice, democracy and 
freedom." 

The full text of Vice President Osmena's address is 
printed on the following pages. 

Rizal Day is a national holiday observed by Filipinos 
everywhere. Coming at a propitious time about the end of 
the year, it affords us the opportunity to rededicate our- 
selves for the coming year to the lofty ideals and noble 
aspirations that made Jose Rizal a symbol of redemption, 
not only of the Filipino people, but also of other peoples 
of the world, struggling for freedom. 



8 



(Comment by tlie (Editors J3ata 



Vice President Sergio Osmena has been called "the 
best statesman that the Philippines ever produced" by 
Manuel L. Quezon. When one considers that these men 
are the two top political figures of the Islands, the tribute 
paid to Osmena is great indeed. 

The words of someone who commands respect as does 
Osmena bear careful watching, for it is through their 
utterances that the man on the street is able to arrive at 
a good picture of the future. 

Thus, the Filipino who lives in the United States, Alaska 
and Hawaii can see something of the world that he is 
going to live in by a careful analysis of the words of men 
like Vice President Osmena, who heads the Philippines 
Post-war Planning Commision. It is with this view in 
mind that the editors of BATAAN are printing on the 
following pages the full text of a long speech by the Vice 
President about the postwar world and American bases 
in the Philippines. Readers are urged to digest it care- 
fully, think about what Osmena says, and discuss it with 
fellow Filipinos. 

Its importance in BATAAN's opinion — we think it is 
one of the most important documents in Philippine-Ameri- 
can relations — is clearly demonstrated by the fact that in 
these days of a shortage of space and more important 
news developments per month than ever before, this maga- 
zine devotes 20 per cent of its news and editorial columns 
to it. 

So rich with ideas is this speech of Sergio Osmena's 
that BATAAN is reprinting it in pamphlet form and is 
circulating it widely among American government and 
business leaders. 

We feel sure that if this speech is an indication of the 
type of post-war planning that will be developed by the 
Philippine government-in-exile, Filipinos the world over 
may feel reassured about the uncharted course of the future. 



In the roll of Filipino heroes, there are others who 
figure prominently and who have earned our admiration 
and respect, but none of them has won, as greatly as Rizal 
has, the universal love of our people and the general re- 
spect of the world. The reason for this is obvious. More 
than any other man, he had given himself completely and 
unselfishly to the cause of his people. With his writings, 
he broadened the vision of the masses; with his martyrdom 
he gave them an example of supreme devotion to the native 
land. It was he who, in the dark hour of our history, 
lighted the torch of freedom which Spanish oppression 
could not quench. 

FREEDOM'S TORCH BURNED EARLY IN P. I. 



ing 



When America came to the Philippines, succeeds 
Spain, she found the torch of Philippine freedom already 
aflame. Far from stifling it, she unselfishly stimulated its 
growth and radiance. One of her first official acts in the 
islands was to proclaim Rizal Day a national holiday. But 
she did more than this. She proclaimed to the world that 
she was holding the Philippines in trust for the Filipinos — 
for their interest and welfare, their freedom and happiness. 
And as she pledged, so also she fulfilled. 




Uice President Odi 



It is unnecessary for me to recite at length the progress 
achieved by us during the forty-five years of American 
trusteeship. The record is well known to all. Suffice it 
tor me to say that no people under the guidance of another 
have achieved so much as we have within the same period 
of time. 

Not only have we gained recognition of all the essen- 
tial rights and liberties that Rizal staunchly strove for; we 
have also made tremendous strides in the economic, social, 
educational and political fields, thus constituting our coun- 
try one of the most progressive nations in the Far East. 
As a fitting climax to her Philippine policy of liberation. 
America, recognizing our capacity for self-government, set 
the date for independence. 

BOTH AMERICANS AND FILIPINOS DIED 

Our people were peacefully engaged in the preparation 
for the responsibilities of independence when, in Decem- 
ber, 1941, Japan suddenly attacked. In the bitter struggle 
against a numerically superior and better equipped invad- 
ing army, thousands of Filipino soldiers fell by the side 
of their American comrades in arms. 

But they did not die in vain. Their prolonged and de- 
termined resistance forced Japan to divert large contingents 
from other war fronts, thereby delaying the fall of the 
East Indies. Malaya, Singapore, and Burma, and thwarting 



■ 9 - 




L Q 



'uezon 



\Jice Prediclent Oi 



'smena 



the Japanese program for an early invasion of Australia, 
New Zealand and the junction of the German and Japanese 
forces in India. They also afforded the United States pre- 
cious time to repair the destruction wrought by Japan's 
perfidous attack on Pearl Harbor, and enabled our Sta! 
in he Pacific to bolster their defenses and to prepare to 
deal counter blows at the common enemy. 

h,. F 2 r 'J i !| e r re rr f constructive association with America 
has afforded the Filipinos the opportunity to develop and 
prove their capacity for self-government, winning through 
peaceful negotiations formal recognition of that capacity 
and a bilateral agreement for the orderly establishment of 
independence on July 4, 1946. Four months of bloody and 
heroic struggle on Bataan has tested the strength of Ss 
htle to independence and have proved Filipino capacity to 
shoulder the responsibilities of independence. P 7 

today, we have not only America's pledge that Philin 
pine independence will be established and protected but 
also the prospect of being declared a separate and ' self 

POST-WAR COLLABORATION LOGICAL 

of harmonious Ph%pin1 JSriLTSS ^ 
tuned then to offer an alfirmat ve ansie r N P ' I 
feet American-Filipino comradeship Ts ^. "' ^ *T 
of Bataan, and with America's offer of tT>™ ^T* 
other pronouncements in the court of S.W , ancl 1 her 
can be no doubt about post-wa, ™11 L str "ggle, there 
United States and Z $£ll?™ ll ± or **l™ between 



the inescapable obligations arising from this war, and the 
common interests of both peoples, make this collaboration 
not only advisable but also necessary. It will find ex- 
pression in many fields. Let us explore a few of them. 

The war will necessarily leave its tragic marks on our 
beloved country. Destruction will be widespread, suffering 
will be acute, poverty and hunger will be rampant. Years 
of privation and hardships will have diminished the physi- 
cal resistance of the masses, making them easy victims of 
disease. Adequate and immediate relief will therefore be 
imperative. Food, clothing and medical care must come 
first. It is hoped that side by side with the American Red 
Cross, accompanying our advance troops, will be a Philip- 
pine Red Cross. 

SMALL LAND OWNER WILL GET HELP 

Apart from the problem of relief in general is the re- 
habilitation of our farms and industries. This will require 
provisions of seeds, fertilizers, farm implements and work 
animals. In this undertaking we should give particular at- 
tention to the needs of the small land owner who may have 
lost his only carabao and his only nipa hut. 

Provision must be made for the reconstruction of our 
industrial establishments and the restoration of ruined prop- 
erties, both public and private. This includes, among other 
things, provincial and municipal buildings, schools, churches, 
hospitals, highways and bridges. 

In addition, we shall have to face the manifold prob- 
lems arising from the closing and insolvency of our banks, 
insurance and credit institutions; the adulteration of our 
currency with unsound enemy issues; the impairment of the 
basis of taxation, and the disruption of our public school 
system as a result of the closing of many schools and of 
anti-democratic indoctrination of children in the few insti- 
tutions which have remained open. Without delay, all the 
schools in operation before the war should be reopened 
in order to resume an education of patriotism, democracy 
and humanitarianism. 

AMERICA HAS PROMISED AID IN REBUILDING 

Whatever the program of relief, rehabilitation and re- 
construction finally decided upon — and the items I have dis- 
cussed are only a part of it — we are already assured of 
America's help and collaboration. Responding to the recom- 
mendations of the President of the United States, the Senate 
has approved a joint resolution which provides for the or- 
ganization of a commission of Americans and Filipinos, 
charged with the study of the relief and rehabilitation prob- 
lems of the Philippines. To this commission is also en- 
trusted the task of surveying the economic situation in the 
islands with a view to their economic stabilization and the 
formulation of a plan for future trade relations between 
the United States and the Philippines. 



United States and the GpXes ^ W h& T™ ** 

opines. me logic of events, 



The effects of the desperate resistance offered by the 
Philippine Army and United States forces on Bataan, 
holding as they did a sizeable portion of Japanese 
strength, were now being felt . . . Also unan- 
ticipated ivas the prolonged defense of the Philippine 
Islands, which upset their timetable for other offensive 
operations in the Southwest Pacific, including Aus- 
tralia. 

—GENERAL GEORGE C. MARSHALL. 



10 - 



As will be remembered, provision was made for the 
ten-year transition period of the Commonwealth in order, 
among other things, to enable the Philippines to stabilize 
her economy with an eye to her future independent exist- 
ence. This preparation was already at an advanced stage 
when war broke out and everything built up was destroyed. 
It will be within the province of the joint commission, 
when organized, to study how to make up for the lost 
years and to recommend measures for the reestablishment 
of such commercial relations with the United States and 
other countries as will assure us a reasonable level of 
public and private prosperity. 

The policy of free exchange of commodities prescribed 
by Congress has brought material benefits to the Philip- 
pines and economic advantages and profits to American 
labor, exporters, and businessmen. This economic tie has 
so affected Philippine economy that the major export in- 
dustries of the Philippines have become dependent upon 
the American market, necessitating a reasonable period of 
re-adjustment. This record of economic collaboration will 
serve as a basis upon which to formulate a posMvar com- 
mercial relationship which will redound to the lasting bene- 
fit of both countries. 

DEFENSE PLANS WILL BE COMPLETED 

The defense plans of the Commonwealth, formulated 
with the advice of the American Military Mission headed 
by General MacArthur, were in the process of execution 
when Japan struck. With the re-conquest of the islands, 
we shall resume this work, making such adjustments as 
new circumstances and experience will require. American 
technical assistance will continue to be needed. Moreover, 
our program should be worked out with full consideration 
not only of our own defense needs but also of the future 
military necessities of the United States. 

This brings us to the question whether, after independ- 
ence, mutual collaboration in defense measures will be 
advantageous both to the United States and to the Philip- 
pines. It can truly be said that during the last four dec- 
ades there has been American-Philippine collaboration for 
defense. The United States Navy maintained its principal 
base for the Asiatic Fleet at Cavite, and the United States 
Army had camps and airfields at several points. The Army 
relied very largely on Filipino soldiery — Scouts, and later 
the Philippine Army— to fill its ranks. That 'the inade- 
quacy of these forces rendered ineffective their defense 
against a vastly superior power, does not argue against the 
intrinsic value of military collaboration. It only empha- 
sizes the need for strengthening the military establishment. 

The maintenance of adequate naval and air bases across 
the Pacific, anchored in the Philippines and supported' there 
by Filipino troops, will assure the mutual protection of 
both the United States and the Philippines, and preserve the 
Pacific Ocean for the peaceful purposes of all nations. To 
the Philippines such plans are vital to its security, liberty 
and growth. To the United States such plans should aid 
greatly in the defense of the sea and air approaches to your 
Western shores. In a joint resolution,, already passed by 
the Senate and now pending in the House, the President of 
the United States is authorized to enter into negotiations 
with the Government of the Philippines for the selection of 
suitable bases in the islands. I have reasons to believe 
that the United States may confidently expect from us full 
cooperation in this regard. 




CULTURAL INTERCHANGE SHOULD CONTINUE 

In the cultural field, cooperation between the two coun- 
tries has a logical foundation in the fact that for over 
three centuries Filipino culture has been based on Western 
ideas. Throughout the long period of Spanish rule, the 
Philippines imbibed Christianity and much of the Greco 
Roman culture and philosophy of Mediterranean Europe. 
During a part of this long association, the commercial in- 
tercourse and spiritual communion between the mother 
countrv and the colony were carried on by way of Mexico 
through the proud and rich galleons plying in the Manila- 
Acapulco trade, thus bringing Mexico and the Philippines 
into close and intimate relations. Mexican soldiers settled 
in some numbers in Luzon, and several of our most impor- 
tant vegetable rnd fruit crops were direct introductions 
from Mexico. The architecture of some of our churches 
shows the influence of Aztec ornamentation. 

With the eclipse of Spain as a world power. Mexico, 
along with most of her other American possessions, became 
an independent state, and for the ensuing 75 years Spain 
dealt directly with the Philippines. Subsequent to the lib 
eralization of the Spanish trade policy and the opening of 
the Suez Canal, the people of the Philippines came into 
profitable commercial and literary contact with the whole 
of southern and western Europe and Great Britain. 

When, as a consequence of the Spanish- American War, 
the United States replaced Spain as the principal contact 
of the Philippines with Western influence. Filipino political 
thought absorbed the essential principles of Anglo-Saxon 
democracy; the English language became the common 
tongue; the American systems of public schools and puWio 
health were adopted; and American methods in commerce 
and finance were practiced. 



11 ■ 




FILIPINO CULTURE IS ECLECTIC 

For centuries the Philippines has been linked with the 
peoples not only of the East but also of the West, both old 
Kf, L hus Filipino culture is eclectic; to the original 
ma o-Maiayan foundation there have been added Asiatic. 
Latin, Mexican, and Anglo-Saxon elements. Today the 

rl^ P n n ° t - Vay ° f Ufe is the Occidental, the Christian, the 
democratic way of life. It is , therefore, natural that inti- 
mate cultural relations will continue between the Philip- 

" e , an V. e Lnited States ; and that these relations will 
extend and improve. 

StJZ I He i ?u hti ™l fidd ' coo Peration between the United 
woriL t t P £ h,ll PP ine * ^ most logical. After having 
he 1 tiJltl f ° r * e , buUdin S of the Philippine Nation 
come devl S r S 3nd th c Philippines can in the years to 

fold nost ™ IT* eff °f S t0 tHe S ° luti0n 0f the mani " 
Uoited SX" P I° S - ^ a dau S hter re P ublic of the 
the Philinnine , 35 ° nCW birth of libert y in the Far East, 
y.hKKJ W^** 3 VangUard 0f dcmocrary and 
the Phlppint T 'V^ P a " °f the globe. If, through 
reach lei Wt?' ? :nflue "ce of American democracy can 

peace ^ ^EXt" °! then the ?~» ° f ™ rld 

is peculiarlv m,n r i-fi 7. Ved More over, the Philippines 
wiff SfMg!^ i° si S a erW as A-*-', bridge Osgood 

ISLANDS EXAMPLE OF TRUSTEESHIP 

Philtpint Znttu^ ° f - ^diwork, the 

of thepohcy of tr Si S 3 T ld e , xam P le «* the success 
of the West ean which the ™tions 

everywhere To these d'Lnd °T f 
pendent Philipnin es ift [ pe ° P CS ' a free and ind e- 
not by distraS ■wlffi »lw»*6 Wd that can be attained 

political S the Unt [ a ^ 01 ?- Thus ' b y Gaining close 
make great contrlb^t^S the" builder 8 
w«W of peace, jus tice, a dZoSacf andt^ 3 ^ 
the day of our liberation is not far off TU f r 
freedom are on the inarch in the pSfi ° f 
fronts. The final tr'nn I \ Clfic as ln other war 

Pines is inevitable an n °l^ nc ^ ™ the Philip- 

pine incept nee the independence. Phil- 

I tne.s.i p m the task of nation-building— will not 




Indinadalangiri ko na 
ang taong 1944 ay ma- 
kapagbibigay rig ka- 
payapaan at tagumpay 
at ang kalayaan rig 
ating Inang Bayan. 



S. T. SALCEDO 

GRAND 
SECRETARY -TREASURER 

Caballeros De Dima* Alrt™~ t 

2108 Fillmore St. ™ S A ™<3> Inc. 

— -^zr San Francisco, Calif 




XJice President Qu 



Cot flieto 



essentially change American-Philippine relationship, ^ ne 
ties of friendship and the spirit of collaboration will endure. 

In a free Philippines, America will continue to find a 
loyal partner in the defense and the furtherance of the 
ideals and policies which the two countries hold in common. 

America may rest assured that the Philippines Republic, 
born out of the sufferings of Rizal and of other Filipino 
heroes and martyrs, including those who fought on Bataan 
and others who are fighting still, will know how to cherish 
and defend its freedom, and that the Filipino people, whom 
she has so unselfishly helped in attaining self-government 
and independence, will always remain a friendly and a 
grateful people. 



Read Bataan Magazine 

* For authoritative articles discussing the Philippines — 
its Present and its Future! 

* For no vo about the Philippines: the Facts — the Sig- 
nifi~an^3 — the Ion-j Range Meanini of the News! 



INTZR'STINC 



INFORMATIVE 



ENTERTAINING 



BATAAN MAGAZINE is only tsn months old, but 
already thousands have acclaimed it. 

See for yourself! — Send for a free sample copy today! 
Write to 

BATAAN Magazine 

1300 National Press Building - 'Washington 4, D. C. 



B/ V* Subscribe Now 



Only S3. 00 a Year 
Out Everv Month 



12 ■ 



United Nations' Plan To De-loot Japan 
Praised By Philippine President 

Cairo Statement says Japan will be deprived of all her conquests in 
the last fifty years. Development of Nipponese Empire traced. 



President Quezon of the Philippines hailed the tripartite declaration at Teh- 
ran and looked forward to the post-war world, which will afford security to 
small nations as well as large ones. 

"The conference at Tehran of President Roosevelt, Prime Minister Churchill 
and Premier Stalin, following the conference of the first two chiefs of state with 
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, should clear all doubts as to the war and the 
peace that will follow it," said Presi- 
dent Quezon. . 

"Germany and japan will both be ™$ . J"» f .as New Jersey. 

; lhls island, in addition to welcome 



V.7C1 many ctnu japan »» "» *->~ 

crushed and reduced to impotence, so 
that they may never again disturb the 
peace of the world. 

PEACE WILL ENDURE 

'The peace that will follow will be 

. J 1 T'U^ ,.,^,-1^1 T»7i'll hf> r«nn- 



enduring. The new world will be con- 
stituted by a world family of demo- 
cratic nations — large and small alike 

" slavery, oppression 

and intolerance w 



i;iclL!L Ilcll-UII> lai^b cuav> 

where tyranny and slavery, oppression 
and intolerance will have no place. 
For such a world the sacrifices of all 
liverty-loving peoples will not have 



been in vain. 

The intention to de-loot Japan, an- 
nounced by the three-power agreement 
at Cairo, will make current the map 
of Nippon fifty years ago. Japan's 
first big "steal", from China in 1895, 
was the seizure of Formosa and the 
Pescadores, according to the National 
Geographic Society. 

Japan was a mere lllls ^\*"" J oc ~ A ~ 
medieval agricultural islands in 
when President Fillmore of the United 
States and Commodore Perry lifted the 
lid of that Oriental Pandora's box. For 
223 years no Japanese had been per- 
mitted to leave the islands' atmosphere 
of feudalism. 

Not until 1870, after the great Ishin 
"renovation," were feudal castes 

1 ] 1 ^ ^q/-vta1o oil nxkTf^ft 



.. . -""'""ii iu welcome 

supplies of minerals, tea, sugar and 
rice, gave Japan until very recently i 
virtual world monopoly of camphor. 
Now the island supports three million 
people, about five per cent of them 
Japanese. The near-by Pescadores Is- 
lands were taken from China at the 
same time. Mako Island in the Pes- 
cadores has been converted into a naval 
base. 

Along with these island acquisitions 
Japan wrested from China a toehold on 
the continent of Asia. China agreed 
to cons,der Korea (Chosen) an Inde- 
pendent state and ceded the tip of the 
near-by peninsula of Liaotunf; site of 
the important leased area of Kwantun^ 
and of the ports now known as Dairen 
and Ryojun. At that time R yo j un 
.Port Arthur) was extensively used' g 
Russia when more northern ports were 
frozen over Russia growled at the 
prospect of Japanese encroachment on 
Asia s mainland; so Japan hastily sol 
back the Liaotung Peninsula to Chin-i 

Ten years later, however J aDa ' 
waged the 18-month Russo-JapaS 
war to overcome Russia's objections 
Ihe peace treaty- in IQnq i • 

Portsmouth. New &J2JL 
nzed Japanese authority over 
2±*! >-d Kwantung° V area KCl 



men maaicxo , w o*i»« 

couraged to cut off their „.„, „, >:lk , , ; , 

long hair and stop wearing swords on as Karafuto no larger than Vennont 
peaceful strolls in the streets. When and Connecticut together, has bee™ 
' - off, Japan began important source of fish L7a 



the lid finally came off, Japai 
to expand with explosive force. 

MOVE TO MAINLAND CAUSED BY 
TWO WARS 

China's first losses to 
the short Sino-Japanese 
95, from which the maj 



coal. 



and 



i • Tmn iXUSS °-J a Panese war, J £ 

Japan followed m 1910 annexed Korea This 

War of 1894- Japanese colony on mainland Asia . 

trom wnicn u» major Japanese Mutes a rich one-third of the are; 

C a n wa, a bio southward step to trop- Japan s empire proper ( as d~ 

fc a Formosa (Taiwan), an island area guished from occupied countries). 



WORLD WAR TOOK JAPAN INTO PACIFIC 

first 
con- 
ea of 

adu- 
lts 



peninsular area. 85.000 square miles, 
nearly equals that of Great Britain, 
and supports 22 million people, of 
whom only three per cent are Japa- 
nese. Rice, soybeans, cotton, gold. coal, 
iron, and other minerals have been 
taken from Korea to nourish Japairs 
people and war industries. 

Japan's next expansive spurt was 
released by World War I and an An- 
glo-Japanese treaty, by which England 
and Japan were allied to protect each 
others interests in the Far East. With 
Britain at war. Japan also declared war 
against Germany and proceeded to take 
over all German-controlled territory in 
the Far East north of the Equator. The 
German-governed Pacific islands of the 
Marshall. Marianas, and Caroline 
groups thus came into Japanese hands. 
By the Versailles Treaty in 1919 these 
were left under mandate to Japan. 

The exception to Japanese control 
of these island groups, known collec- 
tively as Micronesia, was the island of 
Guam, largest of the Marianas. Japan 
captured that from its American gar- 
rison in December, 1941. 

Under this mandate, Japan received 
control of some 600 coral atolls, many 
of them consisting of family circles of 
disconnected islets surrounding cen- 
tral lagoons. Their total land area 
does not exceed 830 square miles; their 
pre-war population was approximately 
50.000. Yet they have been incalcu- 
lably useful to Japanese war loards in 
providing such bases as Yap in the 
west and Truk in the east in the Caro- 
line group; Jaluit farther east in the 
Marshall Islands; and Rota in the Ma- 
rianas, not 50 miles north of Guam. 



Oke Battler* of Ba 



ta 



As long as schoolboys meet in class, 

Past history to scan, 
No deeds they read will e'er surpass 

The Battlers of Bataan. 

As long as statesmen praise the name 

Of any fighting clan, 
So long 'twill be they shall acclaim 

The Battlers of Bataan. 

As long as brave Old Glory flies 

O'er an American, 
Her stars and stripes shall symbolize 

The Battlers of Bataan. 

As long as Freedom has a soui, 

The memory of man 
Shall write them on a blazoned scroll: 

The Battlers of Bataan. 

Cpl. Avery Giles i, 
(From Electrical Union World) 



13 



Repatriated Journalist Charges Japs 
Sell Relief Parcels Sent To Internees 



American reporter doubts that actual delivery of comfort packages 
to Americans will be made, even if they are unloaded at ports. 

by Royal Arch Gunnison 

(Royal Arch Gunnison was the North American Newspaper Alliance corre- 
spondent in China, Australia. New Zealand and the Philippines and was in Manila 
when the city fell to the Japanese. He was interned by the Japs for almost two 
years before being repatriated.) 

Word just received from Japanese-occupied East Asia that Dr. Paravicini, 
International Red Cross delegate in Japan, was attempting to distribute American 
Red Cross comfort and medical parcels to civilians and military prisoners in Jap 
camps over the holiday reason, raises a question as to how many of these much- 
needed parcels actudly will reach the prisoners. 

Only recently returned on the repatriation ship Gripsholm from nearly two 
years imprisonment m two Jap camps 



— one in xVlanila, one in Shanghai I 

have a basis for wondering about dis- 
tribution of parcels sent from home to 
the Par East. For one thing, I never 
re< eived or saw one. I know from my 
own personal experience in Shanghai 
that up to the time we left in Septem- 
ber there were still undelivered some 
01 the medical and comfort parcels 
sent to the Far East on the returning 
ships from the first (1942 ) exchange 
Hirthermore, I know that many of 
these parcels "somehow" were "un- 
avoidably broken open" and that the 
Jap soldiers and some civilians were 
usins and reportedly even selling the 
contents — particularly cigarettes and 
some of the medicines. 

FEARED JAPS WOULD PULL OUT 

Our people, the Swiss (representing 
our interests i and the American Red 
Cross delegate aboard the Gripsholm 
were so fearful the Japs would pull out 
of Goa before all the Red Cross sup- 
plies were loaded— and they had rea- 
son, due to reports of Jap behavior at 
the first exchange in 1942 at Lourenco 
Marques, Portuguese East India--that 
all personnel exchange at Goa was 
made secondary to the speedy loading 
of these supplies aboard the Tela Mam. 

The Jap captain stated he was leav- 
ing on a certain date "loaded or not" 
woe the Gripsholm was a day late in 
arriving it meant 24-hour unloading 
to get all the comfort kits, medical sup- 
plies and clothing parcels off the 
Gripsholm and "horsed" by Indian la- 
bor over to the quay alongside the Tela 
Our people figured if all these supplies 
were dumped on the quay in front of 
the lew the Jap captain would lose 

14- 



too much "face" just to go off and 
leave it sitting there. Although the 
Red Cross has been very hush-hush 
about it, there was much talk at Goa 
regarding some parcels and supplies 
reportedly left by the Japs in Lourenco 
Ma rques. 

SUPPOSED TO MOVE SUPPLIES QUICKLY 

It meant added inconvenience for us 
American and Canadian repatriates to 
remain aboard the "camp ship" extra 
days before transfer to the clean, white 
Gripsholm — but we were glad to re- 
main filthy— and continue to go with- 
out to be absolutely sure the supplies 
would get aboard and back to those 
we left behind. If the J aps double- 
crossed us at Lourenco Marques in 

n l 19« C t0 k thCy didn,t repeat 

Under international agreement the 
Japs are supposed to move these sup- 
plies— as well as a prescribed tvpe of 
mail— quickly. But as usual the Japs 
strlled, stating they didn't have the 
bottoms in which to move the supplies, 
there's no excuse for that this time. 
I he Teia was scheduled to put into 
Saigon, French Indo China; San Fer- 
nando or Manila Boy in the Philip- 
pines; and Hongkong and Shanghai 
en route to Yokohama. I saw the sup- 
plies loaded, and loaded in such a 
manner as to permit unloading at these 
ports. 

But after being a prisoner in the^e 
camps and experiencing Jap treatment 
1 m still skeptical regarding full de- 
livery of comfort parcels, even though 
they 1Tlay nave been un ] oaded at tne 
Ports of call. 



> BE DISCRIMINATING 

UN EXCELLED 
WHISKEY 



JtelROSE 




BLENDED 
STRAIGHT 

WHISKIES 



90 PROOF 



Melrose , 




INCORPORATED 

BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 

ESTABLISHED 10 8 5 

THE STRAIGHT WHISKIES IN THIS 
PRODUCT ARE 6 YEARS OR MORE OLD 



Filipinos Who Still Enjoy Freedom Wonder 
What Future Holds In U. S.; At Home 



In survey for Bataan Magazine writer finds that people look to Government-in-exile for 
intelligent post-war planning. Ask about government program to protect natives against 
"social" and legal" discrimination. 



by J. C. Dionisio 

Chief, BATAAN Pacific Coast Bureau 



Immediately after they recovered from the initial shock of the Jap attack on 
Pearl Harbor and the Philippines, some 100.000 Filipinos in the U. S., Alaska, 
and Hawaii, as if in unison, turned anxious faces to the representative of their 
government in Washington — the Resident Commissioner — demanding an answer 
to ihe'r most pressing question: What shall we do now? 

Thousands did not wait for an answer. With bitter hate in their hearts for 
the perpetrators of that calumny, they 



flocked to army and navy recruiting 
stations, only to be turned down be- 
cause, not being citizens — the inde- 
pendence law had taken away their 
previous right to serve in Uncle Sam's 
armed forces — they could not enlist. 
Disgusted, dismayed, even angered, they 
returned to their homes and waited for 
word from the Resident Commissioner. 

All over the country, community or- 
ganizations and even private associa- 
tions, raised money for the relief of 
the embattled civilians in the Islands. 



Here Are Some of the 
Questions Asked 

1. What concrate Frogram does the 

of 
the 



Government have for the participation of 
Filipinos not under the Jap heel in the 
reconstruction of the Philippines after the 



reconstr 
war? 

2. V/hat program does the Government 
l:a/e for the second generation? 

3. What program does the Government 
have to protect Filipinos from "legal" and 
"social" discrimination? 

4. What program does the Government 
have which will help the thousands of 
Filipinos who will return to the homeland 
after the war to fit in the economic life 
of the nation? 

5. What program does the Government 
have to help Filipinos succeed in their 
business and farming enterprises? 

5. What educational program does the 
Government have which will help the 
Filipinos who ma/ elect to remain in this 
country after the war in securing their 
economic betterment? 

7. If independence is granted the Phil- 
ippines before 1946, would the rights of 
Filipinos in America be protected, so that 
they would enjoy reciprocal rights as 
Americans may enjoy in an independent 
Philippines? 



Since it was impossible to send money 
home, Commissioner Elizalde advised 
them to give the money to the Red 
Cross. They were not satisfied; they 
still wanted to send the money direct! 
As Lieutenant Colonel Jaime Velasquez 
of the First Filipino Infantry accu- 
rately describes it, theirs was a feeling 
of frustration at their utter helpless- 
ness to do something for their blitzed 
countrymen in the homeland. 

PROGRAM OF ACTION DEMANDED 

Those were dark days indeed. The 
Resident Commissioner, harrassed by 
the gravest problems he had ever faced 
in Washington, finally was able to se- 
cure legislation permitting Filipinos 
not only to enlist in the armed forces 
but also to secure civil service and mer- 
chant marine employment. Through his 
eflorts, defense plants which had re- 
l used to employ Filipinos because they 
were "aliens," were ordered henceforth 
to class Filipinos as "nationals" owing 
allegiance to the United States, and 
emphy them. 

The Filipinos appreciated the Com- 
missioner's efforts, but they were not 
entirely satisfied. They wanted the 
Government to have a definite program 
ot action for them, a concrete plan 
whereby they might participate not 
only in the winning of the war but also 
m the reconstruction of the Philip- 
pines after victory will have been 
achieved. They waited impatiently for 



his 



answer, and when it was 



not forth- 



coming, they took him to task, some- 
tunes severelv. for inaction. In war. 
they said in effect, slowness is a crime. 

Today, two years after, sobered by 
the bitter reality of the defeat of their 




J}> C 2)ionidio 

country but grimly determined to dedi 
cate their full efforts to its redemption 
and future rehabilitation, the^e Free 
Filipinos are still anxiously waitino 
for the answer to their questions nol 
from the Resident Commissioner' any 
more but from President Manuel I 
Quezon himself. 

INTENSELY LOYAL 

The Filipino has matured, one might 
say in his thinking and during tfS 
past two years, he has thought deepW 
of the problems that confront , 
They are serious problems and h 
wants his government to heln bin, i 
them. Essentially nationalistic 1 / i 
encounter with American int l 
had intensified this feeli n <v '" U)[ ^ce 
Sim-he is intensely loyaf to tha ^ 
eminent, and he waits with ~ 
ions heart for guidance. [ anx " 
state some of these probU US re 

amine them. 



,e nis . m d 



ex 



1. What concrete program ,1 
Government have for the ° CS thc 

of the Free Filipinos in th f ^ 
Han of the Philippine ajter^^ 

" tf me war? 



15 



♦ 




Shown above, with their friends, are delegates to the Fifth Filipino Inter - Community Conference held in Stockton. Cali- 
fornia, last July. The delegates enthusiastically received Mr. Manuel A. Adeva's "Cooperative Savings Plan" when it 
was presented. Mr. Adeva is National Division Assistant to the Philippine Resident Commissioner. 



The Free Filipinos realize fully the 
difficult job that lies ahead for the Fili- 
pino nation after the war. Money will 
be needed to rebuild the country. The 
Free Filipinos believe they can help 
in that task, for they are making money 
now. But they need guidance, for the 
Filipino in America has not learned 
to be frugal with his money. He might 
be able to save part of his earnings, 
but only a small part. The Govern- 
ment must find some way to channel 
the millions which are squandered. And 
they are millions. 

There are approximated between 
100,000 to 110,000 Filipinos in Alaska. 
Hawaii, and the mainland, counting 
those who are American citizens by 
virtue of birth or naturalization. Prob- 
ably more. Let us take the round fig- 
ure of 100,000 as the ones who are 
actually working. Let us give each of 
them an average gross earning of $30 
a week, which is very low, considering 
the present scale of wages That 
amounts to 3 million dollars a week 
Let us give all of them a vacation of 
tour weeks m a year and multiply the 
5 million dollars by 43 weeks. That 
gives us the staggering sum of $144- 
000,000 a year as the "national in- 
come of our Free Filipinos. 

ADEVA'S SAVING PLAN HELPS P. I. 

How much of that is saved? How 

™, of ^ m ° ne y wil1 find ^s way 
into the Philippines to help realize for 
the nation Freedom from Want? 

Last summer, Manuel A. Adeva, na- 
tionals division assistant to Commis- 
sioner Ehzalde, presented a plan de 
signed to conserve at least a part of 
this national income" for future use 
in the rebuilding of the Philippines. 
The plan was enthusiastically received 
by the delegates to the Fifth Filipino 
Inter-Community Conference held in 
Stockton. California. The reader no 

16- 




Antonio ^4. Cjonzafed 



doubt has read of it, because it has 
been given wide publicity in Filipino 
newspapers, including BATAAN Maga- 
zine. Very briefly, the plan is this: 
iMlipinos are encouraged to buy U. S. 
War Bonds which they will send to the 
Philippine government in Washington 
for safekeeping. The depositor agrees 
not . , to . casn &e bonds except in the 
Philippines. After the war, the repatri- 
ated Philippine government will help 
the depositors organize a cooperative 
which will engage in business in the 
inlands. 

It has been six months now since the 
plan was first announced, and to all 
appearances it is still on paper. 

NEW PLAN SUGGESTED 

A variation of the plan is being dis- 
cussed by thinking Filipinos on the 
West Coast. It is thought that the new 
suggestion would answer the criticism 
of some people who fear that some 



unscrupulos individual might win con- 
trol of the cooperative as envisioned 
by the Adeva Plan and run away with 
the money. The new plan is this: 

The Philippine Government should 
issue Philippine government bonds and 
sell them to Filipinos only. These 
bonds would be a direct obligation of 
the government. The money raised 
must not be used to defray the ex- 
penses of the government, but must be 
immediately invested in U. S. govern- 
ment securities. After the war, the 
purchasers may cash their bonds, only 
in the Philippines, either by them- 
selves or, at their direction, by their 
beneficiaries or any others they may 
designate. The cooperative or business 
angle is entirely optional. Those who 
want to enter into a business coopera- 
tive may do so, with or without the 
help of the government. Those who 
want all their money will get it. 

If the Philippine government has no 
right to issue bonds here, surely, ar- 
rangements could be made with the 
U. S. Government to give it that right 
After all, the money is to be invested 
in U. S. bonds. 

But whatever plan is adopted, the 
Filipinos are waiting for their govern- 
ment to move. 

2. What Program does the Govern-^ 
ment have for the Second Generation. 

Filipinos in America are, and have 
long been, worried about the future 
of the second and third generations. 
There are thousands of them, and they 
know precious little about the Philip- 
pines: its history, its government its 
culture— even its geography! Many 
of them will be going to the Islands, 
and for all practical purposes, the 
country will be foreign to them. What 
course of study should they pursue 
here so that they wouldn't be misfits in 
the Islands? Shouldn't they be taught 



something about our history, our folk 
stories and folk songs, our economic 
conditions? 

In some communities parents of these 
youngsters have tried to establish Taga- 
log schools, but these were makeshift 
affairs. There were no textbooks, no 
organized curriculum. Surely the gov- 
ernment would be spending money 
wisely even if all it would do is to 
devise a curriculum and supply mime- 
ographed textbooks! Are these "fair 
hopes of the fatherland" to be forgot- 
ten? 

VICTIMS OF DISCRIMINATION 

Filipinos, especially in the Western 
States, have long suffered from dis- 
criminatory legislation which forbids 
them, among other things, from owning 
or leasing farm lands. They have suf- 
fered racial discrimination and even 
prosecution by intolerant officials. 

3. What program does the govern- 
ment have to protect them from what 
might be loosely termed legal" and 
''social" discrimination ? 

4. What program does the govern- 
ment have ivhich will help the thou- 
sands of Filipinos who will return 
home after the war to fit in the the 
economic life of the nation? 

Should not the government educate 
them as to the future needs of the 
country? 

5. What program does the govern- 
ment have to help Filipinos succed in 
their business and farming enterprises? 
They need help, and they need guid- 
ance. Has the government any plans 
for them? 

6. What educational program does 
the government have ivhich will help 
the Filipinos who may elect to remain 
in this country after the war in se- 
curing their economic betterment? 

7. // independence is granted the 
Philippines before 1946, would the 
rights of Filipinos in America be pro- 
tected? Would the government see to 
it that they would be given reciprocal 
rights as American citizens may enjoy 
in an independent Philippines? 

Those are only some of the questions 
the Free Filipinos would like their 
government to rnswer. Filipino lead- 
ers who give articulation to the mur- 
murs of discontent or sigh of hope of 
the common tao in America, are em- 
phatic in their demands that the gov- 
ernment include the Filipinos here in 
its plans, and strongly suggest that the 
Government Planning Board which ha? 



4,000 American Prisoners Of Japs 
In Philippines Lack Medical Supplies 

State Department official, interned at Santo Tomas, reports no 
additional medicine has ever been received from the United States. 

by Edward Mitchell 
Washington Post Staff Writer 

Four thousand Americans interned at Santo Tomas in the Jap-held Philip- 
pines have almost exhausted their medical supplier and no additional medicines 
ha^.e ever been received from the United States, Nathaniel P. Davis, inspector in 
the State Department's Foreign Service, who returned on the Gripsholm from 
Manila, revealed. 

"The spirit of the internees is excellent, however." Davis said. "I 
granted permission to inspect Santo 



was 



Tomas the day before I left Manila 
The prisoners were cheerful, but thev 
have begun to look seedy. The men 
have aged more than the women. I 
think it has been found that men have 
aged more than women in interment 
camps everywhere. It's probably be- 
cause the men have business and fam- 
ily worries." 

Three other foreign service attaches 
were interned with Davis and 32 other 
Government officials in a private house 
on the outskirts near Manila, and alsc 
returned on the Gripsholm. They are 
George Manlove Abbott, Horatio Tobev 
Mooers and Charles E. Whitaker. 
NOT VISITED BY RED CROSS 

Davis said that to his knowledge the 
camp at Santo Tomas has never been 
visited by a representative of the neu- 
tral Swiss government or by the Inter 
national Red Cross. This is the fault 
of the Japanese, he said. 

The prisoners are self-governed and 
operate their own public utilities Da- 
vis said They are allowed about 50 
cents a day, which must cover all ne- 
cessities, including lights and water. 

"Next to medical supplies, the pris- 
oners' greatest want is better commu- 
nication facilities," Davis said. "No 
letters are reaching there." The official 
said that he personally received only 
two letters during his internment They 
were from his wife and both arrived 
in October of 1942. 



been created to formulate a program 
for the rehabilitation of the Philip- 
pines after the war, should have a 
member who will represent the Fili- 
pinos in America. And they stress the 
urgency of action now. Tomorrow^ will 
be too late. 



The war, according to Japanese in- 
formation dispensed in the Philippines, 
is just one big Jap victory after an- 
other, Davis said. 

"JAP PLANES NEVER DOWNED" 

'Map planes are never shot down. 
They either fall into the sea, dive into 
an enemy objective or are lost. Every 
time the Americans take another island 
it's just another Dunkirk. Sicily was 
a trap. The Germans let the Allies in 
so they could inclose them and wipe 
them out. We'd begun to wonder it 
Berlin would be just a trap, too.' 

Counter propaganda is not needed 
among the Filipinos, however, Davis 
assured. Immediately after the Japs 
seized the Philippines, there was talk 
in the streets that the American troops 
would be back by April 8 ot IW. 
When Davis left, the word was that the 
Americans would be back by the end 
of 1943, he said. 

"A Filipino hears an American radio 
report that a Jap cruiser has been sunk 
By that time the story has been told 
several times, the whole Jap fleet is at 
the bottom of the ocean." 

AMERICANS POPULAR IN MAN-LA 

American Government officials were 
o unguarded into the Ma- 
nila business district 
ness, but were made to wear red 



allowed to go unguaiu^u - — 

district on specific busi- 
ness, nut were made to wear red arm 
bands. The Filipinos usually walked 
up and insisted on paying the cab tare 
or something for the Americans, he 
said. 



Davis was 
from San Francisco aiu 



en route to Singapore 
id had reached 
Manila" when the war broke out. The 
Japs never attempted to question hm, 
on American affairs, and were gener- 
ally -pretty decent" to him and other 
American officials held, he said. 



- 17 ■ 



May 1944 bring to 
you and yours 
Prosperity and 
Happiness — and 
to all free men in 
t h e world Peace 
and Victory! 

Benito R. Alcantara 

Proprietor 



LUZON CAFE 

Sea Foods 
Our Specialty 

Credit extended to 
workers under contrac- 
tor's name 




B. R. Alcantara 



LUZON MARKET 

GROCERIES — FISH — MEATS 

Producers of "Alcantara Brand" Bagoong 
for the Wholesale and Retail Trade 



Res. Phone 2-0462 

Phone 2-9438 
112-116 E. Lafayette St. 



Phone 5-5381 
Stockton, California 



Best Wishes for A Happy New Year 
to all our Friends and 
Customers 



M. CORREN & SONS 

"The Friendly Furniture Store" 



148 So. San Joaquin St. 



Stockton, Calif. 



LODGE and SOCIAL 
PRINTING 



SIMARD PRINTING CO. 

726-732 East Weber Avenue 
STOCKTON CALIFORNIA 



PHONE PLAZA 105 + 



FELIX V. G0LDSB0R0UGH, Jr. 

Special Agent 



NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
1008 Keyser Building 
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 



13 ■ 



FEA Predicts Japs Can Increase Production 
Of Arms In '44, But Face Crisis In Shipping 

U. S. Agency handling economic warefare analysis says Nipponese failed to capitalize 
full on its conquests. Measure of Jap strength now is not raw materials, but ability to 
make goods. 



The United States Foreign Economic Administration made public a summary 
statement on the economic position of the enemy. The summary was prepared 
by William T. Stone, director of the Special Areas Branch which handles economic 
warfare analysis for the FEA. 

Main conclusions of the statement regarding Japan are: 

Japan has passed the peak of its industrial plant expansion, but will undoubt- 
edly be able to increase the produc- 



tion of armaments for defense in 1944. 
Shipping remains the chief economic 
weakness which prevents Japan from 
fully exploiting conquered territories 
and expanding further its economic 
base. Japan has failed to capitalize 
fully on its conquests since Pearl Har- 
bor. Primarily the measure of Japan's 
war production is the capacity of its 
pre-Pearl Harbor industrial plant rath- 
er than the raw material resources of 
its recent conquests. 

CONQUEST ADVANTAGES NOT USED 

As 1943 ends it is becoming in- 
creasingly apparent that Japan has 
failed to capitalize fully on its con- 
quests since Pearl Harbor. The imme- 
diate strategic advantages that Japan 
has gained from its continental and 
island conquests have not to date been 
matched by corresponding economic 
gains, and Japan is fighting the war 
largely on the base of its pre-Pearl 
Harbor industrial plant. This indus- 
trial plant has continued to expand 
since 1941 and it has utilized raw ma- 
terials such as rubber and oil drawn 
from its expanded empire. But Ja- 
pan's industrial strength remains con- 
centrated in Japan proper, Korea, Man- 
churia and Northern China. 

It is true that Japan now exercises 
political control over several hundred 
million people and that its empire 
now contains some of the richest raw 
material resources in the world. Left 
undisturbed for 20 or 30 years in the 
possession of such manpower and re- 
sources Japan might easily reach the 
first rank of industrial nations. But 
mere possession of the potentially rich 
new conquests does not multiply Ja- 
pan's production of weapons in this 
war. The conquered oil production 
areas provide fuel for Japan's navy, 
but nothing which Japan has conquered 
can lead to a great expansion of the 



navy itself within the probable time 
range of this war. 

STEEL MAKING MEASURES POWER 

The size of the Japanese war ma- 
chine is determined largely by Japan's 
capacity to make steel. Japan's con- 
quests since Pearl Harbor have brought 
it virtually no additional steel-making 
capacity. Thus, the growth in Japa- 
nese war production since Pearl Har- 
bor has been an extension of Japan's 
industrial development during the past 
decade ratlier than a new departure in 
Japan's economic history. The ability 
of Japan's economy to transform raw 
materials into armaments, rather than 
the availability of raw materais, is the 
real test of Japans' economic position. 

This economy now appears capable 
of supporting military activity for an 
indefinite period at the present scale 
of military and naval offensive opera- 
tions against Japan. The economy is 
of course under strain and there can 
be no further substantial diversions of 
economic resources and effort from 
civilian to war production. On the 
other hand, the materials and man- 
power that have been expended on the 
expansion of industrial plant in the 
past five year are now available for the 
production of armaments. Increased 
output is believed possible for almost 
every category of war equipment and 
military supplies. 

LIVING STANDARD LOWERED 

Levels of living in Japan proper 
have been considerably reduced since 
1937, and further reductions in food 
rations and other consumer goods 
would tend to impair working effi- 
ciency. However, economic strain alone 
is not likely to cause any serious low- 
ering of industrial productivity or 
break in morale during 1944. 



There are many indications that Ja- 
pan's industrial expansion began to 
level off during 1943 and that plant ca- 
pacity will not be materially increased 
during 1944. The decision to discon- 
tinue plant expansion was influenced 
to a great extent by shipping and air- 
craft losses since Pearl Harbor. Ja- 
pan's serious shortage of transportation 
in general, and of merchant ships in 
particular, has already limited the flow 
of raw materials into Japan's industrial 
centers. At the same time losses of 
ships and planes have forced the Japa- 
nese to divert materials and manpower 
from further plant expansion to the 
immediate production of replacements 
for the marchant marine and airforce. 
A still higher rate of shipping and 
plane losses in 1944 would tend to 
have even more serious consequences 
for Japan. 

INDUSTRIAL ADVANCE NOTED 

By the full exploitation of resources 
within easy reach, by the use of sub- 
stitute materials and the utilization of 
stockpiles, Japan may be able to con- 
tinue for some time to increase the 
production of critical types of military 
goods. Japan now has plant equip- 
ment adequate to a considerable in- 
crease in the production of planes, 
tanks, armored cars, and trucks as well 
as ordnance. Increases in some lines 
may be prevented by technical and or- 
zanizational problems, rather than by 
lack of raw materials, labor or basic 
plant equipment. However, it is clear 
that Japan has advanced technically 
beyond the stage of mere imitation of 
western models. 

Although the defeat of the European 
Axis will free United Nations forces 
and equipment for the Asiatic theaters, 
Japan's economy will not be affected 
directly by the loss of its western part- 
ner. Two years ago Japan was re- 
ceiving some assistance from Germany 
through the blockade, but blockade- 
running has been all but totally elimi- 
nated, and in spite of the presence of 
some German engineers, the Japanese 
economy is today almost wholly de- 
pendent upon its own material and 
technical resources. 



American Internees Display Splendid Morale, 
But Are Now Facing Critical Food Shortage 

Special report compiled by Relief for Americans in Philippines group says prisoners 
are kept busy and time flies. Little mail has been delivered. Movies, but no news reels, 
are shown regularly to adults. 



One of the most important stories of 1943 was the second repatriation of 
Americans from internment in the Far East. Many of the 1263 were in the Phil- 
ippines at the outbreak of the war. Some spent their entire period of internment 
there and were picked up in the Islands by the Japanese exchange vessel. 

The Editors of BAT A AN carefully studied the many reports of what indi- 
vidual internees said. But they found the mn^t ™™„.„;, • • . • i , , 
hiving rep0 rt from the RdUf for c0m P rehe ™™ P^lure m the fol- 



Americans in the Philippines organiza- 
tion of New York We think that it 
tells the story we ll and will enable 
readers to get a fairly accurate picture 
of the conditions in the Philippines by 
those who most recently left there. 

The Gripsholm docked on the morn- 
ing of December 1st, one day ahead of 
schedule, and by noon of the follow- 
in- day all the passengers were off. 
This was much quicker than the last 
tme. By that time many of the re- 
patriates were already flocking to our 
office, particularly those whose^relatives 
were unable to meet them in New York 
Almost all appeared remarkably well 
and semed overjoyed to see so many 
familiar faces about. First news of 
our Committee and its work had 
reached them at Mormagao and later 
hey had details when our special no- 
tice was posted on the bulletin board, 

g ^ nts had been made 

All the Philippine Group were "tre- 
mendously thrilled" to learn of our ex- 
istence and our work, and as a result 
of this we have had their unselfish co 
operation and assistance in 2^ 
information in regard to individuals 
and conditions in Santo Tomas L 
Bancs and Camp Holmes. A few o 
them worked as late as nearly two 
o clock ,n the morning using our ste no 
graphic service in order t/X ££- 
hand information to relative! and 
friends m th ls country. Besides this 
they have taken precious time from 
family reunions and necessary rehabili 
tation to give us all aid possible. I n 
spite of all their happiness in bein- 
free and home again, they have the fate 
of those left behind very much at 
heart, and their one idea is to go to 
Washington and stress the vital need 
of further repatriation. 



With all this splendid cooperation on 
their part we are now able to give a 
clearer picture of conditions in Santo 
Tomas, Los Banos and Camp Holmes. 

Up to September, 1943, the com- 
bined report on Santo Tomas stresses 
the fact that most of the nearly four 
thousand internees were in excellent 
health and still displayed splendid mo- 
rale and this after nearly two years of 
hardships and an unbalanced diet. They 
all agreed that time passed very swift- 
ly because they were kept so very busy, 
this is by far the best news which has 
come out. However, they are now fac- 
ing probably the severest test of all. 
Ihe general food shortage is their most 
pressing problem and one which threat- 
ens to become worse as time goes on. 
food shortage is their most pressing 
problem and one which threatens to 
become worse as time goes on. 

The Red Cross supplies recently de- 
livered at Manila should help the situ- 
ation for the time being. Many of the 
internees have been able to augment 
their diet with provisions from the 
camp canteen supplied from the out- 
side, such as vegetables, fruits and a 
few staples, but these are now not only 
becoming scarce but more and more 
expensive. However, they still have 
meat three times a week. Sugar, which 
used to be very plentiful in the Philip- 
pines, has now to be severely rationed. 
Rice flour is substituted for wheat 
flour, which entirely disappeared some 
time ago. Coconut milk or carabao 
milk is now in general use. Leather 
shoes are very scarce and costly and 
clothing and cloth severely rationed. 
Eight meters a year is allowed per per- 
son. For men one pair of long trou- 
sers and one shirt, or one pair of 
shorts and two shirts, or two pair of 
shorts and one shirt is the allowance. 



ILLNESS CONSIDERED NORMAL 

For thousands to be living in such 
close quarters without a single epi- 
demic is indeed a remarkable record 
and a great tribute to the physicians 
in charge of the health and sanitation 
of Santo Tomas, a University which 
was never designed for mass living. 
Illnesses which occur from time to 
time and which do exist are not con- 
sidered above normal. The most as- 
tonishing report is that with 900 chil- 
dren interned there has never been a 
case of the usual children's diseases. 
In fact, they are the healthiest inmates 
of the camp. Their diet is especially 
taken care of and they are given the 
precedence in whatever is obtainable, 
such as milk, eggs, and vegetables. 

The produce of the kitchen garden 
in Santo Tomas is reserved entirely for 
the hospital and the children. The 
milk allowance is 24 ounces of milk a 
day for a child up to one year, 12 
ounces from one to eight years, and 
4 ounces from thereafter. Boys and 
girls are kept in excellent physical con- 
dition by supervised exercises, and 
boxing was taught by a professional 
to the children of five years and up- 
Matches are frequently held, with all 
the rules adhered to and participated 
in by the boys and girls with a great 
deal of enthusiasm, fighting to a finish 
and ending with childish and sports- 
man-like hugs. 

NO NEWSREELS SHOWN 

Movies for the adults are regularly 
but after spontaneous outbreaks of ap- 
plause for President Roosevelt by the 
Americans, and Mr. Churchill by the 
British, news films are not permitted, 
but news of the outside world does 
trickle in by various means. Everyone 
is most hopeful as to the outcome of 
the war. 

In a census taken in the camp with 
regard to repatriation, 40% refused 
repatriation and preferred to stay until 
the end. 



■ m • 



The shack colony has increased to 
600. These are used during the day 
by families to do their washing and 
preparation of light meals on native 
charcoal stoves. This enables them to 
stay out in the open air but protected 
from the glare of the sun. A great 
many men are permitted to sleep in 
these shacks in order to reduce the 
congestion in the dormitories. 

ABOUT 100 NOT IN CAMP 

During May of this year the Japa- 
nese authorities rounded up all those 
living on the outside, irrespective of 
age, and brought them into camp. 
Only those who are actually ill were 
allowed to remain outside, and their 
number is a little over a hundred. 
Besides this the internment camps at 
Iloilo, Cebu, Bacolod, Tacloban, and 
Tagbilarn have been transferred to 
Santo Tomas which leaves only four 
civilian internee camps; Santo Tomas, 
Camp Holmes, Los Banos, and Davao. 
Los Banos was started in April, 1943, 
to relieve the overcrowding at Santo 
Tomas and it now houses 800 able- 
bodied men, 12 Navy nurses, two civil- 
ian women who volunteered as secre- 
taries to the Executive Committee and 
one civilian woman who acts as house 
mother to the nurses. These 800 men 
are mostly bachelors, with 120 married 
men without children who volunteered 
to complete the quota of 800. 

The camp is situated in the old Agri- 
cultural College, and its high elevation 
makes health conditions an improve- 
ment over Santo Tomas. Food is less 
costly in Los Banos, so the men are 
able to obtain three meals a day while 
the same amount of money provides 



those in Santo Tomas with only two. 
Besides this there is a small convales- 
cent camp at Sulphur Springs where 
there are 83 people interned and it is 
considered the healthiest camp in the 
Philippines. It is situated about five 
miles outside of Manila on a hill and 
has excellent water. It is used espe- 
cially for convalescents and elderly 
people and is run as a sanitarium. No 
work is required and they have three 
meals a clay. This is actually, how- 
ever, an annex of Santo Tomas. 

CAMP IN MOUNTAINS 

At Baguio the internment camp is 
Camp Holmes, situated on the moun- 
tain trail in the Trinidad valley five 
miles out. The internees were moved 
there after three months of uncom- 
fortable internment in Camp John Hay. 
The building used are the old Constab- 
ulary Barracks, which are somewhat 
limited in space, but the internees have 
considerable freedom within the camp 
grounds. There are approximately 
500. The camp is well organized and 
has a hospital, with six doctors, a den- 
tist, and numerous nurses in attend- 
ance, and good medical care is given 
to the patients, but there is a great 
need for medicines and medical sup- 
plies. There is also an excellent school 
for the children, under the supervision 
of a large faculty from the Brent 
School, also interned there. 

All the able-bodied have work to do 
and there is a regular wood crew which 
cuts, splits, and hauls wood into the 
camp for the cook stoves. There is 
an adequate supply of food and a 
camp store which provides some of the 
necessities as well as vegetables and 




University of Santo Tomas — Manila civilian internment camp where 
Americans are interned since the fall of Manila 



fruits. Besides this there is also a 
little bake shop which manages to sup- 
ply edible concoctions out of rice and 
casava flours. A certain doctor interned 
there has been most helpful in provid- 
ing the camp with banana yeast, which 
has been a great addition to the diet. 
He has also been able to manufacture 
soap, face cream, cocoanut butter and 
many other items helpful to the in- 
ternees. There is also a small much- 
used camp library. Entertainments are 
arranged every Saturday night. The 
other evenings are spent in games and 
bridge, or the pursuit of individual 
hobbies. They have several baseball 
teams and games are held nearly every 
afternoon for exercise and the enter- 
tainment of the internees. 

10 SOLDIERS AT BAGUIO 

There is no military camp at Ba- 
guio. However, there are about 10 
American soldiers who are acting as 
volunteer truck drivers. 

Unfortunately no information with 
regard to conditions in Davao were 
available. Evidently as far as the in- 
ternees are concerned there has been 
practically no communication except 
for censored notes which are allowed 
to pass between relatives in different 
civilian camps. 

Of all the thousands of letters which 
have been written in this country to 
Santo Tomas, very few have been re- 
ceived in the camp. Only about a few 
hundred letters altogether have trickled 
through. The British, however, have 
been more fortunate and have had at 
least six distributions of English and 
Australian mail. The internees have 
been allowed two or three opportuni- 
ties to write home and also send ca- 
bles, but the high cost of cables has 
made it almost prohibitive for many 
to avail themselves of this means. 

LITTLE EXTRA PURCHASED 

For most, it is a question of buying 
a little extra food or going without, 
and quite naturally under these condi- 
tions survival takes precedence over 
sentiment. We are requested by those 
who have returned from Santo Tomas 
to advise our readers that when send- 
ing letters or cables to the internees 
no account of bad news or mention 
of deaths be included. This omission 
is considered essential to the morale 
of those still left behind in Santo 
Tomas. 

For the first time since war began 
civilian mail from the internees is now 
being distributed in this country. This 
evidently was brought on the Grips- 
halm, . . . continued on page 27 



- 21 ■ 



Marine General Says Japan Hopes 

U. S, Will Quit Before Complete Victory 

Chief of Staff of Second Marine Division says Nips make every battle 
tougher with intention that Americans will fear losses, give up. 

Japanese strategy is based on the hope that the United States will stop fight- 
ing before attaining complete victory, Brig. Gen. Merritt A. Edson, U.S.M.C said 

Envisioning the road to victory as a long one, General Edson said that at 
tnatX ^.^P^ had "lost practically nothing" except some shipping 
K 5£L l - e \t ad b6en h ? ht in ^Parison with their total strength and 

tht wlr for » P ° SSeSS10n 31 the m ° ment everything that they* started 

Our victory on Tarawa, however indiV^rl rfv«* « , i r i 

anything they have," Genial Edson MB ^ fr ° m the Ja l )S 

declared. 



I am sure we're going to find some 
tough spots ahead of us," he added. 
•1 hope they re no tougher than this 
one." 

SEES LONG ROAD TO VICTORY 

General Edson, who as a colonel 
commanded a Marine raider battalion 
in the Solomon Islands campaign, said 
that, tor the comparative number of 
troops involved, our casualties at Tara- 
wa were no greater than those suffered 
m taking the Solomons. He said that 
the Tarawa losses had struck the public 
more forcefully because they had oc 
curred in four days while those in the 
holomons had been stretched over four 
months In addition, he said, casual- 
ties in the Solomons caused by fatia Ue 
war neurosis and disease were°far 
greater. 

In a review of the Tarawa action, 

Eds ° n i S ° Usht t0 swee P away 
what he called a number of public 
misconceptions, particularly a belief 
that the American commanders had 
miscalculated the time of the landiruT 

ABNORMAL CONDITIONS CITED 

Actually he said, the landing was 
made at a high tide time but became 
of abnormal conditions of th ' area of 
which the commanders were definitely 
aware, the rise and fall of the tide on 
the landing day did not amount to 
more than one foot and duringTe el- 
ire day did not provide enough depth 

cross me reet. Since boats were un- 
able to pass over the reef, he said 
we re extremely grateful that our men 
had guts enough to get over the sides 
of the boats on the edge of the reef 
and punch in on their own. 

-22- 



"The information which we had on 
tides ^ at Tarawa was sketchy at the 
best," he said. "As we get farther 
toward Japan we will have even less 
information than we had this time." 

He emphasized repeatedly, however, 
that the commanders had been prepared 
for the possibility that the tides would 
not be normal on the landing day. "We 
carried out plans drawn up for such 
an eventuality," he said. These plans 
were for some troops to be carried 
ashore in amphibious vehicles and for 
others to wade to the beach from the 
reef. 

MOST CASUALTIES FOLLOWED LANDING 

General Edson said that another false 
impression held by the public was that 
most of our casualties had been suf- 
fered before the troops reached the 
beach. As a matter of fact, in all ex- 
cept one battalion 80 per cent of the 
casualties were suffered after landing. 

As for criticism that the Navy had 
tailed to soften the island sufficiently 
before the landing, General Edson said 
that the pre-landing bombardment had 
wiped out" all shore batteries, "neu- 
tralized" all anti-aircraft and a large 
part of the anti-landing craft guns and 
driven many enemy troops to shelter, 
giving as good support as anyone 
ever had" for such an operation. 

General Edson said that the strength 
of the fortifications and the stubborn- 
ness of resistance on Tarawa could be 
explained by the fact that the Gilbert 
Islands were of "great strategic impor- 
tance" to the Japanese, as they pro- 
tected the Marshall Islands and provid- 
ed a base within easy bombing range 
of our own installations. "They had 
no intention of losing it whatsoever," 
ne declared. He added that com- 
manding Japanese admiral had told the 
defending garrison that a million men 
would be required to take the island. 



15 Newspapermen Initiated 
At Sigma Delta Chi Dinner 

Fifteen Washington newspapermen, 
including Elmer Davis, director of the 
Office of War Information, were initi- 
ated recently as professional members 
of the Sigma Delta Chi, professional 
journalistic fraternity, as Willard R. 
Smith was installed as national presi- 
dent. Mr. Smith, associate editor of 
the Wisconsin State Journal, Madison, 
Wisconsin, succeeds Palmer Hoyt, pub- 
lisher of the Portland Oregonian and 
former deputy director for domestic 
operations of OWL 

A feature of the dinner meeting at 
the Statler Hotel was an address by 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo, secretary of 
information and public relations of the 
Philippine government - in - exile, who 
graphically described the last days on 
Bataan and Corregidor. He was or- 
dered off the fortress by Gen. Jonathan 
M. Wainwright two hours before the 
defending forces surrendered to the 
Japanese and carried sealed messages 
to Gen. Douglas aMcArthur in Aus- 
tralia. 

ADDED TO ROSTER 

In addition to Mr. Davis, the follow- 
ing were added to SDX's roster: 

Paul Wooten, president of the White 
House Correspondents' Association ; 
Charles P. Trussell, Washington staff 
of the New York Times; Dewey Flem- 
ing, chief of the Washington bureau of 
the Baltimore Sun; Alexander F. ("Ca- 
sey") Jones, managing editor of the 
Washington Post: Norman Baxter, as- 
sistant to the Secretary of Commerce; 
Forbes Campbell, director of informa- 
tion for the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation and the Office of Alien 
Property Custodian; Dr. Diosdado M. 
Yap, editor and publisher of the Phil- 
ippine news magazine BATAAN. 

Also Sol Taishoff, editor of Broad- 
casting magazine; Philip Rodgers, spe- 
cial assistant to the domestic director 
of OWI; Lt. Jack R. Howard, former 
assistant executive editor, Scripps-How- 
ard Newspapers; Sir Will molt Lewis, 
Washington correspondent of the Lon- 
don Times; George Lyon, OWI deputy 
domestic director; Thomas L. Stokes, 
Scripps-Howard Newspapers Alliance; 
Barnet Nover, Washington Post col- 
umnist and magazine writer. 




Newsman honored bv Siqma Delta Chi. professional journalistic fraternity. 
Left to right: Norman Baxter, Assistant to the Secretary of Commerce; 
Alexander F. Jones, Managing Editor of the Washington Post; Lt. Jack R. 
Howard former assistant executive editor, Scripps-Howard Newspapers; 
Dr Diosdado M. Yap, editor and publisher of BATAAN; Elmer Davis, direc- 
tor of the Office of War Information; Thomas L. Stokes, Scripps-Howard 
Newspaper Alliance; and Sir Wilmott Lewis, Washington correspondent of 

the London Times. 



Admiral Halsey Hails Victories Of 
Small U. S. Forces Against Heavy Odds 

Commander of South Pacific Area reviews year of war in his theatre. 
Promises offensive and says "each of us has an appointment in 
Tokyo." 

by Admiral William F. Halsey 




the capture of our second Solomon Islands objective, Munda airfield, we can take 
deep pride in the knowledge of having achieved much against great odds 

Tt is an established military axiom 
that a firmly entrenched defender holds 
the initial advantage against an at- 
tacker. 

AWARE OF ODDS FACED 

Well aware of the odds to be faced, 
the newborn South Pacific force moved 
against the lower Solomons on August 
7^ 1942. History shows that this force, 
then under Vice Admiral Robert L. 
Ghormley, U.S.N. , accomplished its 
m ission. Guadalcanal, Gavutu. and 
Tanambogo, were surprised in a per- 
fectly timed, well - coordinated early 
morning assault. 



Perhaps we should have wished to 
jmstpone our entry into the Solomons 
until a later date, when our strength in 
aircraft, ships and men would have 
been greater. We had little choice. At 
the very moment that Gen. A. A Van- 
degrifts Marine shock troops swarmed 
the beach-heads of Guadalcanal, the 
airdrome, now famed as Henderson 
Held, was receiving its final touches 
from enemy graders and rollers. De- 
lay would have jeopardized the secur- 
ity of the islands to the south as well 
as Australia and possibly New Zealand. 
We did not delay. 



LONG STRUGGLE STARTED 

Then began the long, long struggle 
which can only end with the annihila- 
tion of the Japanese imperial army 
and navy. 

In the prosecution of the Pacific war, 
which encompasses almost 70 million 
square miles from the Aleutians to 
New Zealand, and from the China Sea 
to the west coast of the Americas, we 
have now made an earnest offensive 
beginning. Our first year of South Pa- 
cific sea warfare alone has accounted 
for what can be regarded as an im- 
pressive enemy fleet of combatant and 
noncombatant ships sunk and damaged. 

Our victories in 1942 included the 
battle of the eastern Solomons, August 
23-25; Cape Esperance, October 11-12; 
Santa Cruz, October 26; Guadalcanal, 
November 13-15; Lunga Point, Novem- 
ber 30- December 1. This year we can 
look with the satisfaction of a tough 
job well done in the initial Kula Gulf 
action, March 5-6; battle of Kula Gulf, 
July 6; Kolombangara, July 12-13; 
Vella Gulf, August 6-7. We have made 
the waters of the middle Solomons 
costly and dangerous for the Japanese. 

SUBMARINE WARFARE 

I regret that security does not permit 
a breakdown of submarine action in 
our theater. This much I can say 
without aiding the enemy: Our under- 
seas forces grow daily; they strike him 
hard and often, where it hurts most — 
in his military breadbasket. 

His attenuated supply lines which he 
must frantically guard in his efforts to 
pour men and materials into his crack- 
ing perimeter-defenses, provide a 3000- 
mile target for us. I call to witness the 
exploits of such submarines as the Wa- 
hoo — which disposed of a whole con- 
voy of badly needed Japanese supplies. 

In the air. our Navy, Marine and 
Army pilots, generally outnumbered 
but never outfought, shot down more 
than 1800 enemy planes of all cate- 
gories. We can say with pardonable 
pride that on August 6, this year, one 
American was worth at least four Japs 
in aerial combat. 

As our forces grow, we have been 
able to send heavier aerial concentra- 
tions into the skies against the enemy. 
The final days of our unrelenting on- 
slaught against Munda saw more than 
200 aircraft bringing our wrath down 
upon his head in the form of high ex- 
plosives, cannonfire and machine-gun- 
ning. 

The Jap found his own attempts a! 
mass aerial attack devastating— to him- 
self. Witness his rout on April 7, 

■ 23 - 



June 16. and June 30, on which three 
days he lost a total of 234 planes. 

UNDER MacARTHUR'S COMMAND 

Early this year the South Pacific 
force, which has always been and re- 
mains an integral part of the United 
States Pacific Fleet, came under the 
strategical command of Gen. Douglas 
MacArthur. Each of us, he in his 
theater, and we in ours, had long been 
aiming at the same ultimate objectives. 

Coordination of our efforts was noth- 
ing new. This unity of command was 
the natural outcome of our northward 
progress. Throughout our entire South 
Pacific operations, Army bombers un- 
der General MacArthur's command 
played an essential role in the successes 
we attained here. Teamwork has al- 
ways been of the highest order. 

We have begun a new phase of the 
campaign in the waters and on the 
islands of the southwestern Pacific. 

Many months of unrelenting labor 
brought us to this desirable stage in 
the conflict. These were hard months 
of preparation, made harder by the 
fact that we started from scratch We 
went into harbors where little if any 
docking facilities existed— and built 
them. We cut the turn-around time of 
cargo ships carrying vital supplies from 
weeks to days. 

"MAGNIFICENT ENGINEERS" 

Our magnificent engineers. Navy 
^eabees and Army units hewed air- 
fields out of jungles— and we got planes 
into them in time to stem all enemy 
counterattacks against our hard-won 
new advanced positions. Sometimes it 
was touch-and-go. Often sheer guts 
as exemplified by the Marine fliers who 
ierned gasoline drums into Guadal- 
canal in unarmed transport planes dur- 
ing the dark days of October, 1942 
tipped the scales from defeat to ulti- 
mate victory. 

ft is with the deepest gratitude that 
I Pay tribute to all these components 
of the South Pacific force. 

Thanks to their labors, we now have 
hese springboards from which our fu- 
ture offensives must be launched. 

This I can promise: We shall have 
offensives. It is not the nature of 
Americans, Australians or New Zea- 
landers to sit idly by while the enemy 
overruns their lands. Nor does anyone 
of us feel that he has begun to win 
until he reaches enemy soil. Taking- 
back what was ours originally i s just 
the start. Each of us has an appoint- 
ment in Tokyo. 



Russian Journal Says Japanese 
War Strategy Has Been Faulty 

Soviet trade publication reviews Nipponese relations. Points out 
many Jap miscalculations about United Nations' ability to fight. 

The Soviet trade journal War and the Working Class asserted in Moscow 
New Year's Day that "Japan had lost the strategic initiative" in the Pacific and 
her "temporary advantage is a thing of the past." 

The article, reviewing Japanese-German relations, said Japan must now recall 
the Oriental proverb: "He who mounts a tiger cannot easily dismount." 

"In any case," the article continued. 
"Japan cannot count now on effective 
assistance from Germany." 



COMMENT MOST OUTSPOKEN 

The comment was the most outspok- 
en yet made in Moscow on the Pacific 
war in which the Soviet Union is neu- 
tral. 

The magazine said the capitualtion 
of Italy was "a smashing blow" to the 
Axis and "that is why the Germans are 
advertising now with greater fervency 
the unchangeability of Japanese-Ger- 
man relations and shouting that Ger- 
many and Japan will be together to 
the end." 

The article recalled that "Japan never 
has been a vassal of Hitlerite Ger- 
many" but her "aggressive plans pushed 
Japan into rapproachment with Hitler- 
ite imperialism." 

JAPS MISCALCULATED 

After the fall of France, the article 
continued, "Japan made the mistake in 
deciding that the strategic positions of 
the democratic countries, mainly Great 
Britain, were so weakened that it would 
pay Japan to cast off her policy of 
noninterference in the World War." 

The article said Japan had counted 
on Germany to tie up Allied forces 
while Germany expected Japan to at- 
tack the Soviet Union. 

JAPAN DOES SHOW SENSE 

But, the article said, "in its rela- 
tions with the Soviet Union Japan 
showed common sense." 

The magazine said both Germany 
and Japan were dissatisfied with the 
action of the other but declared that 
while they are losing confidence in 
each other the fear of the consequences 
keeps their military union strong. 

"At this stage of the war," it con- 
tinued, "Germany and Japan both are 
interested in the prolongation of mili- 
tary operations." 



"Philippines By June - 
Is U. S. Soldiers' Slogan 

Successes at Cape Gloucester and 
Saidor in the past two weeks have 
started a fire of opinion among troops 
in forward areas, a Chicago Tribune 
writer reports. Before Christmas the 
popular slogan was "The Golden Gate 
in '48." Now the cry is "The Philip- 
pines by June." 

This optimism is based on the leap- 
frogging up the New Guinea coast. 
When fooking at the map, the rank 
and file of the troops smile as they 
see it is only 600 miles from the north- 
west tip of New Guinea to Mindanao, 
the most southerly of the Philippine 
Islands. In between lies the Island 
of Halmaheira, which already has been 
visited by the allies. 

Elizalde Terms UNRRA 
"Omen Of Hope" To All 

J. M. Elizalde. Philippine resident 
commissioner and Philippine represen- 
tative on the Council of the United 
Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Ad- 
ministration, in a statement issued at 
the end of the organization's Atlantic 
City session, declared that "immediate 
and humanitarian relief of peoples 
suffering from the ravages of war all 
over the world" was "uppermost" m 
the minds of the member countries of 
the Council. 

Elizalde said that the member coun- 
tries also entertained "the practical 
idea that the sooner world rehabilita- 
tion is accomplished the sooner can 
peoples of the world return to normal 
living." 

He declared that the "initial inter- 
national move toward immediate relief 
and early rehabilitation" was "an omen 
of hope" to all countries of the world. 



-24° 



General Godfrey Calls Airdrome Need 
Urgent In Offensive Against Japs 

Army Air Forces Engineer describes building of field with Japs only 
40 miles away, on return from world-wide inspection tour. 

A two-months inspection trip to seven combat theaters convinced Brigadier 
General Stuart C. Godfrey, the Army Air Forces' Air Engineer, that the most 
u rgent engineering ta*k at present is rapid construction of airdromes and land- 
ing strips to make possible the forward advance of Allied air operations. 

General Godfrey traveled 45.000 miles on an itinerary that took him to 
England. Africa, Sicily, India, China, Australia. New Guinea, New Caledonia, 



— /Aiiiua, oiuny, xnwic*. 

Guadalcanal, Munda and Hawaii. 

"Airborne Engineer Units have been 
formed to meet'the problem of 'rush- 
order airdromes,' " General Godfrey 
said. "These are pioneer units with 
light equipment, supplementing the un- 
equalled heavy equipment that our 
standard battalions use." 

General Godfrey then described a 
fighter airdrome of two landing strips 
constructed in New Guinea recently by 
one of these battalions in the short 
tlme of three weeks. 

JPLANES LAND MEN, MACHINES 

"All of the men and equipment, in- 
cluding 19 bulldozers, 32 jeeps, grad- 
ers, scrapers, field camp equipment and 
5 0 caliber machine guns (for defense 
of the field while construction was un- 
derway), was flown in by the Troop 
Carrier Command's C-47 transports be- 
cause there was no other way to get 
the stuff there," General Godfrey said. 
"Some preliminary work was done by 
the natives in clearing a place for the 
transports to land. The construction 
was in progress with the japs only 40 
miles away. This airfield served for 
successful attacks on Wewak and Lae 
by the United States' Fifth Air Force." 

General Godfrey added that this im- 
portant forward field was made possi- 
ble only because the engineers could 
get to it by air. 

"While the airdrome was under con- 
struction a flight of 12 Jap medium 
bombers, escorted by 20 to 25 fighting 
planes, slipped in to bomb the field, 
General Godfrev said. "They were in- 
tercepted by P-29 Airacobras who shot 
down all 12 bombers and three fight- 
ers. We lost four fighter planes. 

VISITED OVER 100 AIR BASES 

During the trip General Godfrey in- 
spected more than 100 airdromes and 
50 aviation engineer battalions. He 
raveled the 45,000 miles in 260 flying 
hours. 



"The rapid rate at which an ad- 
vanced landing field can sometimes be 
provided doesn't offset the need for 
complete air bases to the rear, with 
their large ground crews and elaborate 
installations for repair and servicing," 
the general said. "These bases are 
costly and require much labor and 
time to construct. The engineers are 
working round the clock to provide all 
necessary airdromes and supplemen- 
tary network of docks, roads, shops, 
etc." 

Tokyo Warns War Will 
Be Decided In 1944 

New Year's statements broadcast to 
the Japanese people by military and 
political leaders stressed the "serious- 
ness" of the war situation and warned 
that the outcome of the war would be 
decided in 1944. 

The broadcasts, recorded by U. S. 
Government^ monitors, emphsized, how- 
ever, Japan's ability to crush "the en- 
emy counter offensives." 

Premier Tojo in a New Year's Day 
message said, "Victory for Japan and 
East Asia can be attained only by 
crushing these enemy onslaughts." 

Foreign Minister Mamoru Shigemitsu 
declared "1944 is the year in which 
we must defend our home, that is 
greater East Asia, and crush the en- 
emy's counteroffensive." 

Nobuyuki Abe, president of the Im- 
perial Rule Association, Japan's totali- 
tarian political party, declared "1944 
would be the year in which the destiny 
of the war would be decided." 

Kazou Ooki, minister of "Greater 
East Asia" affairs, warned the Japa- 
nese home front that it "must endeavor 
to bring about a drastic increase of the 
fighting power." 



Puppet Laurel Changes 
Islands' Cabinet Setup 

Domei, official Japanese news agen- 
cy, said that the "independent" Philip- 
pine Government had completed an ad- 
ministrative reorganization with puppet 
President Jose Laurel's announcement 
of the creation of nine Government 
Ministries. 

These will include Foreign Affairs, 
Home Affairs, Finance, Justice, Agri- 
culture and Natural Resources. Educa- 
tion, Public Works and Communica- 
tions, Economic Affairs, and Health. 
Labor and Public Welfare. The new 
ministers will be appointed later. Senor 
Laurel at present heads the Home Af- 
fairs and Education Ministries. 

The Japanese dispatch was recorded 
by United States Government monitors. 

The broadcast said Laurel's cabinet 
now was constituted as follows: 

Foreign Affairs — Claro M. Recto. 

Finance — Antonio de las Alas. 

Justice— Teofilo Sison. 

Agriculture and National Resources 
— Rafael R. Aluman. 

Public Works and Communications 
— Quintin Parades. 

Health, Labor and Public Welfare— 
EmiLiano Tria Tirona. 

Laurel, the broadcast said, retained 
three portfolios in the puppet cabinet 
for himself — the post of Home Affairs, 
Education and Economic Affairs. 

U. S., British Officers 
Staff Postal Center 

The International Red Cross Com- 
mittee has been informed that the Jap- 
anese authorities have created a cen- 
tral post office for prisoners of war at 



Higashi Shina^awa — the 



mam 



Tokyo 



camp. This post office is charged with 
the distribution and reforwarding of 
mail to prisoners of war held by Ja- 
pan, and its staff is composed of Amer- 
ican and British officers. These officers, 
tt is stated, have complained that in- 
sufficient address frequently makes it 
difficult, if not impossible, to locate 
the prisoners they are intended for, 
and the request is made that the ut- 
most care should be taken in writing 
out the exact address on mail for pris- 
oners of war in Japanese hands. 



-25- 



U. S. Due To Get Japan's 
Mid-Pacific Islands 

Britain, China and Russia have 
agreed that the United States will get 
all Japanese-mandated islands in the 
Pacific as a post-war assurance of last- 
ing peace in the Far East, the Army 
and Navy Journal stated. 

The Teheran conference of "The Big 
Three" also settled the date for the 
invasion of western Europe, the Jour- 
nal declared. 

The Jap-mandated islands now form- 
ing a protective ring of steel around 
the Japanese island proper could be 
effectively used by the United States 
as strategic bases and as a wall quar- 
antining Japan from the rest of the Pa- 
cific. The mandates include the Mar- 
shall Islands now being subjected to 
daily bombing raids by the American 
air forces, the Carolines where the 
great Japanese naval base of Truk is 
located, and the Marianas Islands 
whose number includes Guam. 

FORMOSA BASE LIKELY 

The Army and Navy Journal added 
there was no doubt that China would 
be willing to permit the United States 
to establish a base on Formosa," but 
said she would not be disposed to 
make a similar grant to Russia or 
Britain. 

tt " AI ! J eaders were agreed that the 
United States should acquire the Japa- 
nese-mandated islands," the Journal 
declared. 

Indications that all differences of 
opinion between the President, Prime 
Minister Churchill and Premier Stalin 
were not solved at the Teheran confer- 
ence in spite of general unity lie in 
Mr Roosevelt's recent statement that 
re does not think" any insoluble dis- 
agreements will arise between the three 
major powers, the military journal 
pointed out. J 

nJJri C,ifferences < ^ was explained, 
might have sprung f rom the ' 

dents declaration that the rights of 
every nation large and small, must be 
respected and guarded. 

MAY DISPLEASE STALIN 

"Perhaps Stalin, in view of his terri- 
torial designs, will not like the Presi- 
dent s declaration," the Journal ven- 
tured. 

Entering; into the talks between the 
Big hear were the questions of the 
troops that should occupv Germany 




Buy War Bonds 

and give the change to fight 
INFANTILE PARALYSIS 



600 U. S. Prisoners 
Mine Coal, Build Ships 

Fukuoka camps, numbering seven in 
all, are situated at the western end of 
the mam Japanese island of Honshu, 
lhe camps derive their name from the 
arge city and prefecture of Fukuoka 
located at the northern tip of the ad- 
joining island of Kyushu, presumably 
because Fukuoka is the military head- 
quarters for the region. Most of the 
c fW* are centered around the cities 
ot Ube and Omine, but two camps are 
on small islands— Inn oshima and Mu- 
kajima— in the Inland Sea about 150 
miles east. 

When visited by a delegate of the 
International Red Cross Committee last 
May it was reported that these camps 
housed only British prisoners, but later 
advices have indicated that there are 
now over 600 Americans in the Fuku- 
oka camps. Prisoners in these camps 
are principally employed in coal mines 
and shipyards. 



and Japan after unconditional surren- 
der, the length of occupation and the 
kind of governments they shall be per- 
mitted to have, the service news dis- 
closed. 



64 Cables Reach U. S. 
From Islands In October 

Sixty-four cablegrams from prison- 
ers of war, internees, and United States 
nationals in the Philippines were re- 
ceived by the Red Cross during the 
month of October for delivery to rela- 
tives and friends in this country. This 
was the largest number received in any 
one month from the Far East, as well 
as the largest number to arrive from 
United States internees and prisoners 
of war in any enemy or enemy-occu- 
pied country. 

While communications from the Phil- 
ippines have been trickling in through 
Red Cross communication service since 
last January, this is the first time per- 
sonal messages from individuals have 
been received in any quantity. Many 
of the cables were replies to messages 
sent through Red Cross channels from 
persons in the United States. 

It is hoped that this influx of com- 
munications from the Far East is in- 
dicative of a continued increase in 
the number of messages and welfare 
reports from that territory. 



Tojo Tells Japanese 
Air Aim Is Victory Key 

Premier Hideki Tojo has told a con- 
ference of Japanese district governors 
that "the reinforcement of the air arm 
is the kev to victory in modern war- 
fare" and that such reinforcement de- 
pended in Japan's case on solution of 
two ' fundamental problems," transpor- 
tation and labor, the Tokyo radio said. 

The recording was by the United 
States Foreign Broadcast Intelligence 
Service. 

A lengthy transmission to the Japa- 
nere-controlled press also quoted Tojo 
as warning the district executives that 
"unwavering determination" was re- 
quired from the Japanese people and 
that hunger constituted the greatest 
danger to such determination. 

"It is very essential and an unavail- 
able requirement," he said, "that we 
must make every possible preparation 
and must put them into practice in or- 
der to achieve absolute security in 
foodstuffs." 



Internees Have Good Morale 

. . . continued from page 21 

The 150 children at the Holy Ghost 
Convent, with a few adults to help 
with their care, are all reported to be 
in excellent health. 

PHONE SERVICE CUT 

In Manila proper conditions appear 
to be much the same as they were last 
year. Some factories are still being 
operated, but by the Japanese. The 
rest have been stripped of their ma- 
chinery and this, together with all 
available metals, has been shipped to 
Japan. Telephone services have been 
greatly curtailed, most phones having 
been removed. There are only a very 
few automobiles in use and these are 
using charcoal or alcohol for fuel oil. 
The street cars are still operating. 
There are several daily newspapers, 
but are under Japanese control, the 
main English paper being the Manila 
Tribune. All the clubs, most of the 
hotels and apartments are occupied by 
the Japanese and some Germans. Jai 
Alai is more active than ever and play 
goes on daily, with the restaurants and 
bars functioning as usual. 

All foreign banks are closed, two or 
three reorganized Filipino banks have 
reopened and there is also a Japanese 
bank. The money used is the Japa- 
nese government peso, par exchange 
value with the Japanese yen and with 
the old peso, but the value is uncer- 
tain, as inflation is rampant. The po- 
licing of Manila is done both by the 
Filipinos as well as Japanese. The 
law courts have been reorganized and 
are functioning. The activities of the 
religious orders have been very much 
curtailed, but they are operating to a 
certain extent. Most of the hospitals 
are still open. The Philippine General 
Hospital is running as usual. Quezon 
Institute, St. Luke's Hospital and Ma- 
nila Sanitarium have all been taken 
over by the Japanese and are run pri- 
marily for their benefit. 

SPANIARDS ARE FREE 

The Spanish residents are living as 
usual, with little interference on the 
part of the Japanese. All the German 
refugees are still free in Manila and 
Jiving as usual. 

We have had many inquiries with 
regard to the military camps in the 
Philippines. Unfortunately very little 
information is obtainable in regard to 
them, their location or identification, 



Rizal Day Celebrated 
By Filipinos In America 

In commemoration of the 47th an- 
niversary of the execution of Dr. Jose 
Rizal, Filipino patriot and martyr, 
Filipino communities throughout the 
United States held fitting literary-musi- 
cal programs. 

In Chicago, Vice President Sergio 
Osmena was the principal speaker, with 
Mayor Edward J. Kelly of Chicago, 
Miss Carmen B. Gavino, Miss Sybil 
Ashby, Miss Julieta V. Sotejo, Clara 
Kuncl, Dorothy Peterson, Rev. Alvaro 
A. Carino, Dr. Feliciano A. Hicaro and 
J. Manzano participating in the pro- 
gram. The program was prepared un- 
der the leadership of Bennie C. Cas 
Secretary and Adjutant of the Filipino 
Post No. 509 of the American Legion 
In New York City, Colonel Carlos P 
Romulo was the guest speaker. Miss 
Enya Gonzales, Professor Cornejo, Sec- 
retary of Finance Colonel Andres So- 
riano and Dr. Benvinedo Dino, Director 
of the Filipino Center participatino- i n 
the program. In Washington, D C 
Major Jesus Villamor, Filipino ace' 
was the principal speaker, with C T 
Elbo, president of the Filipino Execu- 
tive Council, presiding. Other partak- 
ers of the program included Manuel A 
Adeva of the Resident Commissioner's 
office, reading the messages of the Pres 
ident and the Vice President, and S 
Montano reciting Rizal's "Mv T ac t 
Farewell." Y ljHSt 

In Philadelphia, Dr. Diosdado M 
Yap, editor and publisher of BA* 
TAAN, was the principal speaker at a 
banquet and dance. Eugenio I Car- 
pio was the toastmaster, with A M 
Jaucian, president of the Filipino" As* 
sociation of Philadelphia, giving the 
welcome address. Resident Commis- 
sioner Ehzalde was represented by his 
legal assistant Sebastian TJgarte, who 
gave a few short remarks Vocal *e 
lections by Miss Josephine Sitiar * n A 
Miss Leoncia M. Pambuena rec ted Ri 
zal's "My Last Farewell." T he Ho n nr~ 
able Joseph F. Galla-her nL ? 

placed a wreath on a bust of Ri zn l Tk! 
invocation was given by Rt. R ev ; M ^ 
Cornelius P. Brennen, PhD n;J~V 
Catholic Charities of PhilaSeiph iT 
chairman of the nro&ram T * • 
was A. F. PambuenT 0 ' C ° mmittee 



Rizal Day Message 

Of The President 

As we commemorate Rizal's 
martyrdom this year, while our 
country is under the heel of 
the invader and our people are 
actually under the iron control 
of a foreign army, some may 
ask if our sacrifices and suf- 
ferings, the imprisonment and 
the death of our beloved ones, 
all the hardships and daily 
dangers of our fighting men 
still resisting the enemy, are 
too much or too unbearable. 

To this question, the answer 
has been given by Rizal him- 
self — an answer that applies 
to every Filipino individually 
as well as to all our people 
collectively. Rizal suffered in 
exile and in prison, and gave 
his own life for the liberty of 
our people and country. No 
Filipino living today, and no 
Filipino yet unborn, can give a 
life more precious, more valu- 
able, than the life Rizal gladly 
sacrificed. These are his words 
that ring in my ears as I 
send this message to you, my 
beloved countrymen: 

"The place matters not — 
cypress or laurel or lily 
white, 

Scaffold or open plain, combat 
or martyrdom's plight, 

# Tis ever the same, to^ serve our 
home and country's need." 

Let us, therefore, vow once 
again that we shall fight unto 
death for our country's freedom 
and independence. 

MANUEL L. QUEZON. 



except there are known to be four mili 
tary camps in Manila proper, one on 
Engineers Island, one in the Elementary 
School in Pasay, one at Nichols Field 
and one at Bilibid Prison. 



Philippine Army Fund 
Kept Up By War Dept. 

The War Department's appropriation 
hills still carry $205,000,000 "for the 
organization and maintenance of the 
Philippine Army." 

Senator Elmer Thomas of Oklahoma, 
explaining the item to the Senate, said 
that was carried "to take care of the 
Army of the Philippines just as soon 
as the islands are freed of Japanese 
domination." 



-27- 



ALL OF US CAN FREE OUR COUNTRY BY 
PURCHASING WAR BONDS. 

— President Quezon. 



PHILIPPINE 
NATIONAL BANK 

New York Agency 



2 5 BROADWAY 

NEW YORK CITY 




gATAAN 

DCAACAADCD TU c nun iiM^iuii^ 



i 7 



REMEMBER THE PHILIPPINES 



VOL. I 



NO. 11 



FEBRUARY. 1944 




WASHINGTON, D. C. 



flaps Thutde'i Tllanij Gme'ticans, ~ti[<binos 




FILIPINOS AVENGE BATAAN WITH 



IS 



ZJwent^hi/e cents a copy 



OUR READERS WRITE 



THE EDITORS WELCOME 
COMMENTS FROM THE READERS 



0 " ® 



NICANOR BACOLOY 
Rizal Post No. 142, American Legion 
Seattle, Washington 

May I congratulate vou for publishing 
>uch a high-class magazine as BATAAN. 
It is really something our people should be 
proud of. 

To my mind, 
nothing else 
should matter 
to a 1 1 of us 
but the win- 
ning of the 
war; victory 
means free- 
dom, not only 
for our be- 
loved Philip- 
pines but also 
for all the en- 
slaved peo- 
ples of the 
world. \V e 
should devote 
all our efforts 
towards that 
goal. Those of us who are too old to fight 
should take up defense jobs, such as farm 
work. We should back up Uncle Sam and 
President Roosevelt 100 per cent We 
should support President Quezon and the 
leaders ot our government, for thev are 
lighting, not only to win the war hut also 
to protect the rights of our people, not 
only in America, but also at home. 

We should all invest a good part of our 
earnings in war bonds, so that Uncle Sam 
can buy guns and ammunition for our sol- 
diers. And as President Quezon says. " Ml 
of us can free our country bv purchasing 
war bonds." Surelv. that is a cheap price 
tor freedom! 



SEVERO T. SALCEDO 
Grand Sec.-Treas. 
Caballeros de Dimas-Alang, Inc. 

.".May I congratulate vou for Mr Dio- 
msios article in the January issue calling 
the attention of our government-in-exile 
AmeHc PreSSing problems of our People in 
"A prosperous Filipino citizenry in this 
country is a national asset and our people 
should be helped to prosper. More than 
anything else, they need guidance and our 
government could give them that guidance'' 



GEORGE H. MALONE 
Administrative Assistant 
Planning Division, Navy Yard 
Pearl Harbor, T. H. 

"Your November, 1943, issue of B\T \ \\ 
was a delight to read. | can sav that BA- 
I AAV m its composition, can he said to 
^ an organ to increase understanding be 
twe . en * he peoples of these two coCntrie 
?. nd 1 nited Nations.' CongratuU 

tons I have read it with deep Stews* 
Kindly convey my respects and best wishes 
io President Quezon and General Valdes'' 



ANDREW ESCALONA 
Proprietor, Club Inn 
Delano, Calif. 

"May I congratulate you for the article 
in your January issue' entitled 'Filipinos 
Ask About the Future.' It is to be hoped 
that our government — to which. I can say, 
Filipinos are intensely loyal — will really 
activate a concrete program for our people 
in America. We need, and need badly, 
proper guidance. 

"Delano is a small town in California 
but 1 am glad to say that through the 
efforts of the leaders of our community, 
hilipinos h ^re do not sulfer intolerance 
and discrimination. We have a colony 
which is respected by the Americans be- 
cause, individually as well as collectively 
we try to conduct ourselves in a manner 
becoming to our race. We have 19 fam- 
ilies here owning their own homes— nice 
respectable homes. Our farmers are pros- 
pering: some of them own their farms 
I hese farmers, the families, the business 
and civic leaders and the industry and 
good behavior of our workingmen are fac- 
tors which contribute to the stability as 
well as respectability of our community. 

"Many more want to buy homes and 
farms, but are unfortunately barred from 
doing so by California's discriminatory 
Alien Land Law. This is a problem which 
hounds our people, not only in Delano but 
throughout the State, and we hope Presi- 
dent Quezon will help us solve it. We 
hope, also, that he will see to it that Fili- 
pinos in America are given reciprocal rights 
as Americans are given in the Philippines. 
lu a . I1 ? atter ot justice, we should be given 
the right to become American citizens." 



DON LLEVA 
Seattle, Washington 

"BATAAN is a great magazine. It gener- 
ates quality and radiates the comforting 
warmth of good, honest, clean reporting. 
I he name is well chosen. There could be no 
better motive. It must not swerve in its 
mission. It cannot fall from its standard." 



MRS. MARY R. BAILEY 
Baltimore, Maryland 

"1 am receiving BATAAN and enjoying 
it very much. I am interested in any- 
thing about the Philippines, as my husband. 
Cpl. Chester A. Bailey, died in Balaam 
April S. 1942. one day before Bataan fell. 
Would like that your April edition ot this 
splendid publication be dedicated to those 
boys who died in Bataan, as a memorial 
to them. Those bovs may have died not 
in vain: may be gone, but not forgotten. 



MRS. PERFECTITA GARCIA 
Gallup, New Mexico 

"For some former months I have re- 
ceived your splendid and interesting publi- 
cation, BATAAN. It is indeed very inter- 
esting to me to read this informative pub- 
lication, as my son is a prisoner of war 
there. Any news about that beautiful 
country — the Philippines — will be of great 
interest to me always. Congratulations 
and more power to you." 



Bataan Magazine Is As Near As Nearest Mail Box! 

From California we receive reports from our agents that Filipinos 
are enthusiastic about BATAAN Magazine and are eager to buy copies 
ot it but are reluctant to subscribe "because they move around so much 
that they miss their magazine most of the timer 

We wish we could accommodate our mobile Filipino population on 
the Coast by selling them individual copies. Unfortunately, like any 
other periodical in these war times, we have to contend with drastic 
paper rationing, and therefore cannot print enough copies to take care 
of subscriptions and newsstand distribution both. 

But we wish to remind our Filipino readers that BATAAN Magazine 
is as near to them as their nearest mail box! Here is what we mean: 

If you are a subscriber and you move, all you have to do is send 
US a postal card, giving us your name, your old address, and this note: 

Mease forward my next copy of BATAAN to my new address " 

Inen put down your new address and drop the card in the nearest mail 
box, I hat's all there is to it! We will take care of the rest. 
Simple, isn't it? 

But please cooperate so that we can give you faster and better service 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 

( Circulation Department ) 



VOLUME I 
NUMBER 11 




FEBRUARY 
1944 



AN INDEPENDENT PHILIPPINE NEWSMAGAZINE 



DIOSDADO M. YAP 

EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 



DICK FITZPATRICK editor and publisher t „ ™™ TT ot^ n 

executive editor I- C. DIONISIO, Associate Eaitor 

r^n-Dirsc* «i TT «„.. CHIEF. PACIFIC COAST BUREAU 

CARLOS BULOSAN and CAYETANO C. NAGAC 

CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 

■ M n n Ne r S L° M ' l a T ar Bennie C - Cas ' Chica ^° Representatives 
BernardmoD.Arado. Benny O.Escobido and Ang sl P. Pingpong. Territory of Hawaii Representatives 



TTsrANTStUT^oZ, TuL," ° FFICES: 1300 NATIONAL PRE *S BUILDING, WASHINGTON 4, D. C. ADVER- 
TISING AND CIRCULATION OFFICES: 424 LAMONT STREET. N. W., WASHINGTON 10 D C PACIFIC COAST OFFICE- 
239 SO. EL DORADO STREET, STOCKTON 4, CALIFORNIA Qirec^om^^,' „ PACIFIC OOAbl umtt. 
ADVERTISING RATES ON APPLICATION . . . "ENTERED AS SECOND CLASq mjttc^ S3 ' 0 ° A YEAR; SINGLE 

WASHINGTON, D. C. UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3 1870 COPYRTr^HT * **** ^ ^ ^ ^ 
' 0/u - • • • COPYRIGHT 1943 BY DIOSDADO M. YAP, EDITOR AND PUBLISHER. 



Jront Clover 



PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS 
SIGN "AVENGE BATAAN" SCROLL 

Sergio 0smena 3 Vice President, center, signs 
the "Avenge Bataan" scroll after purchasing war 
bonds in the Treasury Department' 's Fourth War 
Loan Drive. 

Left to right — Dr. Arturo B. Rotor. Secretary 
to the President; J. M. Elizalde, Resident Com- 
missioner; Sergio Osniena, Vice President: Col. 
Andres Soriano. Secretary of Finance; and Jaime 
Hernandez, Auditor General, awaiting to sign 
their names. 

In supporting the drive. President Quezon 
wired Secretary Morgenthau. U. S. Treasury: 
"My wife and I have agreed to invest every cent 
ice have in the purchase of 'Avenge Bataan' 
Bonds/ 9 

The scroll will be taken back to the Philip- 
pines and, according to President Quezon, "will 
be given a place of honor in my country." 

ASSOCIATED PRESS PHOTO FROM 
PHILIPPINE DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATION AND PUBLIC RELATIONS 



Quezon Urges Filipinos To Buy Bonds 

Hoping Drive Will Speed Re conquest 4 

Editorials 6 

Randolph Introduces Bill In House Making 

Filipinos Eligible For American Citizenship ... 7 
Confesor Says As Long As U. S. Fights Japs 

There Will Be No Peace In The Philippines .... 8 

laps Murder 7700 Prisoners U 

The Progress Of The War In The 

Pacific Theatre This Past Month 12 

Romulo Says U. S. Faces Trained Killer 

In Pacific; Urges Facing Of Reality 13 

Filipino Organization Looks To The Future; 

Adopts Plan For Islands' Reconstruction 14 

Licking Japanese Will Be Long, Hard Task, 

OWI Concludes In Analysis Of Enemy Power 17 

A Bataan Father Asks The President 18 

The Philippines and The United Nations 

Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 19 

Sec. Hull Charges Japanese Violate 

All Laws Governing War Prisoners 20 

Japs Evacuate 300,000 of Peiping's 

Residents As Food Crisis Continues 21 

Send MacArthur Planes and Tanks To 

Avenge Bataan, Senator Demands 22 

Lucas Says Japs Choose Hari-Kari 

To Capture By American Forces 23 

Chinese Paper Pleads For Offensive 

Against Japs By Allies This Spring 24 

Osmena Speaks On Freedom of Speech 24 

Chinese Gov't Explains Ban on "Pleasures" 25 

Much Rubber, Not Enough 

Cotton: Jap Perplexity 26 

Jap Shipping Takes Heavy Pounding 

But All Aircraft Still Being Replaced 27 



Quezon Urges Filipinos To Buy Bonds 
Hoping Drive Will Speed Reconquest 

In special message, Philippine President asks all to help those in 
Islands who carry on the fight against the Japanese. 

President Quezon of the Philippines urged Filipinos in America, Hawaii, 
Alaska and elsewhere, to purchase War Bonds in the hope that the Fourth War 
Loan Drive "will result in speeding up the reconquest of the Philippines." 

President Quezon called attention to the fact that war is still going on in the 
Philippines. "They are keeping up the fight with such arms and ammunition 
as Filipino and American officers who refused to surrender were able to take 
along with them," he said. 



President Quezon stated that he is 
resigned "with a bleeding heart to the 
decision that the war against Germany 
demands prior consideration." But, he 
asked, "Has not the time arrived to 
drive the Japanese out of the Philip- 
pines r 

PEOPLE IN ISLANDS SUFFER MUCH 

President Quezon's message reads: 
"After the revelation of the un- 
soeakable atrocities perpetrated by the 
Japanese upon American and Filipino 
prisoners of war, the American people 
can gain some idea of the sufferings 
that the Japanese have also infliced on 
the non-combatant elements of the Phil- 
ippine population. 

"It is true that the Japanese govern- 
ment and its high military command 
pursued a policy of attraction, appeal- 
ing to racial affinity and granting the 
so-called independence. These decep- 
tions tailed, however, to win the Fili- 
pinos to the side of the Japanese be- 
cause of the many and frequent cases 
of. cruelty committed by their soldiery, 
wh^xnclude the raping of helplesl' 

FILIPINOS AT MERCY OF JAPS 

cines clothing ami other JseSk 

rh:" e e a v nd of de ! enSeleSS ^ ^ 
Film I r Y i Ja P anese soldiers— the 

0 ! f^T FiHp7„ 0 indeed 6nSlaVed 

the deprivation of their liberties w ^ 
gnob e and cowardly resignation War- 
are IS going on everywhere in the 
Ph-l.ppines, as Tokyo broadcasts un 
wittingly reveal now and then 

"Although the Filipinos are receiving 
neither arms nor ammunition from out 
side, they are keeping up the fight 
with such arms and ammunition as 
Filipino and American officers who re 
fused to surrender were able to take 



along with them. The war in the 
Philippines is going on despite Japa- 
nese retaliatory measures by burning 
entire villages and killing civilians in- 
discriminately. 

BONDS MAY SPEED OFFENSIVE 

"How long are the Filipinos going 
to be left alone to fight the Japanese? 
1 hope the Fourth War Loan Drive 
will result in speeding up the recon- 
quest of the Philippines, and the liber- 
ation of my people and those unfor- 
tunate prisoners of war still in the cruel 
hands of the Japanese. Mrs. Quezon 
and I are doing the best we can in 
purchasing War Bonds, and we hope 
ai . Flll P ,nos in America, Hawaii, 
Alaska and elsewhere will do the same. 

. " With a bleeding heart, I am re- 
signed to the decision that the war 
agamst Germany demands prior con- 
sideration But has not the time ar- 
rived to drive the Japanese out of the 
Ph.Iippines? Remember, that only in 
the Philippines the American flag has 
been humiliated. Let us aven-e Ba 
taan NOW" aven e e tsa- 

lexas chairman of the War Finance 

thTar\ 0f ShackeIf -d County, saicl 
ha after hearing what had happened 
to his son, the late Lieut. Col. William 
L. Dyess, at the hands of his Jap cap- 

£3 r WaS SUre noboc, y in Shackel- 
oid County would need any further 
ur?mg to buy war bonds. 

soolffl , DyeS u Sa j d his son ' Iik e the 

about I I tha L t , he WaS ' never tal ked 
about his horrible experiences to his 
tamily except in broad outlines. 

heTrlTY - Hltle he did ^ ^ough," 

pose of i' 1 W3S dear that the P^- 
pcse oi the Japs was to see to it that 

no American prisoner taken at Bataan 

would ever escape and live to tell the 

After eluding the guards at the pris- 
on camp, Colonel Dyess, his father 



said, like a hunted animal, dodged his 
Jap pursuers in various ways he did 
not reveal, although the Japs were on 
his heels all the time and shot at him 
numerous limes. How Colonel Dyess 
managed to shake them and get over to 
Australia after his island-hopping ex- 
perience he never revealed to his fam- 
ily in detail. 

OSMENA'S STATEMENT ON WAR BONDS 

In Washington, Vice President Os- 
mena issued the following appeal: 

"In the 'March of Death' Filipino 
and American soldiers were together 
as they had been in the bloody fox- 
holes of Bataan and in the bomb- 
scarred tunnels of Corregidor. Forced 
to march for days, miles upon miles 
on a sun-beaten road without either 
food or water, they suffered humilia- 
tion, bodily pain and even death. But 
those who died and those who sur- 
vived it clung together in a common, 
unshakable faith in ultimate victory, 
sealing and giving expression once 
again to Filipino-American comrade- 
ship. 

"If with the 'March of Death' the 
enemy intended to frighten and terror- 
ize the American and Filipino peoples, 
he certainly has not succeeded. For 
even those who went through that or- 
deal emerged triumphant in spirit, 
while the exhibition of cruelty of the 
enemy has merely served to arouse the 
anger and hatred of our two peoples. 
'Avenge Bataan' has become our pledge, 
and to help fulfill this pledge, I am 
sure that our people on the home front 
— Americans and Filipinos — will spare 
nothing within their means to buy more 
war bonds and make the Fourth War 
Loan Drive a great success. 

17-1- • . TTm'ted States choose 

rilipinos in the unucu ^ 
war bonds as one of the tangible ways 
to show their hate of the Japanese for 
their barbaric methods in occupying 
the Philippine Islands. 

They played an active part in the 
Fourth War Loan drive, which sought 
in a single drive the greatest amount 
of money for war financing known in 
the history of the country. Their ac- 
tivities are reported below. 

Every cent of the personal savings 
of Manuel L. Quezon, president of the 
Philippine Commonwealth, and his 
wife are invested in War Bonds. In 
the absence of President Quezon, now 
ill in Florida, Madame Quezon handed 
a check to Ted Gamble, national direc- 
tor of the War Finance Division of the 
Treasury, to cover bonds for her hus- 
band, herself, each of their daughters 
and their son. 

"I agree with my husband," Madame 
Quezon said. "We must put every- 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 




Mr. Ted Gamble, National Director of the War Finance Division, Treasu 
Department, receiving a check from Madame Manuel L. Quezon for IV 
Bonds during the "Avenge Bataan" Week of the Fourth War Loan D " ^ 



thing — everything — in bonds. For the 
time being, this is the most effective 
way of avenging those who died on 
Bataan and of rescuing those who still 
are prisoners of the Japanese. Actions 
are more important than words, and 
buying bonds is an action everyone 
can take." 

DOES VOLUNTEER WAR WORK 

Aurora Aragon Quezon understands 
what remains to be done before her 
country is freed from Japan. She and 
her family have been in Washington, 
provisional capital of the Philippine 
Commonwealth, since May, 1942. Here 
she has chosen to lead a secluded life, 
devoting herself to her husband and 
children, working with the Filipino 
unit of the Red Cross, which she or- 
ganized, and aiding other war activi- 
ties. 

The need for helping "avenge Ba- 
taan" caused her to appear in public in 
Washington and in New York. In an 

FEBRUARY, 1944 



interview at the Quezon apartment, 



she 



The friendship existing between the 
women of my country and those f 
United States is now a sacred l ink 
binding women whose sons and h 
bands died together at Bataan 'and .till 
suffer together in Japanese prison 
camps. I hope this link will contin 
always, and I am confident it will 
ALL FILIPINOS BUYING BONDS 

•The 80,000 Filipinos residing 
the continental United States and Ala* 
ka are not wealthy, but they are buyW 
all possible war bonds. During the 
First War Loan drive the Fili p i nos i n 
Hawaii oversubscribed their quota 100 
per cent. Filipino communities in this 
country have oversubscribed their al- 
lotted quotas in other bond drives 
The recent publication of Japanese 
atrocities and inhuman treatment to 
Filipinos should spur them to extend 



no 



n 

las- 



Army Reports Jap Morale 
High On New Georgia Isle 

The morale of Japanese troops who 
opposed the Americans in the New 
Georgia campaign in the South Pacific 
was high, as "indicated by their wil- 
lingness to fight to the end," Army ob- 
servers have reported to the War De- 
partment. 

"However, it was noted/' the report 
continues, "that there were fewer cases 
of self-destruction in preference to cap- 
ture than in other operations. A few 
such cases were reported, but the sui- 
cide was usuallv by an officer. Enlisted 
personnel indicated a willingness to be 
captured when the circumstances were 
right. Japanese who had been wound- 
ed and who had become separated from 
their units accepted capture freely, and 
even sought to be taken prisoner in a 
few cases, taking no steps to end their 
own lives." 

The observers also found that "the 
Jap is tricky, but not as tricky as many 
have been led to believe. He's not 
nearly as ingenious as the average 
American, and the truth of the matter 
is, he's afraid of us, our artillery, and 
our sea and air power. 

The Japanese are past masters at 
camouflage and concealment and the 
observers report that "the Japanese skill 
at concealment of installations using 
natural camouflage was extraordinary 
Enemy trails were difficult to detect and 
follow. The individual soldier was 
rarely seen while his defenses were in- 
tact. However, once disorganized, he 
apparently became confused and dis- 
closed his position carelessly. 

Enemy troops were found to have 
been well trained, although it was 
noted their "marksmanship was poor 
in the use of infantry and artillery 
weapons." Their discipline was classed 
as "superior" and "control was good 
considering our continuous harassment 
of the enemy communications. 



a • r ~.A^ rlnrin^ the Fourth 

their former records during 

War Loan drive. 

"The flag of the Philippines is com- 
posed of two horizontal bars ot red 
and blue enclosing at the left s,de the 
symbol of the country on a white field. 
In time of peace the flag is flown with 

bar will be raised to the top again 
and the sooner we shall once more 
be free." 

•5- 




Kindly- Hearted Japs 

Tt must be evident to every reader 
of" this magazine what Americans and 
Filipinos think of the Japanese. 

We cannot sav that they are in 
agreement with the description found 
in the current edition of Encyclopedia 
Britannica. That scholarly, august 
work says the Japanese are "essentially 
a kindly-hearted, laughter-loving peo- 
ple, taking life easy and not allowing 
its petty ills unnecessarily to disturb 
their equanimity." 

The editors of BATAAN feel that 
when United Nations troops enter the 
streets of Tokyo those "delightfully 
delicate" Japanese will not even know 
that they ever had any equanimity. 

Although many people in this coun- 
try object to the publication of the 
verified, documented details of Japa- 
nese atrocities, we think that their 
publication was necessary for several 
reasons. 

First, it is a good thing to know 
what one is up against. Although the 
sneak attack on Pearl Harbor well dem- 
onstrated the "character" of the Nip- 
ponese, some people may have felt that 
after all that inhuman method of start- 
ing a war was necessitated by military 
expediency. The stories of what the 
Japs did to American and Filipino 
prisoners of war— in violation of any 
human code of ethics, not to mention 
ot course, international law— clearly 
shows that they are a fanatical people 
who will do anything blindly if those 
m control tell them to do so." 

Secondly, these stories show that 
offensive against Japan i s great!* 
needed. greatly 

Thirdly the actions of the Japanese 
clearly indicate that they have a bso 
lutely no sense of respoi sibiHtv 4t 
editors of BATAAN h^S^^ 
planners and those statesmen who will 
represent the United Nations al th 
peace table will remember this fart 
-dud act accordingly. 

Lastly, the inhuman treatment of 
\mericans and Filipinos should make 
those ol us who are not forced to live 
under the treacherous Japanese do 



everything possible to bring victory as 
soon as possible. 

There are no words that will ade- 
quately express the indignation of all 
reasonable men to the indecencies 
which some of our fellow men have 
been forced to endure. 

As pointed out by two of those gal- 
lant Americans who escaped from Ba- 
taan — Commander McCoy and Colonel 
Melnick — Filipinos and Americans who 
surrendered after two months — on a 
starvation diet and little equipment — 
were not prepared for what they were 
to face. These men had heard about 
atrocities in the last war, but later 
learned that they were actually fiction. 

But these men experienced atrocities 
at first hand. 

The editors of BATAAN hope that 
those brave and gallant heroes who 
have died at the hands of the Japanese 
have not died in vain. 

We hope that those irreplaceable 
Filipino and American lives have not 
been lost without showing the world 
that treachery is possible in a suppos- 
edly civilized world. 

The world owes much to these men. 
It is a debt that can never be repaid. 
May it always be a lesson to us and 
an inspiration. 

Filipinos As Citizens 

One of the most important and en- 
couraging events in recent history took 
place on January 18 when Representa- 
tive Jennings Randolph of West Vir- 
gin introduced in the House of Repre- 
sentatives a bill which would make 
Filipinos eligible for American citi- 
zenship. 

Regardless of other considerations, 
tnis bill, ^ passec] by Congress, would 
correct an injustice. It is an injustice 
that was never intended. It was mere- 
ly one that existed through oversight. 

America taught Filipinos that in- 
justice is something that can be avoid- 
ed in a nation of free men. That is 
why BATAAN Magazine saw fit to un 
dertake something for the public good 
and requested Mr. Randolph to in- 

H°t 400? ^ Whkh iS ^ « 
We feel confident that America's 
busy legislators will take time to con- 
fer this bill which will allow Filipi- 
nos the same right granted to any non- 
American, namely, the opportunity to 
become a citizen. 



Filipinos are now nationals of the 
United States. They are not citizens. 
They are not aliens. They are. in brief, 
in the realm of the undefined. 

Three generations of Filipinos have 
been born under American parenthood. 
They know American ways. They like 
them and they respect them. Some 
Filipinos want to live in the United 
States and to participate fully in Amer- 
ican life. This they cannot do under 
existing laws. This many wish to do. 
And this many will do when an over- 
sight which was made 46 years ago is 
corrected on Capitol Hill in Washing- 
ton. 

War Bonds 

Readers, by turning to pages 4 and 
5 of this issue of BATAAN will see 
how Filipinos have gone all out in 
their efforts to aid the Fourth War 
Loan Drive. 

Filipinos in the United States and 
Hawaii purchased more war bonds as 
a visible way of avenging Bataan. 

In the future, Filipinos will con- 
tinue to buy more War bonds because 
they know what happens to well- 
trained fighters who are brave and 
gallant when they do not have the 
tools of war. Filipinos know that 
when Americans and Filipinos jump 
from landing barges to assault the 
shores of their homeland fortified by 
the Japanese, that these men were 
equipped and will be well supplied as 
a result of the sacrifices made by peo- 
ple here at home. 

Although Filipinos have 
to have faith in the future they know 
.i . r q wartime nidus- 

that the conversion ot a }] i 

inr>tioii win lesiut 
try to peacetime Product mt 

in some dislocation and g ^ 
war Bonds are a means i" 
over in this transition period. iney 
know, too, that the reconstruction will 
cost much after the looting and destruc- 
tion hy the Japanese. 

Filipinos who build up a reserve jn 
War Bonds will have a chance to neip 
their loved ones in the Islands who 
have suffered so much under the Japa- 
nese and who have enjoyed so little. 

**• 

The printing shop of Santo Tomas 
University, in Manila, is the oldest m 
the world today. It has been under 
the same management since early in 
the 17th Century. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Randolph Introduces Bill In House Making 
Filipinos Eligible For American Citizenship 

Measure, sponsored by Bataan magazine, seeks to correct Filipinos' unsettled status of 
neither alien nor citizen. Hundreds hail proposed legislation and urge its passage. 



Immigration and 



perma- 



by DICK FITZPATRICK 
Executive Editor of Bataan 

The bill, which was referred to the House Committee on 
Naturalization, reads: 

A bill to authorize the naturalization of certain Filipinos who 
nent residents of the United States. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States 
of America in Congress assembled, that the Nationality Act of 1910, as amended, 
is amended by inserting after section 
324 thereof the following new section: 

"Sec. 324a. A native-born Filipino, 
not otherwise entitled to naturalization 
under this Act, who. prior to May 1. 
1934, was lawfully admitted for per- 
manent residence to the United States, 
may be naturalized upon compliance 
witli the requirements of this Act. ex- 
cept that no certificate of arrival shall 
be required." 

Sec. 2. Section 303 of such Act. as 
amended, is amended to read as fol- 
lows : 

"Sec. 303. The right to become a 
naturalized citizen under the provisions 
of this Act shall extend only to white 
persons, persons of African nativity or 
descent, and descendants of races in- 
digenous to the Western Hemisphere: 
Provided, That nothing in this section 
shall prevent the naturalization of na- 
tive-born Filipinos as specified in sec- 
tions 324 and 324a, nor of former 
citizens of the United States who are 
otherwise eligible to naturalization un- 
der the provisions of section 317." 




$e pre sen la live l^ando fph 



YAP'S PRESS STATEMENT HAILED 

Immediately after the introduction 
of the bill, BATAAN's editor, Dr. Dios- 
dado M. Yap, issued the following 
statement to the press: 

"The Filipino's legal and social status 
in the United States is very uncertain. 
The citizens of the Philippines are not 
aliens in the legal and accpted meaning 
of that word. They are not aliens be- 
cause thev owe allegiance to the United 
States. They are subjects of this coun- 
try, end not citizens of a foreign state. 
He is a National, yet because he is 
neither 'white nor of African descent' 
lie cannot become a citizen except in 
rare cases. 

"As a non-citizen he is denied in 
many states certain occupational op- 



portunities and, because he is not a 
voter and cannot become one, unless 
naturalized, politicians turn a deaf ear 
to his agitation for better opportunities 
and belter living conditions. Many 
civic-minded Americans tend to regard 
him only as a transient in this coun- 
try and see no need for establishing 
more certainly his legal and social 
position. 

"The different states seem to vary 
in their interpretation of the Filipino 
status of citizenship. For certain pur- 
poses, the mere fact that he owes al- 
legiance to the United States is suffi- 
cient compliance with the citizenship 
requirements in order to practice his 
profession or to be employed in some 
state or private projects. 



"But despite this fact, Filipinos, even 
though they may remain for as long as 
twenty vears or more are being handi- 
capped by the common assumption 
that they are merely transients. Con- 
sequently, the legal, racial and marital 
status of many Filipinos and their fam- 
ilies is yet uncertain. In some parts 
of the country this same feeling of 
racial uncertainty, with its resulting 
marital instability, can often be ob- 
served, even though it is without an 
immediate basis in legal issue. 

"The Randolph Bill will clarify this 
anomalous situation, thus placing the 
Filipinos on the same category as oth- 
ers who are admissible to American 
citizenship." 

FILIPINOS URGE IMMEDIATE ACTION 

Response to the anouncement of H.R. 
1003 was immediate and grateful. Hun- 
dreds of letters poured into the West 
\ irginian's office. 

A sample of this response can be 
seen in the following six cablegrams 
which reached Representative Ran- 
dolph's office from Hawaii: 

"Filipinos of Hawaii feel indebted to 
you for your benevolent presentation 
of bill of naturalization of Filipinos. 
We earnestly solicit support of bill 
from other members of Congress and 
prayerfully hope approval by Presi- 
dent."— Roland D. Sagum, President. 
Filipinos Equal Rights Committee of 
the T. H. 

The Filipino Federation of America 
in the Territory of Hawaii extends its 
profound gratitude to you in sponsor- 
ing the Randolph bill which provides 
Filipinos to become naturalized citi- 
zens. If bill becomes law. your name 
shall be emblazoned in the history of 
the Filipino people abroad. Very re- 
spectfully yours. — Filipino Federation 
of America', Territory of Hawaii. 

Members of Filipino Commonwealth 
Club, consisting leading Filipinos, Ter- 
ritory of Hawaii, extend heartiest con- 
gratulations for your Filipino naturali- 
zation bill and hope you succeed.— Jose 
Gal ura. President. 

. continued on page 16 



FEBRUARY, 1944 



■7- 



Confesor Says As Long As U. S. Fights Japs 
There Will Be No Peace In The Philippines 

Provincial Governor of Panacy in hiding replies hotly to plea of puppet ruler to return 
and quiet the people. Says people are bearing hardships because they know they are 
resisting Japan. 



The editors of BAT A AN reprint below excerpts from a 
letter written by Tomas Confesor, Governor of the Province 
of Panaw to Dr. Farmin Car am, puppet governor of the 
same province. The letter, dated Feb. 20. 1943, was read 
by Major Villanor at the Rizal Day celebration in Washing- 
ton, D. C, and is self-explanatory. 

"My dear Doctor: 

"I am happy to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 
January 14th last signed at the same time by former 
General Quimbo, Senator Veloso and Captain Tando I 
regret very much that your letter reached me more than 
a month after it was written, despite the fact that the 
party to whom it was handed was just living across the 
river from my place on the other side of the hill Had I 
received it earlier, I would have been only too' dad to 
meet my good friends, Quimbo, Veloso, and Tando 




DOUBTS SUCCESS OF PEACE MISSION 

"I would have had no objection to the pleasure of the 
acquaintance of Col. Furukawa. He came on a mission of 
peace and I would have taken advantage of his presence 
to present to him my views on the subject. I regret much, 
therefore, not to have met him. Nevertheless, I hope that 
he and his companions had a good time while they were 
in our province. I wonder how successful they had been 
with their mission. 

"I feel flattered, indeed, by your statement that should I 
return to the city I would bring relief, peace and tranquil- 
lity to our people in Panay. In this regard, I wish to state 
with all frankness that peace and tranquillity in our coun- 
try, especially in Panay, do not in the slightest degree 
depend upon me nor upon the Filipino people, for as long 
as America and Japan and their respective Allies are at 
war with one another, peace and tranquillity will never 
obtain in our country nor in Panay. 

FORM OF GOVERNMENT IS ISSUE 

"This is a total war in which the issues between the 
warring parties are less concerned with territorial questions 
but more with forms of government, ways of life, and those 
that affect even the very thoughts, feelings and sentiments 
of every man. In other words, the question at stake with 
respect to the Philippines is not whether Japan or the 
United States should possess it, but more fundamentally 
it is: What system of government should stand here and 
what ways of life, systems of social organizations and code 
of morals should govern our existence. As long, therefore? 
as America and Japan remain at war, these fundamental 
questions will remain unsettled. Consequently, peace and 
tranquillity will not reign in Panay, much less in the whole 
Philippines .... 

"I agree with you when you say that our people are 
'experiencing unspeakable hardships and sufferings' because 
of these hostilities, but you should realize that our people 
are bearing these burdens cheerfully because they know 
that they are doing it for a good and noble cause. They 
know why we are resisting Japan. They are aware that 
Japan is trying to force us to accept her system of gov- 
ernment and ways of life which are unacceptable to us 
to say the least. You may not agree with me, but the 
truth is that the present war is a blessing in disguise to 
our people and that the burdens it imposes, and the hard- 
ships it has brought upon us are a test to our character 
to determine the sincerity of our convictions and the integ- 
rity of our souls. 

PRAISES U. S. REGIME 

"In other words, this war has placed us in the crucible 
to assay the metal in our being. For as a people, we have 

BAT A AN MAGAZINE 



been living during the last forty years under a regime of 
justice and liberty, regulated only by universally accepted 
principles of constitutional governments. We have come 
to enjoy personal privileges and civil liberties without much 
struggle, without undergoing any pain to attain them. They 
were practically a gift from a generous and magnanimous 
people — the people of the United States of America. Now% 
that Japan is attempting to destroy these liberties, should 
we not exert any effort to defend them? Should w r e not 
be willing to suffer for their defense? 

"If our people are undergoing hardships now. and are 
doing it gladly, it is because we are willing to pay the 
price for those constitutional liberties and privileges. You 
cannot become wealthy by honest means without sweating 
heavily. You very well know that the principles of democ- 
racy and democratic institutions were brought to life through 
bloodshed and fire. If we sincerely believe in those prin- 
ciples and institutions, as we who are resisting Japan do, 
we should contribute to the utmost of our capacity to the 
cost of its maintenance to save them from destruction and 
annihilation, and such contribution should be in terms of 
painful sacrifices, the same currency that other peoples 
paid for those principles .... 

LEADERS HAVE DUTIES TO PRINCIPLES 

"This is not enough. I firmly believe that it is not 
wise and statesmanly for our leaders, in this their darkest 
hour, to teach our people to avoid sufferings and hard- 
ships at the sacrifice of fundamental principles of govern- 
ment and the democratic way of life. On the contrary, it 
is their bounden duty and responsibility to inspire our 
people to willingly undergo any kind of difficulties and 
sacrifices for the sake of noble principles that they nourish 
deep in their hearts. Instead of depressing their patri- 
otic ardor, the people should be inspired to be brave and 
courageous under all kinds of hardships and difficulties in 
defense of what they consider righteous and just. We shall 
never win nor deserve the esteem and respect of other na- 
tions if we lack principles, and if we do, we do not possess 
the courage and valor to defend those principles at any cost. 

"Undoubtedly if you and your fellow puppets are today 
receiving a certain degree of consideration from the Japa- 
nese Army, such consideration may be attributed exclusively 
to the heroism of our soldiers in Bataan and the demon- 
stration of the readiness and willingness of our people to 
suffer, especially of the common man, not the rich, the 
learned, and ambitious and crooked politicians and office 
seekers ' who are hungry for power and influence, nor to 
your personal qualities or wealth. You, puppets, love ease 
and comfort so much as to compel you to barter the liber- 
ties of our people for anything. You underrate the no- 
bility and grandeur of the character and soul of the Fili- 
pinos by such action. Such sentiment is terribly igno- 
minious. You are besmirching to the maximum degree by 
it the character of our people . . . 

SURRENDER WOULD KILL HONOR 

"You were decidedly wrong when you told me that 
there is no ignominy in surrender. That may be true in 
the case of soldiers who were corralled by the enemy, con- 
sisting of superior force with no way of escape whatsoever. 
For when they gave themselves up they did not repudiate 
any principle of good government and the philosophy of 
life which inspired them to fight heroically and valiantly — 
to use your own words. Should I surrender, however, and 

FEBRUARY, 1944 




SPIRIT OF THE FILIPINOS IN THE CAUSE OF FREEDOM 



with me the people, by your invitation and assurance of 
guarantee to my life, my family and those who follow me. 
I would be surrendering something more precious than life 
itself : the principles of democracy and justice and the honor 
and dignity of our people. 

"I noted that you emphasized in your letter only peace 
and the tranquillity of our people. I do not know whether 
by omission or intentionally you failed to refer in any way 
to the honor and dignity of our race. You seem to have 
forgotten these noble sentiments already, despite the fact 
that Japan has hardly been a year in our country. It ap- 
pears clearly evident, therefore, that there is a great dif- 
ference between the manner you and we are trying to lead 
our people during these trying days. You and your fellow 
puppets are trying to give them peace and tranquillity by 
destroying their honor and dignity, without suffering, or if 
there is any, the least possible. 

WOULD REDUCE FILIPINOS TO ANIMALS 

"On the other hand, we endeavor to inspire them to 
face difficulties and undergo any sacrifice to uphold the 
noble principles of popular rule and constitutional gov- 
ernment, thereby holding up high and immaculate their 
honor and dignity at the same time. In other words, you 
are trying to drive our people to peace and tranquillity 
on the road of IGNOMINY, to borrow your own language. 

-9- 



Peace and tranquillity are easy to achieve if you choose the 
easy way, but in that case, however, you would be living 
beneath the dignity of a human being. You would be re- 
ducing our people as a result thereof to the status of a 
dumb animal like the good carabao, which lives in peace 
and tranquillity because it is properly fed by its owner. 
Is that the peace and tranquillity you are talking about — 
that of a carabao? Would this not be clearly igno- 
minious? .... 

"It pains me to read your letter saying that you and 
I at one time nursed devotedly identical convictions on 
democracy and liberty but that you had to revise your own 
for the sake of 'peace and tranquillity.' How can you hon- 
estly and truthfully say that you may enjoy peace and tran- 
quillity when you are unfaithful to your own convictions? 
Do you mean to tell me that you have revised your con- 
victions because you believed that they were not righteous 
or because you considered your personal conveniences over 
and above that of the Filipino people? 

LINCOLN HELD TO CONVICTIONS 

i Tip ^ re ? d > 1 am sure, the story of Lincoln 

who held firmly to the conviction that the secession of 
the Southern States from the northern was WRONG Con 
^^J^l^^ ^ Side * and thTtoutSrn 

oj.il war ft, l-^J^L^rSSt offlerr? 

miseries than the first WoTd War ^J 1 ™' £* r .^J>* 



PHONE PLAZA 1054 



FELIX V. GOLDSBOROUGH, Jr. 

Special Agent 



NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO. 
1008 Keyser Building 
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 




m 



Major Villamor is greeted by Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt 
as Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon looks on. 



and America has become thereby one of the strongest and 
respected nations on the surface of the earth. 

"If Lincoln had revised his convictions and sacrificed 
them for the sake of peace and tranquillity as you did, a 
fatal catastrophe would have befallen the people of Amer- 
ica. With this lesson of history clearly before us, I prefer 
to follow Lincoln's example than yours and your fellow 
puppets. In other word, I sternly refuse to revise my own 
convictions for the sake of temporary and false promises 
of peace and tranquillity .... 

"I hope I have made myself clear enough to make you 
understand my position. I will not surrender as long as 
I can stand on my feet. The people may suffer now, and 
may suffer more during the next six months. To use the 
words of St. Paul, the Apostle, The sufferings of the pres- 
ent are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come 
that shall be revealed in us.' 

"In the language of a wise and devout priest, '"When 
the hour of deliverance has come, we shall counts as noth- 
ing the anxiety and sorrows through which we have passed. 
According to the same religious writer, 'Sufferings afford 
opportunity for the practice of many virtues — virtues which 
develop greatness and nobility of soul.' He further de- 
clares that 'the grandest music of the human heart breaks 
forth in the day of trial; the sweetest songs are sung in 
sorrows; the best things in character are developed in the 
time of affliction. ' 

"Finally, he writes, 'Suffering develops manliness and 
tries earnestness of purpose.' This is the crying need of 
the hour — MANLINESS. 

"With my kindest regards, and may God bless and guide 
you, I remain, 

Sincerely yours, 

"Tom as Confksor, Governor of Panay" 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Japs Murder 7700 Prisoners 

War and Navy Departments released details of Jap atrocities. White House 
gives up hope of getting further aid to war captives. Two Filipinos helped 
American officers escape. 



by JAMES McLEAN 
Miami Daily News Staff Writer 

Release by the War and Navy departments of the factual and official story of 
how the Japanese tortured, starved to death and sometimes murdered American 
and Filipino soldiers — made prisoners of war after heroic battle on Bataan and 
Corregidor — stunned the American nation. 

Reaction was rapid, however. Sales of war bonds in the Fourth War Loan 
Drive doubled and tripled in many parts of the country. 

Quickly, too, came demands for greatly increased power to be used against 
the Japanese. Many asked that strict 
measures be taken against the Nippo- 
nese as soon as have taken over the 
isle of Japan. 

The facts were taken from reports 
made by Comdr. Melvyn H. McCoy, 
United States Navy, of 1126 Lasalle 
St., Indianapolis, Ind; Lieut Col. S. M. 
Mellnik, Coast Artillery Corps, of 
Dunmore, Pa., and Lieut. Col. (then 
captain ) William E. Dyess, Air Corps, 
of Albany, Tex., all of whom escaped 
from the Philippines after almost a 
year as Japanese prisoners. Their 
sworn statements included no hearsay 
whatever, but only facts which the offi- 
cers related from their own personal 
experience and observations. The 
statements have been verified from oth- 
er sources. After he made his state- 
ment to the War Department, Colonel 
Dyess was killed in a crash of his fight- 
er plane at Burbank, Calif., while he 
was preparing to go back and fight the 
Japanese who had tortured him. Colo- 
nel Mellnik is now on duty with Gen- 
eral MacArthur. Commander McCoy 
is on duty in this country. 



"The recent release of the atrocities 
ccmmitted against our prisoners by 
the Japanese generates a storm of 
anger and protest. This is a natural 
reaction. The situation, however, de- 
mands a determination on which will 
divorce the individual from his own 
sslfish weaknesses and ulterior mo- 
tives. Our soldiers must be keenly 
conscious that the full strength of the 
nation is behind them, they must not 
go into battle puzzled or embittered 
over disputes at home which adverse- 
ly affect the war effort. Our small 
sacrifices should be personal even 
more than financial. They should be 
proof positive that we never forget for 
a moment that the soldier has been 
compelled to leave his family, to give 
up his business, and to hazard his 
life in our service." — General George 
C. Marshall. 



JAP REPORTS MINiM ZED NUMBER 
OF DEATHS 

The three officers stated that several 
times as many American prisoners of 
war have died, mostly of starvation, 
forced hard labor, and general brutal- 
ity, as the Japanese have ever reported. 
At one prison camp, Camp O'Donnell. 
about 2200 American prisoners died 
in April and May, 1912. In the camp 
at Cabanatuan, about 3000 Americans 
had died up to the end of October. 
1942. Still heavier mortality occurred 
among the Filipino prisoners of war 
at Camp O'Donnell. 



During an 85-mile "March of Death" 
which began the day of the surrender 
on Bataan. these things occurred: 

Americans and Filipinos were not 
permitted to eat food they had with 
them. 

Those who had Japanese tokens or 
money in their possession were behead- 
ed. 

Patients bombed out of a hospital 
were thrown into the marching column, 
and those who collapsed were shot. 

When thirst-crazed soldiers made a 
dash for roadside wells they were 
killed. 



All were left in the sun for whole 
days at a time without cover and with- 
out water. 

When they were jammed into a 
"bull-pen" with no room to lie down. 
Japanese soldiers charged them during 
the night with fixed bayonets. 

The 12,000 prisoners taken at Cor- 
regidor were kept for a whole week, 
without food, on a concrete floor about 
]00 yards square. There was only one 
water spigot and a man had to wait 12 
hours to fill his canteen. After seven 
days the 7000 Americans and 500 Fili- 
pinos were given their first food — one 
mess kit of rice and a can of sardines. 

The Government, outraged by Jap 
extermination of at least 7,700 Ameri- 
can war prisoners, has given up hope 
of getting relief supplies to surviving 
prisoners in Jap hands, the White 
House said.. 

WHITE HOUSE ISSUES STATEMENT 

White House Secretary Early ex- 
plained: 'The time has come to re- 
lease factual, carefully authenticated re- 
ports on Jap atrocities. The Govern- 
ment can no longer expect to get fur- 
ther relief to American prisoners of 
war in the hands of the Japanese." 

Early's statement appeared to indi- 
cate that additional reports detailing 
similar horrors in other areas might 
be forthcoming later. It also caused 
speculation that there may be no fur- 
ther exchange of civilian internees be- 
tween this country and Japan. 

The British government also re- 
leased a statement dealing with the 
cruel and inhuman treatment of sub- 
ject of that country. 

President Quezon of the Philippines 
revealed that two Filipino prisoners at 
Davao penal colony were responsible 
for the escape of Colonel Dyess and 
the other Americans. 

President Quezon said: ''The escape 
of Colonel Dyess. Colonel Mellnik and 
Commender McCoy was made possible 
with the help of two Filipinos who 
had been sentenced to man\ years' 
continued on following page 



FEBRUARY. 1944 



■ II 



The Progress Of The War In The 
Pacific Theatre This Past Month 

Bataan's summary of the month's developments on the land, air 
and sea fronts against the Nipponese foe. 

by DIANA L. KALIL 
Ba+aan Staff Writer 

Allied forces made encouraging gains in the Pacific war this past month, in 
contrast to the general trend of the fighting in this theatre two years ago. 

Weakened after nearly a month's heavy bombing, Cape Gloucester, on the 
western end of New Britain, was by the Christmas season a likely invasion pros- 
pect. True to promise, United States Marines, under Major William H Rupertus 
overran the area on December 26 and established beachheads on both sides of 
the cape. General MacArthur reported 



that the landings were accomplished 
with negligible losses of men or ma- 
terial, but that the Japanese suffered 
a loss of at least sixty-one planes in a 
delayed attack on the beachheads. 

Four days after their landing,, with 
little opposition from the enemy, our 
forces occupied Target Hill, and after 
artillery barrages and the use of flame- 
throwers against Japanese pillboxes, 
captured Cape Gloucester's important 
airdrome. The trapped Japanese troops 
made a desperate attempt to break 
through the marine lines, but were 
forced back after the slaughter of 
ntty. While the enemy dead numbered 
several thousand, our losses were in- 
credibly light. A few enemy counter- 
attacks were made, all unsuccessfully. 

RABAUL SEES HEAVY AIR FIGHTING 

Over Rabaul, Japanese-held air and 
supply base on the other end of New 
Britain, heavy air fighting has contin- 
ued to the present date, with the score 
definitely in favor of the Allies. Mean- 
while. American Seabees have complet- 
ed a bomber airfield on Bougainville 
only 250 miles from Rabaul. 

For the third time in eighteen days 
our men established themselves on 
enemy-held territorv in this theatre 
when, on New Guinea, American 
ground forces spent the last few days 
o* 1943 in capturing Wandokai on 
Huon Peninsula and Blucher Point, 
jH> miles above their base at Finsch- 
haten. Bv January 3, a surprise at- 
tack on the Japanese resulted in the 
capture of Saidor's harbor and airfield, 
iar up the New Guinea coast, with lit- 
tle resistance from the enemy and no 
loss whatsoever. 

AMERICANS TRAP JAP FORCES 

This operation succeeded in trap- 
ping the Japanese between Saidor and 
Australians at the battle line somewhat 

- 12 : 



north of Blucher Point near Finsch- 
hafen. Saidor, which lies 110 miles 
north of our Finschhafen base, is fifty- 
five miles below the enemy stronghold 
at Madang. The situation reached its 
climax when Saidor was captured Jan- 
uary 5 at the cost of three dead and 
four wounded. Madang itself suffered 
the heaviest air attack yet made on 
New Guinea when Allied bombers 
dropped 253 tons of bombs there Jan- 
uary 2 After repeated air raids, the 
Australian troops have begun closing 
in on Madang and Bogadjim. 

New Ireland was the scene of terrific 
losses for the Japanese this month. 
Owing to our carrier-based bombers, 
thirteen planes, two heavy cruisers, two 
cargo vessels four destroyers, and sev- 
eral other ships were destroyed off 
Kavie^g between December 27 and Jan- 
Z 7 1 I* S° lomons -based planes at- 
tacked St. George on January L while 
accompanying fighters downed twelve 
planes. A week later Allied aircraft 
in the southwest Pacific sank a 10,000- 
ton cargo ship and several others when 
an enemy convoy was attacked off the 
coast of New Ireland. 

OPPOSITION STIFF IN BURMA 

In Burma, opposition was a little 
stiffer than in the islands. The Japa- 
nese made a futile attack on coastal 
forces returning from a bombardment 
of Ramree Island, but succeeded only 

Wh Hf t rt fV f their ow » P^es! 
While the R A F. pounded the Heho 
airfield, United States bombers blasted 
the Japanese-controlled oil center of 
Yenamraung, and in western Burma, 
he Allies moved four miles nearer to 
the Japanese supply base at Akyab but 
not without stern resistance. 

Meanwhile, American bombers have 
been softening up the Marshall Islands 
loi a possible invasion with numerous 



Japs Murder Prisoners 

continued from preceding page 

imprisonment and were confined in 
the penal colony wherein these three 
officers were kept as prisoners of w r ar. 

"Upon learning of what they did, I 
granted these prisoners absolute par- 
don." 

QUEZON ON JAPS' ATROCITIES 

In commenting on the atrocity sto- 
ries, President Quezon continued: 

"I am horrified at the cruelties com- 
mitted by the Japanese on the Ameri- 
can and Filipino prisoners of war. 
The number of Filipinos who died in 
prison camps from torture, starvation 
and resultant diseases is even greater 
than the number of Americans. The 
Filipino people will never forget nor 
forgive the savage treatment which the 
prisoners of war have received, and 
that is an added reason for their con- 
tinued resistance to the Japanese." 

The State Department revealed that 
it had long suspected cruel treatment 
of Americans and had repeatedly de- 
manded information from Tokyo (see 
page 20). 

Soon after the joint Army-Navy re- 
lease, the American Magazine made 
public portions of an article to be 
carried in its March issue by Palmer 
Hoyt, publisher of the Portland Ore- 
gonian, and until recently Deputy Di- 
rector of Office of War Information in 
charge of Domestic Operations, which 
charged the Japs with murder of many 
other Americans. 

American newspaper syndicates car- 
ried the stories of the three men. The 
Chicago Tribune purchased rights to 
Colonel Dyess' story shortly before he 
was killed in an airplane crash in 
California. More than 100 newspapers 



air raids and the destruction of many 
enemy planes and ships. 

As nearly as can be ascertained, the 
Allies have dropped 1043 tons of 
bombs on Japanese-held territory this 
month, shot down 466 aircraft, sunk 
three destroyers, sixteen cargo vessels, 
two transports, one auxiliary ship, one 
ammunition craft, and twenty-one other 
ships, with a loss of only 66 planes, 
and 400 dead to the Japanese' 3,000. 
Government officials report that the 
United States has now liberated one- 
twentieth of Japanese-held territory. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



carried his detailed story. Another 
syndicate is carrying a story hased 
on the experiences of both Commander 
McCoy and Colonel Mellnik. 

The following statement was issued 
by Dr. C. L. Hsia, Director of Chinese 
News Service, agency of the Chinese 
Government: 

"No people in the world feel more 
deeply the horror of the recent dis- 
closures made concerning the treatment 
of American soldiers captured in the 
Philippines than the Chinese. We know 
from our own experiences, from the 
experiences of our own families and 
our own close friends, that the reports 
from Bataan and Corregidor can in no 
slight detail be exaggerated. 

"Such acts have been repeatedly per- 
petrated upon the Chinese — civilians 
and soldiers alike — since 1931. In 
fact, Japan has no Chinese prisoners 
of war at all today, after six and a 
half years of fighting against China. 
Our soldiers were bayoneted, burned, 
buried alive, and shot outright as soon 
as they were captured. 

"Japan's treatment of Chinese men, 
women and children in Nanking, Can- 
ton, Shanghai, the Chekiang-Kiangsi 
area where the Doolittle fliers landed, 
and only last month in the Hunan-Hu- 
peh area, substantiates the first-hand 
reports of atrocities made public to- 
day by the U. S. Army and Navy." 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

Remember tka Philippines 

Here is a battlecry to fire your soul, 
And spur you on to your coveted goal. 
Remember the Philippines, remember them 
well, 

For it was here your countrymen fought and 
fell. 

Unparalleled in history was that stand, 
By American and Filipino who strove hand in 
hand, 

And felt the full fury of the invader's might, 
As they ravaged and destroyed to their bar- 
barous delight. 

In the Philippines you suffered your worst de- 
feat, 

After months of wearisome and bloody retreat. 

No true American will ever forget 

That mingled feeling of vengeance and regret. 

Remember the Philippines with veneration and 
pride, 

And in this greatest of struggles may they 

serve us as a guide, 
To prove free man's spirit can never be stilled, 
For God to him tha t liberty has willed. 

— Harold F. Mohn 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

FEBRUARY, 1944 



Romulo Says U. S. Faces Trained Killer 
In Pacific; Urges Facing Of Reality 

Last man off Bataan points out that American advances have been 
small compared to vast conquests of Japs. 

Colonel Carlos Romulo. the last man off Bataan. declared that the atrocities 
inflicted upon American war prisoners was no more than could be expected from 
the Japanese. 

The Filipino officer, now Secretary of Information and Public Relations of the 
Philippine Government, then stated that America is losing the war in the Pacific 
and said that after two years of fighting Americans still do not know the tem- 
perament of the Japanese. 

Romulo. who fought through the 
four and a half months' siege of Ba- 
taan. escaped two hours before the 
surrender on the order of Gen. Jona- 
than Wain wright. 

"I left on a plane which we fished 
out of the bay and tied together with 
bamboo strips," Romulo says. "It was 
piloted by a Lieut. Barnick, of North 
Dakota, and one of the last men I saw 
was Colonel Dyess. 

"That night I could see the Ameri- 
can and Filipino army in full retreat. 
I saw those boys already collapsing by 
the road — most of them starved and 
some of them malaria-ridden. Those 
who could march were dragging their 
guns on the ground. 

"Those were the soldiers that the 
Japs forced to march for from eight 
to 12 days," Romulo said bitterly. 
"During the first two months on Ba- 
taan we lived on two meals a day, 
made up of salmon and rice. We ran 
out of salmon then, and for the last 
two and a half months we lived on one 
meal a day made up of a handful of 
rice. 

"To understand the atrocity stories 
you must realize that America is fight- 
ing an enemy in the Pacific that makes 
its^own rules— a trained killer. 

"When you have a nation which be- 
lieves that' its highest honor and man- 
hood are expressed by committing ha- 
ra-kari, you can carry that belief to 
its logical conclusion that to do the 
same "thing to an enemy is less than 
nothing to a Jap." 

Romulo begged Americans to "face 
reality" in the Pacific war. 

"Let us face facts and admit that af- 
ter two years of war Japan is the vic- 
tor Out of 1,366,000 square miles of 
land she has grabbed we have only re- 
captured 160,150 square miles. We 
hale been fighting 3 000 miles from 
the Japanese mainland, have advanced 
only 200 miles and have taken onU 
377 Jap prisoners. 




"All I can say is that before it is 
too late for my poor buddies who were 
not so lucky as I to get out — let us 
save them." 



Named For Medal Of Honor 

The late Lieutenant Colonel William 
E. Dyess, who escaped from Bataan 
and was killed in an air crash in De- 
cember on the West Coast, was recom- 
mended for the Medal of Honor b\ 
Brigadier General Russell E. Randall, 
commanding general of the 4th Fighter 
Command. Oakland. California. 

In order to avoid hitting a motorist 
in a forced landing, Colonel Dvess 
chose a more dangerous spot in which 
to land, resulting in his death. 

"W e know the circumstances sur- 
rounding this boy's death." the general 
said. "I am proud to recommend him 
for the Medal of Honor." 



13 



Filipino Organization Looks To The Future; 
Adopts Plan For Islands' Reconstruction 

Caballeros De Dimas Alang, great fraternal organization founded by leaders of Revolu- 
tion against Spain, approves lifetime postwar plan for its members; President Quezon 
extolled. 



by J. C. DIONISIO 
Chief, Bataan Pacific Coast Bureau 

The Caballeros de Dimas Alang, that great Filipino fraternal organization 
whose membership may be found in every Filipino community in the United 
States and Hawaii, has adopted a "Lifetime Plan" for the participation of its 
members in the reconstruction of the Philippines after the war. 

The Plan, presented by its dynamic Grand Master. Celestino T. Alfafara of 

\ri w'T 1SC r r 35 a PPy oved ^ttout opposition by the delegates to the CDA 
Mid- Winter Conference held in Wat- 
sonville, California, January 21-23. 

The "Dimas Alang Lifetime Plan" is 
a wartime version of a Dimas Alan- 
Homestead Project, sponsored by E P 

T* ° f 11 Stock 1 ton ^d Pedro Gaivez 
of Koseville, and approved in the 1934 
grand convention held in San Diego, 
but subsequently repealed. The pres- 
ent plan provides: 

MEMBERS INVEST S100 TO S5.000 

1. A separate entity known as the 
Bayan Dimas Alang will be created. 
Bayan Dimas Alang is a business or- 
ganization, entirely separate from the 

S;?' and wi r H be incorporated in 
the Philippines after the war as such. 
" the meantime, Bayan Dimas Alan- 



will be under the hands of a Board of 
Trustees of five members. These trus- 
tees shall be known as the Caballeros de 
Dimas Alang Post-war Planning Com- 
mittee. The committee will study and 
put into effect details of the program 
and also will coordinate the CDA plan 
with the program of the Philippine 
Government-in-exilee with respect to 
post-war rehabilitation. 

2. Every active member of the Ca- 
balleros de Dimas Alang, Inc., is re- 
qired to invest in Bayan Dimas Alano- 
not less than $100 and not more than 
15000. Only active members may in- 
vest and there shall be absolutely no 
withdrawal of moneys invested. How- 



ever, a member who has invested in 
Bayan Dimas Alang will continue to 
participate in it, even though he may 
have become inactive in the fraternity. 

3. Fifty per cent of every member's 
investment will immediately be con- 
verted into U. S. War Bonds, and the 
other 50 per cent will be placed in a 
savings account. Purpose of this sav- 
ings account is to provide Bayan Dimas 
Alang with ready cash to invest in the 
Philippines before the war bond? ma- 
ture. 

The following are the members of 
the Post-war Planning Committee as 
announced by Grand Master Alfafara: 

Januario B. Sampayan (Salinas), 
chairman; Bartolome R. Lozada ( Wat- 
sonville), Pio Decano (Seattle), Felipe 
Inocencio (Los Angeles), and Marcelo 
G. Layugan ( Castroville ) , members. 

DELEGATES PRAY FOR QUEZON 

As the plan now stands, participa- 
tion in it is not compulsory, but the 
organization has both persuasive and 
mandatory power and if response to 




34 



Delegates and th J 

leros ds P;™~ nV* guests jammed the banquet room of the Resetar Hotel in Watsnn V iii~ i x u r^K^l 

r«*-5sr22; ?t g r Filipino fr r r p nity - me v sl Sr Mid - Winter ^^i^nkt^ Z™£ 

Resident r„J- g y ests a« the banquet were Dr. Roman V. Ubaldo, assistant representative w . ™ ■ -Z. Philirmine 
Stated TmSSTtF?* 0ffi ^ Antonio A. Gonzalez, president. Filipino Inter C~ oTaa "Y Tft s W sta 
Bureau MM?1«™ R ° io - P^ident. UCAPAWA Local 7. C.I.O.. Seattle; and J. TSL k . 7,1 Pacific clast 

(Photo by E. A. Nievera, Bob Studio.) 



Q 1ir ^_ ~* onown in insets 
Supreme Consistory, CDA, Inc 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 




Delegates to the Mid-Winter Conference of the Caballeros de Dimas-A!ancr, Inc.. and their friends pose for the 
photographer during a picnic in M. G. Layugan's camp in Castroville, between Salinas and Watsonville, California. 
The Conference was held in the latter city. January 21 -23, 1944. 



the program would not be as universal 
as expected, compulsion may be used. 
This will be decided in next year's 
Grand Lodge Conference to be held in 
Bakersfield, California, under the aus- 
pices of the Osmena Lodge. 

The Watsonville Conference was at- 
tended by more than 200 delegates 
from all over the Western States. It 
was undeer the auspices of the Aglipay 
Lodge No. 26, whose master is Hilario 
L. Alejandro. Juan Calivo was gen- 
eral chairman, while Jorge Jacob ar- 
ranged the banquet. Headquarters was 
at the famous Resetar Hotel. 

A telegraphic message from Presi- 
dent Quezon from his sickbed at the 
Nautilus Hospital, Miami, Florida, was 
read by the Grand Master in one of 
the sessions. After the reading the 
delegates rose and said a prayer for 
the speedy recovery of the President. 
Banquet chairman Jacob also pledged 
the full cooperation of the order to 
the Philippine Government-in-exile, 
and extolled President Quezon as "our 



Message from the 
President 

I wish to extend my cordial greet- 
ings to the Caballeros de Dimas Along 
on the occasion of their conference 
held in Watsonville, California. Not 
being informed of the details of the 
plans that you are going to discuss, 
I am in no position to express any 
opinion thereon. But I can tell you 
that the Government of the Common- 
wealth is now making plans for the 
post-war rehabilitation of the Philip- 
pines and the development of its re- 
sources and the Filipinos in the United 
States will be given every opportunity 
to take part in the post-war program 
of the Philippines for their benefit and 
the benefit of our common country. 

MANUEL L. QUEZON. 




great leader in our fight to redeem our 
motherland." 

In recognition of his splendid serv- 
ices as grand master of the fraternity 
from 1934-1943, Felipe Inocencio was 
awarded a plaque during the banquet 
and was wildly cheered. The follow- 
ing trophies were also awarded: 

Alfajara Trophy — First prize for 
largest membership for 1943: Bunros 
Lodge of Seeattle. Sampayan Tro- 
phy—New Membership Contest: Za- 
mora Lodge of Fairfield, California. 
Palma Trophy — Reinstated Member- 
ship Contest: Regeidor Lodge of Stock- 
ton, California. 

The presiding officer of the Supreme 
Consistory (33°) was Bartolome R. 
Lozada. C. T. Alfafara presided over 
the Camara de Perfection (4 0 -18°). 
Flaviano Maratas of Salinas w^s elect- 
ed president ( Punong Kawal) of the 
Camara de Perfection. 

Miss Helen Filomeno of Salinas was 
crowned Queen of the Social Night. 
Princesses were the Misses Jane Jacob 
of Greenfield (formerly of Chicago) 
cmd Frances Gutierrez of Salinas. 



The senior officers of the Grand 
Lodge are: C. T. Alfafara, grand mas- 
ter; J. B. Sampayan, grand senior war- 
den; A. D. Palma, grand junior war- 
den; J. A. Reyes, grand prosecutor: 
G. L. Asis, grand chaplain: S. T. Sal- 
cedo, grand secretary-treasurer; E. P. 
Bravo, assistant grand secretary-treas- 
urer; F. B. Sun, grand auditor; M. G. 
Layugan. grand investigator; N. S. 
Flores. grand instructor; A. T. Valen- 
cia, assistant grand instructor; C. Bra- 
sil, grand organizer; A. Legaspi, assis- 
tant grand organizer. 

RIZAL, FIRST DIMAS ALANG 

The founder of the Caballeros de 
Dimas Alang in America was Pedro 
Loreto, and its grand organizer is Cos- 
me Brasil. It was incorporated in 
California on January 22, 1921. Among 
its achievements were the publication 
of a daily paper in Salinas in its own 
printing plant; a successful drive for 
national defense funds which were do- 
nated to the Philippine Commonwealth ; 
and sponsorship of the memorable 
participation of Filipinos in America 
in the 1939 Golden Gate International 
Exposition. 

The Caballeros de Dimas Alang in 
America was organized by a tool-keep- 
er on the U. S. Army Transport "Lo- 
gan," which plied between Manila, 
Honolulu, and San Francisco. He was 
a member of the fraternity in Hawaii 
and was authorized by the Grand Or- 
der in Manila to organize lodges in 
the U. S. 

Loreto's first convert w r as Fausto Re- 
gencia, and it was in his room at the 
Hotel Britagny in San Francisco that 
Regencia was first initiated into the 
mysteries of Dimas Alang. When the 
Mabini Lodge was organized in San 
Francisco, Regencia was its head, and 
later was elected Grand Master when 
the first lodges had their convention in 
Vallejo. On January 22, 1921. the 
organization was incorporated in the 
continued on following paqp 



FEBRUARY, 1944 



" 15 ■ 



Filipino Organization 

continued from preceding page 

State of California. The incorpora- 
tors were Regencia, Cosme Brasil, An- 
tonio S. Echon, Candido C. Faller, and 
Eugenio Barrica. 

Brasil has done more than anyone 
else in spreading the doctrine of the 
order in this country. He is the pres- 
ent grand Organizer and field repre- 
sentative of the Grand Master. 

In its 23 years of existence in this 
country, the CDA has had six grand 
masters. They are Regencia, Bartolome 
Bozada, Nazario Daza, Simplicio Sun- 
ga, Felipe Inocencio, and Celestino T. 
Alfafara. 

The first six lodges organized were 
the Mabini, Bonifacio (Vallejo), with 
Juan B. Sarmineto as first master- Ri- 
zal (Salinas), Plaridel (Oakland)' R e - 
gidor (Stockton), and Zamora (Ro^e- 
vule) . 

In its story of the Watsonville con- 
ference the Philippines Mail of Salinas 
gives this valuable background material 
on the Dimas Alang fraternity: 

the Caballeros de Dimas Alan- is 
an historic organization whose herita-e 
dates back from the time of the na- 
tional hero, Dr. Jose Rizal, who died a 
martyrs death at the bloody hands of 
the Spanish tyrants who executed him 
alter a mock trial on the open field 
ot Luneta facing Manila Bay. Rizal's 
assumed name in the then fraternal 
organization existing was Dimas Alan* 
an adaptation from the Latin expres- 
sion, Noli Me Tangere. ' 1 

Rfeal the first Dimas Alang, was 
the embodiment of the dreams and 
opes the ambition and aspirations, 
the soul and substance of everything 
Filipino; he was the symbol of a peo- 
ple who sought their own sovereignty 
Wt the unwelcome domination of 
the Spaniards. And the Caballeros de 
Dimas Alang, in its national leader 
ship among Filipino organizations in 

n er c ls the ^ and ** 

of that democratic pattern of life which 
ound n^anmg and fruition since the 
tinted btates 0 f America ousted the 
Spaniards from the Philippines and 
the Phihpp ine Flag found 1 place 
again in the heart of the people wh^ 
were hungry for national freedom. 

Among the members today and years 
that have passed may be counted Fili! 
pinos from various walks of life T„ 
the days of the Philippine Revolution 
against Spam two leaders emerged 
from the masses; one was Andres Boni- 

" 16 - 



Filipino Citizenship 

.... continued from page 1 1 

Please accept our appreciation for 
your Filipino naturalization bill. We 
trust this gesture of appreciation of 
Filipino loyalty to America will have 
Congressional concurrence. Suggest 
outright grant of citizenship to appli- 
cants meeting 20 years residence and 
civic test qualifications. Will improve 
racial makeup of territory's citizenry 
predominantly of Japanese descent. Will 
counteract Jap propaganda and boost 
morale among Isle Filipinos who have 
relatives in Philippines. 

We pledge Filipinos in Hawaii and 
everywhere will respond with increased 
devotion to war effort of America. 
Present restrictions unfair to those 
irozen to essential work and not ac- 
cepted for military service, yet are as 
loyal Americans as others. Proposal 
has indorsement of local Chamber of 
Commerce, Juniof Chamber of Com- 
merce, Sugar Planters Association. 
Lions Club, Hawaiian Civic Club and 
^ounty Board of Supervisors. Filipinos 
here feel they deserve naturalization 
nght even more than Chinese.— F. P. 
banta, Chairman, Hilo, Hawaii Filipino 
Equal Rights Committee. 

Filipinos of Hawaii elated by news 
concerning introduction of Randolph 
DUl re-l<ilip lno naturalization. Its pas- 
sage is direct step of further extension 
ot democratic principles which we all 
perish and defend to the very end. 
We thank you.-N. Patacsil, Sr., Editor 
Wagayway Publication. 

OFFICIALS ENDORSE THE BILL 

rt, l ?[l Tm ?i Wash ington sources think 
hat the bill has a good chance of be- 
ing passed. These sources feel that 
V P i m ° S certai "ly have done much 
o help the United States in defending 
,ne Elands so valiantly; (2) that the 
intent of Congress never was to put 
Filipinos in a state of animated sus- 
pension; (3) that Filipinos, since they 
have fully earned their independence, 



facio a plebian; and the other was Dr. 
Jose Kizal, a patrician. In the present 
organization of the Caballeros de Di- 
mas Alang fraternity the plebian and 
the patrician Filipino have found a 
common society. That is the present 
Caballeros de Dimas Alang in America. 

Th e C. D. A. Grand Lodge office is 
located at 2108 Fillmore St., San Fran- 
cisco, California. 



have likewise earned the right to en- 
joy the privileges of U. S. citizenship 
should they choose to live in this coun- 
try. 

It is felt that the bill would have 
the support of President Roosevelt, al- 
though he has not been asked for an 
expression of opinion. 

On August 23, 1937, President 
Roosevelt in a letter to Quintin Pare- 
des, then Resident Commissioner from 
the Philippines to the United States, 
wrote: 

"... I have your letter of August 
12, 1937 ... in which you discuss the 
situation arising over the status of 
Filipinos resident in the United States 
and in which you recommend such re- 
medial legislation as may, in my judg- 
ment, be equitable and proper. 

"It appears that, in general, you at- 
tribute the situations of Filipino resi- 
dent in the United States to recent leg- 
islation rather than to the administra- 
tion of such legislation by the Federal 
Executive departments and agencies 
concerned. 

"Such being the case, it will be nec- 
essary to secure amendments of exist- 
ing law in order to achieve the pur- 
pose you have in mind. May I sug- 
gest that it might be the preferable 
course for you to have intorduced such 
bills as appear to promise results and 
urge their enactment upon Congress. 
I believe the Congress, if fully informed 
as to all facts, will consider the situa- 
tion sympathetically and impartially. ' 

QUEZON FAVORS NATURALIZATION 

Naturally enough, the bill is sup- 
ported by the Philippine Government 
in exile. 

President Quezon of the Philippines 
assured all Filipinos in the United 
States that he will safeguard their in- 
terests in connection with the Philip- 
pine independence joint resolution 
pending in Congress. eH said: 

"I desire to assure the Filipinos in 
the United States that as long as I live 
and am President of the Philippines, 
the interests of the Filipinos in the 
Philippines, in the United States or 
wherever they may be, will be safe- 
guarded by me as far as I can do it. 
I have, therefore, taken into considera- 
tion the future of the Filipinos resid- 
ing in the United States and have 
deemed it essential in justice to them, 
and in recognition of the loyalty shown 
to America by our Government and our 
people in the Philippines, that they be 
given the right to become citizens of 
the United States. I am taking steps 
to this effect." 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Licking Japanese Will Be Long, Hard Task, 
OWI Concludes In Analysis Of Enemy Power 

Nips have internal stronghold guarded by interlocking chains of fortified islands; an 
Army of 60 divisions with good morale faces no manpower shortage and has supplies 
of strategic materials. 



As of today, the United Nations have liberated approximately a twentieth of 
the territory held by Japan a year ago, the Office of War Information reported in 
a statement indicating the size of the joh still ahead to win the war. The state- 
ment is based on the military situation and does not take into account possible 
weakness in the internal structure of Axis nations. 

In the Pacific, the road to victory is long. By the time the Japanese had com- 
pleted their conquests — that is, before 
the Allies prevented them from taking 



the Allies prevent, _ 
still more land — their territory amount- 
ed to more than 3.000,000 square miles, 
or almost half again as much as the 
Nazi domain at its largest. Since then 
we have wrested 160.150 square miles 
from the Japs, or a fraction over five 
per cent. In addition, we have freed 
a considerable ocean area, thus short- 
ening our supply line. 

It should also be borne in mind that 
the territory we have so far liberated 
lay along the outer extremities and that 
the closer we get to the enemy's heart 
(Japan and Germany proper) the stif- 
fer the defenses are likely to be. 

ENEMY STILL VERY STRONG 

The present strength of the enemy 
lother indication of the job still 
nds of Germans and 
and wounded 



s 

key 



P 



is anc 

ahead, Thousan 
Japs have been killed ar.„ 
ince the war began ; German cities and 
industrial plants have been 
bombed; hundreds of Japanese ships 
have been sunk. That beinsj so. what 
is the present capacity of Germany to 
continue to wage war, and of Japan? 

It has been said (not by military or 
naval experts) that once Germany has 
been disposed of, the conquest of Ja- 
n will be relatively quick and easy. 
Geography, logistics, and the nature 
of the Japanese soldiers do not sup- 
port such an opinion. 

EMPIRE NOW SIZE OF UNITED STATES 

The Japan we face today is not an 
island the size of California. Its seized 
possessions make it an empire almost 
the size of the United States. The land 
area of the Japanese empire is a little 
under 3,000,000 square miles, while 
the area of continental United States is 
3,022,387 square miles. Japan's sea 



and land area extends from the Kuriles 
on the north to Timor on the south, 
from mid-Pacific on the east to India 
on the west — an area roughly 4,000 
miles long and 4,000 miles wide. ' 

This vast area is protected by a 
chain of fortified islands, all of which 
have interior supply lines to the em- 
pire's industrial center, Japan itself. 
It is about 3,000 miles from Japan's 
industrial centers, where its war weap- 
ons are made, to its farthest fighting 
front, where those weapons are used. 
Our men and supplies, on the other 
hand, must travel about 9,000 miles if 
they are sent by way of the Pacific, 
and even farther if they go by way 
of the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. 

U. S. HAS ONLY ONE SEA BASE 

Not only are these islands well for- 
tified — as, witness, Tarawa — but many 
of them afford excellent air and sea 
bases for Japanese planes and ships. 
On the other hand, we have now only 
one first-class sea base in the Pacific, 
and it is at Honolulu. 

The Japanese empire consists of an 
inner zone centering around Japan it- 
self and an outer zone consisting large- 
ly of the territory it has taken since 
the war began. All of this territory is 
tied together through an interlocking 
chain of airfields. Thus far all of our 
fighting to liberate territory seized by 
the Japs has been along part of the 
outer fringe of the outer zone. The 
Solomons, where in 14 months of jun- 
gle warfare we have moved north about 
200 miles, is some 3,000 miles from 
Tokyo. We have not yet reached the 
main Japanese Army or Navy, and we 
have not yet reached the outer zone 
or reached anv point that the Japanese 
are determined to hold at all costs. 



ADEQUATE MANPOWER RESERVES 

Military reports tell us that the 
Japanese army now consists of 60 di- 
visions, which could be increased by 
20 divisions during the next two years 
if Japan became hard-pressed. The 
Japanese still have some 2,000.000 men 
who haven't been called to the colors 
because they haven't been needed ; in 
addition, they have an additional 1,- 
500,000 between the ages of 17 and 
20 not yet subject to the draft. 

The morale of the Japanese soldier 
and his ability as a ruthless fighter 
are only too well known. He is a 
fanatic who fights to the last; and 
then kills himself rather than surren- 
der. While he is no superman, his 
desperate courage and aggressiveness 
are unquestioned. 

SHORTAGES ONLY IN FEW CASES 

What of Japan's industrial resourc- 
es? The Army estimates that Japan 
has sufficient supplies of all but a few 
commodities to wage a long war. It 
estimates that Japan has accumulated 
a two to three years' supply of such 
strategic materials as manganese, tung- 
sten, molybdenum, vanadium, mercury, 
tin, chrome and rubber; that she has 
a three years' supplv of high octane 
gasoline and a year and a half's supply 
of lubricating oils. 

Concentrating on war industries, 
thereby reducing production of civilian 
goods to barest necessities, has enabled 
the Japanese to expand their produc- 
tion of ships, iron and steel, light 
metals, and aircraft. New plants are 
being built in areas difficult to bomb. 

Japan has no manpower shortage. 
Its own population is 75,000,000 Jap- 
anese. In addition, it has 400.000,000 
slave laborers to call on — in the con- 
quered areas of China, Manchuria. For- 
mosa, the Philippines, Malaya and the 
Dutch East Indies. 

JAPS ARE WEAK IN SHIPS 

One of the big advantages we hold 
over the Japanese is our ability to 

. continued on following page 



FEBRUARY. 1944 



= 1.7 - 



^4 i3ataavi ^atker ^4dLs the )P resident 



January 28, 1944. 



The President, 
Washington. D. C. 

My dear Mr. President: 

I have just read the story of the barbarous and inhuman treatment of our 
American soldiers in the Philippines. Mr. President, you held back this story 
for over a year. Was it because you thought we couldn't take it. or that we 
were too complacent, or because you didn't want any civilian criticism of your 
high strategy? It is now nearly two years since Bataan. and what have vou 
done to rescue those boys: 

Sent scores of convoys and thousands of soldiers to a few piddling little Pacific 
islands which we don t want and can't use in any important strategic maneuver. 
From all accounts you have a new rmw ^ ™^.t\, l • r> a/t- i 

way and the Philippines ther are m llion o ^ m§ T"", BetWee " 
beyond range of land-based planes SqUarC ° f 0pe " SCa *" 

aW*is d ° dtaJ^e^ft* P ° W . erful Ww * With a11 to -w aircraft carriers, 
aZy g f orlverT thfL endHf * n *™ l J**S« -tead of picking 

the problem of supplying such a tV ^ f f retched -« ut tentacles? You say 
Japs able constantly to brin* f r be lns "mountable. How are the 

points of conquest Lore anfmoT 7 h ° me bases to their farthest 

and men? W e rea 1 ZLZ f ? l . SU PP lles? More and more planes and guns 
and then we capture ^ ab ° Ut ° Ur services of supply, 

Teheran UndStedlvT^ add , u P-, W „ e applaud Casablanca and Cairo and 
also they maie woSrtl^r?X^ 1Ue t* 6 "5«*|H** of grand strategy- 
still there-a pitiful remnant of £ But the b °V* of Bataan are 
you promised long ago , S feebk V"! beg " ins ^ f<3r that relief ^ 
rice and corn mush without the ^ g f ° r quinine and clothing and a little 
grapevine rumor that ^S^B^S^T Am] a11 the >' * et fe 
claw five thousand miles awav „?£ an ° th L er ei « hth of ™ off an enemy 
Stalin. ay ' or that have had a nice friendly party with 

demand that' vou take 'sLe* h^nl^^^ 1 tdl >' ou we ' re boili '^ mad - 1 
with power and driving force and nr. J, T m ' S ° me clrastic action > some action 
prisoners now;, before they are all ." S . nakable Purpose behind it to rescue those 
demand? Just a Bataan 'father with D ° r Starved to deatil - Who am I to 
certainly, but still talking sense \Z * f? 3 " , mother beside me. Prejudiced, 
also claim the right to criticize eve SIf g for , Several thousand more who 
Mr. President, keep faith wff those « nder - in - chief " For God ' s sake ' 
Phihppmes. those me n of Bataan and take us back to the 

Harry M. Robins, 
120 Madi son Ave., 

As this issue went to press, the White H , Detr ° h ^ fc 

above telegram was "under ™ -j H ° USe formed BATAAN that the 

uer consideration." 



Luz Gets Job Of Making 

Orientals Of Filip inos " 

1 !1 -tares Government 
monitors, announced the appoint™" 
of Arsento Luz to the presidency of 
he new Phihppuie Board of InfoLa- 
hon, with cabinet status. 

The hoard was created by J ose Lau- 
rel, puppet president of the Philippines, 

* 13 f 



"to make them (the Philippine people) 
[hink and act as true Orientals." th« 
broadcast said. 

Luz, according to the broadcast 

was named assistant director 
era afTo,* — r tcr^ i.i . « .i 



also 
of gen- 



ct&sibLani director tu ^» 
eral affairs of "Kalibapi," the nationa 
service" organization devised by the 
Japanese to unify the more ardent pro- 
Japanese in a political pressure party. 
He was formerly secretary-treasurer 
and acting assistant director of the or- 
ganization. 



ZL War ck of *Lh)eath 

GREGG J. POWERS 



Men who surrendered, when all hope 
had fled. 

Were beaten and tortured till most 

all were dead; 
Driven like cattle along hot, dusty 

roads, 

And kept on the march bv bayonet 
qoads. 

Nothing to eat for days at a time, 
Perhaps a drink, but only of slime; 
Even to ask for a crust of bread, 
The answer, a shot — another man 
dead. 

Made to stand in ihe boiling hot 
sun ; 

The slightest protest, the report of 
a gun — 

Starvation and torture, had as a 
result, 

Attained the ends of this fiendish 
cult. 

But v/e will remember, there'll come 
a day 

When all of these rats will surely 
pay. 

We will not stop till our work is done, 
And "finis" is written o'er the Ris- 
ing Sun. 



Licking Japs 

. . . continued from preceding page 

produce guns, ships, planes and tanks. 
Our production capacity is several 
times greater than theirs, and that is 
where we can make up for the im- 
mense handicap of geography in this 
war. 

Japan's weakest spot is its ships, 
and we have already inflicted consid- 
erable damage there. We have sunk 
some 1,500 of its ships, about two- 
thirds of them merchant ships and the 
remainder naval craft. Japan must 
have a large merchant fleet if it is t() 
make full use of the rubber in Ma- 
laya, the oil in the Dutch East Indies, 
and other war commodities it gained 
in its seizure of thos 



se territories. 



Its 



ships must carry these goods to the 
industrial plants in the north for con- 
version into war weapons and re-ship 
them to its fighting fronts. It is esti- 
mated that thus far we have sent to 
the bottom approximately a third of 
Japan's pre-war merchant fleet. 

Despite the islands recovered from 
the Japanese, and the ships and planes 
sunk, we are still 3,000 miles from 
Tokyo and a long way to victory. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



The Philippines and The United Nations 
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 

Filipino victims of war assured allocation of relief materials under 
UNRRA agreement. 

The Philippines became a member of the United Nations Relief and Rehabili- 
tation Administration on November 9, 1943, together with some 44 associated 
nations and governments. Signing the agreement for the Philippines was Vice 
President Sergio Osmena. And the Philippine representative to the Council of 
the UNRRA, as designated by President Manuel L. Quezon, was Philippine Resi- 
dent Commissioner Joaquin M. Elizalde, assisted by a staff of technicians and 
advisers. 



RELIEF FOR FILIPINO VICTIMS 

Relief and rehabilitation for the 
Philippines will operate under the 
UNRRA agreement. This means that 
through the UNRRA the Filipino vic- 
times of war in the Philippines will 
receive their immediate relief; and 
through the UNRRA their rehabilitation 
will be realized with all possible speed. 
For the program of the UNRRA calls 
not only for immediate help to those 
ravaged by the enemy but also a 
long-range economic rehabilitation of 
the areas which will be reoccupied by 
the forces of the United Nations. 

As one of the signatories to the 
UNRRA, the Philippines can therefore 
look forward to a definite program of 
relief and rehabilitation the minute 
reoccupation is effected. The Philip- 
pine Government in Washington has 
already drawn up plans of its own in 
regard to carrying out measures of re- 
lief for the Filipino people, such as 



furnishing them food, clothing, shel- 
ter, medical supplies and other essen- 
tial services. 

Under the agreement, however, we 
are going to subordinate our own re- 
lief and rehabilitation activities to the 
policies decided upon by the Council 
of the UNRRA. But even under such 
an arrangement there is no doubt that 
the Philippines will find it very ad- 
vantageous. 

RELIEF MATERIALS ALLOCATED FOR P. I. 

In the program of the UNRRA the 
Philippines will be allocated a definite 
quota of relief materials and supplies 
that will be urgently needed in the 
areas to be reoccupied. It should be 
borne in mind that, immediately after 
the end of hostilities, there will be a 
sort of scramble among the nations 
not only for goods and medicines and 
other basic needs but also for the 
means or facilities to bring these things 



to the areas being given help. In the 
case of the Philippines, our Govern- 
ment is actively studying the problem 
of realizing specific allocations of ma- 
terials and supplies and the needed 
bottoms to transport them to the peo- 
ple in the Islands. 

ISLANDS' POST-WAR PLANNING BOARD 

In connection with the activities of 
the Philippines in the UNRRA. Presi- 
dent Quezon has already set up the 
Post- War Planning Board, headed by 
Vice President Sergio Osmena. This 
Board, whose staff include Philippine 
Resident Commissioner Joaquin M. Eli- 
zalde, Secretary of Finance Andres So- 
riano, Gen. Basilio J. \ aides, and Au- 
ditor General Jaime Hernandez, is now 
making plans for a long-range rehabili- 
tation of the Philippines. Its scope 
covers the extensive and intensive de- 
velopment of the country's industrv 
and agriculture, also the post-w r ar trade 
and commercial relationships of the 
Philippines with other countries, par- 
ticularly the United States and those 
neighbors of the Philippines. But its 
functions will be coordinated with the 
activities of the UNRRA. 

The bases and the broad policies of 
the UNRRA have been laid down at 
its first session — from November 9 to 
December 3 — in Atlantic City. All the 
member nations have agreed to con- 
tribute their share to the operational 
and administrative expenses of this hu- 
manitarian undertaking. An able and 
well-known leader, ex-Governor Herbert 
Lehman of New York, has been elected 
to administer and direct the affairs and 
activities of this relief organization. 
All the favorable conditions are pres- 
ent for a successful start, but it will 
take all the good will and understand- 
ing and a cooperative working together 
of all the nations to bring it to a 
fruitful conclusion. 

Filipinos Still Resist Japs 

The Japanese-controlled Manila ra- 
dio said that a unit of the pre-war 
Philippines Commomvealth government 
still was offering resistance in the 
mountains of Cagayan, northern Lu- 
zon, under the leadership of the former 
provincial governor, Marcelo Adduru. 
The broadcast, directed in English to 
the islands, said that Adduru's men 
were "not in any way a guerrilla outfit 
like those found in other provinces, 
but supposedly a continuation of the 
commonwealth government." 




Representatives of various countries met in the White House to sign 
the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration Agree- 
ment. Vice President Osmena signed the agreement for the Philippines. 



FEBRUARY, 1944 



■ 19 ■ 



Sec. Hull Charges Japanese Violate 
All Laws Governing War Prisoners 

State Department reveals that Tokyo ignored 89 protests filed since 
Pearl Harbor on harsh treatment of American captives. 

Secretary of State Hull formally charged Japan with violating all the laws of 
common decency in its "depraved" treatment of American war prisoners. The 
United States Government has made at least 89 protests and representations, most 
of which Tokyo has ignored. 

The Secretary made public a lengthy memorandum of protest* which disclosed 
for the first time that as far back as February 14, 1942— scarcely two months 
after Pearl Harbor — the United States 
had warned Japan against harsh treat- 
ment of Americans in Japanese hands. 

MADE EARLY PROTEST 

Hull said that when he received from 
military authorities these "reports of 
the brutal atrocities and depraved cru- 
elties inflicted by the Japanese upon 
American prisoners of war in the Phil- 
ippines," this government again called 
on Tokyo to abide by its pledge to 
apply the Geneva Prisoners of War 
Convention to military captives and 
"the international common law of de- 
cency'* to all American nationals. 

18 SPECIFIC INSTANCES 

The January 27 protest set forth 18 
specific instances of Japanese failure to 
treat American prisoners decently in 
accordance with Tokyo's pledge. Among 
other things, it formally accused Japan 
of "inflicting corporal punishment and 
torture upon American nationals," of 
starving them, forcing them into slave 
labor and failing to provide them with 
proper medical care. 

The memorandum revealed that as 
long ago as November 17, 1942, the 
United States protested against "six 
cases of atrocities perpetrated by Japa- 
nese authorities." 

And less than a month later — on De- 
cember 12. 1942— the United States 
dispatched an "extended protest re- 
garding torture, neglect, physical vio- 
lence, solitary confinement, illegal pris- 
on sentences, mistreatment, and abuse 
that led to deaths of some Ameri- 




cans 



CONFERS WITH F. D. 



Hull issued the memorandum after 
conferring with President Roosevelt, 
and as the nation demanded that retri- 
bution be exacted from the Japanese 
for the wanton killing of perhaps as 
many as 25.000 American and Filipino 
war prisoners. 



CJJIJ4JI 

Hull recalled this Government's pro- 
test against Japan's "barbarous action 
in executing" American fliers who fell 

, 1 o^o e ^ em y hands afte r the April 18, 
1942, Doolittle raid on Tokyo. 

The last protest— based on the Ba- 

IIT f™ cit T ies rev ealed recently — 
barged the Japanese government with: 

iiv P /?u 1U o e t0 P ermit representa- 
ves ol the Swiss government and the 

v sf t l, 10n l' Red Cross Committee to 
yj a " P lace where Americans are 

"2. Failure to forward complaint to 
me appropriate authorities and repre- 
?entat,ves of the protecting power. 

3 Punishment of American nation- 
als tor complaining concerning the 
conditions of captivity. 

"4. Failure to furnish needed cloth- 
ing to American nationals. 

"5. Confiscation of personal effects 
om American civilian internees and 
prisoners of war. 

"6. Subjection of Americans to in- 
sets and to public curiosity. 

7. Failure and refusal to provide 
health-sustaining food. 

t , " 8 - Im P r <>per use of the profits of 
sale of goods in camp canteens. 



Chinese Plant Many Mines; 
Many Jap Heads Blown Up 

lioth Chinese guerrillas and regulars 
have planted so many land mines in 
occupied China that Japanese troops 
are rinding they are not safe even on 
the main streets of the villages they 
control. 

In one village guerrillas planted a 
mine beneath a flagstone on the prin- 
cipal street and attached the detonator 
to a nearby water bucket. Villages 
knew that w r as done and avoided the 
bucket, but a traitor who was serving 
as a guide for a Japanese detachment 
picked up the bucket and was killed 
instantly. 

In another case the inhabitants of 
a village lured a small group of Japa- 
nese into a ditch which had been 
mined. iNone of the Jap soldiers es- 
caped alive. 

While the Japanese garrison of one 
town in occupied China was off in the 
hills searching for guerrillas, the lat- 
ter slipped into the town and planted 
a land mine in a road over which the 
Japanese would return. 



"9. Forcing civilians to perform la- 
bor other than that connected with the 
administration, maintenance and man- 
agement of internment camps. 

"10. Forcing officer prisoners of war 
to perform labor and non-commis- 
sioned officers to do other than super- 
visory w T ork. 

"11. Requiring prisoners of war to 
perform labor that has a direct rela- 
tion with war operations. 

"12. Failure to provide proper med- 
ical care. 

"13. Failure to report the names of 
all prisoners of war and civilian in- 
ternees in their hands and of American 
combatants found dead on the field of 
battle. 

"14. Failure to permit prisoners of 
war freely to exercise their religion. 

"15. Failure to post copies of Geneva 
Prisoners of War Convention in Eng- 
lish translation in the camps. 

"16. Failure to provide adequate 
equipment and accommodations in the 
camps. 

"17. Failure to provide the provis- 
ions of the Geneva Prisoners of War 
Convention with respect to the trial 
and punishment of prisoners of war. 

"18. Inflicting corporal punishment 
and torture upon American nationals." 



: 20 - : 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Japs Evacuate 300,000 of Peiping's 
Residents As Food Crisis Continues 

Mobs roam streets and fight over slightest scraps. Food strictly 
rationed includes 3 pounds of rice and 31 pounds of flour per month. 



A mass evacuation of 300,000 of the hunger-stricken inhabitants of Peiping 
was recently carried out by the Japanese occupation authorities, faced with a 
growing food shortage and food riots of increasingly serious proportions, accord- 
ing to latest reports from the enemy-occupied city. 

Scenes of hunger-mad mobs roaming the city streets like starving dogs search- 
ing for food and fighting over the slightest scraps to nil their empty stomachs 
are described by a student of the Cath- 
olic Fu Jen University in Peiping who 

recently arrived in Chungking. No one, j Permit YMCA 

he says, dares to carry food while F 

walking along Peiping's streets, which To Aid U. S. Prisoners 

are filled with hungry people ready 

for a free-for-all at the first sight D . . , *. . 

Q £ f ] Permission to extend its work among 



Once he saw a mob running after a 
horse-drawn cart loaded with bean 
cakes. With sticks and stones the 
angry mob pounded the load, picking 
up the fallen pieces of food and cram- 
ming them in their mouths. This went 
on until the cart was almost empty. 

On another occasion, a hunger - 
stricken gang of more than 100 stormed 
several restaurants. Jap gendarmes 
were summoned. They arrested the 
members of the mob, dispossessed them 
of their domicile permits and herded 
them out of the city. Next morning, 
more than eight of the mob hanged 
themselves from trees in the suburbs 
in an extraordinary mass suicide of 
protest. 

Food in Peiping is strictly rationed 
by the Japs, the student explained. 
Every resident from 12 to 60 years of 
age holding a domicile permit is al- 
lowed to have each month a little less 
than 3 lbs. of low-quality rice, a little 
more than 7 lbs. of low-quality wheat 
flour, about 11 lbs. of so-called 
"mixed flour" made of peanut and 
bean skins and other waste materials 
and a little more than 13 lbs. of kao- 
liang (a grain grown in North China) 
called "cultural rice" by the Japs. 

No one could long subsist under this 
rationing system, the student said. Eat- 
ing "mixed flour" often makes mouths 
swollen and stomach painful. For 
those who can get nothing to add to 
this diet death is sure, for it is slow 
starvation. On his way to school, 
three miles from his home, the stu- 
dent could count every day an average 
of 200 bodies of the victims of starva- 
tion strewn along the sidewalks. 



war prisoners to prison camps in 
Philippine Islands has been received 
from the Japanese government, the 
War Prisoners' Aid, a branch of the 
International Y.M.C.A., announced re- 
cently. 

The association said they had learned 
of the permission several days before 
announcement of the atrocities suffered 
by American prisoners of Bataan. 



Bataan Veteran Hopes 
For Third Crack At Japs 

Pvt. Jose Tugab. 22, who fought with 
the famous Filipino Scouts under Gen. 
Douglas MacArthur on Bataan, and 
who is one of the few veterans of that 
campaign alive and free, has arrived 
in Chicago after experiencing a mira- 
cle-touched odyssey of escape from 
the Japanese. 

The voung Filipino fled from fallen 
Bataan in the spring of 1942 by stow- 
ing away on board a Japanese ship 
with a friendly Chinese crew, and later 
completed his flight to Australia from 
Japanese-held Shanghai. 

He is on leave from an Army hos- 
pital in San Francisco, and is visiting 
relatives in Chicago. He received a 
leg wound at Bataan. 

In darkness in Shanghai, Tugab was 
set ashore and introduced to the se- 
crets of an "underground railway" for 
fugitives. After days of hiding, Tugab 
left Shanghai and was taken aboard a 
submarine on a daring rescue errand. 

Tugab, who w T ears the Purple Heart 
and the Silver Star, hopes to be re- 
leased from the hospital soon to fight 
the Japanese for the third time. 




Proof of the loyalty of Filipinos in America to officers of the Philippine 
Commonwealth in Washington is the celebration every community holds 
yearly on November 15th — Philippine Commonwealth Day. Los Ange- 
les Filipinos outdid every other community in their celebration of the 
holiday last November. It was an impressive ceremony, at which movie 
stars and the Second Filipino Infantry at Camp Cooke participated, and 
for the first time in any U. S. city, the Filipino flag flew on the flagpole 
of the City Hall. The affair was promoted by Francisco A. Lopez, pub- 
lisher of the "Associated Filipino Press," and president of the Filipino 
Community of Los Angeles. . . . Above are shown three lovely young 
Filipinos who graced the occasion — (left to right) Miss Lita Villa, Miss 
Marceline Jacoby and Miss Emily Yatko. 



FEBRUARY. 1944 



: 21 • 




Send MacArthur Planes And Tanks 
To Avenge Bataan, Senator Demands 

Only real consolation nation can offer wives and families of victims 
of Jap barbarism is action, Senator Chavez says. 

Senator Chavez of New Mexico demanded that housands of planes and tanks 
be sent to General MacArthur's forces in the Pacific so that revenge for the Japa- 
nese atrocities committed against American fighting men will be no longer delayed. 

In a speech on the Senate floor. Chavez said that vast and immediate aid to 
MacArthur is the only real consolation the nation can offer the wives and families 
ot the victims of Japanese barbarism. 

PUTS THE QUESTION 

"How do Senators think these wives 
and mothers feel when they hear that 
their loved ones have suffered the ago- 
ny of the damned, as war reported by 
the War Department? 5 ' he asked. "They 
then ask us the question as to what we 
are going to do about it. And they 
ask why was it necessary to give out 
this terrible story. I have heard only 
one answer and this is by the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury. 'we will sell more 
war bonds. 

The Senator pointed to a group of 
telegrams on his desk from families 
01 the American victims and reported 
that they show "first, discouragement, 
second suffering, and third, resentment 
tor neglect. 

MOTHERS' PROOF 

"Senators cannot prove to a single 
mother in my State," he continued, 
that it is more essential to send 2,000 
tanks to England or to Tunisia, than 
to send 203 to MacArthur in the Phil- 
>7»,„e area. Such proof cannot be 
given which will satisfy them, in spite 
oi what the War Department or any other 
branch of the Government may say. 

"The release itself is 15 months too 
late. As far as Pearl Harbor is con- 
cerned, as far as Bataan itself is con- 
cerned as far as the time when the 
Japs first attacked the Philippine Is- 
lands at Clark Field is concerned, it 
is two years too late. 

"I believe in the selling of bonds 
and having the American people buy 
™*»1 * hurts, for winning the war. 
This notice should have been given to 
he world "Yes, we will avenge Ba- 
aar. ami the Philippine Islands and the 
suffering of our boys over there, by 
the selling 0 f bonds and by supplying 
MacArthur with all the things nay 



(jenerut Wjac^JIrlluir 



SUFFERING IS SHAME 



"Of course, we must sell bonds, but 
it is a shame that American mothers in 

„ 22 , 



II hnois, in North Dakota, in Texas, in 
Oklahoma, in New Mexico, all over the 
Union, must suffer at least being given 
some hope that we are thinking about 
them, that we are going to get a thou- 
sand planes to MacArthur instead of 
a negligible number: that if it is nec- 
essary to send tanks and more tanks 
and more tanks to Italy, it is also nec- 
essary and just and fair and humane 
and American to send the same class 
of tanks, and in larse numbers, to 
MacArthur. Then at least the mothers 
in New Mexico, or throughout the na- 
tion, whose hearts are agonized,- would 
have said, 4 We are willing to suffer. 5 

"Have Senators heard one word 
about doing such a thing? What are 
we going to do about it? We have 
heard nothing except what the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury said that the sec- 
ond of February is going to be 'Avenge 
Bataan Day."' 

The first school established by the 
Americans in the Philippines was 
opened on Corregidor Island less than 
one month after the victory of Commo- 
dore George Dewey over the Spanish 
fleet. 



Japs Grant Permission 
To Send Relief Funds 

As a result of prolonged efforts by 
the Department of State and the Amer- 
ican Red Cross to provide funds for 
the purchase locally of relief supplies 
and to extend financial assistance to 
the Americans held by the Japanese 
in the Philippines Islands, the Japanese 
government has granted to the Swiss 
Legation at Tokyo, which is charged 
with the representation of American 
interests in Japan and Japanese oc- 
cupied territory, permission to make 
remittances each month from United 
States government or American Red 
Cross funds to civilian internment 
camps in the Philippine Islands. 

Funds totaling $50,000, furnished by 
the Red Cross, have been sent to Santo 
Tomas for this purpose and arrange- 
ments have been made to forward, on 
a regular basis, 825,000 monthly to 
this camp from United States funds on 
deposit with the Swiss government. In 
addition, $7,410 has been distributed 
to the smaller camps at Bacolod, Ba- 
guio. Cebu, Davao, Iloilo, Tacloban. 
and Tagbilaran for relief purposes. 
These remittances will continue on a 
monthly basis. Permission has like- 
wise been requested to remit funds on 
a regular monthly basis to the Ateneo 
and Los Banos camps. 

Efforts are being continued to make 
similar arrangements for American 
prisoner of war camps in the Philip- 
pine Islands. 

Jap Attack On China Showed 
Filipinos Enemy's Nature 

President Quezon of the Philippines, 
in a message sent to Generalissimo 
Chiang Kai-shek of China, said that 
"the Japanese aggression against China 
has revealed to the Filipino people 
the true character of Japan's policy 
of a so-called co-prosperity sphere, 
namely to enslave politically and eco- 
nomically all Asia and the West Pa- 
cific." 

This explains, President Quezon ad- 
ded, "our determination to fight her 
unto death" and "the utter failure of 
Japan's propaganda to win over the 
Filipino people." 

President Quezon's message was a 
reply to Generalissimo Chiang Kai- 
shek's greetings on the second anniver- 
sary of the outbreak of the Pacific war. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 




Part of the Filipino personnel of Glenview Naval Air Station, 

Glenview, Illinois Lt. Ditmars in the center, with 

Chief Petty Officer Jose M. Albertson. 

Lucas Says Japs Choose Hari-Kari 
To Capture By American Forces 

Marine Corps Combat Correspondent reports Nips thought it would 
take 1,000,000 Americans 100 years to remove them from Tarawa. 

Picked Japanese forces, who boasted that it would take a million Americans 
100 years to remove them from Tarawa, were completely terror-stricken and 
demoralized by the will of American Marines, who refused to waver in the face 
of withering machine gun and cannon fire, Lieut. Jim G. Lucas, Marine combat 
correspondent, declared. 

Lieutenant Lucas said the Japanese didn't think the Americans could get ashore 
and when they did it broke their spirit. 



Great numbers of Japanese, he said, 
committed hari-kiri with ceremonial 
knives and other shot themselves under 
the chin, pulling the rifle triggers with 
their toes. 

Lieutenant Lucas, whose eye-witness 
report of the Tarawa victory was hailed 
by the press as one of the most bril- 
liant pieces of reporting of the entire 
war, was among the second wave of 
marines to land. The 29-year-old lieu- 
tenant was a reporter for the Tulsa 
Tribune before joining the marines. 

Although there never was any doubt 
in the minds of the marines as to the 
outcome of the battle for Tarawa, the 
blackest hour came in the morning of 
the second clay, Lieutenant Lucas re- 
lated. 

"Those of us who landed on the 
first day stood on the beaches and 



watched our boys wade across the reef. 
600 yards off shore," he said. "Men 
were being knocked out right and left 
by Jap machine guns. All that day 
we could see the wounded trying to 
keep their heads above water so they 
wouldn't drown. 

"But the lines of marines never 
ceased to come on, wading, swimming 
and crawling to the beach. That's the 
sort of stuff that is going to break the 
back of the Japs." 

Lieutenant Lucas paid tribute to the 
working parties of marines, made up 
of corps clerks, typists and other spe- 
cialists, who struggled with the land- 
ing of supplies. 

"They are the unsung heroes of 
Tarawa," he said. "I saw them carry- 
ing large containers of vitally needed 



Heroes Day Statement 
Issued By President 

Philippines President Quezon, in a 
National Heroes Day statement broad- 
cast to the Philippines, ressured his 
people of the early date of their liber- 
ation. 

President Quezon said in his state- 
ment : 

"Today is National Heroes Day in 
the Philippines. It is a day dedicated 
to the memory of all those who gave 
their all for the freedom and welfare 
of our people. From Balintawak to 
Bataan we call their roll — and they 
arc all the embodiment of Filipino he- 
roism. We are grateful to them, and 
we think of them with reverence and 
admiration. 

"As our country lies prostrate un- 
der the invader's heel, new heroes are 
arising. They are those who in the 
hills and in the mountains are contm- 
uing the fight for our country's re- 
demption. Thev are those who refuse 
to crook their knee to the Japanese 
aggressor, and whether on the battle- 
field or in the towns and barrios, are 
bravely doing their share to keep the 
spirit of resistance alive in every Fili- 
pino heart. 

"I salute them and I wish to give 
them the assurance that victory will 
soon be ours. The recent successes 01 
Oen. Douglas MacArthur in the Soutn- 
west Pacific, and the more rece" 4 .™; 
tory of Admiral Nimitz in the Gilbert 
Islands are indubitable evidences ot 
our triumphant offensive. We will be 
with you soon! 

"As we honor our immortal heroes, 
let us renew our pledge that the in- 
vader who dared trample our shores 
will be driven away by the avenging 
anger of our arms. Our honored dead 
will not rest easy while the soil m 
which they lie is desecrated by goose- 
stepping Japanese feet. 



water and as one got hit another 
stepped in to take his place. A lot 
of them died without even the satisfac- 
tion of killing one of the Japs." 

Lieutenant Lucas told of the Japa- 
nese habit of planting mines and booby 
traps as they retreated. "We found 
many live chickens that had survived 
the bombing and naval shelling and 
some of the' boys had visions of cliirk- 
en and dumplings until a couple ot 
the birds blew up. Wristwatches and 
the bodies of their own dead were also 
booby-trapped." he added. 



FEBRUARY, 1944 



■23° 



Chinese Paper Pleads For Offensive Quezon Hails Mac Arthur 
Against Japs By Allies This Spring 



Ta Rung Pao. influential daily, agrees with program of knocking Nazis 
out first, but warns against giving Japs chance to augment strength. 

riTftv . ' T \ Kun S Pao, influential Chinese newspaper, recently urged 

Thaler a t Ve for t0 °l ^ he ' m " focused ™ »3 Germany 

a"ainst 1^1 ? h 33 T 11 35 l ° coordi nate with the offensive operations 

^Lt ^rZ^Ti^r in principle with the A,lied J ^y of 

knock out Germany first, but questions 
the advisability of allowing Japan to 
augment her strength. 

"Under no circumstances should we 
let go the opportunity of crushing 
lo ]0 , the influential daily declared. 

In its argument for an offensive drive 

folio, Pnn ?' Ta Kun - Pao ma °e the 
ZT n m S PO»ts: First, Japanese pro- 
duction of aircraft and other military 

a'io f d6Str °y ed in Prepa- 

ration for the final phases of the war. 

INCREASE IN JAP AIRCRAFT OUTPUT 

^rSnV, 0 trus r orth y intelli- 

vi P ut , unde r German technical 

ZZ T h !f lncreased considerably 
awing the past two years. As recentlv 
announced by To jo ; Japan's S3 
effort will henceforth be directed to 
the manufacture of aircraft. 

Japan's aircraft production, if U n- 
nterrupted by any outside force, will 
•n a few months' time make a formi- 
dable arm of the Japanese air forces, 
fa Kung Pao warns. 

POWER LOW IN SPRING 

a<in" nCl r g ° f 3 S P ri "g offensi ve 
against Japan appears to be all the 

the wattt " i' ieW ° f the f «<* that 
ter nd ^ "V Japan is lw in win- 
>ng out that hydraulic electricity fornix 



JAPS FACE LABOR SHORTAGE 

Now with one-half of her 14,000,000 
adult farmers in military service over- 
seas and much of her farm land lying 
tallow Japan is suffering from short- 
ages of labor and, thus, in agricultural 
production. It is almost out of the 
question for Japan to get food from 
the bouthseas, due to her lack of ship- 
ping and dangers on the sea, the paper 
said. 1 1 

The launching of a spring offensive 
i i 6 i S a S ainst Japan, therefore, 
would have overwhelming effects on the 



President Quezon of the Philippines 
cabled his greetings to General Doug- 
las MacArthur in Australia on the 
General's 64th birthday, January 26. 
President Quezon said: 
"I am sure you are younger today 
than you have been since January, 
1942, for you are celebrating your 
birthday not in defensive but in of- 
fensive operations, though, we must 
sadly admit, not as fast as you and 
we all would wish. I am sure that 
the prayer of 17,000,000 enslaved Fili- 
pinos who love you is that God may 
bless you and protect you and hasten 
the day when you will free them from 
the invader of their country and the 
tyrant who has deprived them of their 
liberties." 



morale of both her people at home 
and her forces abroad, Ta Kung Pao 
asserted. In addition, the political in- 
stability caused by the almost unbroken 
series of Japanese military setbacks 
during the last year further warrants 
an Allied drive on a large scale. 




e ectncty, which provides 90 per cen 
o he m t 0 ofthe J P£2« 
Plane industry and all other industries. 



sho^b^kruS'the^f 8 S0Wi " S 
food shortage P "Ufa e r TaT" " 
jested. Though sh/t fi* 
tnahzed nation more than one-half of 
her peop e are farmers. The a La 
consumption of rice in T, dnnua i 

is on non nnn • . Japan P ro P er 

1023 J 1CUls (1 P icul e ^ls 

W, I if In P eap etime she suf- 
fered a shortage of 10,000,000 pieuls. 

24 ■ 



On January 8, 1944, Philippine Vice President Osmena. in a broadcast to the 
s ands, briefly described w } m freedom of speech is. His remarks follow- 

do!^ F ^. ip u inos have always cherished freedom of speech. It i s one of the free- 

biitp'rl »• W i 3S . denied us durin K the Spanish times, and for which we fought 
mtteriy R lza ] himseIf d 

principle, because he believed it to 
be necessary for the existence of a 
responsive government. 

to°tn! pVt 6 ? rC3t b ° 0ns of Am erica 
to the Philippines is the freedom of 
speech an mtegral part of the Bill 
Of Mights carried by the American nasi 

0 our shores. As a ready weapon of 
he public against the misdirections of 
the -rovemment, it has served us in 
£ood stead during the last four decades. 

1 here were times when Americans were 

ZT7 \ Y Fi ' ipin0S ' but Americans 
took It WIth t grud?e Th 

nuzzle us. Instead, they encouraged 
us to exercise the right to express our- 
selves freely as men, and not as robots. 

Japan's militarists do not believe in 
the freedom of speech. As a people 
schooled ,n autocracy and repression. 

hey do not know its meaning. All 

ha they know is that it is dangerous 
to their evil designs. This dislike for 
the freedom „f spee( .h has been car- 



ried by them to the Philippines where 
they have pursued a policy of repres- 
sion. By muzzling the people and by 
depriving them of all essential indi- 
vidual liberties enjoyed by free men, 
they hope to create an intellectual 
blackout which will make it easy for 
them to enslave the people and ex- 
ploit the country. Furthermore, if 
for no other reason, they believe that 
as a gift from America freedom of 
speech should be cast aside. 

We Filipinos, however, are not go- 
ing to be fooled. We know the mean- 
ing and value of freedom of speech, 
and we know why Japan has taken it 
away from us. We shall continue to 
fight for this freedom as our fathers 
before us have done. Japan will know 
that while she can muzzle the Hps of 
our people she cannot quench the fire 
that burns within them — the consuming 
fire of liberty and independence. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



r 




Shown above is BATAAN's nomination for the 1944 "PINUP rmi" W 
the F.rst and Second Filipino Infantry, .fattened at J 
Camp Cooke. California, respectively _ MISS^ PACITA TODTOn « T 
Jose. California. Songstress Pacita was a headline athLtto ^ ° £ 
San Francisco night club last year and was to go on tenr V, V™^ 
her mind because she wanted to go back to coUege^anT'J t f ""It 
has been very active in securing entertainment two Firl" 

ments. and is well known throughout the Pacific CoL H P 
achievement: Being elected "Queen of the Filip^ Pa «°wnmg 
1939 Golden Gate Exposition" Who second the no ~ 0n? ^ 



/Remember i3aL 



an — 



They left no footprints on Bataar 
Those brave men who suffered and di< 
Close by the China Sea. 

Without weapons, food and aid, 
Filipino and American, side by side, 
Were sacrificed for liberty. 

Where the sun beats down relentlessly, 

And humidity runs high, 
They met the foe in death's grim grip, 



cttaan 

Bataan--a name that fills the heart with sad- 
dest memories — 
Bravely and gallantly they fought the Japs 

From foxholes and trapped by camouflage, 
They were then mowed down so helplessly 

By the enemy's barrage. 

Honor to the memory of Filipino and Amer- 
ican, 

And always remember brave Bataan. 

— Grace Lov/e Broadhead 



Beneath a burnished sky. 

FEBRUARY, 1944 



Chinese Gov t Explains 
Ban On "Pleasures" 

The ban placed by the Chinese Gov- 
ernment on gambling, card playing, 
dancing. permanent waving. wine 
drinking in restaurants, selling of cos- 
metics and other forms of pleasure 
was explained at length by a govern- 
ment spokesman at a recent press con- 
ference, when the following questions 
were put to him by a foreign corre- 
spendent present: "Why are "forms of 
normal pleasure such as dancing, per- 
manent waving, banned ? By ^ whose 
authority are they banned? What are 
the penalties for their infringement?" 

Normal pleasures are for normal 
times, the spokesman said. Wartime 
is abnormal, so peacetime pleasure* 
must be reduced to the minimum in 
order that more resources and ener-v 
may be diverted to constructive chan- 
nels. It is with this in view, he ex- 
pained, that the Municipality of 
Chungking enforces, upon the recom- 
mendation of the city council with the 
annroval of the government, orders 
banning gambling, card playin- danc- 
ing, permanent waving, wine drinking in 
restaurants, selling of cosmetics and the 
restricting of luxurious living in general 

As to the punishment for the viola- 
tion of the orders, the spokesman 
pointed out that the penalties consist 
of fines between $20 and $200 for in- 
dividuals and $100 and $1,000 for 
shops, confiscation of apparatus or ar- 
ticles, and enforced suspension of busi- 
ness, temporary or permanent. 

Discussing the moral side of the 
question, the spokesman said: "We 
know that these measures have aroused 
a good deal of adverse criticism from 
quarters where prevails the opinion 
that if there is anything worse than 
the weakening of major morals it is 
the strengthening of minor morals On 
this opinion we differ. Admonishing 
his son and heir, Liu Pei. kino- n f qi b 
Hon, add: 'Do „„, do evil f „„ ?*S 
it i, only . small o,i|; do not re f ' 

»™ *•. -*J ft .ii tsrg 

these restrictions and is eertainl, 8 , 
upholding. At a time K ^ 
diers risk their lives figfe « 
front, when so many are force/; 
live in great want, it is not nr t 
a few to live in excessive l„i PCV for 
if they can afford it." UIXU1 7, even 

It is, of course, well k 
spokesman remarked that p 0W ?' lne 
tertainment of foreign guest'V 
measures do not apply. above 

•25- 



Much Rubber, Not Enough 
Cotton: Jap Perplexity 

Japanese authorities in the Nether- 
lands Indies appear actually at a loss 
what to do with the huge surpluses of 
rubber they have collected. With ex- 
port limited to occasional shipments 
to Japan, owing to lack of cargo 
space, the Japanese claim that rubber 
factories are being erected in various 
sections of the Archipelago for the 
manufacture of rubber goods for the 
army and for local use. 

A recent Domei radio report told of 
an "unnamed" number of such fac- 
tories which are in course of construc- 
tion in Macassar, on the island of 
Celebes. "Aiming at the manufacture 
of simple rubber articles." the broad- 
cast said, "an 'unnamed' number of 
factories have been making rubber 
gloves and icebags since April of this 
year. A ready they are turning out 
unnamed thousands of dozens per 
month. With the advent of the rainy 
season, they have now started making 
rubber boote and cloth for raincoats! 
I he showing i s 'most excellent'." 

In sharp contrast with this apparent 
abundance, the Iananp«P ^ u • • 
t„ f^i Japanese are beginning 

to feel more and more the p in J 



caused by the shortage of cotton. How 
serious this shortage has become is 
evident from a recent broadcast from 
Tokyo, announcing that the authorities 
had been obliged to convert a number 
of cotton mills to the manufacturing 
of rubber goods. "In keeping abreast 
with changes in industry at the time 
of decisive battles," the announcement 
said, "several outstanding change-overs 



have already been accomplished. 

The Tokyo Spinning Co. is entering 
the rubber industry, with an initial 
capital of 8,000,000 yen. The Kureha 
and Kanebo spinning companies have 
also switched to rubber. The Tokyo 
Rayon Co., with a capital of 19,500,000 
yen, has decided to dissolve its present 
organization ; in its place a new rub- 
ber company will be formed." 



Protect What You Have! 



WE WRITE ALL KINDS OF INSURANCE 



FIRE 
THEFT y 
BURGLARY 
PLATE GLASS 
SURETY BONDS 
MISCELLANEOUS 



life m 

AUTOMOBILE ^ 
SICKNESS AND ACCIDENT 1 
PUBLIC LIABILITY 
HOME AND FURNITURE 
WORKMEN'S COMPENSATION 



CROP AND PRODUCE INSURANCE 

AGUSTIN C. LOPEZ 

INSURANCE BROKER 

General Agent 
WESTERN LIFE INSURANCE CO. 



2117 Grant Street 



Phone Ashberrv 0747 



Berkeley, Calif. 



May 1944 bring to 
You and yours 
Prosperity and 
Happiness — and 
to all free men in 
the world Peace 
and Victory! 

Benito R. Alcantara 

Proprietor 
• 

LUZON CAFE 

Sea Foods 
Our Specialty 

Credit extended to 
workers under contrac- 
tor's name 




B. R. Alcantara 



LUZON MARKET 

GROCERIES - FISH - MEATS 

for the Wholesale and Retail Trade 



Res - Phone 2-0462 

Phone 2-9488 

12-116 E. Lafayette St. 



Phone 5-5381 
Stockton, California 



Read. Bataan Magazine 



* For authoritative articles discussing the Philippines 
its Present and its Future! 

* For news about the Philippines: the Facts — the Sig- 
nificance — the Long Range Meaning of the News! 

INTERESTING — INFORMATIVE — ENTERTAINING 

BATAAN MAGAZINE is only ten months old, but 
already thousands have acclaimed it. 



See for yourself! — Send for a free sample copy today! 
Write to 

BATAAN Magazine 

1300 National Press Building - Washington 4, D. C. 



By .e c co Py Subscribe Now g* 



m ■ 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



To the Filipinos, one national holiday which is observed wherever they are situated, is Rizal Day. It is observed each 
year on December 30 to honor the memory of the greatest man the Malayan race has ever produced"— Dr Jose Rizal, 
symbol of the Filipinos' fight for freedom, who was shot by the Spaniards in Manila in 1896. Shown above 

are some of the Filipinos of Fresno. California, in observance of Rizal Day held at the Hotel Fresno. ' Shown at speak- 
ers' table (below flags-left to right: Joe Lopez, secretary. Fihpino Community of Fresno and Vicinity, sponsor of the pro- 
gram; Mr. and Mrs. H. Catania; L. Gavroto. Manager, West Fresno branch. Bank of America; Max Hoen; Richard Campos, 
president of the Community; Antonio A. Gonzalez, President. Filipino Inter-Community Organization of the Western States; 
Hon. Z. S. Leymel. mayor of Fresno; Dr. Roman V ^^'^^^^^l^ Philippine Resident Commissioner's 
Office. Western division; Mrs. R. T. Wallace; Chief of Police R. T. Wallace of Fresno; Mrs. G. Overholt- G Overholt 
Fresno County sheriff; Miss Wallace; Pop Warner. Deputy Commissioner of Public Safety and Welfare of Fresno' 



Jap Shipping Takes Heavy Pounding 
But All Aircraft Still Being Replaced 

Chinese Military spokesman says Nipponese are jittery about fate 
awaiting them. Number of internal disturbances increases as lack 
of determination grows. 

Japanese shipping since Pearl Harbor has sustained "truly great possess," al- 
though the enemy's air strength is not inferior to that which existed at the 
beginning of the Pacific war. a Chinese military spokesman at a press conference, 
reviewing the war picture. 

Since Pearl Harbor. Japan has occupied a number of areas endowed with 
riches in materials and supplies. Still, he added, she lacks the necessary ship- 
ping to bring them to the factory. 
Therefore, despite the occupation of 
these territories Japan, due to ship- 
ping shortage, still lacks essential ma- 
terials. 



AIR STRENGTH NOT INFERIOR 

Regarding Japan's air strength, the 
military spokesman said that its losses 
had also been considerable, but re- 
peated efforts had been made on her 
home front to increase the nation's air- 
craft production and to encourage more 
attention to the air arm of the nation's 
strength. 

From this fact, the spokesman drew 
the conclusion that "on the whole. I 
do not think Japan's air strength, as 



compared to that existing at the time 
of Pearl Harbor, is inferior." 

JAPS "JITTERY" OVER FATE 

There are indications that "the Jap- 
anese are getting very jittery about the 
fate awaiting them." the spokesman 
further declared. He said that there 
has been a good deal of disturbance 
in the internal conditions of Japan. 

Japan's home front, he said, reflected 
how the nation is "confronted with the 
lack of determination to go on and 
also with the psychological apprehen- 
sion regarding its future on the part 
of the officials and people." 



More Japanese Lotteries 
Help Drain East Indies 

The Japanese military authorities 
are constantly increasing the number 
of lotteries which they instituted in 
the Netherlands Indies immediately af- 
ter the invasion According to a broad- 
cast via the Japanese-controlled Ba- 
tavia radio, the purpose of these lot- 
teries is ''to absorb the purchasing 
power of the population." They are 
organized by the military administra- 
tion without any interference by civil- 
ian authorities. 

The latest lottery announced was for 
the Batavia area. A first prize of 50,- 
000 guilders ( S27,000 ) was the main 
attraction. The number of tickets sold, 
however, has been kept secret. 



The spokesman revealed that the 
Japanese government on January 4 
oromulgated a set of regulations to 
govern the conduct of the official? in 
performing their duties. At the same 
httie, Japanese authorities throughout 
Japan put out a series of slogans, all 
exhorting the people to increase pro 
duct ion of war materials, including 
shipping and aircraft, and to effect "to- 
tal mobilization in the coming year— 
the year of decisive action." 



FEBRUARY, 1944 



■27- 



ALL OF US CAN FREE OUR COUNTRY BY 
PURCHASING WAR BONDS. 



— President Quezon. 



■ PHILIPPINE 
NATIONAL BANK 

New York Agency 



2 5 BROADWAY 

NEW YORK CITY 




/ 



REMEMBER THE PHILIPPINES 




vol. n 



NO. 2 



MAY, 1944 



WASHINGTON, D. C. 



(^ofraqilor Yjumber 



EXCLUSIVE 



o 



Bulosan Asks Committee To 
Study Filipinos' Problems 

Sayre ^call^ Last Days On 
Besieged aornB^tfo^slft 

SPECI AL REPORT n - ^ r ^\ 

Food, Iftig Siti^oirfe^iU 
In Manila Camp, Doctor Says 





:ge 16 



FO^VICTgli/^) 




[united 

STATES 
JAVINGS 
liONDS 
STAMPS 





twenty-five centd a copy 



ALL OF US CAN FREE OUR COUNTRY BY 
PURCHASING WAR BONDS. 



— President Quezon. 



PHILIPPINE 
NATIONAL BANK 

New York Agency 



25 BROADWAY 

EW YORK CI 



VOLUME II 
NUMBER 2 





DICK FITZPATRICK 

EXECUTIVE EDITOR 



MAY 
1944 

AN INDEPENDENT PHILIPPINE NEWSMAGAZINE 
DIOSDADO M. YAP 

J. C. DIONISIO, Associate Editor 



EDITOR AND PUBLISHER 



CARLOS BULOSAN and CAYETANO C. NAGAC 

CONTRIBUTING EDITORS 



CHIEF. PACIFIC COAST BUREAU 



Nemesio M. Salazar and Bennie C. Cas. Chicago Representatives 
Bernardino D. Arado, Benny O. Escobido and Anael P P;r.«-rT™„~ t r TT 
ngel ^ngpong. Territory of Hawaii Representatives 



src^^sr^o»?S£ iTysisssrr? BU,LDmG ' — ton 4 - D 1 ss 

239 SO EL DORADO ^trfft qmrmM a & t tcadmtx WAbHINGiON 10, D. C PACIFIC COAST OFFICE: 

ADVERTISING RATES APPLICATi^I ' "i' „ ^"SSTS^^ ^ ™"" COPIES EE CENTS 

WASHMOTC,, > C, „ ACI OE MAKCH , »• . ^gg. ,STS„i'' "^."Z SSShS 



(Editors ^Jliouqht 



That readers might like to know that fre- 
quently the Office of War Information requests 
permission to use material in BATAAN for 
overseas propaganda purposes. 

For Example, the OWI has requested per- 
mission frequently to broadcast the statements 
of many leaders which have appeared in 
BATAAN's special issues dedicated to the 
Commonwealth, to President Quezon, Vice 
President Osmena, the Philippine Army, and 
so on. 

Material from the magazine and other U. S. 
publications is sent to the West Coast where 
if is written in the form of news broadcasts 
and then is beamed to the Philippines over 
powerful government transmitters. 

Recently, BATAAN ran a short profile of 
the First Lady of the Philippines, Aurora 
Aragon Quezon. The OWI liked that so well 
that they requested permission to reprint it 
for overseas distribution. 

BATAAN's article on Mrs. Quezon was the 
work of young, serious, Diana L. Kalil, one of 
BATAAN's staff writers. Before joining BA- 
TAAN as a reporter, Miss Kalil wrote features 
for the Tallahassee (Fla.) Democrat and worked 
in the press intelligence unit of a government 
agency. 

BATAAN Mall continue to bring its readers 
all of the news of importance in Philippine- 
American affairs and its interpretations of 
what the news means. 



Oku Wontk 

pags 

Our Readers Write 4 

Japs In Burma Force Thousands Of 

British, Filipino Prisoners To Death 5 

Japanese People Are Slaves Of Army/ 

Says Former U. S. Ambassador Grew 5 

Editorials 6 

Osmena Lauds Pioneers Of America 

Who Worked To Build Philippines 7 

Carlos Bulosan Urges Naming Of Committee 

To Study Needs Of Filipinos In United States . . 8 

Last Days On Corregidor 10 

Corregidor, Symbol Of The Philippines 13 

Spangler, Republican Leader, Lauds 

'Bataan' For Special Corregidor Issue 14 

Hannegan, Democratic Chief, Says U. S. 

Will Soon Be Marching To Manila 15 

U. S, Physician Reports On Health Conditions 

In Japanese Concentration Camp In Manila. . . 16 
Romulo Says Filipinos Have Remained 

Completely Loyal To U. S. These 2 Years 18 

Latest U. S. Red Cross Reports Reveal 

Supplies Are Distributed In Far East 19 

Rep. McCormack Lauds Filipinos' Acts, 

Urges Americans To Profit By Example 20 

The Last and The First 22 

Yap Stresses American - Filipino Ties; 

Urges Perpetual Partnership After War 24 

Ban On Manila Hemp For Hangings 

Shows Importance Of Fibre For War 25 

On to Corregidor — 26 

Australia Fully Mobilizes To Lick Japs; 

Supply Allied Forces, Owen, Dixon Says 27 



Our $eacler5 VUrite 



THE EDITORS WELCOME 
COMMENTS FROM THE READERS 



Just Published - 



BATAAN 

The Judgement Seat 

by 

Allison Ind 

Lieutenant Colonel, M. I. 



This book is a challenging account 
of all that happened in the Philip- 
pines. Studded with deeds of hero- 
ism that will live forever in history, 
driving on toward the gigantic trage- 
dy of its conclusion, it is neverthe- 
less written with critical frankness 
by a man who was there and who 
dares to tell it straight. 

Praise from 

Col. CARLOS P. ROMULO 

"Here is an 'inside' story, written 
with the authority of one who is as 
excellent a writer as he was a valor- 
ous fighter. Ind does not pull his 
punches. Bataan becomes as large 
as life, as bitter as death." 

Additional Acclaim 

"One of the best books we have had on the 
entire war." — Sterling North. 

"An extraordinary document.'' — Book-of-the- 
Month Club News. 

"Beautifully written and extraordinarily frank 
one ' of the noblest books of military 
reporting." — San Francisco Call-Bulletin. 

To secure your copy of this timely and 
thrilling book, mail this coupon today ! 

r~ ~~< 

The Macmillan Company, Dept. BT 
j 60 Fifth Avenue 
1 New York I I, N. Y. 

I Dear Sirs — 

Please send me copies of 

I "BATAAN: The Judgement Seat," at $3.50 

per copy. 



Name 
Address 



City 

□ COD 



□ Payment herewith 



FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 

"It is a source of deep gratification 
to me to be able to say to the brave 
people, who are now bearing the yoke 
of Japanese domination, that the re- 
turn to freedom to their islands draws 
closer with each Allied victory. The 
Philippine government, temporarily re- 
siding here, possesses all the attributes 
of an independent nation. America will 
fulfill its pledge." 



_! 



MRS. MARGARET L. HANSEN 
State President and National Legislative Rep- 
resentative of Mothers-of-Men-in-Service, 
Baltimore, Maryland 

"I v/ish to express my sincere comments on 
the splendid and patriotic reading foun d ° n 
the pages of this inspiring magazine, BATAAN. 
After having had the pleasure of meeting y° u 
and hearing you at the convention of Bataan 
Relief Organization in Washington, D. C one 
could not expect to read otherwise. BATAAN 
Magazine and its editor are v/orthy apostles 
of this glorious cause, for which our heroic 
sons and daughters fought and died on Ba- 
taan. If they could but know how, thru the 
v/ritten word, you and your associates are 
keeping active the necessity of pressing the 
war onward in the Pacific, to liberate them 
from the bastiles of Japan — they, I am sure, 
will be proud of you eternally." 



AUDRA NEMITZ, R. N. 
American Red Cross, Hobbs, N. M. 

"I have received regularly copies of your 
most interesting publication, BATAAN, and 
found them to be full of interesting informa- 
tion about your country and people and I do 
rot v/ant to miss a single copy. My brother, 
Sgt. William W. Wisdom, was one of the 
brave defenders, along with other American 
boys and your dear Filiipno boys, in the Phil- 
ippines. It is up to each and every one of us 
here in the United States to never stop one 
minute until the Philippines are liberated and 
back in the hands of the Filipinos, then we 
will know our boys are in the safe keeping of 
friends and will get to come home to us. 
Wishing you success." 



A. C McARTHUR, President 
American Bataan Clan, Maywood, Illinois 

"Let the eldest of the Bataan groups ex- 
press its word of acclaim, praise and congratu- 
lations, on the first anniversary edition of 
BATAAN Magazine. We know full well the 
good work you are doing for our boys, as 
well as for their comrades-in-arms, those brave 
Filipinos. May your magazine grow and pros- 
per ds v/e have the American Bataan Clan, 
organized January 14, 1942." 



MRS. MINNIE M. MILLER 
Palo Alto, California 

"I enclose three dollars for renewal of BA- 
lAAN Magazine, which we find very interest- 
ing and instructive. My son died in a prison 
camp in the Philippines last June, so we are 
especially interested in the Philippines and 
their liberation. May God hasten the day so 
that less homes be stricken as ours. With best 
wishes for your success." 



MRS. DOLORES LARDIZABAL 
Chicago, Illinois 

"I received the latest copy of BATAAN 
Magazine and enjoyed reading it, f rom cover 



to cover. I v/ish to offer 



my sincere congratu- 
lations to both you and BATAAN Magazine 
foV the wonderful work you are doing. Am 
enclosing a money order for m w friends' sub- 
scription to your instructive publication." 



4 



MRS. FRANCES A. ASHBORN 
Bridgeport, Conn. 

Today I received the anniversary issue of 
BATAAN Magazine, and thanks from the bot- 
tom of my heart for your wonderful inspira- 
tion in the sense of hope for better da ys to 
come. We, the mothers, s.sters, wives, fathers 
bro thers, and friends are pwyinq that Easter 
Sunday in 1945 be free of all her enemies in 
Manila and once again worship the risen 
Christ and join with the people of the Philip- 
pines in that great event, and at least find 
the grave of my son." 



JAY J. McCARTHY, Commander 
Filipino Guerrillas of Bataan, Chicago, Illinois 

"May I congratulate you upon your anni- 
versary issue. It is a great publication, with 
a great and noble mission." 



MRS. FLORENCE MORGAN 
Philadelphia, Penna. 

"I am pleased with and anxiously await each 
issue of the BATAAN Magazine. It is full 
of informative and interesting news, and all 
of us here found it to be one of the most 
instructive publications we came across. ' 
am sure that BATAAN is enjoyed by all who 
receive it." 



CELEDONIO T s GOMEZ 
Stockton, California 

"I had been reading your most instructive 
publication, BATAAN Magazine. I wish to 
take this opportunity to express my apprecia- 
tion for this timeiy and well-edited magazine — 
the mere name of which brings to mind that 
immortal place in our country where the gal- 
lant American and Filipino heroes died for 
the sake of democracy. AM of your friends 
and admirers here are proud of the great 
v/ork you are doing for our people and the 
Americans as well are deeply grateful to you." 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Japs In Burma Force Thousands Of 
British, Filipino Prisoners To Death 

Korean, who fled from Japs, says Islands natives were taken to 
Burma to build railroad completed in November, 1943. 

Thousands of British and Filipino prisoners of war died while building a rail- 
road between Burma and Thailand for the Japanese, according to Chung Chih- 
ting,, a Korean patriot, now working with the Chinese Expeditionary Force in 
northern Burma. 

The Allied dead were part of the British and Filipino nationals who were taken 
prisoner by the Japanese in the battles of Hong Kong, Rangoon and the Philip- 
pines and later sent to the border re- 



gion of Burma and Thailand to work 
on the road. The road was completed 
and opened to traffic in November, 
1943. 

Chung, who served as a translator 
for t h e Japanese 18th Division in 
northern Burma, deserted to the Chi- 
nese in late January when on a mis- 
sion to listen in on the telephone wires 
between Chinese positions at Taipha 
Ga. He had made an earlier but abor- 
tive attempt to escape the Japanese. 
He was drafted into Japanese army 
service in Changhai in 1943. 

JAPS SUFFER MORTAL BLOW 

Chung said that the prestige of the 
Japanese 18th Division, once called 
the "ever victorious division," had ap- 
parently suffered a mortal blow as a 
result of the series of defeats at the 
hands of the Chi nese Expeditionary 
Force. The "ever victorious division" 
met its first disastrous defeat at Yawng- 
bang Ga at the hands of the Chinese 
38th Division under Lieut. Gen. Sun 
Liljen. 

The Japanese 18th Division, accord- 
ing to Chung, began its notorious ca- 
reer in October, 1937, when it landed 
at Hangshow Bay. Later it partici- 
pated in the rape of Nanking. In Oc- 
tober, 1938, it captured Canton and 
in November, 1939, fought its way 
into Kwangsi and captured Nanning. 
F rom December, 1941, to February, 
l9 42, it fought the British in Malaya. 
Jt was transferred to the Burma sector 
m April of the same year. 

EXPLOIT FOOD RESOURCES 

Following their occupation of Bur- 
ma, the Korean patriot said, the Japs 
began an exploitation of the country's 
food resources. Then they proceeded 
to conscript able-bodied men from vil- 
lages, and, after giving them some 
training, sent them to the fronts ^ for 
transport service. In the meantime, 



the Japanese set up local governments 
in all Burmese villages and through 
puppet officials collected rice, fish, meat, 
vegetables and other provisions at ex- 
tremely low prices. 



The Japanese army of occupation 
has also compelled the local people to 
accept no other currency than rupee 
notes on which are printed "the Dai 
Nippon Government." The notes are of 
inferior quality and have no serial num- 
bers, which is evidence of the excessive 
issuance of currency by the Japanese. 

As a result of frequent Allied air 
raids. Japanese troops in Burma are 
encountering serious transport difficul- 
ties. Trains run only at night. 

The Bataan campaign was a defense 
that astonished the world. The long- 
drawn-out resistance will rank with the 
defense of Malta, Tobruk and Sevasto- 
pol among the outstanding episodes of 
the war. — London News Chronicle, 
April 9. 1942. 



Japanese People Are Slaves Of Army, 
Says Former U. S. Ambassador Grew 

Diplomat says future war in Pacific is inevitable if we are to be 
satisfied with an inclusive or compromised peace. 

The lot of the Japanese industrial worker, the farmer, the investor, the woman, 
and the student under Japan's "cancer of militarism" is described in the National 
Geographic Magazine for April by Joseph C. Grew, formerly United States Am- 
bassador to Tokyo and now Special Assistant to the Secretary of State. 

The worker, writes Grew, is merely an impersonal tool in the hands of those 
who rule. He has nothing to say about his wages, which were, and no doubt 
still are, barely enough for his sub- 



sistence. If he has any union at all, 
it dare not lift its voice. It has been 
driven underground by the brutal meth- 
ods of the "thought control" police. 

The poverty of Japan's farmers made 
possible the cheap food of the cities. 
Their misery drove their sons and 
daughters into the factories to serve for 
the lowest wages in a modernized state. 

FARMER IS MAIN VICTIM 

The China war has in no way helped 
the Japanese farmer. His sons have 
died in it, and he has been taxed for 
it. Occasional food shortages have 
given him the illusion of prosperity, 
when he sold his products on a rising 
market — but the Japanese farmer re- 
mains the first and constant victim of 
Japanese militarism. 

Describing woman's lowly sphere, 
Grew compares standards of the Axis 
partners. He observes that German 
women once had some rights and some 
education, whereas Japanese women 
have always been under the dominion 



of their masters. No other civilized 
people sells its young girls to pan- 
derers with such openness. No other 
civilized people makes the mother so 
completely the slave of her husband 
and the servant of her own sons. 
Women have not been allowed to soften 
or moderate the harsh progress of 
fanatical militarism. 

JAPS CAN'T FIGHT TYRANNY 

It is a tragic commentary on Japa- 
nese civilization that — with all their 
refinement and ancient culture — the 
Japanese people have been morally 
and physically unprepared to defend 
themselves against tyranny within. 

Future wars in the Pacific area 
would be inevitable, concludes Grew, if 
we were to be satisfied with an incon- 
clusive or compromise peace. The 
showdown must be complete and the 
decision irrevocable. American safety 
rnd world peace must never again be 
threatened by Japan. 



MAY, 1944 



'8 - 




6ft 



Wad, they were forced to march 



(^dtltorials 



Corregidor 

Today the Philippines' "island for- 
tress" — Corregidor — stands as a sym- 
bol throughout the world. When 
American and Filipino troops had to 
give up on Bataan, as many of the 
men as were able to. withdrew to Cor- 
regidor. When the government" offi- 
cials left Manila, they. too. went to the 
damp, musty tunnels of the old fort 6 
Our men gave up on Bataan be' 
cause they had to. But on that April 
9th they were not ready to surre 1 
They had hope— hope that supplies"!^' 
men and artillery and planes wouW 
reach them to aid in driving out A 
invading foe. n 0ut the 

But in the next thirty days th* 
atxon grew darker. S^pSs anj T 
forcements could not reach them 
Japs were bombino- the i*lo T lhe 
hold by plane and sub fig*?*- 
never-ceasing artillery fi e f r 1 * 1° 
"-inland a few miles away the 

ment of many men, with the W 
concussion 0 f exploding XC™™ 
bhng throughout the tunnels it m " 
finally decided that fnr-tU ' ? Was 
-uld be fruitlesf ^ZS^f 
only m an unnecessary waie of a 68 " 11 
ican and Filipino lives. * Anier " 

But before the decision to cease n 
resistance was made, the men S r 
regidor responsible for the move W„ 

Tojo, there was a sense of relief W W 
the order to cease resistance came. But 
as these two American officers said if 
.be men had known what was goW 
to happen to them, they would ha f 
fought unt,l the last man had been 
killed rhe • American and Fili pi no sol" 
diers had hoped that they would be 
given tin- treatment that was accorded 
all prisoners of war under the terms 
of international law. and that was ne- 
cessitated by human decency. 



6 



ei2 



l .% miles in the sun, without water, 
•ght days. They were forced to M 
the "- brother soldiers to keep then 
ow " lives. They were given no meet 
ca supplies, and so, each morning, 
?*ked permission of the Jap o&cex 
in charge for permission to bury tne 
ever-increasing number of dead. l»' s 
Permission was denied for a long time, 
'hey saw their fellow Americans and 
*l«pinos shot, with no reason given. 

Yes, those gallant men had hope 
w hen they surrendered. We sincerely 
ho Pe that they still have some hope, 
ev en under the impossible conditions 
Un oer which they live. Their day of 
"Deration gets closer and closer as 
•*» minute passes. May God give 
£ em the power they need to endure 
tn at hell on earth until Americans 
P nd .. FlIi Pinos storm the beaches of the 
riu »ppines and set them free. 

Philippines Ahead 

When General MacArthur Ief t Co£ 
r ogulor to organize forces to retake 
< he Philippines, he flew over New 
^"•nea 0 n his way to Australia. 1WO 
ago, the Japs were already es- 
tabhshed on the north coast of he 
island. I n the iod between, the 
troops of Tojo drove across the Owen 
Niamey mountain range also to * ie 
outskirts of Port Moresby. 

In the latter part of April of this 
^ar, Allied forces under General Mac- 
^rthur landed at Hollandia and Aitape 
j n y ut ^h New Guinea. MacArthur was 
back over New Guinea. But this time 
ne was not fleeing from the hordes of 
th e Son of Heaven. He was in com- 
mand of troops, ships, landing barges 
a nd overwhelming air support. 

The General said, "This reverses Ba- 
[ aai V as he watched well-equipped 
troops, sufficient in number and in 
training, land and move inland to the 
th ree air bases. 

. These air bases put us within bomb- 
ing range of Mindanao. This is im- 
portant for many reasons. Allied fliers 
can now start to work on the Jap in- 
stallations j n the I s l an ds. Not only 
will it show the Jap commanders in 
Jne Philippines that we are coming, 
out it certainly will spread good news 
throughout the islands. 

Although the captured Americans 
and Filipinos may never see the planes 
as they fly over Mindanao and spread 



death to the Japs and destroy their 
supplies, equipment and strongholds 
friendly Filipinos will see and take 
heart. They will know that Filipinos 
throughout the Islands would also be 
heartened if they knew that American 
planes were close enough to bomb at 
least one of the provinces. 

The word will spread rapidly 
throughout the Philippine Islands. } l 
will be the first visible news that Fili" - 
pinos have had that we are on the way- 
The word will reach Americans in i' 1 ' 
ternment camps and our valiant sol- 
diers in prison camps. They, too, W*H 
take heart. For they will know th at » 
while they have suffered long, soon 
they will be free. 

^ i 

Filipinos In U. S. 

The editors of BATAAN think it is 
indeed encouraging that the war g° v ~ 
eminent of the Philippine Common' 
wealth here in Washington has sent 
Col. Carlos P. Romulo, its secretary 
of information and public relations, 
to the West Coast to study the needs 
of Filipinos out there and to find out 
what they are thinking about. 

Filipinos in the United States, as 
Carlos Bulosan points out in his article 
elsewhere in this issue, are looking i 
their government in Washington 
guidance. This is natural, for two 
sons. First, due to one of the odeli" 
of law. Filipinos are not citizens o 
the United States. Thus, American 
laws prevent them from being treate 
justly and they must look some pl» c 
for equitable treatment. That soin* c 
is the government of the Philippines Hj 
Washington, and in peacetime it 1 
Resident Commissioner. 

The second reason that Filipinos 1°° \ 
to the administration of President Q u ?~ 
zon, Vice President Osmena, and the* 
cabinet is that that is the only pl aC ^ 
where they can get the viewpoint 0 
their nation. One of the problems ° 
the younger generation of Filipinos ltl 
this country is that they know little ot 
their native land. 

President Quezon made a wise choice 
when he selected Colonel Romulo f° r 
this investigative assignment. As a 
journalist, the Colonel knows how to 
get the facts. The prominent position 
which the Colonel has assumed in Phil- 
ippine-American relations gives his 
recommendations the weight they need 
and also should inspire the people to 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Osmena Lauds Pioneers Of America 
Who Worked To Build Philippines 

Philippines Vice President in speech, says U. S. sent only men of 
highest qualifications for work in Archipelago. Results have proved 
this to be wise policy. 

Beginning with the arrival of Commodore Dewey in Manila Bay, Vice President 
Osmena of the Phillippines related the history of America in the Phillippines 
and paid tribute to the American pioneers who helped build up the Islands, in 
a speech at a luncheon meeting of the Naval Academy Women's Club in Annapolis 
recently. 

"Important as was the Battle of Manila Bay," said Vice President Osmena, 
"it was only an incident of the big 
military operations conducted by the 
United States in the Carribean. . . . 
Dewey's great victory in Manila Bay 
had created an international situation 
from which the United States could 
not escape. Moreover, it brought the 
Filipino people within the domains of 
American solicitude and responsibil- 
ity." 

Vice President Osmena then told his 
audience of the first Philippine Com- 
mission, headed by Dr. Jacob Gould 
Schurman, president of Cornell Uni- 
versity, and sent to the Philippines by 
President McKinley, "to help the 
United States Army in the task of 
acquainting the people with America's 
altruistic purposes." 

FILIPINOS WERE DISILLUSIONED 

But the Filipinos were disillusioned 
when America stayed on in the Philip- 
pines after they had fought to over- 
throw Spanish domination and hos- 
tilities broke out between American 
and Filipino forces. 

"Filipino resistance, in the face of 
America's superior arms and of her 
liberal pronouncements, could not last 
long," continued the Vice President. 
''Foreseeing the termination of hostili- 
ties, President McKinley sent to the 
Philippines a second Commission head- 
ed by an outstanding jurist, William 
Howard Taft." 




\lice Presiden t -Sergio Od 



6niena 



place their confidence in him and tell 
him the truth. 

So important is this assignment for 
Colonel Romulo and Filipinos in the 
United States that the editors of BA- 
TAAN will publish in the next issue 
a special article by J. C. Dionisio, Pa- 
cific Coast Representative of BATAAN 
Magazine. 



ONLY QUALIFIED MEN WERE SENT 

"It is to the credit of the United 
States that for the purpose of the pio- 
neering work in the Islands, men of 
the highest qualifications were chosen," 
said the Vice President. Mr. Taft and 
his colleagues of the Commission ably 
tackled the difficult initial problems of 
government. Through their patience 
and tact, limitless energy and enthusi- 
asm, consideration and sympathetic 
understanding, they won for the United 
States the good will of the Filipino 
people." 

The Vice President then told of the 
progress made in the Philippines, in 
education "1, economic and political ad- 
vancement. 



Dutch Reoccupation Plan 
For Indies Nearly Complete 

The nucleus of a Netherlands East 
Indies Government will soon be set up 
in Australia, Dr. Hubertus J. van Hook, 
Netherlands Minister for Overseas Ter- 
ritories, announced this week in Mel- 
bourne. This will replace the Nether- 
lands Indies Commission which has 
handled Dutch affairs in Australia since 
the fall of the Indies. 

Netherlands nationals with experi- 
ence in the Indies are being gathered 
from all over the world to help drive 
the Japanese from the Indies and set 
up a civilian government in the wake 
of the Allied invasion. Dr. van Hook 
revealed. More than half of the per- 
sons who have escaped from occupied 
Holland have volunteered for this pur- 
pose, and after the liberation of Hol- 
land as many troops as possible will 
be trained to pursue the Japanese un- 
til the surrender of Tokyo." 

"In the last few months," said the 
Dutch Minister, "the distance from the 
Allied lines of attack to the occupied 
parts of the Netherlands East Indies 
has been reduced by a thousand miles." 

Dr. van Hook recently arrived in 
Australia from London by way of 
Washington, D. C. where he stopped 
to work on plans for supplying the 
immediate post-war needs of the Indies. 



pai 



PAYS TRBUTE TO SOLDIERS 

closing, Vice President Osmena 
tribute to the soldiers, who 



established themselves in the islands as 
independent businessmen^ farmers and 
manufacturers after military service; 
and the missionaries, doctors, nurses, 
educators, engineers, lawyers, and all 
th-se who helped build up the Philip- 
pines. 

He said: "We owe much not only 
to the pioneers of America in the Phil- 
ippines but also to the multitude of 
men and women of good will and 
stout hearLs who have since gone to 
remote islands in the Pacific to join 
in the task of nation-building, keeping 
in mind the welfare of our people and 
maintaining always the good name of 
America. Many of these have returned 
to the United States and are living 
here. Others, like Dewey, Schurman 
and Taft have passed away. But to 
all of them — living and dead, and, in- 
deed, to those now suffering in enemy 
prison mid concentration camps and 
to those still fighting in the mountains 
of the Philippines, I wish to render a 
tribute of affection, admiration and 
gratitude in behalf of my people." 



MAY, 1944 



- 7 - 



Carlos Bulosan Urges Naming Of Committee 
To Study Needs Of Filipinos In United States 



Says people look to government for guidance. Wants action undertaken which will 
familiarize second- generation Filipinos with their homeland -its accomplishments and 
traditions. Asks more effective work by various divisions. 



by CARLOS BULOSAN 
Contributing Editor of "Bataan" 

Contrary to some beliefs, our people on the West Coast look toward the gov- 
ernment and President Quezon for guidance. Since the Nationals Division of°the 
Office of the Resident Commissioner is ineffective, I suggest that a Research Com 
mittee should be formed to study the problems of our people. Such a commits 
should be extended to Hawaii where hundreds of Filipinos, both first and se ,.„„,i 
generation, are in great need of an intelligent program initiated by the govern 
ment. There are expert Filipino writ- *°vern- 
ers, journalists, research workers and 
scholars who are willing to contribute 
their talents in the service of the gov- 
ernment. This project should not cost 
the government too much money be- 
cause a committee of five is enough, 
lo avoid unnecessary delays and mis- 
understandings I would like to recom- 
mend trained Filipino nationals to be 
in the committee. 

} believe that Col. Carlos P. R omu . 
los visit in California will simpHfy 
our complex problems. His vi4T 
undoubted v re o- a ; n t u 0 C j 
our re cam the confidence 

new p 0 t tHe pe °P le - The 

its sinceie'effo^ tn g ° Ver, ] me u nt ' that is > 
population Tn he Unit ^ Filipin ° 
pecially in the Stat ' r 
of g-t signified **** 

Righted tSKSff^ ^ 
make our people understand " and 

SET the ~K d 

WHAT ABOUT THOSE HERE 

We speak about rehabilitation in the 
Philippines but we have forgotten that 
the issue also affects our people 
What plan, have we for the first 
eration Filipinos who are not in i„. 
armed forces? There is the question^ 
citizenshjp. A nation-wide campaign 
embracing both Americans and Fili- 
pinos should be started for those who 
woidd like to become naturalized Amer- 
ican citizens. This should not put our 
government into any embarrassment in 
the name of nationalism. 



will 
of 
and 
jen- 
di- 



es- 
is 
mi- 



will 

co- 
new 



here, 
gen- 
the 




President Ql 



'uezon 



citizenship in America is a symbol 
democracy. In our case, however, it 
is a recognition of our heroic stand in 
Bataan and our sincere cooperation 
with the United States in defense 
democracy. 

Now, there is the problem of 
second generation Filipinos. The 
totally ignorant of their country 
people. 1 suggest that we should bili- 
pvuze Jthem, that is, get them acquinted 
with the great history G f the Philip 
pines and some of our leaders 
founded our great tradition t o 



of 
it 



of 
the 



iey are 
and 
Fili- 



because 



tyranny. I n a sense this will 
with their Americanization, for 
country's tradition and the spirit 
it is similar to ours, and the i 
gent binding 0 f the two tradition* 
create a fully integrated individual 



who 
hate 



this 
behind 
ttelli- 
will 
In 



relation to this idea, a brief history of 
the Philippines should be prepared tor 
these children under government ex- 
pense. I am thinking of a book trac- 
ing the growth of democracy in tn 
Phil lppmes. 

ASKS BOOKS ABOUT FILIPINOS 

In this connection, also, a brief bog 
about ten Filipino leaders should D 
written to supplement the history boa* 

s a brief biography n by 

son. rhe book must awareness 0 f 
Filipino who has a ^ ^ our 
he history of °"' eat hed us an in- 
leaders who had uu ' T j ie story 0 f 
telligent nationalism. ~ j s t he 

the life of Pr« sld ff ln Q our time: the 



i„ our time: the 

,";.i«e of our pe°pl e 
slow and P«n fttl •/ backwardness to 

from tyranny and » acN p re sident 
literacy and O^ocraey. str ug- 
Quezon configurates our u»0) 
gle for liberty. . the 

What about the FUHjn« \ deli- 
armed forces? fere, agam, ^ haye 
cate problem. What definite^ ^ 
we for those who are fightm?" it is 
the battle fronts? I b f e ^ ogra m 
too late to formulate a p g ^ 
or them. Such a program s hou 
elude their families for any P* ^ 
that does not affect them is ^f'^c 
returning soldiers will have a dyn 
place in Philippine life oi F*J 
That is something we must S 
against, because some reactio 
group might use them for the op- 
tion of democratic gains in our 
try. 

NO LABOR DEPT. NECESSARY 

Is it necessary to create a Dep* 
ment of Labor in our gerernW^V 
The Western Division of the Oftce 
the Resident Commissioner is inaa 
coincide quote— say, is useless— to the Filip»| 



history of our ^^"J"^ ' Pf °P f »« 



m 

not 

fo 

c 



8 



quite — say, is useie&s — u> ■ 
on the West Coast, for its approaches 
are merely diplomatic. It is not neces- 
sary, however, to create a new depart- 
ment if the Nationals Division in Cali- 
fornia broadens its work and makes 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



its approaches to Filipino problems 
more realistic. 

If such a department in our govern- 
ment is created, who is the man to 
represent it? Incidentally, a Wash- 
ington lawyer and his satellite in Cali- 
fornia are corning closer to the Fili- 
pinos. This is one thing that our offi- 
cials in the Nationals Division over- 
looked: they neglected the importance 
of personal contact with our common 
people. 

NATIONALS UNIT NOT EFFECTIVE 

What about our Nationals Division? 
As far as I am concerned, this depart- 
ment of the government has yet to 
prove itself adequate for the needs of 
the Filipinos. There is ample time for 
renovation and execution of responsi- 
bilities. 

I understand that a Filipino poet 
and a musician are receiving pensions 
from the government. In the future, 
however, I hope this coveted grant 
should be extended to others in the 
various branches of education and the 
arts. 

"In political warfare the most alert 
and sensitive talents should be utilized. 
It is only in using the collective genius 
of our people that we can withstand 




the onslaught of barbarism. The post- 
war world will be chaotic, but there 
is enough time for preparation. 

These are the problems of Filipinos 
in the United States. President Que- 
zon, through Colonel Romulo, w r ill an- 
swer them and then, after they are dis- 
cussed with our people in California, 
the government will establish a realis- 
tic program. 



Hawaiian Filipinos Plan 
Building Corregidor Hall 

A campaign to raise funds among 
Filipino workers of the Navy lard in 
Hawaii and the Territory for the con- 
struction of a war memorial, honoring 
those who gave their lives at Bataan, 
has been announced. 

The memorial will be know r n as Cor- 
regidor Hall. 

William R. Corpus, Naval Supply 
Depot employee; Adolf o U. Batinga, 
Labor Transportation Office, Supply 
Depot; and N. C. Vellanueva, produc- 
tion manager of Headquarters. Insular 
Life, at 1136 Union St., Honolulu, are 
formulating an organization to begin 
the drive. 

According to Corpus, funds are to 
be raised through the sale of War 
Bonds and from voluntary contribu- 
tions that will be placed in a trust fund 
under the administration of a Honolulu 
bank. 

The War Bonds are to be made pay- 
able to the fund and are to be of a 
series upon which a loan can be made 
as construction will begin as soon after 
the war as conditions will permit. 




Stockton California is reputed to have the largest Filipino community in the United States. There are no accurate figures, but est.mates have 
Placed the Filipino ' population in the city and its environs as high as 10,000 during the asparagus harvest season There are n.ne grocery sfores 
doing an estimated average gross business of $40,000 a year each; drygoods stores, restaurants, hotels, garages, etc. Most of its Filipino families 
now own their homes. 

Stockton has three Filipino Protestant churches-the Catholics go to the St. Mary's Church — the Full Gospel Center, the Methodist, and the 
Trinity Presbyterian Church, part of whose congregation is shown in the above picture. The Trinity Presbyterian grew out of the Filipino Christian 
Fellowship founded by Rev. Vicente Zambra in 1931. Through the efforts of Rev. Zambra and with the cooperation of interested people like 
"Mother"' Frank Reavis, Miss Murray, Dr. and Mrs. M. A. Rader, Mr. and Mrs. S. N. Inosanto, Florencio Bautista, Miss Flora Area and others, the 
Fellowship was transformed into the organized church that it is today. 

Responsible for the Church's progress are the Rev. W. W. Long, minister of the First Presbyterian Church of Stockton, Miss Ida Young former 
Pastor Maurice Legare, now chaplain in the 1st Filipino Infantry. The church is located at 341 S. Hunter Street and the pastor is Rev. Charles Mott. 



MAY, 1944 



9 



etas on 



C^ormaidor 



f 

High Commissioner Sayre recalls his hurried exit from Manila and the last tragic 
days at Philippines' "Island Fortress." Officials burned secret papers and money to 
keep them from invading Japs. 



by FRANCIS B. SAYRE 
Assistant to the Secretary of State 

It is difficult to believe that I am back in the United States where peace reigns, 
where there is no constant feeling of fear haunting the people as they go about 
heir work. I am continually comparing it to Corregidor, with its dangers and 
inconveniences, and the comparison is so great as to be astounding. 

eventuX^nt'^. "J™ 73 ^T" that War with J a P an was boun " t0 ha PP en 
when ,t fin I T VI reallZatl °" of ^ imminence did not lessen the shock o it 
A\nen it hnally rhd come. Of course 

plans had been made for some time- 
conferences had been held with Gen- 
eral Grunert, then in command of th 



American forces in the Philippines, and 
with Admiral Bemis, then commandant 
of the Sixteenth Naval District; civilian 
defense plans had been intensified; and 
1 had even sent my senior military aide 

vetnr r t East L Indies t0 st ^y and 
report back on the measures for civil- 
ia« defense being adopted in Singa- 

mine M ^ ° rderS had ™™ to 

new / an i lk haib0r and t0 su PP ress 
ZZl s . hl P ™ovemente f and in No- 

S T'A the NaVy had assume d ™n- 
noi or American merchant ships. On 
December I we had received a mes- 
sage from Washington warning us that 
Japanese attack might come soon. 

Then—as swiftly and as heedless of 
warning as a thief in the night it 
came. As soon as the full import of 
the news of Pearl Harbor had been 
grasped, we set to work immediately 
to put into effect all the activities 
which for months had been only pre- 
cautions. Now they were necessities. 
We were fortunate in that our tele- 
phone wires had not been cut and that 
public utilities were still functioning. 
I routed my staff out of their beds and 
began preparing for the attack which 
we knew would come. One of the first 
things I did was to close the Japanese 
banks in Manila and have guards post- 
ed around them. 

DEFENSE STEPS TAKEN 

Defense of the High Commissioner's 
Residence took extensive preparation. 
We filled our basement with sand 
bags, emergency tools, and first-aid 



materials, and stocked it with food in 
event of a siege. 

The day after the attack on Pearl 
Harbor, I had a conference with Gen- 
eral Mac-Arthur, who was plainly wor- 
ried about the whole thing. The news 
from Hawaii was not good. Our Navy 
had suffered great damage in the sneak 
attack, and many of our planes had 
been destroyed on the ground. The 
Japs had already bombed Camp John 
Hay and also Clark Field, to the north 
of us. The situation was very bad in- 
deed. 

The days which followed were full 
of nerve - wracking foreboding. Air 
raid warnings were numerous, for no 
one knew when it would be the real 
thing. Vigilance was not relaxed for 
a moment. We spent some time improv- 
ing our basement shelter with the in- 
stallation of electric fans, a telephone, 
writing table, and chairs. We did 
not have long to wait for air raids, for 
the Japs had soon paralyzed the power 
ot our air forces at Clark Field and 
begun their relentless bombing of Nich- 
ols Field, the military air port in Pa- 
say, a Manila suburb. 

JAPS LAND MANY TROOPS 

Day by day, the news became more 
and more serious. One hundred Japa- 
nese transports made a landing in the 
north and began an irresistible push 
southward. In the meantime, more 
Japanese troops landed in the south 
and began advancing northward— the 
beginning of the dreaded pincers move- 
ment. Plans for first-aid help were 
made for the civilian wounded, for we 
now faced the inevitable. 



Directly across the harbor from the 
Residence was Cavite, the old Spanish 
naval base which Dewey had captured 
in 3 898. Admiral Rockwell made Ins 
headquarters in the lovely Comanclan- 
cia, where the Spanish naval command- 
ers had lived. Cavite was now a £'i* ea 
modern naval base into which America 
had put millions of dollars and a g^at 
deal of attention. 

BOMBS DESTROY AIRFIELD 

The day Cavite fell. 27 Japanese 
planes passed over Manila, dropped a 
few bombs on Nichols Field— and tnen 
flew on to Cavite, which they managed 
to obliterate within fifteen ™* n ™?~ 
Admiral Rockwell barely esca Vj n l" 
his life from the blazing Comundancm. 
Later that afternoon boatloads 01 
wounded were landed at Manila ** 
bor. ^ 

Before long those^ of my ^Jg^ 
were not living with their I* ^ 
helped us to organize a ladies 
men's dormitory behind s * n * , " * 
along the center court of the R^JV 
close to the stairway down to the s 
ter. We tried to maintain some sp 
of gayety in the two rooms that coi 
be successfully blacked out by pla> * 
cards or talking until retiring, 
dressed, upon mattresses. 

Now our troops, with no air supp° r * 
and no American reinforcements we 
falling back toward Manila daily, * 
the Japanese pincers movement *r 
gradually closing in to crush us. UOh 
munication with the outside world n» 
ceased so far as mail was concerned, 
we still had the radio and cables, vv 
realized with dread that the fall o 
Manila was not far off. 

CONFERRED WITH MacARTHUR 

I held a conference with General 
MacArthur to discuss what plan should 
be followed when the fatal hour should 
be at hand. He wished for me and 
the President of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth, Manuel Quezon, to escape 
to Corregidor and set up a temporary 



: 10 - 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



government there. This idea was not 
at all to my liking, but there appeared 
to be no other way out. 

Upon receiving this advice. I imme- 
diately set some of our staff to work 
on the files, removing all secret or con- 
fidential documents which would have 
to be destroyed in case of forced flight. 
I collected all gold, money, securities, 
and other valuables which I knew it 
would be necessary to dispose of to 
prevent their falling into enemy hands. 
We were bombed frequently now, and 
it was a race against time to prepare 
for the ordeal which drew closer each 
day. 

The Christmas season was at hand, 
but our only evidence of it was in pre- 
paring Christmas packages of cigarets 
and toilet articles for the wounded who 
had overrun our regular and make- 
shift hospitals. Our own holiday plans 
were thwarted. We had planned a 
Christmas party for our staff and had 
even sent an invitation for Christmas 
dinner to Admiral Hart. The note had 
no sooner been sent when I received 
an urgent message from General Mac- 
Arthur, telling me that Manila would 
soon fall, and that President Quezon 
and I must leave for Corregidor within 
four hours. The General would join 
us later. 

BURNS ALL SECRET FILES 

Hardly realizing just what it all 
meant, I gave orders to burn all our 
confidential files, the product of so 
many years of hard work. From the 
chair at the end of my office I took the 
American and High Commissioner's 
flag, which had been there ever since 
I had entered office. I took them with 
me to Corregidor and they are still in 
my possession. The High Commission- 
er's seal of office I was forced to break 
in two. 

I had to call my wife from a Red 
Cross meeting to tell her to begin pack- 
ing the few things which we could take. 
We threw clothing and a few odd per- 
sonal things into two suitcases, leaving 
behind all the beautiful and precious 
things which we had collected to or- 
nament the Residence in our two years' 
stay there, but there was no time for 
regret. Our hearts were heavy enough 
when we thought of leaving our many 
friends, at whose imminent fate we 
could only guess, without stopping to 
think of material things. 

LEFT STAFF BEHIND 

I was able to take with me only nine 
of my staff because of the extremely 



limited accommodations on Corregidor. 
The others agreed to remain behind to 
look out for the welfare of American 
citizens in Manila and to carry out 
official duties as long as it was possi- 
ble for them to do so. There seemed 
to me to be little difference between 
Manila and Corregidor, so far as safety 
was concerned. If Manila had no tun- 
nel to escape to, Corregidor would be 
the target of the most extensive bomb- 
ing the Japs could give it. 

During the usual morning air raid, 
I bid farewell to my faithful Chinese 
and Filipino servants. It was very dif- 
ficult for me to leave Claude Buss, my 
executive assistant, but he had asked 
to remain behind. I placed him in 
charge of the staff. There was nothing 
I could say — we parted with a hand- 
clasp. 

As soon as the bombing had ceased, 
we hurried away to the Presidential 
Pier to meet President Quezon. Only 
four years before, President Quezon 
had met me at this same pier, and 
planes had been zooming overhead and 
guns had boomed. Now there was only 
deadly quiet after the flight of the 
bombers, and the guns with which we 
had defended ourselves had ceased fir- 
ing. It seemed ironic to me that we 
should meet in peacetime with a show 
of war — and now we met in wartime- - 
the real thing. 

TAKEN TO CORREGIDOR 

Our group included my wife and our 
15-year-old son, Billy, nine of my 
staff, President Quezon, his wife and 
three children, twenty or thirty of his 
staff, and Vice President Osmena. We 
went in two launches to the Mayon, an 



inter-island steamer which was waiting 
outside the breakwater to take us to 
Corregidor. 27 miles across the bay. 
Later that night General MacArthur. 
his wife and four-year-old son, and 
his staff joined us. 

We spent Christmas Eve asleep on 
cots pushed end to end along the sides 
of the Corregidor tunnel with all our 
belongings in suitcases under the cots. 
Christmas Day we donned khakis for 
good, since they were not so good an 
iay target as whites and did not show 
dirt so easily. In the tunnel it was 
hot and stuffy, and no one had the 
slightest inclination to even pretend 
that it was the glorious day of the 
Christ's birth. 

But despite the circumstances we 
were in, it was impossible to ignore 
the beauty of Corregidor. The island 
itself is four miles long, densely vege- 
tated, high and rocky. Rare and bril- 
liant birds hover over its gorgeous jun- 
gle foliage into which wind curving 
roads. The sea is the bluest blue I 
have ever seen, and views may be had 
of it from high cliffs from any part of 
the island. On the east lies Manila 
Bay; on the north, the green slopes of 
Mariveles Mountain on the Bataan 
peninsula. The China Sea winds cool 
the island and free it from the stifling 
tropical heat of the mainland. It is 
actually possible to sleep there without 
mosquito nets. 

WORKED IN TUNNEL 

We had fled from a comfortable 
home and office, but work had to go 
on just the same. We established a 
home and office in one of the laterals 

» continued on following page 




President Manuel L. Quezon and Francis B. Sayre, 
United States High Commissioner to the Philippines 



MAY, 1944 



- 11 • 



Corregidor 

» continued from preceding page 

of the hospital tunnel. We ate at a 
common mess in the tunnels, slept in 
the tunnel, worked in the tunnel. My 
secretary and stenographer labored 
hard at the two desks which I had 
been able to secure, and when the fetid 
air became too much for them they 
would go to the entrance and breathe 
in fresh air, return to their desks and 
resume work. 

The air was indeed so unbearable 
that the commandin;; general placed 
at our disposal one of the officers' hous- 
es which was not far from the tunnel 
entrance. The day after Christmas we 
took the staff over to look over the 
place and arrange a working office. In 
the midst of the proceedings, we were 
forced to seek shelter in a roadside 
ditch from Jap planes which flew over 
and began bombing. 

The s taff immediately made their 
decision— it preferred the tunnel. 

f n B H th f \ du ! ty „ and gem-laden air 
could not be wholly i gnored . 0ur 

*ZeP: fT Cked ™ th -thma, de- 
veloped a fever, and was finally con- 

ofT" he° fe4 H0SpitaI ' UnaMe to thZ 
ott the fever or regain his strength. 
Mr*. Sayre and I discussed the prob- 

o such at Clde S th3t COnstant «Wi 
Larmfnl S , ^ Was "finitely more 
omb ' tH t immedi£ "e danger of 

riff ™ t ' WltH tW ° ° r three of our 
staff members, we spent nidits in the 
house for the Japs launched most of 
their air raids during the day. My 
wife and I used to steal away just be- 
fore sundown to enjoy the beauty of 
the evening and to escape from the 
depressing tunnel. 

NUMBER OF CASUALTIES ALARMING 

At first the number of casualties 
from air raids was alarming. Our men 
were unaccustomed to real bombing, 
and the hospitals filled at a rapid 
rate. But as time went on, they soon 
became proficient at anti-aircraft and 

off In t • 16 JaP i S made did ««* come 
off so easily as they once had. 

The enemy also shelled us from bat- 
teries planted on the Cavite shore to 
the ? onth of us. A shell gives no 
warning but its own scream, and 
there ore gm one no chance to run 
Bombing was no fun, but I think we 
preferred it to being shelled. 

One of our most difficult problems 
was in trying to decide what to do 

■ 12 • 



with valuables and money which we 
had brought along to keep from fall- 
ing into enemy hands. We were faced 
with the disposal of some 6y 2 tons of 
gold, millions of dollars in paper cur- 
rency, both United States and Philip- 
pine, bank boxes of securities and bank 
assets, and valuables of all kinds. 

PAPER MONEY WAS BURNED 

The paper money was comparatively 
easy. After all, a record of the serial 
numbers could be made and bills re- 
issued in Washington when the notifi- 
cation reached them. So we burned 
it. The soldiers stood around watching 
in fascination as we heaped armfuls 
of five, ten, twenty, and hundred dollar 
bills. My naval aide will never forget 
the experience of lighting his cigaret 
with a one hundred dollar bill. 

The gold was not so easily disposed 
of, and neither were the bonds, stock 
certificates and paper securities.' How 
we finally solved the problem I may 
not tell, but I have since then turned 
over several trunks of securities to a 
New York bank. 

We kept in constant touch with Ma- 
nila by telephone, letter, and daily 
boats during the first week. I talked 
with my executive assistant, Claude 
Buss, for the last time on January 1st. 
He said that the Japanese were expected 
to enter the city on the morrow, and 
informed me that all the members of 
the staff were well. We said a linger- 
ing farewell, and I have had no contact 
with him or anyone else in Manila 
since then. 

The next day the Japs marched in. 

MANY IMMEDIATELY INTERNED 

My only source then of knowledge 
. the A ™Y Intelligence and the 
Mlipmos who had managed to cross 
the lines. Some of the Americans es- 
caped to the hills. Those who stayed 
had to register and stay off the streets 
Ihey were then interned i n Santo 
Tomas University, and according to 
reports, are still there. 

The Japanese are reportedly relax- 
ing some of their restrictions— allow- 
ing old people and women with babies 
to return to their home as well as al- 
lowing internees to move about freely 
on the university grounds. Of course 
1 -cm intensely interested in their wel- 
fare, for among them are close friends 
with whom Mrs. Sayre and I lived and 
worked for over two years. 

Our vital source of information on 
Corregidor was the radio. We hung 
over it daily praying for the time when 



American air power was restored and 
we could get back to Manila. But 
there seemed to be little hope of that. 
The Japanese landings were pushing 
southward. 

NO HOPE FOR SUPPLIES 

Finally we were forced to face the 
truth The Allied naval victory in 
Macassar Strait would not help us. 
There was very faint hope that supp hes 
or reinforcements would reach us be- 
fore the Japs did. We could only 
fight on as hard as possible and make 
the enemy pay dearly for this victory. 

I had by this time given up all hope 
of ever again seeing my other cniiaren 
or my native land. There was no es- 
cape, for the Jap ships and planes 
com man ded the sea for some low 
2000 miles to the south of us. 

Then suddenly came a ™**fJ d Z 
President Roosevelt asking I™ 
Quezon and me to come to A ft 
and authorizing the means O) 
might be clone. 

i i T was con- 

Here was a problem. 1 , tne 

vinced that I could do nl ° re facts in 

situation by presenting the 1 Corre - 

Washington than by staying have 

gidor. But to escape, we ^ ht \ ng 

to plough through the denses ^ y veg 

areas, and this meant riskm^jj aS mv 

of my family and staff as ^ 

own. 

We decided to risk it. , 

We left in secret, only AdH»* . uS 
well and General MacArthur sc 
off. When my son asked ni he [[ e ve 
we were going, I could !*^ d igome!'' 
my own words when I choked, ^ 

We crossed the bay to Bataan aiK 
waited there till 3 a. m., J™ 
started on the long journey « on 

The fall of the Philippines pjj 
personal tragedy to me, for ^ 
grown to know and love tne p" 
if it were my own. Some of my ^ 
est friends are there now, ana 
course I am unable to communica 
with them in any way. 

The flag of the Philippines will ris 
again. Of that I am sure. 

The whole world of free men will 
join in paying tribute to the magnifi- 



cent stand made by the American 



and 



Filipino troops in the Philippine Is- 
lands. They have written a chapter ot 
stubborn heroism which will never be 
forgotten. — London Mail, April 9, 1042. 

BATAAN MAGAZINE 



SYMBOL OF THE PHILIPPINES 



by DIOSDADO M. YAP 
Editor of "Bataan" 



Corregidor, like Singapore, used to stand as the symbol of armed might in 
the Orient. But Corregidor, unlike Singapore, did not fold up immediately when 
the Japanese hordes stormed it. It was taken only after a long seige, a seige 
which lasted about a month after Bataan fell. 

From the outbreak of the war, the island of Corregidor had been subjected 
constantly to heavy bombardment. The few thousand defenders stood up to this 
punishment without flinching. No islet 



has cost the enemy greater in men 
and materials before it capitulated to 
him. 

Corregidor is at the tip of Bataan 
peninsula. It guards the mouth of 
Manila Bay. "From the air, all you 
saw was an island four miles long, 
more than half of it a decling spit of 
sand. On it you saw a series of long 
somnolent barracks, a hospital, a few 
playgrounds, roads, some jungle and 
some rock," according to war corre- 
spondent John Hersey. 

Under the rock are tunnels, miles 
long. At the mouth of these tunnels 
were gun emplacements. In certain 
laterals were located the hospital, state 
room for supplies, and . ammunition 
and other material. There were also 
air raid shelters. 

When all the surface establishments 
were blasted out by the Japanese 
bombs, the men on Corregidor had to 
live underground and came out to the 
surface only when there was a lull in 
the enemy activity. 

To Corregidor the seat of the Phil- 
ippine Government w a s transferred 
when it became evident that Manila 
was going to fall. In Corregidor Pres- 
ident Quezon took his oath of office to 
resume his Presidency of the Philip- 
pines as a result of his reelection. In 
Corregidor General Mac Arthur directed 
his war against the Japanese on Ba- 
taan and all over the isolated parts 
of the Philippines where his soldiers 
were still fighting the enemy. In Cor- 
regidor Colonel Carlos P. Romulo had 
his radio station, "The Voice of Free- 
dom," where he sent out his broad- 
casts of Philippine defiance. These 
are the things that make Corregidor 
stand out in the minds of those who 
think of Philippine resistance in the 
sad days of Japanese invasion of the 
islands. 

When the little island finally fell 
on May 7, 1942, the heads of the 
American and Filipino fighting 
forces summed up the full story of 



Corregidor. Just before the battle 
ended on the tiny island, Lieutenant 
General Jonathan Wainwright issued 
this statement : 

"I have been with my men from the 
start, and if captured, I will share their 
lot. Americans, shaken by the loss of 
Bataan, should not feel the fall of Ma- 
nila Bay forts to be a double tragedy, 
but rather the exemplification of the 
grimness of our spirit when we stay 
to the end with a job to be done." 

And from Australia, where General 
MacArthur had been ordered to carry 
on the war by his Commender-in-Chief, 
he said: 

"Corregidor needs no comment from 
me. It has sounded its own story at 
the mouth of its guns. It has scrolled 
its own epitaph on enemy tablets, but 
through the bloody haze of its last re- 
verberating shots, I shall always seem 
to see the vision of its grim, gaunt 
and ghostly men, still unafraid." 

Young Filipinos May Study 
Technical Subjects In U. S. 

Students from China and the Philip- 
pines, as well as from other sections of 
the Far East, would be included in a 
broad-scale program tentatively under 
consideration by the Foreign Economic 
Administration for the post-war train- 
ing of foreign technicians in American 
engineering colleges. 

Details of the program are as yet 
nebulous, and FEA officials this week 
were reticent to elaborate on a story 
in the New York Times last week in 
which the initial framework of the pro- 
gram was outlined. It was indicated, 
howe.er, that the United States would 
retain the final word on the selection 
of the students and the schools the\ 
would be sent to in this country to 
complete their studies. 



» BE DISCRIMINATING 

UNEXCELLED 
WHISKEY 




INCORPORATED 

BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 

ESTABLISHED 1885 

THE STRAIGHT WHISKIES IN THIS 
PRODUCT ARE 6 YEARS OR MORE OLD 



MAY, 1944 



-13- 



Filipino Chaplain Makes 
Life Interesting In War 

There is a Filipino by the name of 
Fernando A. Laxamana, a chaplain as- 
signed to an ordnance battalion on a 
Southwest Pacific island, who refuses 
to let this war get him down. When, 
on the first Sunday after his arrival, his 
jeep bogged down waist-deep in mud. 
he swam the river, met his congrega- 
tion assembled under some coconut 
trees, and conducted the service in 
dripping clothes with trousers rolled 
up and in bare feet. And the last ac- 
counts of the irrepressible chaplain 
were that he is still sloshing or bounc- 
ing up and down across the island, a< 
weather decrees, holding six services 
each Sunday and as many during the 
week. 

Instead of syndicating his depriva- 
tions, he says: "One is surprised with 
how many things he can do without. 
In place of newspapers you have the 
book of nature spread out all around 
you and in place of radios there are 
birds and thousands of insects that 
chatter all day and night, drowning 
out even the airplanes above. The clb 

Thine " S H OCl i l0tS ° f rain and sun " 
shine. His letter reads like a pros- 
pectus of a real estate promoter. P 

ho Pitals and outlying camps, Chap- 
much iT?T that < if " ot too 
Zrinl * ' ^ S6eks diversi0 » "land- 

oe-tif 3 d S s nU * f es f »d Gilding 
shells" He ei u\ ? f white coral 

plants. He woubl lit flow enng 
h °oks, and adds "Tf S °™ ^ 0od 
flower seeds an ■ / you have any 

-nd them ai:ng" VR ¥ h T s T rden 
Ply that Chaplain 1 • " ot im " 

t' igued with the " r f V 3 " 3 15 so 
not like to rejoin It.^ that he wou1 ^ 

CongregSTl cTufffT^ ° f 
or that along with m ln CI "cago, 

talion he would ."^if** 8 of hi s bat- 
the lovelies \t "° Wl]hn ^Y ^change 

American street „ r 1 , rch ' of a drab 
eet 01 landscape. 

ll» chaplain, however h„ e 
farmer boys in hi= I ' , nas some 
Minnesota and ft, ftJjf T fr ° m 
revel in seeing some g 7e^n ^ WQuld 
'«* - their island hS fe w " 

^ would like to be ah! t li 

^me fresh vegetables for he tf 
ov er in the hospital h(,ys 



Spangler, Republican Leader, Lauds 
Bataan' For Special Corregidor Issue 



TlUPMONI AOAHl 9215 



Republican National Committee 



CHAIRMAN 
HARRISON E. SPANGLER 



1337 CONNECTICUT AVENUE 

WASHINGTON 6. D. C. 



April 26, 1944 



Dr.Diosdado M. Yap, Editor 
BATAAN MAGAZINE 
Washington, D. C. 

Dear Dr. Yap: 



. J ou ar9 to be complimented on the manner in which 

you have used your magazine to help keep- informed the parents 
or American boys killed, wounded and captured in the Philippines- 



«™< you and 1 th *nk of Corregidor on this, the secqn d 

anniversary of its capitulation to the Jap enemy, let us resold 
anew that we will leave no stone unturned to see that the war 4 

** r Eas t, which is of great concern to all true Americans, 
is not overlooked by the powers-that-he . 



in 



We Republicans are proud that distinguished members of 
our party long ago saw the economic and spiritual threat of con- 
quest of Japan in the Far East and that it was under a Republic 11 
administration in 1931 that Americans were first warned officially 
of Japan's aims. 



°f course, we also are proud .that we have exercised 
all our power to see that war materiel and men have gone in ever- 
increasing streams to the Southwest Pacific to help us fre* the 
Philippines. You are to be congratulated for accenting the affair 
of the Far East for your American audience today. 



With all good wishes for you and BATAAN, I am 
Cordially yours, 



hes . ew 




- 14 ' 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Hannegan, Democratic Chief, Says U. S. 
Will Soon Be Marching To Manila 



DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE 



WASHINGTON 6. D. C. 



"OBCRT E HANNEGAN 



Kr. Di osd ado SI. Yap 
Editor and Publisher 
National Press Building 
Washington 4, D.C. 



De-.r 7r. Yap: 



May I, 1944. 



The thought occurred to me that you might be interested in 
publishing the following "Message to Manila" in your Corregidor Number 
of Ba taan Magazine; therefore, I am submitting it for use as you may 
see fit: 



In the beginning we were taken by surprise and bewllderod. 



We were men in a world of war, and we had witnessed dark 
dealings, we had seen perfidy, we believed that we comprehended the 
ways of treachery. But we had not witnessed, we could not comprehend 
the way of the smiling ruest.in our house and the dark shadow lurkiner' 
beyond the threshold, the nod, the simal, the stab in the back. * 

There was Pearl Harbor, there was Bataan, there was Corregidor 
There wa3 lightning over the broad waters, and, with the little that 
they had, there were free men defying it in vain. 

We had known men to fifcht, we had seen men kill. But we did 
not know, we had not seen, that done which shamed the image of man in 
the eye3 of the beast. We did not know that there could be, in the 
affairs of men, such things as the march of death and the enslavement 
of the living. 

Today we are no longer stricken, we are neither bewildered nor 
divided among ourselves. We are at war and we are armed for war. We 
understand our enemy well, we know what must be done to the shadow that 
lurks beyond the thre ahold, we have the means for dealing with it. 

There is Midway, there is Guadalcanal, there is Hollandia. And 
again the lightninr strikes over the broad waters, and the guilty flee 
in vain. 

In the end our strength will be proved. In the end the scale 
of a grim justice will be balanced. In the end the promise of 
liberation will be fulfilled. For the light of that promise, once 
kindled, shines on before the eyes of all peoples, unstained by blood, 
undimmed by tears . 

In the end, we shall come back. 



Sincerely yours, 




Admiral Bradford Hints 
We May Hit Japan Soon 

The day when a thousand bomb- 
laden planes will roar off from Ameri- 
can aircraft carriers to bomb Japan 
"may be somewhat nearer than the Jap- 
anese think." Rear Admiral Arthur W. 
Radford declared. 

The deputy chief of naval opera- 
tions for air. in an address before the 
American Society of Newspaper Edi- 
tors, meeting in Washington, declared 
thousand-plane raids are "the rule rath- 
er than the exception" in the Pacific. 

And he added: "It is no exaggera- 
tion to say that today the Navy is ca- 
pable of striking with a thousand car- 
rier-based planes — and more than a 
thousand planes if necessary — at almost 
any spot in the Pacific Ocean. 

"As our task forces grow bigger and 
bigger, it is reasonable to assume that, 
eventually, even the shores of Japan 
itself will not be safe from our sudden 
strikes and destructive raids. 

"It is possible, also, that this day 
may be somewhat nearer than the Jap- 
anese think." 

He compared the Pacific assaults on 
Japanese bases with the thousand-plane 
raids against Nazi-dominated Europe, 
carried out by larger land-based air- 
craft. 

He declared that in the Pacific ef- 
forts always are made to outnumber 
the Japanese when arriving over a tar- 
get. That is accomplished, he said, by 
moving "our floating airfields" — car- 
riers— wherever they might be needed. 
On the enemy-held islands, he contin- 
ued, "there simply isn't enough real es- 
tate" from which to fly as many planes 
as can be launched from "our many 
fast carriers." 

Also, he said, while bad weather can 
ground land-based aircraft, it "is a 
powerful ally" for carrier-based planes, 
for the carriers can be moved out of 
bad weather until the planes complete 
their mission then steam back into 
storms to avoid counter-attacks, 

Radford disclosed also that "we 
haven't been able to find a Japanese 
carrier since November of 1912," but 
added, "we know" the Japanese still 
have carriers and hope to meet them 
in battle. 

Corregidor joins Bataan in the heart 
of America. — Daily Worker* May 7. 
1942. 



MAY, 1944 



U. S. Physician Reports On Health Conditions 
In Japanese Concentration Camp In Manila 



Repatriated doctor says their treatment by Japs characterized by indifference; need 
for drugs and food is critical. Thanks, "brave and dependable Filipino people/' for 
invaluable assistance and humane acts. 



The treatment by the Japanese of the 3,900 internees, about 80 per cent of 
whom were Americans, in a concentration camp at Manila was characterized 
chiefly by indifference, with close confiement and the lack of adequate food, 
medical and drug supplies a constantly increasing menace, Frank E. Whitacre, 
M. D., Sylvania, Ohio, repatriated on the last trip of the Gripsholm, reports. Al- 
though the death rate in the camp was probably not excessive during the first 
twenty-two months, he says, it must be 
expected to increase unless more drugs 
and nutritious foods are made immedi- 
ately available. Dr. Whitacre's report, 
the first to be published in this coun- 
try about the general health conditions 
among Americans interned by the Jap- 
anese, follows: 



During the first few weeks of in- 
ternment in a Japanese concentration 

To P onn PhiIi PP in ^ a group 

of o,900 internees (about 80 per cent 
Americans), with courageous spirit and 
without help from the Japanese, organ- 
ized themselves into a smooth-running 
community, of which the hospital 
tormed an important part. A few 
hours after Pearl Harbor the Japanese 
were attacking the Philippines in force. 
A tew civilian physicians assisted in 
the Sternberg military base hospital 
until the hospital was closed at the 
time of the retreat to Bataan. Most of 
our seriously wounded men from the 
bombings at Clark, Nichols and Niel- 
sen airfields, and also from the Cavite 
naval yard, were transferred the latter 
part of December to Australia on a 
hospital ship. The fall of Manila was 
imminent, and we remained at our ho- 
tel until the Japanese army entered the 
city on January 2, 1942. 

13 BUILDINGS AT SANTO TOMAS 

On January 5 we were taken in 
trucks and busses to Santo Toinas in- 
ternment camp. Santo Tomas is the 
oldest university under American pro- 
tection and consists of some 50 acres 
and thirteen buildings. About two- 
thirds of the acreage and most of the 
buildings were turned over to us bv 
the Dominican Fathers. This gave each 
person only about 30 square feet of 
floor space. The Japanese did not fur- 
nish beds, bedding or cots but allowed 



us to obtain a few necessities wherever 
we could. 

The American aptitude for organi- 
zation was soon in evidence. The Jap- 
anese did not look after details of or- 
ganization and management but per- 
mitted the internees to do that them- 
selves. An executive committee was 
elected, with a chairman responsible to 
the Japanese commandant. Various 
committees were formed, including 
finance and supply, sanitation and hy- 
giene, order and safety, construction, 
work assignment, kitchens, medical at- 
tention, education, religion, recreation 
and entertainment, and in fact commit- 
tees to cover all of the main functions 
required in the operation of a com- 
munity of this size. 

SUPPLIES COME FROM THE RED CROSS 

For the first few months our food 
vnd supplies came from Red Cross or- 
ganizations. On July 1, 1942, the Jap- 
anese government for the first time 
began to supply funds for the support 
of the camp: 70 centavos (35 cents) 
a day per person. Later this was in- 
creased to 1 peso (50 cents), which 
had to take care of everything for the 
support of the camp; electricity, water 
and all supplies, including food. There 
were three kitchens which were oper- 
ated by the internees in a clean and 
efficient way. Two meals were served 
"on the line" daily, consisting of rice, 
green vegetables, a small amount of 
meat twice a week and occasionally 
fruit. 

Although fruit is abundant in the 
Philippines, the lack of transportation 
reduces the available supply. Persons 
with sufficient funds were permitted to 
have food sent in to them, usually one 



cooked meal a day, and this "package 
line" served about 1,000 persons. In 
twenty-two months we each received 
two Red Cross gift packages, from Jo- 
hannesburg, South Africa, and Toron- 
to, Canada, respectively. The average 
diet provided only approximately l?oOU 
calories a day (average American in- 
take is 3,000 calories), containing about 
50 Gm. of protein and around 30 Gm. 
of fat; no more than half of the latter 
was obtained from animal sources, 
is not surprising, therefore, that a loss 
of weight of from 30 to 50 pounds 
was common, and that borderline avita- 
minosis (disease due to deficiency 0 
vitamins) was prevalent. 

JAPS WERE INDIFFERENT 

The treatment of the internees by the 
Japanese was characterized chiefly > 
indifference. The close confinement 
and the lack of adequate food were a 
constant menace. During the first s ^ r 
eral months of internment about 
sick and elderly persons were allowed 
to leave the camp if they could snow 
that they had a place to stay and couH 
be self supporting. But in May,/*** 
coincident with Premier To jo's visit to 
Manila to offer the Philippines inde- 
pendence, almost all of these persons 
were brought back into camp. ^ w f S 
a pitiful sight, as room after room W 
the buildings used for sleeping quar- 
ters literally had to be converted into 
an old persons' home. The camp was 
already overcrowded, owing to t n e 
gradual accumulation of small groups 
brought in from time to time from the 
provinces. This reinternment necessi- 
tated the moving of 800 young and 
middle aged, able bodied men to Los 
Banos, 40 miles distant. 

Medical attention was efficient, as 
far as this was possible. After one 
or two rooms had been used for the 
first few days, a small hospital of 80 
beds was set up in a one-story frame 
building which had been the metal- 
lurgy department of the university. 
This hospital was well defined into 



- 16 " 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



two women's wards and two men's 
wards, an outpatient department con- 
sisting of a waiting room, treatment 
room and facilities for minor surgery, 
and an adequate dental department. 

TWO DOCTORS EXCEL 

Perhaps it would be better not to 
mention any names at all in this brief 
report, but it seems only fair to men- 
tion two: Dr. Charles N. Leach of 
Burlington, Vt., a field director of the 
Rockefeller Foundation, was responsi- 
ble for the organization and direction 
both of the hospital at Santo Tomas 
and of the hospital at Los Banos. Dr. 
Hugh L. Robinson of Auburndale, 
Mass., carried the load of individual 
medical attention. In August, 1942, 
the hospital was moved to another 
building, which permitted better facili- 
ties and 120 beds. At present the 
physicians remaining with our people 
in the Philippines are doing the best 
they can with the supplies they have 
at hand. 

The camp hospital was excellently 
staffed with nurses, at first from the 
internees, a few nurses from the Phil- 
ippine Red Cross, and the Mary Knoll 
Sisters. A few months later eleven 
Navy and sixty Army nurses accepted 
this responsibility and continue to pro- 
vide the best of nursing care. 

MUCH HELP FROM THE FILIPINOS 

We appreciated the brave and de- 
pendable Filipino people. Aside from 
invaluable assistance, both individu- 
ally and collectively, to the internees, 
the officials of the Philippine General 
Hospital made available one 50-bed 



ward for men, which was always filled 
to capacity, and one 12-bed ward for 
women. In many instances the vaguest 
promise to pay sometime was sufficient 
during this emergency. Also complete 
medical, surgical, laboratory and roent- 
gen ray facilities were provided when- 
ever necessary. 

No epidemics have occurred among 
the 300-odd children, who are doins; 
very well; milk supplies are reserved 
for them. The children have their sep- 
arate hospital of 15 beds. The ordinary 
diseases of childhood have not been a 
serious problem, and fortunately scar- 
let fever is rare, if not unknown, in 
the Philippines. 

The vitamin deficiencies previously 
mentioned are chiefly due to a lack of 
vitamin Bl, characterized by an abnor- 
mal sensation such as burning, prick- 
ling, and difficulty in focusing the eyes. 
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) deficiency was 
manifest by pigmentation around the 
nose and mouth, sore tongue and diar- 
rhea. 

One should not fail to mention the 
mental retardation that accompanies 
confinement. Immediately following 
the bombings and in the early days of 
internment, occasional hysteria was 
seen, but after many months lethargy 
and mental deterioration affected a 
moderate number of persons. 

MORTALITY RATE NORMAL 

The number of deaths after twenty- 
two months is probably not much in 
excess of that found in a group of the 
same size in normal times. But it 
must be expected that the mortality 
rate will increase, for nutritional 




University of Santo Tomas — Manila civilian internment 
camp where Americans are interned since fall of Manila 



disturbances are growing and the drug 
and medical supplies situation is de- 
plorable. There are no drugs for treat- 
ing dysentery; the supply of insulin 
and liver extract is almost exhausted; 
there are practically no sulfonamide 
drugs, narcotics, anesthetics or glucose. 
It is to be hoped that out of the vast 
supplies sent to the Far East a fair 
portion of the vitally needed drugs 
and nutritious foods will be made avail- 
able to our people in the Philippines 
to improve their gloomy situation. Bet- 
ter still, it is to be hoped that the 
many efforts of our government for 
further repatriations will be successful. 



McCoy Lauds Filipinos 
At Bataan Day Meeting 

Marking the second anniversary of 
the fall of Bataan, and in high resolve 
to "Avenge Bataan," Seattle residents 
thronged to Victory Square, where, fit- 
tingly, civic remembrance was under 
sponsorship of the Filipino Community 
Council. 

The day's principal speaker, Comdr. 
Melvyn H. McCoy, honored the coun- 
trymen of Filipinos, "except for whose 
kindness I would not be here." 

Commander McCoy, one of 10 who 
escaped from a Jap prison camp in the 
Philippine Islands to bring America 
the story of the "March of Death," told 
of Japs landing "behind our lines." 

"We were all but beaten, hopelessly 
outnumbered. To this small American 
garrison came then, suddenly and un- 
hoped for, a small force of Filipino 
Scouts. 

" 'You go back now, Jose,' said the 
Scouts. 'We take over.' " 

McCoy told the silent, attentive 
crowd of the decimation of the 45,000 
Filipinos who were captured by the 
Japs, 

"Two months later," he said, "27,000 
were dead, many bayoneted and many 
buried alive. In one camp the death 
rate by disease was 500 a day. 

"Of the 45,000 captured, not more 
than 5,000 are alive today. 

"Never," he declared, his voice no- 
ticeably shaken, "never for a moment 
forget those who suffered and died, 
those who still suffer and will die until 
they are liberated." 



MAY. 1944 



- 17 - 



Romulo Says Filipinos Have Remained 
Completely Loyal To U. S. These 2 Years 

Last man off Bataan says MacArthur and Nimitz have costantly 
seized foes' conquered land and harassed supply lines. 

by COL. CARLOS P. ROMULO 

On the second anniversary of the fall of Bataan, we look back at the hellish 
memories of the agony and blood and death of thousands of American and 
rihpino soldiers, and dedicate our reverential thoughts to them, we who are 
enjoying the comfort and security of this America for which they fought and died. 

After two years, it can be said that the avenging anger of American arms is 
increasingly being felt by the myrmidons of Tojo and that if the present tcmno 
ot our attack is maintained in the Pa- 
cific, the sword of vengeance will at 
last be plunged to the hilt in the very 
heart of murderous Japan. 

Two years ago the tide of America's 
fortune in the Pacific was at its low- 
est ebb. The U. S. Navy had suffered 
its worst disaster in Pearl Harbor. 
Guam, Wake and Bataan had fallen. 
Corresidor was heroically resisting, but 
its fall was inevitable. The Japanese 
hordes had overwhelmed the British 
BritiS" Em* in short order in Burma, 

d cs ™ aya 3nd the Dutch East 
nches. Then- onward march of wan- 

Austral; ff- tlble - r hey had warned 
bvSe her " ^ ^ ^ to 

Japan failed to reckon with Philip- 

or,-i,?Ts c , Marsh " n ' *? 

Va1 .;" ;. b - Arrn y= gave the United 
Nations tame to prepare in Australia! 



We will leave it to history to ad- 
judge what military genius it was that 
accomplished with the limited means 
placed at his disposal this seemingly 
impossible task. 

The road is still long and arduous; 
the fight cn uphill one. The flower 
of the Japanese army is still intact. 
The Japanese navy is in hiding. We 
have not reconquered one inch of ter- 
ritory in the vast stretch covering Thai- 
land, French Indo-China, Burma, Brit- 
ish Malaya, Philippines, Guam, Wake, 
rnd the Dutch East Indies. But we 
are now on the offensive everywhere 
in the Pacific. 



Two years ago we did not know 
when and where the Japanese blow? 
would fall. Now we are delivering the 
blows and we are keeping the Japanese 
guessing. 

MARCH BACK TO BATAAN 

W hen Adni. Chester W. Nimitz at- 
tacked Truk and then Palau, a little 
more than 500 miles from Mindanao, 
it was evident that we had gone a 
long way in our march back to the 
Philippines since the fall of Bataan. 

In the meanwhile these two years 
have been years of suffering and faith 
for the Filipino people. They have 
not been taken in by the blandishments 
of Japanese duplicity. The so-called 
independence granted by the invader 
has made not the slightest dent on then* 
loyalty to America. 

Filipino resistance continues una- 
bated all over the Philippines. Thomas 
Confesor, the governor of Panay, who 
wrote that now famous letter in which 
he expressed the Filipino hatred f° r 
the Japanese, and Filipino fidelity to 
the ideals of freedom and democracy? 
is but one of thousands of Filip* n0S 
who have refused to crook their knee 
to the Japanese tyrant. When the his- 
tory of Filipino resistance during these 
two years is finally written it will he 
one of the most thrilling and spectacu- 
lar underground movements ever staged 



MacARTHUR STOPS THE JAPS 

MaT^;Ln°7 g V d0r Gen - 
W 1 a ; ^ her ° Qf was in 

us aha a he commander in chief 
oi the United Nations forces in the 

further!" P there but no 

8in i nd > tid « 0* little has changed 
since then MacArthur was ordered 
o defend Australia. He attacked K 
a series of spectacular victories in the 
lunrthl 81 * NW Brit -n, n N^ 
^Xhe^tedlhe" V i ;- ShaI1 IS " 

a threat ;:rs tr r a ,°h n> t n0 
are on our way back to Bataan. 

■ 18 ■ 




we 



Pacific Army and Navy Chiefs plan strategy — Admiral Chester W. 
Nimitz, United States Navy (right), Commander-in-Chief, Pacific Fleet 
and Pacific Area, talks over future strategic moves with Gen. Douglas 
MacArthur, United States Army, Commander-in-Chief, Soutwest Pacific Area 



PHOTO - U. S. NAVY 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 




by a civilian population anywhere in 
the world. 

In summation, these two years have 
seen two outstanding facts in the Pa- 
cific: First, the steady onward march 
of American forces; and second, Fili- 
pino loyalty to America, whole and un- 
impaired. 



(^owecficlor 

HAROLD F. MOHN 



Corregidor, grim, beieagured fortress, 

Shrine of man's will to be free, 
Incessantly bombed from the heavens above, 

Bombarded from land and sea, 
Was the bastion of liberty where courageous 
men fought 

And drew thir last life's breath, 
Battling to save their freedom and rights 

While bleeding and starving to death. 

To the east lay the the wreckage of Cavite, 
Once the pride of the United States fleet; 
To the v/est stretched the peninsula of Bataan, 
That resounded with marching feet. 
With the fall of Bataan only the Rock re- 
mained 
To carry on the fight, 
And as the days passed by the troops there, 
too, 

Were in a desperate plight. 

The stench of blood, dirt, and sweat 

Was always prevalent there 
The shortage of food and water 

Made life miserable beyond compare. 
Finally, on the sixth of May, 

Surrounded by a merciless foe, 
The fortress fell, but the spirit of those men 

Shall ever onward no. 



Latest U. S. Red Cross Reports Reveal 
Supplies Are Distributed In Far East 

Messages broadcast from prisoners in Manila say they received 
Red Cross food packages, medicines, clothing and comfort supplies 
before Christmas. 



About 88 percent of the supplies shipped from the United States on the dip- 
lomatic exchange vessel, Gripsholm, last September have been unloaded at their 
respective destinations, and have either been distributed or are in process of dis- 
tribution to the prisoner of war and civilian internee camps. Some 12 percent 
of the supplies were consigned to Shanghai and Hong Kong, but were held at 
Yokohama until they could be shipped onward. A recent "cable from Geneva 
stated that the Shanghai consignment 



was being prepared for shipment. 

Complete reports on the distribution 
of the supplies transshipped at Mor- 
magao from the Gripsholm to the Teia 
Maru have not yet been received, but 
cables from the International Commit- 
tee of the Red Cross in the middle of 
March left no doubt that most of these 
supplies had been distributed to the 
camps. 

An Australian dispatch dated Febru- 
ary 22 relayed a Japanese radio broad- 
cast stating that, "Comfort parcels from 
the United States recently arrived in 
Batavia and have been distributed 
among American prisoners of war in 
Java." These parcels, the broadcast 
stated, "were sent by the United States 
on the occasion of the second exchange 
of civilian internees between Japan and 
America." Several messages broadcast 
from American prisoners in Java early 
in March mentioned receiving next-of- 
kin parcels, one may saying, "Received 
from you one package, all complete 
and in good order. My feelings when 
I received this package were of great 
joy. My joy knew no bounds as this 
was the first communication from you." 

RED CROSS PARCELS DISTRIBUTED 

The International Committee has also 
relayed reports from Mr. Schweizer, 
its Singapore representative, stating that 
he had been informed by local author- 
ities of the distribution, at the end of 
December, of mail and Red Cross par- 
cels. At the same time he was told 
that the onward movement of supplies 
for other regions was being undertaken 
and that food parcels and medical sup- 
plies were being prepared for early 
distribution in Malaya. A broadcast 
on the Japanese radio from American 
prisoners of war in a camp at Moul- 
mein, Burma, at the end of February 
reported receipt in their camp of Red 
Cross supplies from the Gripsholm. 



The International Committee Dele- 
gate in Japan stated that he had a re- 
ceipt dated November 8. 1943, from 
the Japanese authorities at Manila for 
21,548 packages of relief supplies un- 
loaded there. Numerous messages from 
prisoners in Camps Nos. 4 and 11 in 
the Philippines, broadcast from Ma- 
nila, reported receipt of Red Cross food 
packages, medicines, clothing, and 
comfort supplies before Christmas. The 
Delegate in Tokyo cabled on January 
21 that the executive committee of the 
civilian internees at Santo Tomas had 
established a plan for the distribution 
of their share of relief supplies. The 
Delegate had cabled earlier that he 
was attempting to forward at least one 
food package to every prisoner of war 
in Japan, Korea, Formosa, and Man- 
churia before Christmas. Later he re- 
ported by cable that such a distribu- 
tion had been made during December 
and January in all the camps in Ja- 
pan p rope r, as well as substantial 
amounts of clothing. 

A Japanese broadcast early in March 
included two messages from American 
prisoners in Japan acknowledging next- 
of-kin parcels from home. One said, 
"Received your package last Christmas 
and letter recently." The other pris- 
oner had received a package but no 
letter. 

Corregidor needs no comment from 
me. It has sounded its own story at 
the mouth of its guns. It has scrolled 
its own epitaph on enemy tablets. But 
through the bloody haze of its last re- 
verberating shot. I shall always seem 
to see a vision of grim, gaunt, ghastly 
m e n. still unafraid. — Gen. Douglas 
Mac Arthur. May 7. 1942. 



MAY, 1944 



19 



Rep. McCormack Lauds Filipinos' Acts, 
Urges Americans To Profit By Example 

Congressional leader says Bataan will be redeemed; that the guilty 
will be punished and that no plea of madness will bar retribution. 

by JOHN W. McCORMACK 
House of Representatives 

I write in solemn tribute to the heroes of Bataan. On this day when the 
alleluiahs for a risen Christ triumphant over sin and death resound through- 
out America, we pause in memory of those valliant men and women who, in heroic 
battle, fought the enemy of mankind until their weapons fell from hands too tired 
to carry on to victory the fight their spirit so devoutly desired consumated. With 
courage high and heart heavy those men — the bravest of the brave — gave way 
before the foe, not in ultimate defeat 
but in anguished despair that our be- 
loved Stars and Stripes could not con- 
tinue in glorious permanence over the 
land for which America gave of its 
fortune and its blood. Men of Bataan, 
your bravery and sacrifice in the cause 
of free mankind relighted the path for 
us who, as true Americans today, give 
promise that your cross shall not have 
been borne in vain. 

THE EPIC OF BATAAN 

We all know the story of the epic 
of Bataan. When the siege of Bataan 
began, General MacArthur had in his 
command approximately 7,000 Ameri- 
can combatant troops, 3.000 Filipino 
Scouts, and 55,000 Filipino Reserves. 
This small army was without important 
air and naval protection. Heroically 
they battled against a force of yellow 
zealots far superior in number, seasoned 
by training, well equipped for battle, 
the Japanese were supported by bomb 
divers and naval guns, with lines of 
communications intact, reinforcements 
constantly available, supplies and am- 
munition at instant command. Despite 
these overwhelming odds our men 
tpught until exhausted from hunger, 
sick from disease, and until their am- 
munition had been exhausted. 

Beleaguered American soldiers held 
heir ground against repeated and sus- 
tained attack, meeting assault upon as- 
sault without rest or replacements, tired 
to exhaustion in a situation grievously 
aggravated by lack of sustenance, med- 
ical aid, and munitions. At their out- 
post they were surrounded and cut off 
from our aid by an enemy superior on 
the sea, in the air, and on the land. 
I he met their enemy with faith in 
their hearts— courageous beyond de- 
scription—in conduct becoming our 
fighting forces. Under fearful bom- 
bardment from daylight to nightfall 



and from dusk till dawn, they kept a 
faithful vigil at their posts. Four long 
months of siege was withstood bv these 
brave men who succumbed only after 
they had become so exhausted by hun- 
ger, disease, and fatigue that it was 
humanly physically impossible for 
them to carry on. Their days were 
numbered, as the world knew, and on 
April 9, 1942, after 4 months of siege 
in which a fearful enemy utilized every 
instrument of destruction, the bitter 
truth that courage alone will not suf- 
fice in w r ar became too evident and a 
battle of man against machine was over. 
We in America have not felt, nor can 
we feel, their suffering, but we can, 
with reverence, be ever mindful of their 
dignity in their fate. General MacAr- 
thur had no hesitancy in proclaiming 
publicly: "The sacrifice and halo of 
Jesus of Nazareth has decended upon 
them and God will take them unto 
Himself." 

AMERICA IN WORD WAR II 

The significance of Bataan rests upon 
the vital moral effect of our defeat 
upon the American people. After World 
War No. 1 America, ostensibly at 
least, had been lulled into the false 
security that a war to end war had 
been fought and its end accomplished. 
America refused to face reality and 
even in the approaching storm when 
the heavens filled with war clouds 
Americans refused to believe that World 
War No. 2 was our war. Then came 
dastardly Pearl Harbor, and Bataan 
and its horror. Then America, aroused 
from its peace-loving lethargy, proved 
that her sons had not grown soft in 
luxury and could, with men of other 
nations, equally withstand the fright- 
fulness of modern warfare. Bataan 
regenerated hidden American morale. 



In this hour of recollection America 
must not forget the courage and devo- 
tion with which Filipino troops fought 
side by side with our soldiers. Their 
example established them to a place 
among free nations and vindicated for- 
ever the basic soundness of our Ameri- 
can policy of holding the Philippines, 
not for exploit or gain, but for the 
development, education, and prepara- 
tion of their long-awaited self-govern- 
ment. When our hour of crisis came, 
these natives of the Philippines, three 
out of four of our Army being Fili- 
pinos, never hesitated or wavered in 
their determination to fight valiantly 
and unflinchingly with America for its 
future destiny — and our victory. We 
must never forget that they, with us, 
were glorious in an army which won 
the commendation, "No army has ever 
done so much with so little." 

CASUALTIES IN THE PHILIPPINES 

There are, because of understandable 
circumstances, few available statistics 
which will accurately portray the fight- 
ing forces of Bataan. On April 17, 
1942, a War Department communique 
stated that there were approximately 
35,000 American combatant troops and 
several thousand noncombatant troops 
and reserves at Bataan. There were 
included in these figures Filipino 
Scouts. In January of 1944 the War 
Department stated that the casualties 
of the Philippine campaign amounted 
to 1,092 killed, 1,720 wounded, 15,309 
missing, and 13,494 prisoners of war. 
In this total of 31,615 fighting troops 
who became casualties, there are in- 
cluded 12,506 Filipino Scouts. For- 
eign governments have officially noti- 
fied that 1,614 prisoners of war have 
died in prison camps and it is safe 
to assume that the majority of these 
men died following their capture and 
internment by the Japanese. 

THE NURSES ON BATAAN 

No story will ever be complete with- 
out reference to the group of American 
nurses who were always at the side of 
our soldiers in their hours of sorrow 
and suffering. No words of mine can 
adequately portray their sad and in- 
spirational performance of duty. These 
heroic women faced hardship and dan- 
ger without murmur or complaint — 
with distinguishing courage and exam- 
ple. Only the men who were there 
can truthfully tell what we can but im- 
agine — the strength and faith and spirit 
instilled into our soldiers by these an- 
gels of mercy as they quietly and effi- 
ciently cared for the wounded and the 



• 20 ■ 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



sick, encouraged the impoverished, 
made brave the faltering. These women 
learned intimately the meaning of want 
and privation. They suffered the worst 
of heartache and disappointment, as 
only a woman can know and under- 
stand the sufferings of a man. These 
heroes of our nursing corps have won. 
unasked and unasking, our undying 
praise and gratitude for their devotion 
to duty. And their sorrow, the bitter- 
ness of their fate, is but a mild reflec- 
tion of the sorrow of womanhood 
throughout the world — in all lands — 
where the crimes of the aggressor na- 
tions have brought death and ruin. 

America has learned a lesson from 
Bataan — taught by those heroes who 
knew they never had a chance but who 
fought a hopeless, delaying series of 
actions that our country might have as 
long a time as possible to recover from 
Pearl Harbor. We have learned realism 
in international relations. May we ever 
profit by their teachings — may we never 
forget that international trust must be 
wise as well as sincere. Reproachment 
and recrimination will never avenge 
our sorrow. Hope and faith will, how- 
ever soften its grief. 

We have learned another lesson from 
our Philippine campaign. You and 
I, as Americans, have come to know 
that we can make sacrifice in our daily 
lives without complaining. We, as a 
nation, have come to realize that by 
our sacrifices alone we can reward 
those men and women who have left 
their homes and families and today, on 
distant battlefields, protect our lives, 
our wives, our parents, our children, 
from the crushing evil of despotism 
and tyranny. We have learned as a 



nation that we are glad to be able to 
show individual appreciation of that 
protective sacrifice of the men and 
women of the armed forces which 
brings both sorrow and joy into our 
hearts. May we ever strive to be more 
worthy of those men and women who 
have given and are giving all that we 
may live in freedom and peace. 

ROOSEVELT'S PROMSE TO FILIPINOS 

President Roosevelt has said, "I give 
to the people of the Philippines my 
solemn pledge that their freedom will 
be redeemed and their independence 
established and protected. The entire 
resources in men and materials of the 
United States stand behind that pledge." 
Inspirational words of our inspirational 
Commander in Chief, General MacAr- 
thur, on the first anniversary of Ba- 
taan, stated, i; I was the leader of that 
lost cause, and from the bottom of a 
seared and stricken heart I pray that 
a merciful God may not delay too long 
their redemption, that the day of sal- 
vation be not so far removed that they 
perish ; that it be not again too late." 

I too, say Bataan shall be redeemed. 
The vile barbarism of the hand that 
wreaked havoc upon our people with 
all the terrible consequences of cruel 
and devastating war shall be destroyed. 
The guilty will be punished. No plea 
of madness will bar retribution. 

No; Bataan was not fought in vain, 
a futile sacrifice upon the altar of mili- 
tarism. The greatest single defeat of 
our history has proven worth the tears 
and blood. Bataan has taught that 
America can lose a battle and win 
the war. 



Let us hope and pray that after we 
win the war, that the heroism and sac- 
rifices of those who fought at Bataan 
and on other battle fronts, past, pres- 
ent, and future, will be the guiding 
spirit to our statesmen in winning the 
peace. 

Central America To Become 
Big Source of Manila Hemp 

By 1945. it is estimated, Central 
America will be supplying the United 
States with 15 to 20 per cent of the 
amount of abaca formerly imported 
from the Philippines. Abaca is the 
source of manila hemp, essential for 
the manufacture of cordage for mer- 
chant and naval vessels. 

This estimate of prospective abaca 
production under the large-scale de- 
velopment program in Central Amer- 
ica is given by Leo T. Crowley, head 
of the Foreign Economic Administra- 
tion, in an account of strategic-mate- 
rial procurement in the other American 
republics recently submitted to Sena- 
tor Kenneth McKellar, acting chairman 
of the Senate Appropriations Commit- 
tee. 

Some 40,000 acres are being devel- 
oped in Panama, Guatemala, Costa Ri- 
ca, and Honduras for production of 
abaca to help replace the loss of ma- 
nila-hemp imports from the Philip- 
pines, formerly the source of virtually 
all the United States' supply of this 
material. 

In 1937, the United States imported 
nearly 44,000 long tons of abaca from 
the Philippines, compared with only 
300 from Panama. On this basis, 
Central America by 1945 would supply 
7,000 or 8.000 tons to help meet in- 
dispensable rope needs. 

The Central American plantations 
are being developed from root stock 
obtained from a small experimental 
plantation started in Panama in 1925 
with the aid of the United States De- 
partment of Agriculture. 

We have nothing but praise and ad- 
miration for the commanders and the 
men who have conducted the epic 
chapter in American history. 

This is only a temporary loss. We 
shall not stop until we drive the in- 
vaders from the islands. — Secretary of 
War Stimson, April 9, 1942. 




MAY, 1944 



■ 21 - 



FRIENDS OF THE PHILIPPINES— II 



by LARSTON DAWN FARRAR 
"Bataan" Staff Writer 

On November 14. 1935, Frank Murphy, the last Governor General to the 
Philippine Islands, spoke before the assembled Philippine Legislature: 

"This great and happy venture of the American and Filipino people is not 
yet ended. With an altered framework and broadened autonomy, the Philippine 
Government goes on under the American flag with the full confidence and support 
of the people and the Government of 
the United States. 



"As in all good books of high ad- 
venture and romance, we close this 
chapter, anticipating the next, confi- 
dent that the Divine Author will bring 
the story to a fair ending in accord- 
ance with the faith and high purpose 
of its beginnings " 

MURPHY HELD BOTH POSTS 

m The next day, Frank Murphy stood 
in beautiful Malacanan Palace and 
took the oath of office as first United 
States High Commissioner to the Phil- 
ippines. He was the last of the Gov- 
ernor-Generals and first of the Hi<m 
Commissioners. ° 

On the next day ? Manuel Quezon 
was inaugurated President of the new 
Eft Government and th" 

22 p ST f gan i he last mile ° n the 

road to freedom-little dreaming that, 
in seven short years, the Japs would 
dor ^ tri um P hantly on Corregi- 

EAGERLY AWAIT LIBERATION 

Mu^t y '' f0rmei ;. High Co ^sioner 
it s i l Y fV associate 
us ce of the Supreme Court of the 

lZ e t S , tat ? and ™ e of the best 
fi ends of the Philippines in all the 
nation. Like every American, he waits 
eagerly for the day to come when the 
Hhihppmes— and every Pacific isle- 
is cleared of the Japs and can once 
more enjoy the hopes of freedom. 

Frank Murhpy went to the Philip- 
pine Islands as Governor General. He 

RoJ^h ?° Ve r r Generd ^dore 
Koosevelt Jr., who although a second 

cousin of Franklin D. Roosevel wa 

Z the 193 2 ardent Re ^ bli — Dur- 
mg the 1932 campaign, Teddy, J r 

(he was the son of former PrSiden 
Theodore Roosevelt) campaigned ac- 

ivelv for President Hoover. After the 
Democratic landslide, Governor Gen 
era! Roosevelt was asked about hi, re- 
lationship to the President-elect/ 

n 22 :: 



"I am a cousin about to be removed," 
he replied. 

IS A CATHOLIC BACHELOR 

He stayed in the Philippines until 
March 16, 1933, when he was suc- 
ceeded by Frank Murphy, the second 
Catholic and the second bachelor Amer- 
ican Governor General of the Philip- 
pines, destined to be the last Governor 
General. 

Mr. Murphy, who had attained a 
national reputation as Mayor of De- 
troit because of his advanced methods 
of caring for the poor and indigent, 
took the oath of office as Governor Gen- 
eral on June 15, 1933, saying, after 
his appointment: "I believe in freedom. 
I am a Democrat and believe in the 
intents and purposes of the Declara- 
tion of Independence." 

As a noted writer has commented, 
that information was unnecessary — the 
map of Ireland was written all over 



Mr. Murphy's face and every Irishman 
is noted for his love of independence. 

POPULAR POLITICALLY, SOCIALLY 

Mr. Murphy was most popular — po- 
litically and socially — in the Philip- 
pines. In the former field of endeavor, he 
became famous in Manila for his par- 
ties in Malacanan Palace, and in 1934 
the Philippine Free Press selected him 
as the "Socialite of the Year." He won 
his popularity with Filipinos because 
he insisted on discussing every ap- 
pointment with local leaders as well 
as Washington leaders. And in form- 
ing his cabinet, he appointed four 
members of the Philippine Legislature 
as department heads, showing the peo- 
ple of the Islands that he believed in 
pushing self-government whenever and 
wherever possible. 

Therefore, it was no fault of his — 
in fact, whose fault could not be de- 
termined — that in May, 1935, the Sak- 
dalistas, members of a radical politi- 
cal organization in provinces surround- 
ing Manila, tried to overthrow the lo- 
cal government. The insurrectionists 
succeeded in taking over several mu- 
nicipalities, but were eventually sup- 
pressed after more than 60 persons had 
been killed and scores wounded. This 
was the first Philippine uprising in 
many years. 

FILIPINOS FRAMED CONSTITUTION 

The Philippine Com omn wealth con- 
stitution was framed by the Filipinos 
in 1934, and early in 1935, together 




Justice Murphy predicts early return 
Bay, in his Commonwealth Day add 
Auditor General Hernandez and Vice 



of the American Fleet to Manila 
ress, as Col. Carlos P. Romulo, 
> President Sergio Osmena listen 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 




with his good friend. Manuel Quezon, 
Mr. Murphy went to Washington to 
help see that it obtained early ap- 
proval by President Roosevelt. Both 
he and Mr. Quezon were at Franklin 
D. Roosevelt's side when the constitu- 
tion was signed on March 23, 1935. 

"For all practical purposes the Fili- 
pinos will be independent when the 
Commonwealth begins," Mr. Murphy 
commented, little dreaming of the gath- 
ering storm in the Pacific that would 
engulf the Philippines and many an- 
other island empire. 

On his visit in Washington, Mr. 
Murphy helped lay the foundations for 
the Joint Preparatory Committee on 
Philippine Affairs. Then he returned 
to the Philippines to take the oath as 
first High Commissioner, in Novem- 
ber, 1935. 

MURPHY RETURNED AT F.D.R.'S REQUEST 

Early in 1936, after being asked to 
run for the post of Governor of Michi- 
gan by President Roosevelt, Mr. Mur- 
phy returned to the United States. His 
job was held open for him in the Phil- 
ippines until he was elected. During 
this period, J. Weldon Jones, financial 
adviser to Mr. Murphy, acted as tem- 
porary High Commissioner, but after 
Murphy's election, Paul Vorhis Mc- 
Nutt was appointed High Commissioner. 

Frank Murphy was born on April 
13, 1890, at Harbor Beach, Mich., the 
son of John T. and Mary (Brenan) 
Murphy. He attended grade and high 
schools in his home town and then at- 
tended the University of Michigan, 
where he attained the degree of Bach- 
elor of Law. He did graduate study at 
Lincoln's Inn., London, and Trinity 
College in Dublin. 

WAS CAPTAN IN ARMY 

Imemdiately after graduation, he was 
admitted to the Michigan Bar and, a 
short time later, he became a law clerk 
in the firm of Monaghan and Mona- 
ghan in Detroit. During this period, 
he applied himself even more vigor- 
ously to the study of law and taught 
law at night school in Detroit until 
April, 1917, when he entered the U. S. 
Army. He served as first lieutenant, 
later captain of an Infantry Division 
in the Army, serving overseas in the 
war and later willi the Army of Occu- 
pation in Germany. 

On his return to Michigan in 1919, 
he was named chief assistant to the 
United States Attorney for the Eastern 
District of Michigan for one year. 
From 1922 until 1927 he held two 



jobs — one as instructor in law at the 
University of Detroit and one as judge 
of the Detroit Recorder's Court. He 
was elected mayor of Detroit on the 
Democratic ticket in 1930, serving 
there until he was appointed Governor 
General of the Philippines. His tenure 
as Governor of Michigan, beginning 
in 1936, lasted only three years, but 
was characterized by excellent adminis- 
tration and service to all classes of 
people. In 1939 he was appointed At- 
torney General of the United States, 
serving until January, 1940, when he 
was appointed Associate Justice of the 
United States Supreme Court. 

AWARDED MANY HONORARY DEGREES 

The value of Mr. Murphy's services 
in all his work can be seen in the 
manner in which his colleagues and 
fellow-workers have honored him 
through the years. When he was in 
the Philippiines he was literally 
swamped with honorary degrees from 
various universities — an LL. D. from 
the University of Santo Tomas, Ma- 
nila, 1934; the same from the Uni- 
versity of the Philippines in 1935, as 
well as the same degree from Fordham 
University, Loyola University, Los An- 
geles, University of Detroit, Duquesne, 
St. John's L^niversity of Brooklyn, New 
Mexico State College, Louisiana State 
University, St. Bonaventure College of 



New York, University of Michigan, 
John Marshall College and St. Joseph's 
College of Philadelphia. 

While mayor of Detroit, he was 
elected President of the United States 
Association of Mayors. 

Today, although deeply engrossed 
in national law and international af- 
fairs, Frank Murphy has lost none of 
his interest in the Philippines. He is 
still a close friend of Manuel Quezon, 
President-in-exile of the Philippine 
Commonwealth, and looks forward ea- 
gerly to the time when his friends in 
the Philippines are freed from the yoke 
of Japanese domination. Although he 
has not personally been in the news, 
the imprint of his humanitarian, inde- 
pendent outlook is seen in many de- 
cisions handed down by the highest 
court of the greatest representative 
government on earth. 



The tributes all of us are payina the 
heroes of Corregidor make us feel bet- 
ter. But the words are not enough. 
It was their acts that counted. Only 
our acts count now— on the home front, 
on the production line, and in battle ~ 

"Remember Corregidor ! " — Editorial 
Washington Daily IXeies. May 7. 1942 



MAY, 1944 



Yap Stresses American - Filipino Ties; 
Urges Perpetual Partnership After War 

Filipino editor says that these years of suffering will conclusively 
show all that the destinies of the U. S. and Philippine Islands are 
linked. 

The United States and the Philippine Commonwealth must not dissolve their 
close partnership once the Japanese are cleared again from Bataan and all the 
islands of the Pacific, Dr. Diosdado M. Yap, editor and publisher of BATAAN, 
declared recently in an address commemorating the second anniversary of the 
fall of Bataan, at Maywood, Illinois. 

"In the battle of the Philippines, the Americans and the Filipinos have been, 
and are, partners in sacrifice and suf- 



fering," he declared. "Unhappily for 
both of us, there have been times in 
the past when we have allowed the 
Japanese to sow suspicions between 
us, when we allowed minor and tem- 
porary difference and sectional and 
selfish interests to detract us from the 
grand strategy which ought to have 
dictated unity of purpose in our every 
act. 

"Both of our nations have made mis- 
takes in our policies. Let us admit 
this — and then let us draw the right 
lessons from our mistakes and push 
on together to victory against the Jap- 
anese and to perpetual collaboration 
in the post-war world." 



Christ stands for life after death and 
suffering — so we, also, in our Chris- 
tian faith renew our determination to 
the dawn of a new day when the suf- 
ferings and agonies of our loved ones 
who fell on Bataan will have its Easter." 

Reviewing the Bataan campaign, Dr. 
Yap declared that it ended in the death 
or capitvity of the Filipino-American 
Army of 36,853 men, but that this 
army won a tactical victory by delay- 
ing for months the Japanese march to 
victory in the Southwest Pacific. 

"Hongkong, Singapore, Burma and 
the Netherlands Indies fell one after 
another and the Japanese onslaught 



REVIEWS BATAAN CAMPAIGN 

Beginning his speech with a com- 
parison of the tortures undergone by 
Christ and those endured by the pris- 
oners on Bataan, Dr. Yap said, "Two 
thousand years ago there was enacted 
a drama filled with unspeakable tor- 
ture and atrocities. The victim of that 
indescribable suffering was the Son of 
God who, in the prime of His youth, 
was made to suffer tortures. As He 
bore the Cross in that never-to-be-for- 
gotten March of Death on the dreary 
road to Calvary, Christ dramatized the 
supreme agony because of an ideal 
which He championed — the very doc- 
trine of righteousness, of sound, hon- 
est, and equitable human fellowship. 

"Two years ago, there was also en- 
acted a drama characterized by tor- 
tures and atrocities— the victims of 
which episode were our youthful Amer- 
ican-Filipino troops. They, too, had 
undergone the 'March of Death.' They 
suffered also because of an ideal— the 
ideal for which Americanism stands— 
for freedom, liberty, equality, and jus- 
tice. 

"As we pause today to celebrate Eas- 
ter with jubilation — as the resurrected 



was beginning already to be felt down 
in the antipodes — threatening the con- 
tinent of Australia, but deep in the 



heart of the Japanese-conquered lands 
was a sore spot — the Philippines. Brave 
fighting by the Americans and Filipinos 
under Gen. Douglas Mac Arthur tied 
up 200,000 of Japan's shock troops, 
pinned to the jungles of Bataan. 

BATAAN PROTECTED AUSTRALIA 

"Had Bataan collapsed a s quickly 
as British and Dutch colonies in the 
Far Fast did, it is probable that Aus- 
tralia would have been invaded. There 
is no telling where Japan would have 
utilizerl the 200,000 soldiers that would 
have been available if Bataan had not 
held, but it is not pleasant to think 
of the result if these men had been 
able to get into action outside of the 
Philippines." 

Dr. Yap. who is also the Washing- 
ton representative of the Federated 
Organizations for Bataan Relief, con- 
tinued : 

THOUSANDS OF FILIPINOS DIED 

"The men who were captured on 
Bataan were subjected to all kinds of 
atrocities and humiliations by the con- 
querors. From Bataan, the prisoners 
were marched over 50 miles of hard 
roads to the Japanese prison camp m 
Tarlac. On the way thousands of 
Americans ana Filipinos died from 
hunger, fatigue, disease and enemy 
bayonets. 

"But the Bataan campaign has come 
to mean more than a bloody spot 




Bataan Day was celebrated in Maywood, Illinois, April 9th, with 
Dr. Diosdado M. Yap, Editor and Publisher of BATAAN Magazine, as its 
principal speaker. Picture above, left to right Mr A. C McArthur, 
President of the American Bataan Clan; Mrs Clara Kunoy (whose son 
is still reported missing in the Philippines) ^ M.ss Frances Pancho, and 
J ay J. McCarthy of the Filipino 



Guerrillas of 



Bataan Association 

PHOTO BY RUDY LUCIANO 



■ 24 ■ 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



where contending forces fought each 
other desperately — to the bitter end. 
Bataan is a grim story of brave men 
whose heroic deeds will live down in 
the history of man's struggle against 
the forces of aggression. 

DEFEATED BUT RENOWNED 

"It is the story of an ill-equipped, 
out-gunned, hunger-bitten, disease-rid- 
den army of Filipino and American 
soldiers who succeeded in humiliating 
Nippon's numerically superior and bet- 
ter-equipped armies. Our brave sol- 
diers buried themselves in their fox- 
holes, contesting every inch of ground 
the enemy gained from them by the 
sheer force of his air and land might. 
As a result, they covered themselves 
with glory, despite their defeat in the 
end. Their dogged determination to 
stall the enemy, while hoping for re- 
lief that never came, helped a lot in 
upsetting the Japanese timetable of 
invasion. 

"Outside of the strategic as well as 
the moral triumph which the Filipino 
and American soldiers have achieved 
on Bataan, the place holds out as a 
'beacon to all liberty-loving peoples of 
the world.' 

"It is natural that our thoughts 
should go out across the Pacific to 
the somber but heroic events which 
are unfolding in the southwest Pacific 
area today. Our minds turn to the 
brave people of the Philippines, to all 
the peoples now suffering under the 
heel of the Japanese domination, and 
all of the once-free countries still oc- 
cupied by the enemy. 

FACE DEATH FOR FREEDOM 

"To these prisoners — to all of them 
— we pay the tribute which their silent 
suffering and courage claim. 

"It is no secret today that Filipino- 
American guerrilla forces are in open 
and armed revolt against the Japanese 
forces occupying the Philippines. Nor 
is it a secret that, with a cold courage 
beyond all praise, men and women in 
towns and villages all over the Philip- 
pines are working for the liberation of 
their country, although discovery may 
mean instant death by the invader. 

SUFFERING WILL UNITE THEM 

44 In these men and women lies the 
promise of the freedom of the isles. 
I have profound faith in the restora- 
tion of the Philippines. I believe that 
the sufferings of the Filipinos and the 
Americans in the islands during the 
last two years will have the effect of 
a purifying fire, out of which will 



Ban On Manila Hemp For Hangings 
Shows Importance Of Fibre For War 

Philippines supplied U. S. with 95 per cent of its manila hemp needs. 
Filipinos used top fibers in cloth making. 

Shortage of "manila hemp," the world's best rope-making material, is empha- 
sized grimly by a recent ruling of the War Production Board that hangmen can 
not use ropes of this fiber in putting an end to the lives of criminals. Instead, 
the Board says, they must use ropes of agave fiber, which grows in Mexico, the 
West Indies and East Africa. 

Chief pre-war sources of abaca were the Philippine Islands and the Netherlands 
Indies, says the , National Geographic 
Society. About 95 per cent of the 
United States total imports was cred- 
ited to the Philippines. 

The Army, the Navy, and the Mer- 
chant Marine are given first call on 
the much-needed manila hemp. 



BETTER THAN HEMP 

"Manila hemp" is not hemp at all. 
It is much better. Whereas ordinary 
hemp comes from small stalks, each of 
which produces only a few fibers, ma- 
nila hemp consists of the fibers from 
the leaf stalks of a species of banana 
plant called abaca. Each leaf stalk of 
the many which wrapped together form 
the trunk of a banana "tree," yields 
hundreds of fibers longer and stronger 
than those of the hemp plant. 

To get the fibers the tree must be 
felled. Then the leaves are stripped 
off. Next, the leaf stalks are separated 
and scraped with a dull knife or by 
machinery until the pulpy part is re- 
moved. The coarse fibers remaining 
are washed, dried, and baled. 



emerge a new friendship of vigor and 
vitality, together with a new common- 
wealth. I am confident that once more 
the Philippines will stand erect — free — 
proud — and strong — and again take her 
place which belongs to her, in the fu- 
ture of the Far East and of the world. 

"I predict — and it is my fervent 
hope — that these terrible years of un- 
speakable sufferings will have left in 
our minds, and burned into our na- 
tional consciousness, the lesson that in 
the final analysis the destinies of the 
Philippines and of the United States 
are linked, that our interests are in- 
separable, and that as we are com- 
rades in war, we must remain partners 
in the peace that we shall keep secure 
together when the war is over and the 
long post-war world is a reality." 



FIBERS IDEAL FOR MAKING ROPE 

Abaca fibers are water-resistant, do 
not harden or stiffen when wet. They 
are salt resistant, shock absorbing, and 
ideal for making rope. Finest fibers 
were used by the Filipinos to make 
abaca cloth. 

Since 1925 abaca has been cultivated 
i n Latin America through arrange- 
ments made by the United States Gov- 
ernment. It matures quickly, reaches 
harvest age about eighteen months af- 
ter planting. From an experimental 
planting of 2,000 acres in Panama, 
cultivation spread to other countries, 
and accelerated rapidly following Pear] 
Harbor. The area needed to fill war 
requirements is estimated at 30.000 
acres. Mills set up near the planta- 
tions separate the fibers mechanically. 

SOME IMPORTED FROM MEXICO 

Mexico's agave, when it crosses the 
United States border, is known as the 
century plant. It is a plant of may 
species, many uses. Sisal hemp, or 
henequen, conies from the thick, fleshy 
eaves of one variety. Other types of 
the plant yield Tampico hemp, maguey, 
ixtile, pita, yaxci, and lechuguilla. 

Agave plants mature and flower in 
three to fifteen years, according to spe- 
cies. The flower stalk — issuing like a 
flag pole from the center of the plant — 
may push up thirty feet. 

A brisk foreign and domestic trade 
rested on agave fibers. Some were 
exported; all are used in their home 
land for making rope, mats, bags, har- 
ness, hammocks, hats, baskets, and 
brushes. Flower stalks provide build- 
ing material and razor strops. Roots 
make soap substitutes. The sap of some 
species, mixed with milk and rennet, 
makes the drink pulque. The fermented 
juice of other species, when distilled, 
becomes the heady liquor known as 
mezcal or tequila. 



MAY, 1944 



-25- 



On to C^omaidc 



lor 



by ELIZABETH PARSONS 

He came to say goodbye two years ago, almost to the day, when the ghastly 
news of the fall of Corregidor had left us stunned and almost bereft of hope. 

He was* one of the youngsters here on our road — just a kid even now, when 
he came to say "goodbye." Red-haired, freckled "Red" — off with the Marines. 
Although he didn't then know, and we had never heard of the place, he was on 
his way to Guadalcanal. 

One could not believe, when he came 
so boyishly — manfully — to tell us, "I'm 
shoving off in the morning. I'm going 
to do my best to bring Jim home to 
you, from the Philippines. I want to 
help him and the other swell guys 
there, that the Japs have captured." 

No; one really couldn't believe that 
this sixteen-year-old lad was £>;oing 
away to fight the Japs. So we shook 
hands, said, "Goodbye, Red— God bless 
you, and we know you'll do a grand 
job, and write when you can." 

He didn't have much time to write, 
our red-head. He was too busy — too 
very busy- -fighting Japs in the jungles 
and swamps of far-off Guadalcanal. 

Then, one day, word came to his dad 
and mom— "regret to inform— son- 



killed in action!" Later, came a pur- 
ple heart decoration — and later-, yet, 
his bits of things that were his very 
own — personal effects. 

Brave, blithe, read-headed "Red," 
not yet seventeen, sleeps somewhere in 
a rough-dug grave, ten thousand miles 
from home. He went away to help 
bring home our gallant men of Cor- 
regidor, of Wake, Bataan and Guam. 
He has fallen, and with him many 
more. 

Yet hundreds of thousands have lift- 
ed the torch that was for a little while 
held by a gallant boy, and are carry- 
ing it on, from steaming jungles, from 



wretched fox-holes, from 



high-flying 



Fortresses, Mustangs and Liberators, 
from great battleships and cruisers, 
from PT boats and barges. From every 
city, town and village the men of 
America are marching relentlessly on — 
the invincible men of America! 

They carry the torch of freedom that 
was handed them, at Guadalcanal— 
they carried it to Tarawa, Kwajalein, 
Ponape, Palau, Hollandia and Truk. 
And even now they are buckling on 
their armor anew for the day of the 
great liberation, when the men of 
America will join their Filipino friends 
in mutual victory — when the White and 
Gold Flag of the Philippines and the 
Stars and Stripes shall once again be 
flown on the "Rock" and over fair 
Manila Bay. 

And in that throng, in that great 
Victory Parade, will march unseen the 
gallant "Reds," the fair-haired' lads, 
the dark-skinned boys, the boys who 
paid in full to set the Philippines free. 
And not till then, and only then, will 
gentle sleep attend them. 

Just tarry a little longer, then, for 
the Men of Mac Arthur, the Men of 
Nimitz, are soon to be there. The day 
of the Great Liberation draws near — 
ever nearer. And little Red Beckett will 
not have died in vain. 



2 Mv- - 



MAN-UFACTU RE D'By" 
STOCKTON, CALIF. 

WHOLESALE St RETAIL 

MAIL ORDER INQUIRIES SOLICITED 



BENITO R. ALCANTARA 

LUZON MARKET 

Telephone 2-9488 Telephone 5-5381 

Residence Telephone 2-0462 
STOCKTON CALIFORNIA 



PHONE PLAZA 1054 



FELIX V. G0LDSB0R0UGH, Jr. 

Special Agent 
NEW YORK LIFE INSURANCE CO. 



1008 Keyser Building 
BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 



BATAAN MAGAZINE 



Australia Fully Mobilizes To Lick Japs; 
Supply Allied Forces, Owen Dixon Says 

Australian Minister to U. S. reports that reverse Lend-Lease accounts 
for 18 per cent of his country's war expenditures, compared to 
America's . 14 per cent. 

Despite the absence of armed violence from the history of Australia, that 
country has managed to prepare for total war in all its aspects, including the 
best Utilization of manpower, the procurement of all available supplies and 
services under reverse lend-lease, and the direct participation in actual fighting, 
said Sir Owen Dixon in an address recently. 

Speaking to the Rhode Island World Affairs Council at Brown University, 
Providence^ R. I., the Australian Min- 
ister to the United States declared that 
12 per cent of Australia's population 
of 7,174,247 are enlisted in the armed 
forces. "Both manpower and woman- 
power are under the direction of a 
manpower authority," he said. 

"As a consequence, factories produc- 
ing civilian goods have diverted to war 
production 70% of their pre-war 
strength; banking, insurance, and 
finance, 40% of theirs; retail trade 
30% of its pre-war numbers, and 
wholesale trade 28% of its pre-war 
ngure. Of women, 30% of those of 
fourteen years and over are in full 
time war work or else in full time 
civilian employment. Of these some 
50,000 are in the women's auxiliaries 
to the armed services, of which there 
are three, that is, for Navy, for Army, 
and for Air Force." 

PLEDGED TO FEED ALL THERE 

On the subject of food production, 
Sir Owen revealed that Australia had 
committed itself "to feed every Ameri- 
can, Australian, and Allied serviceman 
in the theatre commanded by General 
MacArthur . . . and ... to feed also 
those in the neighboring command of 
Admiral Halsey, namely the South Pa- 
cific Area. We are committed of 
course also to feed the Australian civil- 
ian population and ... to maintain 
food exports to Great Britain at the 
highest possible level. To do all this, 
the civilians in Australia have submit- 
ted to the rationing of butter, sugar, 
and meat, and have suffered from 
shortages of various fresh vegetables.' 

The Minister touched briefly on the 
financial side of the war by giving a 
few statistics. He said that Australia 
had spent something less than half the 
total national income on the war in 
the 12 months ending June 30, 1943, 
and cited the typical income tax rates 
currently in force, direct taxation be- 
ing heaviest on high incomes. 




^S*> Owen <2)/* 



REVERSE LEND-LEASE ANALYZED 

From finance, Sir Owen turned his 
attention to the provocative question 
of reverse lend-lease and referred to 
statements made on the subject by Col. 
Spencer B. Eddy (U. S. Army) before 
the House Foreign Affairs Committee 
upon his return from two years' service 
in Australia, when he had been acting 
most recently as General Purchasing 
Agent for the Army. 

'The Minister quoted Colonel Lddy 
as raying, " . . • tlie overall policy 
laid down by the Foreign Eco- 
nomic Administration and the War De- 
partment . . . has been clear from 
the outset— procure all supplies and 
services available in Australia, and, in 
order to save American dollars, pro- 
cure as much of it as possible under 
present limits of its manpower and 
materials— is doing what it reasonably 
can for the United States and is car- 
" in g out the job of supplying recipro- 
1 aid in the true spirit of a cour- 
ageous ally and a good friend." 

Discussing the Battle of the Pacific, 
Sir Owen said that Australians take the 



ca 



greatest pride in the contribution of 
their fighting forces to the defeat of 
the Japanese. He reminded those pres- 
ent of the battle of the Coral Sea in 
reverse lend-lease." 

SUPPLYING MUCH TO ALLIES 

According to Sir Owen, Colonel 
Eddy declared "lend-lease expenditures 
constitute .14// of our total war ex- 
penditures, while reverse lend-lease con- 
stitutes 18 r t of Australia's war ex- 
penditures .... What is significant is 
that the resources of both nations are 
being utilized most effectively for the 
prosecution of the war . . . Australia — 
May, 1942, when the United States 
naval forces foiled the attempt of . an 
enemy naval force to reach Port Mores- 
by by sea round the Louisade Archi- 
pelago. The Japanese, however, coun- 
tered with a ground force attack, driv- 
ing back Australian troops on the north 
coast of New Guinea. Reinforcements 
of American troops eventually resulted 
in defeat for the enemy. 

"The first part of the campaign in 
New Guinea was brought to a con- 
clusion at the end of January, 1943," 
Sir Oowen pointed out. "As July 
began, a new offensive was opened by 
the Allies and it resulted in the tak- 
ing of Salamaua and Lao and the clear- 
ing of the Huon Peninsula. The major 
part of the ground fighting in this 
campaign fell to the Australians, though 
at various points some American units 
were used." 

PRAISES NEW GUINEA FIGHTERS 

He expressed pride in "the hard- 
fought but completely successful cam- 
paigns in New Guinea . . ." He went 
on to say that "... their ground 
troops, operating over a terrain as 
difficult as could be found in any the- 
ater of war, have made a great con- 
tribution to the defeat of Japan. It 
is great because not only did it throw 
back the Japanese advance but it es- 
tablished the complete ascendency of 
Allied troops over the Japanese sol- 
diery and dispelled the illusion of the 
superiority of the Japanese as a fighter, 
whether in the jungle or elsewhere." 

The Australian Minister concluded 
by observing, "Australian and Ameri- 
can forces combine in the fighting 
against Japanese in a spirit of cooper- 
ation closer probably than has ever 
been witnessed among Allies. They 
meet the Japanese as comrades in arms, 
united by understanding and mutual 
confidence, and at sea, in the air, and 
on land, they form a combination so 
formidable that the Japanese arc quite 
unable to withstand it." 



MAY, 1944 



- 27- 




TRUK, Palau, Ponape, Kusaie, 
Kapingamarangi, Hollandia . . . 
the Jap -held bases are reeling 
under the sledge-hammer blows of 
our Air Forces. Guadalcanal, Bou- 
gainville, Tarawa, have already felt 
the fury of our landing parties. The 
enemy knows that we are on the 
read back toward victory and libera- 
tion of the Philippines. 

In the high tide of invasion, east 
and west, thousands of International 



Diesel Tractors are serving the Army, 
Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Forces. 
On many a battlefront these tractors 
play a righting part in the drama of 
tanks and ships and fighting men. 

It is the year of decision — over- 
seas and over here. This year many 
thousands of tractor operators on the 
home front will come to close grips 
with the warning : Take care of that 
equipment ! Make it last ! Make it 
do ! Harvester and the International 



Industrial Power Distributors are 
ready to see you through. K your 
need for new equipment is vital to 
the war effort, there is nc 
ment for you. If your nee 
vital, your International 
distributor is ready to } 
your present International 



INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER EXPt 



Harvester Building 



Chicago 1.J 



with your blood- 
Give to the* Blood Bank 



INTER 



Ig/jLlJC with your money- *\ls/*Ufc 
<flM* /S ' Boy EXTRA Bonds ft/fr"^ 



©n the food front- 
Stay with that War Garden 



the hidden on* 
Fight 1NFLATK 



ATIONAL HARVESTEI 

TWm jfat l/ic &yuf 1 




