\94fi 



r 





jWiflf KB CSWS' 

BUREAU OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS 

1NTERSCHOLASTIC ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION 

MEET 

OFFICIAL PROGRAM 



RIZAL MEMORIAL STADIUM, MANILA 



FEBRUARY 3-8, 1948 



OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
OF THE PHILIPPINES 



Message of His Excellency 
the President of the Philippines 

It is gratifying to note that thousands of our 
youth are now gathered in healthful athletic rivalry 
for the purpose of developing not only the physique 
but the spirit of fair play and good sportsmanship. 
I commend the efforts of the teachers and principals 
of the various public schools who have devoted time 
and. energy to the success of this athletic meet. I 
hope that the athletic program of our nation shall be 
carried on with enthusiasm and with true devotion to 
the dictum that a sound mind rests upon a sound body. 

Manuel A. Roxas 

President of the Philippines 



— 4 — 



HON. ELPIDIO QUIR1NO 

Vice-President of the Philippines 




— 7 — 




— 9 — 



MESSAGE OF THE HONORABLE 
THE SECRETARY OF EDUCATION 

I - happy to aref ^(S^fSSTA XuSl^sct- 

££jm SSSr sr-w 

^r noTt" culminate in this national athletic festival. 

7 Zi nVhUtio* in this country. There was a time when the ath- 

theZtio^ events and when such meets produced most 

/tKffi sent to international competitions. Now the colleges and 
JJwsities, public and private, have rightfully acqwred a leadmi , rote 
on the athletic scene, but the Bureau of Public Schools, which has blazed 
the trail will carry on with its program of developing interest in phys- 
ical education among the youth. For the physical education program of 
our schools is the expression of a basic concept that training for citi- 
zenship involves the acquisition not only of knowledge and skills but 
of physical preparedness and desirable character traits as well. 

This Interscholastic Meet therefore is a symbol of the well-rounded 
or balanced training that our public school system is providing for the 
youth of the country. It demonstrates that classroom teaching is ade- 
quately supplemented by physical and, character training on the play- 
ground and, athletic field training which often is the more essential 
equipment for the struggles of everyday life. This Interscholastic Meet 
then is one of the necessary activities to achieve the prime objectives of 
education in this country. I wish the Meet a full measure of success. 



Manuel V. Gallcgo 



SECRETARY OF EDUCATION 





HON. JOSE T. NUENO 

Congressman, North District, City of Manila 



— 11 — 



• MESSAGE OF HIS HONOR 
THE MAYOR OF THE CITY OF MANILA 



TO THE 



FIRST TOST-WAR BUREAU OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS INTERSCHO- 
LASTIC ATHLETIC ASSOCIATION MEET 



The initiative that the Department of Education has taken in help- 
ing build up the vigor and strength of the youth of today, through the 
holding of the first post-war Bureau of Public Schools Inter scholastic 
Association Meet at the Jose Rizal Memorial Stadium from F ebruary 
8 to S, is worthy of praise and the highest commendation. The depart- 
ment knows full well, as it has always known, that in the development 
of a strong citizen) y, health of body and mind is of prime importance. 

The first Association Meet will foster genuine love for wholesome 
sports and add incentive to the zest of clean living. There is no denying 
the fact that a healthy mind goes with a. healthy body and that each is 
a necessary complement of the other. 



To the organizers of the Meet, my heartiest congratulations. They 
are doing a splendid and exemplary job that deserves the gratitude of 
the nation. 



Man iiel de la Fuentc 

MAYOR, CITY OF MANILA 



— 14 — 




HON. PRUDENCIO LANGCAUON 

Undersecretary of Education 



j— 



— 15 — 

U 



Message of the President 
of the 

Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation 

The revival of the National Inter scholastic Games which, except in 
war years 'were held annually since 1908, augurs well for the develop- 
ment' of athletics in the country. These games which were kept on a 
lofty plane have done much to foster interest for sports and recreation 
among the young men and women in the schools. They have also con- 
tributed, more than any other factor in the gradual elimination of sec- 
tional prejudices. For this reason, they have always merited the moral 
and financial support of the Government. Whatever development has 
been made and whatever standard . of achievement has been established 
along this line have been due in a' great measure to the efforts of the 
school teachers behind the movement who, at times promoted sports at 
their own personal initiative and sacrifice. 

The revival of the National Interscholastic Games is significant es- 
pecially in this period in which the Philippines is trying to repair not 
only the material but also the spiritual ravages of the war. But it is par- 
ticularly important because this being an Olympic year, we are anxious 
to find out what our young athletes can do for the Philippines iv the 
coming Olympic Games at London in 1948. 

We are proud of the great contribution that public school athletes 
have made in the participation of the Philippines in the World's Olym- 
pics and particularly in the Far Eastern Championship Games against 
China and Japan in which the showing of our teams, especially in track 
and field, depended upon the strength of our athletes who were products 
of the Bureau of Education athletic system. Nowhere else in the coun- 
try are track and field athletics so well encouraged and so extensively 

TZT ft "V* t lC V f^ C Seh00ls - As l °ng « Von continue to do thS 
interest ) 'or track and field will never be in the wane in the PhUippin^' 

J^lt VC tMt V- sh0W as much enthusiasm in the promotZ of 

TtZll^\Tn d V n tm f « ^at the future deTeiZment 

wouTb^aXS. 8P0H WMch SlWuld be Ve ™ *» ™r?oui 

naJetf ^h%I^ Mr^eZ'fS!^ ' P**? g 7 etin ° s > ™ th * 
athletes, as the l^NcS^F^ 1 ^/^^ to al1 officials and 
to open. It is my earnel hove W C ^onshi V s are about 

as an effective agencu in th* $l i the games ml1 continue to serve 
«%. totally ^ZrZtas^o*^ Youth-phyZ 



forge B. Vargas 

FRESIDENT, PAAF 




— 17 — 



I 



Message of the Director of Public Schools 

* ,% a viiivenii of Public School? Interscholastic Athletic As- 
On the occasion of the. Bw can of q . R f thi<f . v ear, I desire to ex- 

sociation Meet which will be ^f^^l^Z^m Tosffordial greeting 

it annin. 

mZtiod of our -program of physical ^vcfton mthe ^bhes^ 

gram embraces practically all of our youth mid. is ^^t^^^^fdm 

It hat therefore for its purpose some kind of "unlimited continuity. uou 

e^e o7T emails Ih&h the public schools of this country have 
llZd onthe health, conservation, and development of the 
man personality, we see our youth today stand tatter and f}^eiectm n 
ents, better prepared for gainful action, and more confident in then poum to 
grapple with the problems of the future. 

It is not, of course, the human body alone that the public schools have sought 
to develop through their program of health and physical education. Inside the hu- 
man body is a mind, a heart, a soul — and we have not neglected any of these in the 
execution of that program. Thus, by means of calisthenics, dances, and games duly 
integrated with health instruction, we have sought to promote the mental, social, 
and moral, no less than the physical, development of students in the public schools. 
We have endeavored to improve their outlooks and attitudes; we have_ taught them 
how to assume and discharge more fully their responsibilities as enlightened citi- 
zens in a democracy ; and, in every possible way, we have tried to purify the tone 
of their social lives. Because uie recognize the universality of the aims of phys- 
ical education. — in fact, of all good education — ice have always managed to impart 
its message of good ivill and understanding among peoples and races. 

Daihi we endeavor to dispel the. phantoms of international ill will and make 
little of the clouds that, hang ominously over a war-weary mankind. We pray and 
hope that never again may the Philippines and the world, go through the travail 
and the horrors of armed conflict. But if our dreams of peace are once more 
shattered and another world holocaust engulfs our beloved land may I sag that 
our people can test assured that the Filipino youth, largely because' of the train 
ing thev have received, directly or concomitantly from the program of health and 
physical education in the public schools, will again acquit themselves with dianitv 
and honor worthy of the vohle heritage of fortitude and valor beaueathed us bv the 
long roster of heroes, both Irving and dead, whose deeds and sacrifices have 
adorned the pages of our national history. ' a e 

Esteban R. Abada 

Director of Public Schools 



— 18 




MR. ESTEBAN R. ABADA 

Director of Public Schools 




— 20 — 




— 21 — 



HON. SEGUNDO AGUSTIN 

Member, Municipal Board, City of Afanila 





HON. ANDRES SANTAMARIA 

Member, Municipal Board, City of Manila 



HON. JOSEFINA PHODACA 

Member, Municipal Board. City of Manila 




( 




HON. AMADO V. HERNANDEZ 

Member. Municipal Board. City of Manila 




m HON SALVA DOR MARINO 

Member. Municipal Board, City oi Manila 



— 22 





HON. PEDRO R. ARENAS 

Member. Municipal Board, City of Manila 



HON. VICENTE CRUZ 

Member, Municipal Board, City of Manila 




HON. GREGORIO N. GARCIA 

Member. Municipal Board,' City of Manila 




HON. rSAURO M. SANTIAGO 

Member. Municipal Board, City of Manila 



— 23 




— 25 — 




MR. VENANCIO TRINIDAD 

Superintendent of City Schools 
President and Secretary-Treasurer 




MR. SERAFIN AQUINO 

Superintendent, Physical Education 
Department of Education 
Athletic Manager 



— 26 — 



B 0 A R D 0 B 1 D I R ECTO R S 




MR. MACARIO NAVAL MR. ROMAN F. LORENZO 

Superintendent, Philippine Normal School Division Superintendent of Schools, Cavitc 

President, Manila Tntcrscholastic Athletic Ass. President, Southern Tagalog Athletic Ass. 

Member Member 

— 27 — 



BOARD OF DIRECTORS 





MR. MANUEL ESCARRILLA 

Acting Div. Superintendent of Schools, Alba}' 

President, Bicol Athletic Association 
Member 



L. . 



«6 



DR. PEDRO C. GUTANG 

Division Superintendent of Schools, Cebir 
President. East Visayan Athletic Association 
Member 




MR. FERNANDO S. PUENTES 

Acting Div. Superintendent of Schools, N. Occ 

President, West Visayan Athletic Association 
Member 



— 28 — 



Acti„ c M S; v ^ T s °R *■ DE LEON 

MU, - er ^ tendent of Schools, 
tj ., Misamis Oriental 

Prewdent. Mindanao AthW a 

° Athletic Association 
Member 



