









r. 





. 






few 


it For approval or thft a- 





Page 1 
GENERAL 
DISCIPLINE 


1*01 Cadets of the Baguio Military Institute are not subject 
to the Military Laws of the Philippines, The conduct of a cadet 
shall he hound by the Rules and Regulations of the Bureau of 
Private Schools* Reserve Officer Training Coips (ROTC) Rules and 
Regulations, the by-laws of the Corporation* BSffl* the civil laws 
of the Philippines and such other rules and regulations that the 
Superintendent and the Commandant of Cadets shall promulgate from 
time to time® It is expected of every cadet to conduct himself, 
upon every oocasion, with the propriety and decorum which charac- 
terizes the society of gentlemen® 

1.02 Intoxicating Liquors & Narcotics ® - Cadets who shall 
drink, take or be found under the influence of intoxicating liquor 
or nar odtics, or cause the same to be brought within the Cadet 
limits, or have the same in their rooms, or otherwise in their 
possession, shall be dismissed from the school or otherwise less 
severely punished. 

t 

1*03 Ungentlemanlv Conduct . - Cadets are not only required 
to abstain from all vicious, immoral, and irregular conduct, but 
it is enjoined upon them to conduct themselves upon every occasion 
with the propriety and decorum whioh characterizes the society of 
gentlemen® Any cadet who shall be guilty of conduct unbecoming a 
cadet and a gentleman shall be dismissed from the school or other- 
wise less severely punished. 

Io04 False Statement . - Any cadet who shall knowingly or will- 
fully make or cause to be made any false statement shall be dismissed 
from the school or otherwise less severely punished, 

1.05 Disordersand Neglects . - All disorders and neglects to the 
prejudice of good order and discipline and all conduct of a nature 
to bring discredit upon the BMI shall be taken cognizance of by a 
board composed of officers appointed by the Commandant of Cadets 
according to the degree of the offense and punished at the discretion 
of such board subject to confirmation by the Superintendent. 


2 


1 e 06 Hazing, etc. - 

Section I. a. Hazing Defined .- Hazing is defined as 
any unauthorized assumption of authority by one cadet over ano- 
ther cadet whereby the latter 3 hall or may suffer or be exposed 
to suffer any cruelty, indignity, humiliation, hardships or op- 
pression or the deprivation or abridgement of any right, privilege, 
or advantage to whioh he shall be legally entitled. 

b. Encouraging Hazing Defined : - Encouraging hazing 
is defined as any act done or word spoken which directly or in- 
directly results in hazing or inclines another to haze, and any 
indication of approval when hazing is in process. 

c. Countenanci ng Ha zing_JD.af i ne d - Countenancing hazing 
is defined as the act of being present during hazing and while 

in a position to do so, or failing to make an honest effort to 
induoe the guilty parties to desist therefrom. 

Section II - a. Physical hazing (boxing or socking, 
kicking, slapping, beating, etc) is absolutely prohibited. Old 
Cadetswill not require any new cadet to do things or acts which 
will impair their health such ass 

(1) drinking "patis” or excessive water; 

(2) eating banana peelings, cigar^ette butts, paper- 
n$>pkins, etc; 

(3) Squat-,1 umping immediately a f ter meals (at least 
one hour should be allowed after meals before giving any strenuous 
or heavy exerciees) • 

b. If any oadet is charged ivith losing, participating in, 
encouraging or countenancing the practice of hazing, and if upon 
investigation, the Superintendent (BMI) is convinced that such 
oadet is in fact guilty of any of the above offense, he may reoom- 
mend the punishment of either suspension, or dismissal from the 
school subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. 


If, as a result of hazing, the victim or victims shall he hospital® 
ized or shall he incapacitated to perform his normal duties, the 
penalty to he imposed shall he dismissal and in addition, a cri- 
minal case may he filed in a civil court against the erring oadet. 

1*07 Tackling : <="Tackling”is hereby defined as the privilege 
given tto older cadets (hy virtue of their residence at the BMI) 
to make oorredtions or take instant remedial measures to correct 
the defects of the new cadets such ass 

(1) giving ’’double time” to new cadets who are late at formations 

(2) requiring a new cadet to ’’stand at attention” for a rea- 
length of 

sonable/time if he is caught moving or inattentive when ’’attention” 
or ”f all-in” is given; 

(3) ”squatting” for a reasonable length of time given to a 
new cadet who is too fresh or is observed to he fooling around in 
any formation or during class periods, etc* 

ho The following policies regarding ’’Taokling" will 
he observed: 

(1) Old oadets in the high school will not ’’tackle” any 

new oadet enrolled in college. Old oadets in the high school will 
not ”taokle ” his classmates, but only those who are in the lower 
grades, 

(2) Old oadets in 1st year college cannot ”tackle” any new 
cadet in the 1st year and 2nd year college; they can ’’taoklfi” 
only high school cadets, from 1st year to 4th year* 

(3) Old cadets in 2nd year college may ’’tackle” new cadets in 
the first year college, and new oadets in the high sohool; hut they 
are prohibited from "tackling” their own classmates in 2nd year 
college, 

(4) However, an old oadet who observes any new cadet whom he 
cannot "tackle”, who is flagrantly violating regulations or breaches 
of discipline, will immediately report such offenses to the Officer 
in Charge or to any Tactical Officer* 


4 - 


1.08 Gambling: - Cadets shall not gamhfe* 

l o 09 Absence at Bight : - Cadets who shall absent themselves 
from their quarters between taps and reveille for a period longer 
than half an hour on any one occasions without proper authority's 
shall be dismissed from the school or otherwise less severely 


punished. Cadets shall not sleep in a room other than his. 

1.10 Passing Cadet Limits . « Any cadet who shall go beydnd 
cadet limits without leave shall be dismissed from the school or 
otherwise less severely punished. 

1.11 Combination Amon g Cadets ; - All combi® tions or 3olnt 
action among cadets for the purpose of violating or evading any 
regulation orders, or instructions issued by competent authority, 
or for the purpose of expressing disapprobation of censure of any 
person in the B.M.I. shall be dealt with accordingly. 

1.12 Re no ration of Wrongs . - If any cadet shall consider him- 
self wronged by another cadet, or by an officer of the School, he 
may complain therof to the Superintendent, who shall take such 
action as he deems advisable. Sheuld the oomplainlng parties be 
refused redress, they may appeal to the Board of Trustees through 
the Superintendent of the School who will forward the appeals, with 
his remarktfs, thereon for the action of the Board of Trustees* 

REPORTING TO THE SUPERINTENDENT, COMMANDANT, DEAN OF STUDIES 

1.13 Reporting to Superintendent : - Any cadet reporting to the 

Superintendent will report first to the Commandant of Cadets who 
shall arrange for an appointment* \ 

1*14 Reporting to Commandant . - When any cadet reports to the 
Commandant, he will report first to the Officer in Charge, who will \\ 

V \ } 

arrange for an appointment. 

j \ 

1.15 Retorting to Dean of St.udeis l - Any cadet, reporting to 
the Bean of Studies will r<£ ort first to the Office of the Secretary, 
Aoademio Group who arrange for an appointment. 


\ 




■x ;'”X 


=> 4 - 


1.08 Gambling: - Cadets shall not gambfe. 

l o 09 Absence at Might : - Cadets who shall absent themselves 
from their quarters between taps and reveille for a period longer 
than half an hour on any one occasion, without proper authority, 
shall be dismissed from the school or otherwise less severely 
punished. Cadets shall not sleep in a room other than his. 

1.10 Passing Cadet Limits . - Any cadet who shall go beydnd 
cadet limits without leave shall be dismissed from the so;hool or 
otherwise less severely punished. 

1*11 Combination Among Cadets : - All combi® tlona or joint 
action among cadets for the purpose of violating or evading any 


regulation, orders, or instructions issued by competent authority, 
or for the purpose of expressing disapprobation of censure of any 
person in the B.M.I, shall be dealt with accordingly. 

1.12 Re na ration of Wrongs . ® If any cadet shall consider him- 
self wronged by another cadet, or by an offioer of the School, he 
may complain, therof to the Superintendent, who shall take such 
aotion as he deems advisable. Sheuld the oomplaining parties be 
refused redress, they may appeal to the Board of Trustees through 
the Superintendent of the School who will forward the appeals, with 
his remark^s, thereon, for the action of the Board of Trustees. 

REPORTING TO THS SOPERINTBHDEMT, CCMMDANT. DEAF 0? S TODIES 

1.13 Reno r ting to Superintendent : - Any cadet reposing to the 
Superintendent will report first to the Commandant of Cadets who 
shall arrange for an appointment. 

1.14 Reporting to Commandant . - When any cadet reports to the 
Commandant, he will report first to the Officer in Charge, who will \\ 

Y ' V: 

arrange for an appointment. 

1.15 Reporting to Bean of Studeis j - Any oadet reporting to \ 


the Dean of Studies will r*5» ort first to the Offioe of the Seoretary, 
Aoademic Group who ^arrange for an appointment. 


i\. 

\ 

X 

V ' 


- 5 - 

PUBLIC RELATIONS 

1.16 Periodicals. Giving Information to . -a .Cadets who wirte 
stories or articles for publioationyf will submit to the Superin- 
tendent a request to publish such stories or articles. In eaoh 
case the request will be accompanied by a copy of the manuscript 
until they have been approved by the Superintendent. 

b« Cadets will not give out for publication any information 
about transactions at the BMI. News queries will be referred to 
the Superintendent. 

1.17 Debts or Commercial Transactions . - a. Agents and sales** 
man may canvass, exhibit, or sell to cadets by permission of the 
Superintendent only, and on places specifically designated for 
their use. No person may take advantage of permission to visit 

a cadet in barracks by carrying on commercial transaction in 
barraoks. 

b 9 Cadets are prohibited from acting as agents for commercial 
houses or insurance companies, and from soliciting orders of any 

kind. 

o 0 Cadets shall not contract any debts without permission 
of the Superintendent. All their authorized debts shall be paid 
by the Treasurer, B.M.I. but shall not pay asmy money nor receive 
deposits on account of any cadet without authority from the Sup- 
erintendent. Cadets shall not enter into any business transaction 
with entities in or outside the sohool without specific authority. 

RESIDENCE 

1.18 Addre ss of Parents . - Each cadet will submit in duplicate 
a report of every change in the address of his parents or guardian. 
This report will be submitted immediagely upon learning of a 
change in address. Cadets may not change their own address except 
as a result of the aotual ohange of residence of their parents or 


guardians • 


2 - DISCHARGE OR SEPARATION 


3*01 The following are oauses for discharge or separation from the 
Baguio Military Institutes 

a. Deficiency in conduct 

b. Undesirable havits or traits or character 

c. Drinking, taking, bringing or under influence of intoxicating 
liquor or narcotics 

d« Ungen tlemanly conduct 
e 0 Making false statement 

f* Participating, Countenancing or Encouraging hazing 
g* Disorders 

li* Unauthroized absence for one (1) month 

i. Absence between taps and reveille fro more than thirty (30) 
minutes 

Passing cadet limits 
k. Physical unfitness 

2* 02 Clearance * - A cadet leaving the sohool either permanently 
or for a considerable period of time whether by discharge", resignation, 

dismissal, suspension, hospitalization, or sick leave, will report to 

the Commandant of Cadets for instructions regarding his clearance 

papers* 

3 -0 HGrAL'j I ZATI ON AT1D COMMAND ORGANIZATION 

3*01 Cadet Corps (B.M.I.) . - The Oadet Corps will be organized 
as the Commandant of Cadets may prescribe* 

3*02. Assignment to Companies » - Every cadet, regardless of his 
rank, will be assigned to a company for quarters and administration. 

3*03 Commandant of Cadets . - The Commandant of Cadets shall com- 
mand the Cadet Corps, and is charged with its military instruction 
and discipline* 

3*04 Taotioal Officers . - All officers under the Commandant of 
Cadets will be referred to as Tactical Officers* Tactical Officers 

t 

assigned by the Commandant of Cadets to supervise cadet companies will 

be referred to as Company Tactical Officers* 

3.05 Cadets * - a* General* - For training purposes, the Cadet 

Units, under the direct^ supervision of the Company Tactical Officers, 

shall be commanded by oadet officers and oadet noncommissioned officers 

appointed by the Superintendent upon the reooramendation of the Com. 
mandant 

of Cadets. The chain of oommand also inoludes, in the Mess 


Hall, area commanders and Table Commandants., The responsibility for 
the proper administration of the Cadet company rests with the cadet 
chain of commando 

bo Regular or acting oadet officers and non commissioned officers 
will be responsible for maintaining discipline, for instructing those 
placed under their control, and for setting a soldiery example at all 
times. All cadets, however, will exercise their influence to maintain 
the discipline, standards, and traditions of the Oadet Corps, B.M.I. 

o. In any situation, including groups not in formation, respon- 
sibility for command and the maintenance of order, discipline, proper 
behavior and general decorum, will rest with the senior oadet present* 

It will be lessened because of the presenoe of another oadet {such as 
a mamber of the guard) who has concurrent authority* 

d. whenever a oadet, who would normally be in command in any si- 
tuation, is to be absent, he will notify the next in rank. Acting cadet 
officers and noncommissioned officers will have the authority and res- 
ponsibilities of the position they are temporarily fillingo 

Seniority. - a. Except in academic sections, seniority will 
be determined first, by order of military rank in the Cadet Corps and 
secondly, by alphabetical order among the privates of eaoh class begin- 
ning with the highest class* 

b. In academic xaxttxx sections, seniority will be determined by 
the order in which names appear on "Weekly Report of Grades"* Section 
Marchers will be held responsible for the conduct of their sections. 

Cadets transferred to a lower or higher section, aonot will take rank at 

the top or bottom, respectively^: of their new section, and rank among them° 
selves in the same order as before the transfer was made* 

c. Section Marchers for the succeeding week will be announced at 
the Mess Hall after Dinner every Saturday* 

Giving 0rc3ers . - a. Regular or acting oadet officers and non- 
commissioned officers have authority to give authorised orders at any 
time to any cadet Junior to them in class or military rank, unless the' 
cadet be removed from their control by some special condition* 


t>. Unless acting, in a n offioial oapacity, cadet privates may 
not give orders to other privates. However^ upperolass privates may 
correct lower class privates,, 

c. Cadets who are detailed to special duties such as Guard, Cadet 
in Charge of garters, Section Marohers, Floor Inspectors, etc., or 

who by virtue or seniority become vested with specific responsibilities, 
may give any cadet such orders as are necessitated by their duties 
or responsibilities. 

d. Personal orders, such as cleaning shoes, running errands, etc., 


are not tolerated® 

4 WD jjLIN ■ jCMCIES? ; D MERITS AMD PUNISHMENTS 

4.01 Definition. - Any oadet who, through design, neglect, care- 
lessness, or fAilure to perform duty, violates regulations, commits 


acts to the prejudice of good order and military discipline or fails 
to measure up to the standards of a oadet and a gentxeman, tfill be 
adjudged to have oommitted a delinquency*. Delinquencies will be punished 
according to directives issued by the Commandant of Cadets and ap- 
proved by the Superintends. The total number of demerits awarded during 
a demerit period determines a cadet’s standing in Conduct for that 


period . 

$.02 Classification of Delinquencies . « a. Class I - Offenses 

for which awards will be made by the Commandant, subject to the 

approval of the Superintendent. Such offenses include: 

Delifcerqte neglects of or absence from a prescribed duty 
Improper conduct, reflecting on character 
Improper conduct, reflecting discredit on the uorps 
Insubordination 

Intentional violationaciz of limits 

Use of or traffic in liquor _ . , . 

Destroying, wasting, or damaging sohool property or any £ina 

(intentional) 

Other serious offenses 

b. Class II - Offenses for whioh wards will be made by the 


Commandant of Cadets. Suoh of'enses include: 

Failure to obey order, instructions, or regulations, not 
amounting to insubordination 


Derelictions that tend to incite unfavorable comment regard* 
ing discipline 
Indifference of any kind 

Consistent failure to maintain Corps standards of neatness and 
deportment 

Discourtesy or ill manners 

Responsible cadet, failing to maintain order or discipline 
Careless performance of duty 

Destroying, wasting, or damaging school property through 
carelessness or neglect 

' ' f • \ » ; 

eu Class III - Offenses of a lesser nature for whioh awards will 
be made by the Company Tactical Officers* Such offenses include: 
P w ssession of anauthorized articles 

Failing to comply with general instructions or published 
memoranda (unintentional) 

Lesser intentional offenses 

Rusty, missing, dirty, or torn articles of any kind 
Violations of uniform reguations 

Violations of prescribed standing classroom instructions 
Unintentional violation of limits 
General inattention 

4«03 Reports * <* A. A cadet may be reported for committing any 

•tmt 

delinquency* Reports may be asubmitted at any time by any officer or 
civilian instructor or cadet against any cadet, his military junior; 
except that rank does not enter into oases involving honor, character, 
hazing or when the reporting cadet is acting in an official lEapaixsijEjcx 
capacity. 

b. A oadet who has been reported by another oadet for any delin- 
quency shall hold no duscussion of the matter with the cadet who re- 
ported him unless specif ioially permitted by the company tactical Of- 
ficer or higher authority. A oadet having reported another shall like® 
wise hold no discussion of the matter with the cadet reported unless 
with similar permission. 

4.04 Form for Reporting Delinquencies . - Reports will be entered 
against a cadet on the prescribed B.M. I. Form, in two copies. Both 
the original (white) and duplicate (yellow) copies will be forwarded 

i 

to the oadet guard Room. \ 

i \ 

4.05 Explanation of Reports . - Explanation of reports on the dup- 
licate (yellow) copu of the prescribed B.M. I. Form will consist of a 

N 

straightforward, clear and oomplete summary of the facts connected with 


eaoh offense or with the intention of the cadet, such as may he neces- 
sary to a full understanding of the case. It will not contain ar- 
gument, radbadbia ai equivocation, criticism, complaint, opinion, or ir- 
relevant remarks. If the explanation places responsibility on another 
cadet, he will be named. Should a report be in error, or in any way not 
convey the oomplete facts in the case, the cadet concerned should con- 
sider it a moral obligation and responsibility to explain the report 
fully in order that any error may be rectified or the responsibility 
plaoed where it rightfully belongs. 

b. In all reports for failure or neglect to prepare lessons, ex~ 
planations will be required which shall account, in detail, for the 
study time of the £4 hours preceding the recitation for whioh the cadet 
was reported. 

c. All explanations of reports will be returned by the cadet, 
properly filled out, to the Department of Tactics by dropping them 

in the Delinquency Box provided for this purpose in the Office. These 
explanations of reports should be submitted not more than 24 hours 
after receipt of the duplicate (yellow) oopy® Reports turned in 
after such time will be awarded immediately xvithout benefit of ex- 
planation. 

DMRITS 

4.10 Demerits Defined . - Demerits are not punishment but are marks 
in conduct. 

4.11 Demerit Allowances . - For purposes of computation of the 
demerit allowances of cadets, the following will be made the basis in 
determining their total allowances for demerits for every demerit 
period of fifteen (15) days: 

Old Cadets* Mew Cadets 


College ----- 8 demerits 13 demerits 

High School (2nd 

Tr to 4.th Yr) » 10 demerits 16 demerits 

1st YrHS-------- 18 demerits 

* 


All "recognized cadets" are considered Old Oadets 


4. IS Grading of Conduct . - The system of grading in conduct sha. 
he based in the following table; 



'K " — 

~ nr 

r 

D 

COLLEGE (Old) 

6-3 

Demerits 

4-3 

Demerits 

“nnr-'Ttf " 

Demerits 

FOR 

COLLEGE (New) 

0-4 

5-12 

13 - 26 

EVERY 

" HIGH SCHOOL 
(Old) 

0-5 

6-12 

13 - 20 

EXCESS 

“ t£egh school 

(New) Except for 
1st Yr HS 

0-6 

7-19 

4> 

32 

DEMERIT 

AND 

HlflH SCHOOL 
(First Year) 

0-9 

10 - SI 

36 

SPECIAL AWARDS 


8 . « 


& 4.13 Excess Demerits . - R e eeipto of demerits in excess of 

a fixed demerit period ( R ft fer to par 4.11) allowances is a basis for 
punishment. Punishments awarded for excess demerits will be served by 
punishment tours, one (1) hour for every excess demerit atnrfctasx 

b. Demerits received as a result of Commandants or Special Awards 
will not be included in determining excess demerits# 

c« Cadets shall be given the benefits of frantions in computing 
allowance of demerits. 

d. The Commandant of Cadets may direct a periodic computation 
of demerits of cadets, once before the end of each semester, to be 
based on par 4.11. Cadets who are exceeding their total allowances 
at this computation will be reported to the board of officers formed 
by the Commandant of Cadets s r x xt for this purpose, to be counted 
against the cadets concerned as their Deficiency in Conduct# The 

said hoard shall act upon every Cadet who has exceeded his total demerit 
allowances as in the case of Deficiency in Academics* Demerits in excess 
of the total allowance may constitute a bdsis for dismissal from the 
School# 

e. The investigating board will submit the corresponding results 
of their probe to the Commandant of Cadets on all cases involving 
Excess Demerits, together with their findings and recommendations* 

f. Demerits acquired from Speoial Awards should be included in 
tMs periodio computation. Demerit allowances for Cadets may be in- 
creased or deoreaded proportionately as the Superintendent may direct. 


4 * 14 Heoord of Dsaerit Awards* - a. A 11 records oiff demerit 
awards of oadets will be filed in their respective 801 Files* 

b. Parents of Cadets ooneernea will be furnished with a copy 
of serious delinquencies toegher with its corresponding awards. They 
may also be allowed to lodk at the SOI Files of jdmsxErai their sons 
in the Office of the Department of Tactics, 

4,15 Jte consideration of Award. - If a oadet believes the award 
for any offense to be incorrect or unfair , he may submit in writing 
a request for reconsideration of the award# Each requests will be 
addressed to the Commandant of Cadets and will follow the accepted 
form for military correspondence. The cadet will state the offense 
as it appears on the Delinquency Report, the date of the award, the 
award, and the reasons for the request* ouch requests will, except 
for cogent reasons, be submitted with the approval of the Department 
of Tactics to the Commaddant of Cadets as soon as possible# If such 
foquests are unduly lengthy or complicated, the cadet cocncrned may 
fequest consultation with any Tactical Officer, Late requests will 
oe disapproved unless = in the opinion of the Commandant of Cadets 
he reason for the delay justifies special consideration* If the award 
■.or an offense is changed as a result of a request for reconsideration 8 
the cadet concerned will be so notified, 

PUITISHLI5HT3 

0 ' init loru - Any award, other than demerits, conferred 

£or delinquencies, are termed punishments# A punishment may consist of 
walking ,he area, fatigue, extra vocational duty or confinement to a 
cadet’s own room as may be prescribed* 

Punis hment Tours # - The following procedure in conducting 
Punishment Tours should be strictly observed: 

a* The Punishment List will be published in the Bulletin Board 
prior to the period that punishment are to be servedo 

b* The Cadet in Charge of quarters will immrdiately inform all 


oadets who will serve punishment tours* 

o. The Cadet in Qharge of Quarters will form the punishment squad 
in line at the punishment area designated and renders the report to 
the Cadet Officer of the Day* He should account for all absentees* 
d* The Cadet Officer of the Day will then renort to the Officer 
in Charge who wiil require the cadets serving punishment tours to: 

(1) With the rifle at right shoulder, they wallc in a military 
manner at moderate time (slower than '’quick time”) ; 

(2) Rifles at right shoulder may be shifted to left shoulder, 

and vice versa while walking; 

to 

(3) Execute/the rear march when the end of the are is reach; 

(4) Salute officers, colors or standards not eased* (In saluting 
the flag at retreat, they halt, face the flag, and execute 
"Present Arms”; all other salutes will be at right shoulder 
arms# 


(5) Carry the rifle at all times at right shoulder or at left 
shoulder 0 

(6) Halt and come to port arms when talking to anyone officially 
and 

(7) Will not leave the area to which he is assigned until the 
hour of tour has terminated# 

e* The uniform and time for walking tours will be as prescribed# 

No cadet will be allowed to tour at any time he pleases unelss with 
the authority from the Commandant of Cadets, or in his absence, from 

*' i 

the Officer in Chargeo 

f, A five-minute break is given every 30 minutes to allow the 
oadets to attend; to their personal necessities# 

g* Punishment Tours will be conducted on the parade ground or, 
in case of inclement weather, at the gymnasium, or along the pavement 
at West side of the Cadet Barracks* Other cadets will habitually use 
the eastern sidewalk of the Cadet Barracks# 


h« The Officer in Charge,, the Cadet OT), the Cadet in Charge of 
Quarters, or any Tactioal Officer, oan report all cadets serving punish- 
ment tours who do not comply strictly with the provision stated herein 
above* 

i* Members of the Guard while on guard duty, will not serve pu~ 

nishment tours* 

j, All Cadets, regardless as to whether they are Cadet Officers 
of Noncommissioned Officers, shall serve punishment tours for their 
excess demerits and Special Awards* 

4*22 Kestrioted Limits* - M Bestricted limits 1 * includes the barracks 
olub rooms, areas of barracks, the gymnasium and outdoor athletic areas 
for exercise for not more than two hours, the Post Library for reading 
and study only, and to such other places for official visits when per- 
mission has been granted by the Officer in Charge. The cadet involved 


will be subject o $nspeoticn at any time and must account for absences 
by properly marking his absence cafd, and by signing out in the Cadet 
Departure Book 0 

4*25 Company Punishment . *» Company punishment may be served daily 
as directed by the Company Tactical Officer. Seuh punishment will be 
recorded in the Company Punishment Book, but will not appear as a de° 
linquency report on a cadet’s record. Punishment as listed below, singly 
or in combination, up to the maximum which may be served in one week, 
may be awarded for offenses other than those described in subsequent 
pertinent paragraphs* 

(1) Admonition 

(2) Beprimani 

(3) Deprivation of one or more privileges, including cancellation 


of a week-end leave 


(4) Bestriotion to prescribe limits 


1 


(8) Barracks fatigue on personal property or equipment, living 


space, and soaoe used in common with other cadets 




4*84 General . - a. Other duties will take precedence over the 
serving of punishments unless specifically excepted. 

b. Punishment Tours will be effective as soon as posted on the 
Bulletin Board* Company punishment feB®!2EfidxE^±s:x±far®:* becomes effec- 
tive as gwr-x- directed by the Sompany Tactical Officers*, 

c. Cadets with punishment to serve, unless specirically excepted, 

will serve all or as much as possible of the punishment charged against 

them, serving every punishment period commencing with the first such 

period after punishment beoomes effective. 

tours 

d* Cadets having punishment/to serve, who are deficient in Aca- 
demics may request that they served only confinements as punishments. 
Such requests will be submitted in writing to the Commandant of Cadets 
through the Tactical Officer, whose r ,;coramendations will be added 
thereto. However, any cadet who has reqeusted confinement as punish- 
ment will receive approval of such request for the time he is actually 
deficient only. 

e. Any oadet, who, for any reason whatsoever, is turned back to 
join another class, will not serve any punishment he may have had left 
unserved at the time of his departure from the School except when 
anraiar specifically ordered by the Superintendent. 

f. Punishments will be suspended as follovis: 

(1) Pot cadets allowed to go on vacation, Christmas or emergen- 
cy leave. 

(2) For cadets engaged in extra-curricular activities as au- 
thorized by the Commandant of Cadets. 

{3) For members of Corps S.uads when engaging in cpmpetition, 
praotioe or instrudtlon incident to their particular squad, However, 
during the period of competition, practice, or instrudtion, cadets 
desiring to serve punishment will obtain a written permission from their 
coaches and will serve confinement only, sxibjeot to the following 
limitations: 


(a) Ob'?’?' full punishment May b© served. 

(to) 'emits from coaches must be forwarded through Company 
Tactical O'floer to the Cadet in Charge of ua tera in 
time to insure the serving of punishment. 

{e) Punishment will be served only during the periods pres- 
cribed by the Coaaaand«Eat of Carets. 

(4) At other times punishments "'ill bo suspended ohly by 
order of the up&rinten&ent. 

&• a cadet may not serve any punishment while he 13 In sick con- 
finement, or when excused by the School ' hyslcian, sick in hospital, 
ab ent from 1 oat, or when doing u duty which he would otherwise per- 
form at that particular time. 

h. Cadets required to serve punishments, who de ire to attend extra 
instruct! *n, will not serve puniehir-ut on that day. This <.oec not re- 
lieve cadets undergoing punishments for a very serious ofi'ensolxsnc’aac 
from observing restricted limits. 

4.£5 risr-iuanl, : ’n; reus ion, and Loss of leovo . - l or very carious 
delinquencies the Superintendent may dir ot the dismisral, suspension, 
or ferfeituro of vacation, or Christmas leave of any cadet, subject to 
approval of the Board of Trustees * Apodal orders covering this pro- 
cedure will be issued when necessary* 

tfiriTg 

4.30. C-ncral . -a. Tor excellent performance of duty, cleanliness 
of quarters, beat e-peorance, obedience to ore-era, good conduct and 
other commendable actions, Cadets mr y be awarded merits at the discre- 
tion of the Commandant of Cadets. 

b. All merits earned by Carets may be utilized by them to cover up 

/ 

for their dene rite no paired in any d rit period. However, unused me- 
rits cannot be util lied aa a deposit to cover up future demerits but may 
be included in the over-a' 1 1 computation for erodes in conduct. Q a# juerlt 
earner is equivalent to one punishment tour served for an excess demerit; 
tmto merits eerned is e uivolent to one punishment tour served for 
specie 1 Awards. 


6 - LOST PKOPiiMTY 


®*01 Anyone who finds a lost property will turn it over to the owner 
or to any member of the Cadet Guard. The Cadet Officer of the Day 
will from t* time hare the list of articles found published in company 
bulletin boards. Any property so published an not % claimed within one 
month from the first publication in the bulletin board, will be turned 
orer to the Supply Officer, SBMI for disposition getting a reoeiot 
therefrom for file and future reference 0 

5.02 A cadet who has had property missing for several days mar/ for- 
ward to the Commandant of Cadets through his Company Taotieal Officer 
a request for an "All Is Well" for the missing property. The request 
will include a statement to the effect that a check with the Cadet 
Officer of the Bay has failed to locate the missing property. The 
^aotioal Officer will if he considers it advisable, have an inspection 
made in his company instead of having an "All Is Well" asked. 

i An "All Is Well" request for a lost property, if approved by the 
Commandant Of Cadets, will be asked of all cadets. Prior publication 
of an approved "All Is /ell ' request for lost property should be made 
to enable cadets to check carefully all properties in their possession. 
5.04 All oommunieati on concerning lost property will include a des- 
cription of the artiMe, the marking, if any, time and date when lost, 
if known, and the place where it is believed to have been lost. 

.05 Aost and found artioles belonging to guest at socials, outings or 
pic Aids, will be turned in to the Cadet Officer of the Day. Publica- 
tions of such items found will also be published in the bulletin boards. 
Such artioles may be identified and claimed the following day. The 
Cadet Off loer of the Day will note down on the list of the lost and 
Ibund properties the full name of the cadet claiming the article or if 
a civilian his or her full name and address. 

6 * SCHOOL PROPERTY 

6.01 A cadet will be pecuniarily responsible for all school property 
for which he signs and will not be relieved of this responsibility 


tultil hi a receipt is returned to him or a Turn-in-Slip duly signed 
by the officer from whom he received the property, is given. 

6*02 All damages or destruction of school property whioh are not 
the result of fair wear and tear, will be charged against the res- 
ponslble cadet* 

6.03 Cadet will not mark school property unless so directed* They 
will not take arms, accoutrements or other school property from 
barrakce exoept ftoen authorized* They will neither lend or exohan&e 
such articles nor use articles issued to another oadet without per- 
mission from his Company Tactical Officer* 

6.04 Cadets will not use emery cloth, sand paper or other abrasives 
on their rifles or bayonets, nor alter them by cutting, filing, 
scrapping, or varnishing any part of them exoept with the permission 
of the Company Tactical Offioer. 

6.05 School property whioh are rendered unserviceable through fair 
wear and tear should he returned to the Supply Officer, BMI for re- 
placement* 

7 ° OFFICIAL COMaOTflIOhTIQflS 

7.61 a. All official communication by cadets shall he submitted 

* 

either written in ink and in printed form or typewritten. The letter 
shall conform to the sample letter shown below: 

b. Cadets will transmit official communications through channels* 
All letters originating from a cadet and intended for higher authority 
shall be forwarded through his Company '.Tactical Offioer* Except as 
elsewhere specified, all communications requiring action by the Com- 
mandant of Cadets or a lower echelon of command will be submitted in 
triplicate and to higher authority in quintuplicate, 

Co In the firs paragraph of any communication, cadets will refer 
to the order or regulations pertinent to the subject of the communicatiom 
cadets will refer to orders or regulations pertinent to the subject 


of t e communication. 


d« E xo ept reference to orders and regulations, abbreviations may 
not be used in the body of the oonraanioati on* 

e# When a cadet signs a letter in the performance of official duties, 
as the ease of a Cadet in Charge of Quarters, he will place his title 
or official designation in block style in line below his rank and 
class as follows: 

JUAN DE LA CRUZ 

Cdt Cpl, 4th Yr HS/(iollege 
Cadet in Charge of Quarters 

f* 'hen a letter is only one paragraph long, the paragraph is not 
numbered* When more than one page is needed, plain paper will be used 
ana all pages will be numbered starting with page two (2)# 
g» Sampl© Military Letter* (Next page) 

8 - BAHBACKS 

8#01 Ass i gnment of Rooms # - a# Exoept when otherwise authorized in 
individual cases, all cadets will be assigned to rooms with their own 

companies* 

ho Subject to the approval of their respective Company Tactical 
Officers, Cadet CompanyComiaanders will make all room assignments within 
their companies# 

c# Company Commanders and their staff will be assigned rooms in t 
the barracks of the companies to which they are assigned# 

8 #02 Bath # - Cadets may bathe anytime between reveille and first call 
for breakfast, anytime after authorized or scheduled athletics and 
aijfcime during release f r an quarters# 

8#05 Inspections # - Rooms will be subject to inspection at all times# 
8#04 Authorized Articles * - a# CA&ets may keep in their possession 
only snob articles as are issued or speoifieally authorized# 

b* Flreaiaa s# - Firearms and ammunition which come Into the possess* 
ion of a cadet from sources other than issue will be turned in immediate- 
ly to the Company Taotioal Officer, who eill arrange for proper disposal 
with the Security Officer, BMI# 


HEADQUARTERS 

BAGUIO MILITARY INSTITUTE 
Irisan, Jaguio 


GCI/chm/319 


aB 106*35 

SUBJECT: Military letter 


10 June 1957 


THRU; 


The Commandant of Cadets 


TO 


Cadet Juan de la Cruz 


1. The military ( hubj eet-To ) letter is used for oommuuioa^ 
tion with military 9 naval, and air personnel and between activities 
of major services and other units of the AS'P and may not be used 
for coasnunication with other Governmental departments or with Civil 
agenoies* 

2 a Margins are 1 l/4 inches (15 spaces ° elite type) on the 
left side and 3/4 inch (9 spaces) on the right side 0 The'margin is 
kent even as possible# <hen no printed letterhead is available, 
the top margin of the typed letterhead is approximately 3/4 inch 
(6 spaoes) from the top of the paper® On the second and succeeding 
pgges, the top margin is approximately 1 1/4 inches (7 spaces). At 
the bottom, the margin is not less than 1 l/4 inches (about 7 spaces). 

3© Single spacing with a double spaoe between paragraph is 
usually the practice* If the letter is less than nine lines and 
neither reply nor further action is anticipated, it may be double 

spaced* 

4© Only one side of a sheet of paper is used© The office 
symbol of the offioe of preparation is typed in the upper corner 
as shown on this sample, and the list of inclosures typed in the 
left signing the communication. The complimentary close is never 

used. 


BY COMMAS D Of GEiSF. iL JOHH DOS 


I Inol 

Sample of Mil Ltr 


DEDKO 3 CRUZ 

Ca pt , f A 

Adjutant/ 


c® Deadly Weapon s , - Ifo oadet should have in their possession 
deadly weapons such as knives and other pointed instruments* Such weapons 
will he turned in immediately to the Company Taotic&l Officer who shall in 
turn deposit it with the Security Offioer, BHI* 

8*05 Ventilation* - a* Booms will he kept well ventilated when occupied* 
Windows should he left open during day and night except during inolement 
weathe r* 

h„ When all oooupants of a room are absent from the school , or in 
the hospitals the room will he left in order* the windows closed and the 
doors loekedo 

8*06 Lights * => a* Cadets are authorized lights until Taps* 

h* On evenings of general entertainment or when Saturday evening 
privileges are in effect, lights are authorized until thirty (30) minutes 
after Taps® After 10:30 P*M« cadets taking advantage of any privilege are 
authorized lights ten (10) minutes after they have signed in* 

o* All lights in Barracks, except those in the sinks, bulletin hoards, 
orderly rooms, and in rooms duly authorized to have late lights will he 
turned off by the Cadet in Charge of Quarters or the Cadet Officer of the 
Day after the termination of his dutieso 

8*07 Late Lights * « The Company Commander and hisstaff, the First Sergeant, 
the Floor Inspector and the members of the School publication Staff (When 
using the staff rooip) are authorized late lights up to 10:30 P*M« 

b* Late Lights * «= iksxSarapKxgcxSsmaiaradexx'aEui rhfs -rstaff Late lights 
upt to 11: 00 P® M* will he granted automatically to cadets scheduled to 
take any kind of examination the following day* 

o» All other cadets not included above may submit to their Company 
Tactical Offioer a request for late lights up to 10:30 P.M® on the pres- 
cribed forms Only cadets who are actually deficient as per weekly list 
of deficient cadets may he granted late lights* 

d* The Cadet in Charge of ftuarters and regular members of the Cadet 
Guard when visiting their respective rooms may open their room lights 
after Taps* After the termination of their duties, they may keep their 


11? ts #n only as may be necessary for them to prepare to go to oed* 

• « Other oadets inside the room who are not specifically authorised 
to have 1 tc lights, may take advantage of the rivilege, provided that 
the cadet authorised to have late lights is actually taking advantage of 
it; and provided further, that their beds must have been already fixed 
for sleepong at Taps Inspection* 

8*08 Vi a i tor 8 in Barrakks * - a. Except for the following individual s, 
anyone desiring to enter barracks must obtain a written authority from 

the Offioer in Charge*. 

Superintendent and members of his Staff 
Tactical Offioers 
Barracks Janitoss 

b* With Written permission of t:e Officer in Charge, cadets may take 
male visitors (other than solicitors or tutors) into barracks during re- 
lease from spnrtacr quarters and when Saturday evening privileges are in 
effeot, unitl tattoo* Only Superintendent of the Commandant of Cadets 
(or Officer in Charge in emergencies) may authorize a visitor (including 
an officer) to visit the club rooms* 

o» Individuals performing authorized repair work or inspections mu«t 
secure a signed pass from the l?ost Enjd near and presented to the Officer 
in Charge or the senior member of the Cadet Guard thereof* 

d 6 Women mav be taken in barracks only during "Open House”© 
a 0 Mo authorized visitors, except those cadets of similar Military 
or Naval Academies of other countries and EOTC cadets, may spend the night 
in barracks* Bequest for permission to have visitors overnight in barracks 
will be addressed to the ComfaacdaAt of Cadets* Such request will contain 
the following information: the uaue or names of the visitors and official 

status, inclusive dates of the visit, and the rooms in wi: ioh the visitors 
will sleep® 

f* Visitors except those authorized may not enter the areas of barraoks 
nor loiter in the entrances thereto* Visitors may not loiter to watch the 
punishmeM squad* Cadets are responsible that their visitors follow these 


orders. 

. Ho cadet may entertain a visitor who as a former oudet has been 
dismissed from the Baguio Military Institute for misconduct or who has 
resigned for the rood of the school, unless such visitor has written per- 
mission of the -superintendent to visit the schools 

8*09 Beds * - a. all beds exoept those belonging to the Officer in Charge 
ana regular members of the guard shall be fixed for sleeping before Taps 
Inspection. 

b* During evenings of social entertainment, or when Saturday evening 
privileges are in effect, cadets taking advantage of any privilege will 
fix their beds within the ten (10) minutes allowed by para 8*06. 

8*10 Tap s . - a. ill cadets except those authorized by (b) below shall 
be in bea during Taps Inspection. 

b. Cadets author ijf'zea late lights, who are actually taking advantage 
of±Jt it, aral ether cadets inside the room not specifically authorised late 
lights but who are likewise taking advantage of the privilege, may be out 
of bed during f*P* Inspection. 

c. After Taps. « Unless in oases of emergency, cadets may leave their 
rooms only to attend to the call of nature. They may not go to the sinks 
to study, wash their faces, brush their teeth, etc. 

9 «. HESS HALL 

9.01 3 )i t i s &o ii into Areas. - The Company Commander vi 11 divide the Mess Hall 
into -Platoon areas and assign the necessary number of tables to each. 

9.08 Se rf gnat ion of Tables. - a. 4 table at the center will he designated 
the Staff fable. 

b. fables assigned to Athletic Squads will be referred to as ’’Athletic 
Squad fable.” A "diet table” for cadets below the wdight standards will 

also he designated. 

9.03 Assignments of Seats o - a. Cadet Company Commanders and Captains of 
Athletic Sauads will be responsible for assigning seats to cadets under 
them. Ho cadet may change his seat wihtout proper authority. 

b. Unless especially authorized to sit elsewhere, all cadets will sit 


la their platoon areas * 

9,04 Hftnpgn aiblllty of Cadet O ffi cers * - a. Cadet Officers will be 
especially responsible with the maintenance of good order and the en- 
forcement or regulations within the areas in whieh seated. 

b. In naoh area the senior oadet (other than the Company Commander) 
present for duty will be in charge® 

o„ Mess Hall Area Commanders will remain in their respective areas 
until the last cadet has departed therefrom. They will be responsible 
that Table Commandants in their area carr out their assi ;ned duties. 

9 o 05 Table Commandant . « a. The senior oadet present at any table at any 
time will the Commandant thereof except Athletic Squad Tables wherein 
seniority by designation will prevail. 

b« The Table Commandant will always sit at* tho head of the table , ex- 

when 

cept that **n the regular T ble Commandant leaves the table temporarily, 
or for the remainder of the .neal, he will designate a cadet to act as 
Table Commandant during his absence* Table Commandants will not relin- 
quish their seats to visitors? Visitors will normally sit to the right 
of t e Tabl© Commandant. 

e. Saoh Table Commandant will be reppontf. blejiJf or gentlemanly and 

orderly conduct and the observance of mess etiquette at his table® 

do He will see to it that all Hew Cadets eat their food without 

physical restraint, maintaining the position and attitude at the table 

as prescribed in the hew Cadt Customs . 
a 

9.06 Mass Darnges, - Cadets will be charged for mess equipment which they 
loss or damage* The fable Commandant will immediately require the oadet 

to al gn a voucher (in 2 copies) for the mess equipment which is then given 
to the waiter for delivery to the Hess Officer. Voucher forms could be 
aaked for from the gaiter. 

9.07 Ba taring the Mess Hall , -a. All units will wnter the Mesa Hall as 
prescribed by memoranda® 

b. Cedota excused from marching will precede the Corps into the Hess 


Hall. 


c# -All cadets (except Company Ooffiaander s ana Cadet Guards) will re- 
aoye their oape on entering the Mess Hall, proceed directly to their seats 

j 

and stand at atttention until the command ’’Take Seats'’ is given. Rain- 
coats if worn, will be taken off after ”Tato Seats” is given, 

9i0 8 Deaimation of Meals , - ieals will aLways be designated as break- 
fast, lunch and dinner* 

Time Allowed for Meals * - From the time the command ’’Take Seats” 
is given, twenty (25) minutes wHl be allowed for breakfast; thirty 
(30) minutes for lunch and dinner* The Officer in Charge may vary the 
time tfien necessary. 

9 #1 0 Lading tae Mess Hall * - a. Ho cadet may before publication or 
ordrs and no cadet may leave individually without proper authority. 

b. If te r” Company Rise” is given, no cadet (except those specifically 
authorized) will put on their headgear when leaving the Mess Hall. 

Headgear may be worn onl when outside the Mess [all. 

c. Any cadet leaving the Hess Hall individually before the di snissal 
from meals, will report ’’All Is riell'^ Sir to the Mess Hall Corporal on 
duty near the door. 

d. Only the First Sergeant, Supply Sergeants and other cadets with 
specific authority from the Officer in Charge may leave the Mess KaLl 
individually* 

9.11 paving the -ess Hal1 (Pore s)* - a. Immediately prior to the 

termination of the meal, the Company Commander will inspect the entire 
Mess Hall. Area Commander s will rise with the Company Coranander and 
remain in their areas until the last cadet has departed therefrom. 

h. Cade s will cease eating at the command "attention” and leave 
the Mess Hell individually at the Command "Rise* » 

9*12 Visiting. - Cadets may visit in the Mess Hall onlu with the 
snecific authority from the Officer in Charge. 

9.13 Complaints . - All complaints concerning the cadet mess will be 
made to the Officer in Charge, vheneber any article of food is considered 


unfit fbr consult ion, the Tal l A Commandant will take it at once to the 
Off jeer in Charge after aekinf the permission from the Company Commander. 
Complaints will not he made to waiters, 

9*14 Behavio ur Inside tae M e ss -all , - a* Cadets will not throw or toss 
any article in tie Mess all. 

b. They may not make unnecessary noise* 

o. Cadets while in the Hess Hall shall at all times conduct them- 
selves in a gentlemanly and orderly manner ana shall observe correct 
mess etiquette* 

9.15 heading Hatter* - Reading matter, except official papers, will 
not he taken into the .Jess ,!allo 

9*16 Bringing and Removing nrtioles * ~ Cadets will not bring or remove 
any artiole of food or mess equipment from the Mess Hall without proper 
authority* 

9.17 lisLtors. ° a* The Officer in Charge will authorize cadets to take 
®atult make friends to meals as follows: 

(1) Visiting Officers, cadets of other Military Schools <= any meal » 

(2) Other Guests: (Members of immediate family of cadets) supper 
oil free evenings; dinner on Sundays and Holidays* 

b, A cadet who takes a visitor to a neal will notify the Corporal 
of the Shuard at the door that he has obtained wuhtority f or his visiter* 
Unless entertaining the visitor officially for the Corps, the cadet will 
sign a charge Slip for each visitor for each meal. 

c « Visiting teams may take their meals in th' cadet re.ss* 
d. The Corps is called to attention in the Mess Hall when a visit 
is made by the Superintendent, the Commanlant of Cadets, the Dean of 
Studies, or by a distinguished person not on duty with the school* The 
same procedure will bA followed when he leaves the Mess Hall before 
"Company Rise" is given* The Cadet Company Commander will make a timely 
command of ’’Attention*’ or cause the command to be given at the appropriate 
moment. 

9.18 Special foods : - a* Cadets should not ask any Mess personnel for 


any special menu in the Mess llall* All oadets should be served with the 
same kina of food in sufficient quantity* 

b, Special foods sent by parents and/or relatives to oadets should 
not be served in the Mess hall unless there is a sufficient quantity far 
all oadets to be Berved equally, in which case, the cadet conoeriBd 
should te give the food to the Mess personnel through the Mess Officer 
for preparation and sorting* 

o* Oadets are disoouraged to ask any form of food or dish from their 
parents, relatives or friends* 

d. In oases when a cadet is "alergio” to some food served in the 
Mess Hall, he should inform the Officer- in-Charge<> He should not ask 
the waiters to be served another menu unless with expressed authority 
from the Officer in Charge or from the Sohool Physician* 

10 - GYMNASIUM 

10*01 All oadets will conform to Gymnasium Regulations, issued by the 
Office of Physical Education^ BMI. 

10*02 Honrs for Exercise * - Cadets may visit the gymnasium anytime during 
Selease from Quarters daily, on Saturdays from immediately after In° 
s petti on to 6:00 P*M*; on Sundays and Holidays from 9:00 A*M* to 12:00 P^lf* 
and from is 00 P*M* to 5:30 P*U« 

10*03 Injuries * - Injuries incurred during instruction will be reported 
at once to the Instructor in Charge. 

16*04 Hnlf orm » - Cadets will habitually wear authorized athletic 
clothing whan exercising in t e gymnasium for any purpose© 

10*05 Handllng_ of Equipment * - Handling of equipment shall be in accord- 
ance with instructions by the Bireotor, Physical Education* 


11 - '‘ALL IS WELL" 


Ho 01 The report "All Is Well" means : 

a, From an Assistant Floor Inspectors That he has inspected his floor 
at the time and in the manner prescribed, that during his inspection all cadets 
were present or accounted for, and none were visiting without authority; or that 
all violations of the foregoing have been duly reported to the Floor Inspector, 
b„ From a cadet outside his room or crossing a sentinel' post: That he is 

going, or has been, on an authorized visit and nowhere else; that he has observed 
or will observe the regulations relative to gambling, hazing, limits, & liquor, 

Co From any occupant of a room at any inspection ( except lost articles 
and Taps inspections J: That all absentees and all visitors are authorized and 
that lights, if burning, a*e authorized, 

d« From a cadet at an inunction for lost property: That he has inspected 

his own and other similar articles in his possession, th&t the lost property 
is not in his possession, and tat he has no knowledge concerning it, or that he 
has personally returned the propert to its rightful oxmer, 

e. From a cadet entering or leaving the Mess Hall individually: Thathe has 

authaity to enter or leave individually and that any guest accompanying him is 
authaized, 

f. From a Mess Hall Corporal: That all cadets entering or leaving the 

Mess Hall individually by the door at which he is posted reported "All Is Well" 
and no other person entered without authority; or that all violations of the 
foregoing will be duly rprted to the proper authority, 

go From a sentinel (Barracks : ) That he has inspected in the prescribed 
manner all rooms in this floor and that all cadets were present or accounted 
for; that no ■unauthorized persons have entered or left the floor and that all 
cadets have reported "All Is Well" on thir departure or return; or that an 
violations of the foregoing have been or win be duly reported to the proper 
authority, 

h 0 From any occupant of a room at Taps Inspection °° that all absentees 
and visitors are authorized, an lights if burning are authorized, that an bunks 
except those belonging t o cadets authaized by para 8,09 (aJ, are fijced for 


sleeping end that all cadets except those cadets otherwise authorized are in bed* 

11* 02 a, A cadet is bound to report himself for any violation of "All Is Well". 
b» In the event an aaergaicy arises wherein common sense dictates that a cadet should 

violate his "All Is Well", he will take the indicated action, report himself, and sub- 

mit an explanation ofthe circumstances to his Company Tactical Officers 

11® 03 No other "All Is Well" will be asked for or given* The"All Is Well" will not 

am -> 

not be used away from the Institute unless required by proper authority, 

11*04 The "All Is Well" will not be required at any room inspection until after the 

last note of taps, tattoo, or assembly for eall to quarters 0 

11 « 05 A Cadet is "visiting" when, after going to a room other than his own, he open 
the door, or enters the room, or talks tdth its occupants® The act of leaving his room 
and going to another essentials the act of entering the roan is not® Casual greeting, 
in itself, is not considered visiting* 

11*06 A cadet in inspecting his possession for lost property, will not necessarily ins- 
pect itmes in the £runk^ room or other place outside his room ifhe in reasonably certain 
that he does not have the propetty* However, should he later find that he did have the 
lost property at the time the inspection was made he would have violated his "All is 

Well"* 

11*07 When an "All Is Well" is given, it applies to conditions existing at the time 
said "All Is Well" was asked for and not to the time when it is given* 

11*08 Signature * ~ a* A cadet’s signature, or whenever used by his autnority, will be 
binding on the cadet* When signing for another cadet, signature will be followed by 
the initial of the signer* 

b. Whan taking advantage of privileges autnorized in t hese regulations , such as dining 
permits, socials etc*, a cadet As signature in a departure book has the same significance 

r* 

as an "All Is Wekll" from a cadet outside his room or crossing a sentinel’s post, and 
certifies as to the correctness of all entries* 

c* When signing out in all other cases, such as for trips away from the post, altering 
or returning from the hospital, etc., a cadet&s signature in a departure book simply 

certifies as to the correctness of all entries* 

12-CALL TO OUARTEES 

12,01 Period of Call to Quarters, - a. Daily except as otherwise prescribed: 


(1) From r eveille to first call for breakfast; and from morning call to 

quarters until first call for lunch. 

(2) From call to quarters after lunch until recall from the last 

regularly scheduled instruction in the afternoon. 

(3) From evening call to quarters until reveille, 
b» Saturdays and evenings preceding holidays, 

(1) Same as para 12,01-a (l) above, 

(2) From gall to quarters after lunch until completion or regular 

Saturday inspection, 

d. Periods not expressly desigiated as ’‘Call to Quarters" will ccustitute ^Release 

•n 

from Quarters", 

12,02 Restrictions , - a. During call to quarters cadets will be in their rooms 
except when required for duty or authorized to be elsevmere, 

b. The;'- must preserve silence in barracks except when Saturday evening privileges 
are authorized,, 

c, At assembly ibr evening call to quarters rooms will be inspected to verify presaice 
of cadets, 

12,Q3 Leaving Room During Call to Quarters ; *= a, A cadet may leave his room during 
call to quarters for any authorized, purpose by pa properly accounting Ms absence 
on the Absence Card, The follovdng formations or places are those at which cadets 
are required for duty or to vihich they are authorized to go during call to quarters: 

(1) Class or other authorized forma tions 

(2) Barber Shop 

(3) Hospital by permission or appointment, 

(4) Dentist b permission or appointment, 

(5) Sinks aid Bathrooms 

(6) Cadets* Club as authorized by the Commandant of Cadets 

(7) Mail Carriers when delivering mail or other authorized papers 

(8) Cadet Store 

(9) VJhen directed in an emergency to report at a designated place by on officer 
(10^ To viiit company bulletin boards 


(11) To take advantage of an authorized privilege 
(l$) For specially authorised occasion and purposes 
b 0 When Saturday evening privileges are in eeffect, cadets are authorized to visit £ the 
following from immediately after inspection following evening call to quarters until 
tattoos 

(1) & barracks 

(2) The Library 

(3) Friends or relatives at Visitors Room or at Officer* s Quarters in the posts 

(4) Class clubs 

Co Except in snergencies or viien specifically authorized to be absent, at the sounding 
of call to q • rters, cadets shall at once ^repair to their rooms* This applies to all 
days of the week and only those cadets who have signed out in the company departure 
book for dining permit or special privileges on Saturday, evening preceding holidjtyds, 

maybe absent* 

13 - iahiVE OF AB&iMCB 


13. 01 Types 

Christmas leave 
Week-end leave 
Sick leave 
Emergency leave 

13.02 General Rules. - a, Application by a cadet for a leave of absence will be made 
on the prescribed forms* 

b* Cadets on leave will not enter the post or camp without obtaining prior permission 
from the Commandant of Cadets in ach instance and while in the post will conform to 
the usual customs governing cadets* 

c. Cadets who, for any reason, fail to take advantage of an approved leave will indorse 
this fact on their leave request and submit it without delay to the officer specif ico. 
in the instructions appearing on the leave form, 

d* Cadets will report promptly every change of address while on vacation and Christmas 
leave, sick, or emergency leave. 


e« In calculating the length of a leave, the day of departure will be a day of leave, 
the day of return a day of duty*, Day begins and ends at midnight; bat when the authority 
for leave fixes a definite time of return, cadet must have returned to duty by that time, 

f. An approved leave blank will be retained in possession of cadets until return. In 
the case of emergency leave blanks, one copy will be left with the Officer in Charge. 

g. Cadet will sigi out in Company Departure Book only, giving complete address, 

h. A cadet returning from week-end leave will return to the Orderly Boom, sign in, 
complete leave blank, file it with the Cadet in Charge of Quarters and report his return 
in person to the Cadet Company Commander prior to assembly for dinner formation. Cadets 
returning from emergency leave will complete the leave fora in the Office of the Officer 
in Charge. 

i. Cadets who are going on leave cannot ask or withdraw money from the 3-4 or the 
Treasurer unless they have previous deposits as their emergency funds. They are 
therefore encouraged to make the necessary deposits in order that they will have 
money enough to defray the expenses that may be incurred during the leave, or for 

any other personal needs. Forthis purpose, they may write their parents to remit, from 
time to time, an amount not exceeding / 30 e 0 Q to be addressed to the 3-4« 

Report of Lates - Each case will be considered on its merits, taking into consideration 
the circumstances accounting for the late. Adequate and timely travel arrangements made 
by the cadet, regardless of the mode of travel, will be the determining factor in 
whether or not disciplinary action iswar ranted, 

13 o 03 Leaves andVacatians , - Leaves and vacations will be granted under such 
provisions as the Superintendent may direct. 


14 - LIMITS 

14*01 Cadets are not allowed beyond the immediate premises of the Institute reser- 
vation 

without specific permission, unless when cn official business. AH other 
roads, grounds and buildings outside the perimeter of the reservation, unless spe- 
cifically axpepted, are “off limits’* to cadets, 

14*02 All buildings and adjacent premises and indosures within cadet limits are 
"off limits,” except those listed below, and as otherwise provided for by para 

15*14 b p 

a. Officer f s garters and grounds when invited or sufficient notice to the officer 
concerned is made, 

b. Academic building - only when on official business, 

c. Administration building (less library) - only when on official business, 

d. Cadet Mess Hall, Cadet Supply Boom, Post Tailor - only when on official business. 

e. B.M.I, Headquarters, except the Disciplinary and Rating Section - only when on 
official business, 

f . Gymnasium, Hospital, Cadet Store, Post Barber Shop, Chapel, Post Theatre - only 
when on official business* 

g* Library «= as authorised by para 15*13* 

h« Post Guard House -» only when on official business. 

14*03 Restricted Limits . - Refer to para 4*22 
14*04 Escorting Limits,; - 

Cadets while escorting may enter a building where the escorted guest lives in 
order to escort such guest to and from a general entertainment provided that such 
action is limited only to a courteous gesture of an invitation; and provided fur- 
ther that it will not jeopardize the time schedule of the extertainment and/or ohe 
time alloted for escorting, 

14,05 Limits . - Cadets may ride in automobiles or taxis within the 

City of Baguio when authorized. 

15 - KaCRj^TlOHAL Ail) SOCIAL PttI VlhhGuL 

15,01 oenaral Provisions : - a. Before taking advantage of any privilege, a cadet 
will familiarise himself with the authorizations arid limitations pertaining thereto. 
He will take no undue advantage of any privilege* 

b. Privileges other than those appearing in this section may be granted at the dis= 


cretiori of the CoHSiandant of Cadets# 

15.02 General - The term general entertainment defines any entertain- 

meat of a general nature, sponsored by the BKE, that is attended hy all or a lagge 
number of the Corps diring release from quarters or when Saturday evening privileges 

are in effect* 

15.03 After a general jintartainmait . - a. Upon the completion of an evening general 
entertainment, all cadets will leave the place of entertainment as soon as practicable* 

b. Cadets will be authorized one (l) hour to sign return after the completion of an 
entertainment, or, in case of early departure, after leaving the entertainment* 

15.04 Saturday Evening Privileges : - a* The recreational and social privileges extended 
to cadets on Saturday evenings and evenings preceding holidays will be referred to as 
“Saturday evening privileges.” Advantage may be taken of any authorized privilege or 
combination of authorized privileges on Saturday evenings by any cadet entitled to them. 
Such cadets may be absent from their rooms at /{/all room inspections up to the termina- 
tion of their privileges, provided such absences are accounted for. 

b. The hour terminating any privilege is the hour by which a cadet will have signed his 
return to barracks or will have arrived at the place of some other privilege having a 
later termination. 

c. No cadet will leave his room after Taps to take advantage of any Saturday evening 
privileges. 

15.05 Limitation of Privileges i a , Qaddts serving confinement shall not avail any 
privilege, 

b. Anjr Cadet who is deficient even in one subject only is discouraged from applying 

tor any privileges or leave unless on an' emergency. 

for 

e 0 A cadet who applies/ any privilege when privileges a re in effect is understood 
to have no duty to perform during the period of the privilege applied for* 

d. Cadets on leave or on privilege should observe strictly the time their leave or 
privilege are supposed to terminate* Only under justifiable circumstances ean a cadet 
who overstays his leave or privilege be pardoned. 

e. The bad habit of calling by telephone \hen cadets are already outside enjoying their 
leave or privilege for an extension of their leave or privilege should be stopped. 

Oily on emergency cases, these telephone calls may be honored. 


f, An requirements for leave as contained in the Cadet’s Leave Form should be 
complied -with before a cadet submits his application for approval,, 

15.06 fciWMiA Privileges. - a, Automobiles will not be operated by cadets on the 
Military Institute reservation except as authorized by the Commandant of Cadets, 

b* BMI Vehicles will not be operated by cadets, 

c. Cadets may use taxis at such times as authorized by the Commandant of Cadets, 

15.07 Dining Privilege . - a, Upon invitation , cadets not performing duty or undergoing 
punishment may dine at the quarters of officers or civilian instructors residing in the 
Poet, with relatives, or with friends at residence in Baguio or at places authorized by 
memoranda, as follows! 

(1) Noon meal on Saturdays, when inspection precedes the noon meal 

(2) Noon Meal on Sundays and holidays 

(3 j Evening meal on Saturdays and evenings preceding holidays 
* 

b 0 If a combination of privileges is to be taken, entries will be made accordingly when 
signing out. An departments mil be rnadeprior to first call forthe meal formation, 
otherwise the cadet will not take advantage of the privilege, 

c, A cadet taking advantage of a dining permit for a meal will sign his return on time 
for the next duty, 

d. Cade s will apply in writing for dining privilege in the B.M.I. prescribed foim and 
will submit such application 24 hours in advance. All approved applications will be 
submitted to the Ccdet in Charge of Quarters prior to departure, 

15.08 Visiting in Barracks . - Cadets may visit in barracks! 

a. During release from quarters 

b. During call to quarters 

(1} Ch official business 

(2) When coaching or being coached for deficiency in studies 

(3) After tattoo inspection until taps, as authorized by the Comply 

Tactical Officers, 

Co When Saturday evening privileges are in effect, until tattoo e 

15*09 Escort in tr. - Escorting is defined as walking with, riding in an automobile with, 
or holding an extedded conversation with visitors or residents of the Post, 


b 0 Cadets may escorts 

(1) Anytime they are allowed to walk within defined limits, 

(«) Before and after a general entertainment from and to transportation 
within the vicinity of the place of entertainment, 

(3) Be/fore and after a general entertainment from and to Officers Quaters, 

( 4 ) Before and after a general entertainment from and to guests* residence 

in Baguio, 

( 5 ) To and from a show privilege combined with diningo 

Co Cadets may not escort in improper uniform unless granted specific authority by the 
Officer in Charge in aaoh individual case, 

15.10 Cadet Dances . - New Cadets may not attend cadet dances until after declared pro- 
ficient in social grances, 

b„ Cadets who, for a good reason, desire to attend a dance other than that being given 
for their class, must obtain permission from the officer in charge, 
c 8 Dances shall not be considered a duty, unless otherwise specified, 

15.11 Radio-Phonographs . - a. Cadets may not have more than one radio and one 
phonograph or one radio-phonograph per room, 

b. Radios, radio-phonograpfeh or phonographs will be small table type models, 

c. Exterior antennas will not be authorized, 

15.12 Reception Room . - a. Cadets may visit guests in the reception /room during re- 
lease from quarters and when Saturday evening privileges are in effect until tattoo, 

b. Unexpected Visitors, - During call to quarters, or in confinement (special, ordinary, 
or sick), a cadet may see unexpected visitors in the cadet reception foam for a brief 
period with the permission of the Officer in Charge, If during call to quarters he will 
report his departure and return in person to the Officer of the Day and if in 

1 , / < / 

confinement, to the Cadet in Charge of Quarters, and sign his departure and return in 

) i | ' V ‘ 

the Company Departure Book# . fj 

15.13 Library . - Cadets may visit the library during their freo /periods, 

' :• , \ • 

; a A, „ 

15.14 Visits on lost , - a. Cadets may vidfc the quarters of officer during ecxbbbs 
release from quarters and when Saturday evening privileges are in effect until tattoo* 

1 t / ' ■ 

.<;{ I t V} 

;.i . i, • \\ . 

\ \ 


\ ^ ) 

b, Cadets may visit other cadets confined in the Post Hospita^Auring visiting hours 
prescribed by the Cormiianding Officer of the Post Hospital, and with the permission 
of the Officer on &tty thereat# 

15*15 Picnics * - a. Cadets may attend picnics in the camp or in authorized places in 
Baguio. 

b. Cadets may picnic at times when they may dine out. Evening picnics will terminate 
not later than taps; by tilt hair all cadets of the party will have signed in their 
return. Noonday picnics will terminate by first call for the next duty, by which time 
all cadets of the party will have signed in their return. 

c. Picnic permits (BMI prescribed form ) will be submitted in duplicate to Company 
Tactical Officer, 24 hours in advance. No picnic permits will be approved for less 
than ten (10) cadets. 

d. The cadet in charge of the picnic will request through his Company Tactical 
Officer an officer to act as chaperon for the picnic, 

15.16 Smoking . « Smoking is discouraged but not prohibited. While at Post, cadets 
may smoke in all places where others are pexmitted to smoke except that cadets will 

not: 

(1) Smoke on roads or on sidewalks 

(2) Smoke cigars or pipes outside of barracks 

b. Smoking by cadets in barracks will only be confined inside their rooms or sinks 
or vioinity of their table if a msnber of the guard or Charge of Quarters. 

c. While away from the Post and in uniform, cadets will conform to the spirit of 
the regulations gn anaaasax governing smoking at the Military Institute. They will 

not smoke in such places as would invoke criticism of the Corps of Cadets or render them 
impolite or conspicuous. 

15.17 Inviting Privilege . «. a. Cadets may invite relatives or friends at their quarters 
in the Post or in Baguio to any cadet affair in camp such a s those enumerated in 
sub-paragraph below on approval of an inviting permit (SKI prescribed form) by the 
Company Tactical Officer. 

b« Cadets may incite guests to the following occasions: 

(1) Cadet dances and frolics 

(2) Progrmas taken on the nature of general entertainment held in the camp. 

(3) Whenever specifically authorized by the Commandant of Cadets. 


Co A cadet taking advantage of an inviting privilege is not excused from any duty# 
d, k cadet going on inviting privilege mast sign his return not later than the ( 8 ) 
two hoars from the time he signed out# 

15.18 Show Privilege., - a e Cadets not performing duty or undergoing punishment may 
got to any movie house in Baguio as follows: 

(1) Saturday afternoons 0 

(2) Evenings preceding holidays 

(3) Holidays 

b« Show tickets will be purchased from the Cadet St ore 9 
Co Cadets will go to and return fraa show in formations 

15.19 Dancing. - Cadets may attend dances and parties give^ in private homes only 0 

15.20 Combination Privileges.. - a* The following combination privileges are authorised: 

(1) Dining Privilege - This privilege may be combined with all or any of the 
show, walking and dancing privileges e The place Sot dancing privilege, if applied for 
should be the same place for dining privilegeo 

(2) Visiting Privilege - This privilege may be combined with both or any of the 
show end walking privileges, 

(3) Dancing Privilege •» This privilege my be combined with both or any of the 
show and dining privileges, 

b. Application may be filed for the f ollovdng combined privileges: 

(1* Dining Privileges - - 1:00 P.M. to 1Q$30 P.M e 

(2) Dancing Privileges => 1:00 P.M, to 10:30 P.M 0 

(3) Visiting Privileges ~ 1:00 P.M. to 5*30 P.H. 


16 - A-SSftVS ii ; tQj; I QI»J 


16.01 


C&lls: 

fK5l Call ....... 

• ssembllss ••••«.. 

Reveille 

faus, aarniog ball 
Tap* 


... ’"Ira minutes/before assembly; 5-seonds 

. 6 - « 

, .five .minutes .before assembly; 16- " 

....Five minutes before assembly; 6- ” 

9U ; 2 - " 


ring 


*? 

It 


16.02 fire . - fire oall will be sounded repeatedly ou the bugle and/ 
or a series of 

2-seoond rings on the bells oo tinned for ap roximately 


two minutes. 

16.03 Cadet in Command. - a. 3h certain special oases, the cadet in 
•uamand of a formation will be determined by detail. 

b. In all other oases, the senior cadet present for duty at the for- 
mation of any group of cadets will command, He will be responsible 
that the formation is conducted in a military manner. 

16.04 Attendance Chech . - An attendance check and report will be re- 
quired at all formations. Xettes and absentees will be reported to the 
guard. 

16.05 Reforming and Dismissal . • Unless otherwise prescribed, groups 
will always be reformed after any duty and msrohed back to the plaoe 
of dismissal. 

16.06 la formation. - Unless otherwise prescribed, groups 
midckxaSrwuysxfcK serf. umiuakxsf: tsMzrsjfxdjatpxsnA ■ udxxbxuk siaakxtmfciiaxgimw 

confine themselve on the right side of the road, hall- 
icfce wa/«s» nnd stairs when nvirohing in formation. 

16*0? Cede t a B roused froa Marching. - A cadets who is required to 
attend any duty to which he would normally march, but who is excused 
from marching beoause he is in the hospital or for other reasons, will 
prooeed as follows in attending the duty; 

a. If the feimatlon for duty is a ocrapany formation, the cadet will 
report in person to the first Sergeant at the place of formation at 
assembly, then prooeed Individually to the place of duty. Upon comple- 
tion of the duty, he will again report to the first Sergeant prior to 

dismissal. 


4 * 


b# In all other oases, a cadet who normally marches to class will 
fill oat and sign a walking to class slip (BMI prescribed farm) and 
deliver it to a member of the guard* He will then proceed individually 
to the plaoe od duty, reporting upon arrival there to his section 
marcher* Upon completion of the duty, he will return without delay to 
barraoks, or to the hospital* 

16,08 Absence from duty , -a. Only the Superintendent or the School 
Ifcyeioian may exouse a cadet from any duty* 

b* A cadet will be "absent from duty" when he does not join before 
the duty ends and absent from a ceremony if he does not before adju- 
tant* s call, after which he may not join* 

c* Absent from formation when he is not in his proper place after re- 
ports have been rendered, 

d« a cadet will be "late" if he is not exactly in his proper place 
at the last note of assembly* 

e* Unless definitely stated, a privilege acoorded to cadets will not 
excuse them from any duty or the serving of punishments* 
f* When for ary reason a oadet misses a part of a duty, he will im- 
mediately report to the Officer in Charge for instructions* 
g* Whe n a oadet fails to report all absentees from a formation, he 
will correct the report with the guard, at the first opportunity* 
h* When cadets are excused from inspection in ranks, they will display 
their arms and equipment at room inspection the same day* 
i* Cadets excuse from any oeremony may not observe that ceremony* 

16*09 Absence Card o - a* Any authorized absence of a cadet from his 
room during a period of Call to Quarters must be accounted for on the 
cadet * s absence card* 

b« firing release from quarters, oadets in sick, ordinary or special 
confinement or arrest will record their authorized absence as thoguh 
it were Call to quarters. 

o* Bntries on an absence card are considered as official statement; s 
that the cadet’s absence is authorized and for the purpose indicated# 


16 #10 Departure Books . - a, Cadets will sgx sign their departures and 
return in the Company Departure Books as follows: 

(1) When going on leave and vacation 

(2) When taking advantage of dance privileges or general 

entertainments 

(3) When taking advantage of any authorized privilege outside 

the school 

(4) When being admitted or discharge from the hospital as a patient 

(5) When reporting to the hospital under individual circumstances 

during Call to Quarters 

(6) On special occasions to be announced by the Dept of Tactics*BMI 
b 0 Cadets w 11 sign their departure and return in the Guard Departure 
Book as follows: 

(1) When going on leave, trips and vacation# 

(2) When taking advantage of any authorized privilege outside the 
School except that when a formation is required for the privilege 
cadets need not sign their departure and return in this departure book* 

(3) Whan being admitted or discharge from the hospital as a jatient. 

(4) When reporting to the hospital under individual circumstances 
during Call to Quarters* 

(5) On speoial oooasions to be announced by the Department of Tactics, 
BMI* 

c* Sfctries will be aocurate to the mintite basing upon the official time# 
They will be official statements that cadets are going to the places in- 
dicated and nowhere else* A oadet will be responsible that he is properly 
signed out in the Departtire Book, except when the guard is required to 
sign him o4t* Ifhis status ohanges after he has signed out, he must 
oorreot his entry upon his return* 
iSxfiixxSx 


17 - S-IOK 

17*01 general . - A cadet will go to the Hospital for examination con- 
sultation or treatment ae follows? 

a* At siok oall* = 

(1) fie will report to the Cadet in Charge of Quarters before 
or daring breakfast to have his name entered on the Siok hook. The 
siok aorli squad will be formed in front of the Mess Hall at siok oall* 
Cadet officers, first sergeants and supply sergeants will be exouse 
from the formation of the siok squad and will proceed individually 

to the hospital# 

(2) If a cadet is detained at the hospital at ®i©k call s© that 
he will be late far instruction he will as the School Physician for 
an "Individual Absence Slip" and see thfct it is properly completed. 

]£> b* In Saaergenei es. - 

(1) Unless prevented by the seriousness of his illness, a cadet 
will mark his absence card, obtain an Individual Absence Slip from 
tie Officer in Charge and sign his departure in the guard Book. Upon 
hie return from the hospital, he will oomplate this Individual Absenoe 
Slip as indicated. 

(2) Whenever a cadet accompanies ai other to the hospital or to 
an ambulanoe, he will turn him over the the firsb available medical 
personnel and return immediately to any duty, except ceremony, he should 
be standing. 

(3) Cadets reporting to the School Physician or School Dentist 
in an emergency will, if they request to excuse from any duty, inform 
the officer of any high priority duties which conflict, such as phy- 
sical test and written examinations. 

(4) Any cadet who falls out at a ceremony will be sent directly 
to the hospital. He will be reported for falling out and will submit 
an / expoanation of report. 

(6) When a oadet has occasion to call the hospital for an 
ambulanoe, he will notify the Officer in Charge, or, in his absence, 
the Officer of the Day, of the circumstances# 


(6) In the event of serious injury to any oadet 9 the Officer in 
Charge will he notified immediately* 
o* By Appointment* • 

(l) A Cadet will obtain an isnttt. Individual Absence Slip from the 
Sohool Physiean at the time his appointment is made. He will sign his 
departure and return in the appropriate departure books and complete 
the Individual Absence Slip* 

(S) Except in oases of emergenoy 9 hospital appointments will not 
be made to conflict with academic written examinations* In the event 
that hospital scheduled an appointment for a cadet at a time which 
oonfliot with a scheduled written examination,, it will he the res~ 
ponsibility of the cadet to notify the School Physician concerned* 

17*02 Excus ed from any Duty . - a« Any exemption from duty hy the 
Sohool Physloinn must be shown on an Individual Absence Slip 0 
b* When a cadet is excused by the Sohool Physicdan from "ell formations 
the cadet will automatically be in sick confinanento During meals, 
he will be present at the door of the Mess Hall in time to enter 
the Mess Ball before the Corps* 

Oa A Cadet will be excused from attendance at physical training 
classes only when the entry on his Individual Absence Slip is marked 
"Excused from Athletics" the cadet will attend the Physical training 
class in the gymnasium uniform and will report the fact to the 
instructor ±mcKksxg<t>:ocfk£a&iiui Hi txsnalHgxlHxt fcexSgpaasiacix that k±s he 
is excused* He will then be required to report to the instructor 
in charge of Ee conditioning in the Special Exercise Room for special 
instruotione 

d* When excused from any duty* a cadet will report at siok oaL 1 the 
next day 9 except when the Sohool Physician enters on his Individual 
Absence Slip "Excused from sick call until (date)"* 


e« Cadets who are excused by the School Physician from drill and athletios 
but who are not excused from academic duties, will attend military ins- 
truction of a nature that requires no more physicial exertion than other 
classroom instruction* 

17.03 Sick Confinement . - a. Sick Confinement will restrict a cadet to 
his room, except to go to the sinks far proper purposes, and to attend 
meals in the Mess Hallo Cadets in sick confinement will, however, 
attend all scheduled duties from which they are not specifically excused. 

b. A cadet in sick confinement may serve no punishment tours or ordinary 
confinement. 

c. Cadets in sick confinement will be inspected f esc by the Cadet in 
Charge of Quarters. Absence cards must account for all absences. 

17.04 Admission as a Patient . - a. A Cadet who at any time is admitted to 
the hospital will, if he is allowed to return to barracks for his per- 
sonal belongings, mark his absenoe card and sign his departure in Com- 
pany and Guard Books 0 

not 

b. If/allowed to return to barraoks, the cadet will notify the Officer 
of the Day of the admission or request someone at the hospital to do s>© 0 
o. A cadet who is admitted to the hospital, whose physical condition per- 
mits, will take with him textbooks, bathrobe, slippers, pajamas, laundry 
bags, name card, and toilet articles, including soap, when unable to 
take those articles with him, the cadet will tlelphone , or arrange far 
someone to telephone, the Guard at the proper guard room for them. 

17.05 Individual Absenoe S'liu a - a. fifidets will fill out and submit an 
Individual Absence Slip when re orting to the hospital at the time other 
than sick call. 

b. Cadets will fill out and submit an Individual Absenoe Slip for each 
official appointment outside the area of barracks. 

' i 

(1) When a cadet receives an Individual Absence Slip no tifying. him 

V 

of an appointment, he will complete the slip as prescr ibed\, below. 

(2) When a cadet is noti led by official orders. Daily Bulletin or 
other memoranda, that he has an appointment, he will, at thewix 


V - - 4 

end of his a pointment, submit a ocmplete Individual Absence 
Slip, indioatirig as his authority# "Hq., B.LI.I.” JhysioaL 
Examinations, dental surveys, and immunisations are not con~ 
eidered appointments unless so stated, 

(3) Cadets will be held responsible that all data on the hospital 
section of the Individual Absence Slip has been properly fill a 
out at the hs opital and that the slip has bean presented to 
the medical officer for signature, 

c. Individual absence slips will be filled out and submitted as fillom s 

(1) Cadets will complete the form to include the initials. 

(2) On the following circumstances, individual absence slip shall 
be presented to the guard for the latter's informati n before 
delivering them to the cadet in Charge of Qaearts&rs* 

(a) ./hen cadets are excused from any duty. 

(b) Jhen cadets in the sick squad return from the hospital 
after assembly of the . irst scheduled instruction in 
the morning. (Refer to par 17.01 a, 2) 

18-CHAPEh 

18.01 General . - a, attendance at chapel is part of a cadetfe training, 
lo cadet will be exempted* 

b* Th services of the Chaplain will always be available to cadets. A 
cadet may mafce appointments with the Chaplain at any time during his 
off duty* 

a. 

18*02 Chtitldlo Chapel service . - Cadets will be formed for Catholic 
Chapel Service by company formation. 

b. All cadets attending chapel, except those having duties to jb rform 
in connection with the service, will sit with their respective compa- 
nies. 

o. Cadet c 1 b pel ushers shall be designated by the Company Commander 
and shall perform suoh duties as desired, by the Chaplain. They shall 
proceed to the chapel individually bef®re the start of the service 
and e rform thAir duties. After the tesmination of the service, they 




will Join the breakfast formation. 

d. The Cadet Chapel Choir will be formed separately from the Corps 
and marohed to the chapel and reported to the Choir Master. 

18.03 Catholic Bervloe other than Sundays . - .During Holy days of 
obligation, cadets shall be marohed direct to the Chapel iirraediate- 
ly after report for reveille has been rendered. Uniform for chapel 
shall be pr seribed by the Of fi oer in Charge* 

18.04 Confession . - Confession hfc&ll be held during Saturday afters 
noons or during Saturday evenings up to tattoo# 

18.00 Other Chapel Squads. - a. Company First Ser :eants will list ± 
the names of non-Catholie cadets with their religious affiliations 
and submit ther names to the Department of Tactics which will ar- 
range for their chapel services in Baguio City. 

b. The separate chapel squads will proceed to their respective 
chapels at Baguio in time to attend one regular service and return 
to the Post upon completion of the service. 

\ 

19- 71 ,3 fi SULAT lofts 

19.01 Motif ioati on . - A cadet who discovers fire anywhere in or 
near barracks will at onoe notify the Officer in Charge, or, in his 
absence, the senior member of the Guard present, using the telephone 
if this will save time# 

19.02 Fire Call . - Sire call will be sounded repeatedly by bugle. A 
series of 2-second rings on the bells continued for two rainuteso 

i ^6^x 2Km»digriexi^gcaxg±£^f!^tg±aa^rasotJEdg 3:3ixgzx8TgBKCxg xxxxxxxxxxx 

19.03 /hen the Officer in Charge is present he alone may authorize 
sounding fire oall; otherwise Kxxixaotfc the decision rest with the 
senior member of the Guard pres onto 

v 

V \ 

19.04 Procedure When lire Call is Sounded . - a. Except as otherwise 
provided for below, all cadets will proceed immediately to the 

W v 

areas of barracks, fcrm as for reveille, and await orderso 

b. The floor inp sectors will proceed tothe highest numbered room in 


their floor and* taking the rooms in order, require all cadet 3 to pre- 
cede them to the area. Their inspections will include the singes and 
bathrooms. Upon completion of this inspection, the floor inspectors/ 
will re ort to the Cadet Company Commander that all oadet roome/n 
and sinks have b en vacated. 

o. The Company $taff will report at once to the Officer in Charge. 

d. Cadet in Charge/ of Quarters will obtain the fire extinguishers 
from the company orderly room aud form with the compaay. 

e. all other cadets will arm themselves with any water container a- 
vallable and form in front of barracks. 

f* All movement of individuals to ranks or of details to assigned 
posts will be at double time. No unnecessary noise will be made. 

80- SBR7ICB. VAC IL K I QS, and SUPPLIES 
20.01 Barber jap? ,- Cadets may patronise only the barber shop in 
Camp. 

20.02. Cacet Vturo . - Cadets may visit the Oadet itore any time it 
is open for business. 

20.0S Sunni ios . - a. The Treasurer, through the Cadet Store, will 
furnish the cade s all supplies except school property issued by the 
Supply Officer, Bill, or articles whioh, upon proper authority, may 
be purchased elsewhere. 

b. Cadets will be responsible that their names are cl early marked on 
all personal possessions. 

c. Adtpmatie issues. - hen all or a majority of oudets are required 
to have an article, it >viil be issued automatically without requisi- 
tion. 

d. Special Requisition. - Submitted on regular BliT prescribed farm 
in three copies thru the Company Taotioal Officer. All requisitions 
for tfeje re-issue or replacement of articles of clothing will be made 0 . 
this fom. 

e. Articles approved on requisition but not supplied due to lack of 
stock may be requistioned at anytime by the oadet indicating above his 


& ignatu r e " I'reviously approved but not issucu due to lack of ebook " • 
f, Reissue Articles. - Cadets may not wear second hand olothing 
without the approval of the Company l'aotioftl Officer. Approved gar® 
merits will have a "reissue” tag shown therein. 

20.04 Cash s - Cadets may not hold cash except when specifically 
authorized. Cash received from home or from any other source shall 
he deposited with the .Treasurer, immediately upon r oei$t. Cash 
left unspent upon return from trips will likewise be deposited 
with the fro&surer, or in his absence the Office r in Char? e imme- 
diately upon his arrival in Camp. 

20.05 Laundry . - a. Cadets will send laundry clothing according to 
published schedules. 

b. articles sent to the laundry will be placed on a laundry bag with 
a laundry list properly made out. Cadets will retain^ a duplicate 
laundry list until the return of the laundry. laundry bags will be 
placed near the Orderly Rooom before breakfast of the scheduled day. 

c. Cadets will be charged for laundry on a flat rate basis. The ma- 
ximum number of ieces per bundle will be prescribed in current me- 
moranda . 

d. Clean laundry will be plaoed in rooms before evening oall to qu«r® 
ters on the day it is delivered. It will be folded and placed in the 

prescribed places before the next morning inspection. 

e. A cadet receiving articles from the laundry belonging to another 
cadet will return the article to the ownder of to the Cadet Officer 

of the Bay. 

20.06 Mail.- a. Outgoing. - All outgoing mails sh il have a return 
address. Cadets may go to the ma jl boxes in barracks any time bet- 
ween reveille and taps. 

b. Inc oalfg - (l) Special delivery letters and registered mails and 
parools shall be signed for by the Officer of the Iky from the Mes- 
sage Center Clark, BMI, and delivered in 3rson to the addressee. 

(2) Ordinary Mails shall be taken from the Guard Room by the desig- 


nited mall orderlies after noon and evening ness ncl delivered to 

\ 

the addressee In -erson. All other cadets are not authorized to 
get tneir letters from the Guard Room. 

(3) Cadets will advise o corespondents th t all mails sent to them 

shall he addressed similarly to the following: 

Cauet Juan delu Cruz, Co a 
B aguio Military Institute 
Baguio City 

:o other desi ntions are neoessary. 

20.07 T elephones . - a. General. - Caaets may use the to Jsfhone^not 
to exoeee five (5) minutes at a tine in: 

Company orderly rooms 

Offices or Officei’s Quarters when invited or given pe r- 
mission t o do so . 

Hos ital when a patient therein and for short duration 

only. 

b. Looal Calls. - Cadets must not send or reoeive local unofficial 
calls during call to quarters. 

3 . Incoming Long Distance Calls. - Cauets, who are not at a duty 
w.i.cii revent , may reoeive long dis anoe calls at any tine provided 
erdis are limited to five (5) minutes, except in extreme emergen cie s 
tfhen cadets is not available, the calling party will be told at whit 
hour the caaet will be available. Cauets should notify their friends 
to cull tea over -per son- to -person than station- to-station calls. 

ai- uaiffOxuis 

» .x Unlianas shall he worn as prescribed by memoranda. 

21,02 01othin 8 and OQ uipment will be kept clean and worn so as to 
presents neat appearance at all times. 

u.. a, Cadets will not lend articles of clothing or equipment without 

iXSi0n * eKC9 P t that raincoatcs only may be worn by visitors du- 
ring ino lament weather. 

JeweXiy# " Cadets wear one watch and one ring and an iden- 
tification braoelet. 





2 g- 



(To be covered by ourrent memoranda from the 
Department of .icademics) 

23- 3BSCIF 10 iD.'lIHISTHhTiyjg PUTINS 

(To be covered by current memoranda and instructions 

of the Commandant of Cadets and Superintendent ) 

24- -^Xf xiit- GU&K ICULuR ^CTIVITIFS 

(To be covered by memoranda and spooific instructions 
from the Superintendent and Coiamandant 
of Cadets, Department of Tactics) 


j 


