

iHalacanang 

Manila 


Pp tfje $resibent of tf je $fnltppme£ 
proclamation Ho. 799 


DECLARING A PERIOD OF NATIONAL MOURNING OVER THE 
DEATH OF FORMER PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMEftA. 

Whereas, the death of former President SERGIO OSMENA on 
October 19, 1961, is a great loss to our people and has caused deep 
sorrow among them; 

Now, therefore, I, CARLOS P. GARCIA, President of the 
Philippines, do hereby proclaim the period from October 20 to 
November 3, 1961, as a period of national mourning for our beloved 
former President. During this period flags of all government build- 
ings and installations throughout the Philippines shall be flown at 
half-mast. 

In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the Republic of the Philippines to be affixed. 

Done in the City of Manila, this 19th day of October in the 
year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the 
Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth. 



President of the Philippines 


By the President: 


(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA 

Assistant Executive Secretary 


jfflalacanattg 

jflanila 


J&V t!)e ^refiibent of tfje ^fjilipptnefi 
Sbrnimstratibe <£rber J!o. 368 


CREATING A COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE 
FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF FORMER 
PRESIDENT SERGIO OSMENA. 


Whereas, former President SERGIO OSMENA passed away 
unexpectedly on the nineteenth day of October, nineteen hundred 
and sixty-one; and 

Whereas, it is fitting and proper that adequate arrangements be 
made for the holding of official necrological services arid a state 
funeral for our former President, commensurate with the people’s 
love and respect for him with the great debt of gratitude that they 
owe him; 

Now, therefore, I, CARLOS P. GARCIA, President of the 
Philippines, by virtue of the powers vested in me by law, do hereby 
create a Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial, composed 
of the following: 


Speaker Daniel Romualdez, Chairman 


Hon. Fernando Lopez 
Hon. Ferdinand Marcos 
Hon. Mariano Jesus Cuenco 
Hon. Domocao Alonto 
Hon. Elpidio Valencia 
Hon. Alejo Santos 
Hon. Jose Tuazon 
Hon. Jose Nable 

Minister Manuel 


Justice Jesus Barrera 
Hon. Constancio Castaneda 
Hon. Cornelio Villareal 
Gen. Basilio Valdes 
Hon. Jose Reyes 
Hon. Enrique C. Quema 
Gov. Francisco Remotigue 
•. Zamora, Secretary 


Done in the City of Manila, this nineteenth day of October, in 
the year of Our Lord, nineteen hundred and sixty-one, and of the 
Independence of the Philippines, the sixteenth. 


By the President: 



President oj the Philippines 


(Sgd.) ENRIQUE C. QUEMA 

Assistant Executive Secretary 


&tate Jfuneral grrangementsi for tfje Hate ^Srefitbent 
Sergio ®gmena, &r. 


Friday, October 20, 1961: 

10:00 p.m. — Arrival of the remains of the late President Sergio Osmena, 
Sr. in Malacahan Palace to lie in state at the Ceremonial 
Hall from the Malate Church. 

Saturday, October 21, 1961: 

8:00 a.m. — Mass at Malacanang will be said by Fr. Alejandro Froilan. 

The relatives and close friends of the late President will 
be present at the mass. Immediately after the mass, the 
scheduled vigil will start. 

9:00 a.m. — The public will be admitted to pay homage to the late 
President. 

Sunday, October 22, 1961: 

8:00 a.m. — Mas s at Malacanang will be said by Col. Nicolas Ortega, 
Chief of Chaplains of the Armed Forces of the Philippines. 

9:00 clttl . — The public will be admitted to pay homage to the late 
President. 

1:00 p.m.— The remains will leave Malacanang for Base Operations, 
Nichols, to be flown to Cebu City. 

4.-00 p.m. — Arrival of the bier at Cebu City. 

4:30 p.m . — Military Honors, Philippine Constabulary. 

5:00 p.m.— Start of the Funeral Cortege along the following route: 
Lahug Airport Road, Gorordo Avenue, Gen. Maxilum turn 
around Fuente Osmena, Jones Avenue, Carmelo, Magallanes, 
Morga, Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral. 

6:00 p.m.— Requiem Mass in Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral. 

7:30 p.m. Start of vigil. The public will be admitted to pay homage to 
the late President. 

Monday, October 23, 1961: 

6:00 a.m.— Requiem Mass in all Churches of the Cities of the Province 
of Cebu. 

7:00 a.m. — Requiem Mass in Cebu Metropolitan Cathedral. 

8:00 a.m.— Start of Funeral cortege to the Cebu Provincial Capitol 
Social Hall along the following route: Urdaneta, Martirez, 
Gen. Maxilum, Capitol Road. 



5:00 p.m . — Necrological services at Cebu Provincial Capitol. 

7:30 p.m . — Start of vigil. The public will be admitted to pay homage to 
the late President. 

Tuesday, October 24, 1961: 

1:00 p.m . — Start of funeral cortege to Lahug Airport along the follow- 
ing route: Capitol Road turn around Fuente Osmena, Gen. 

Maxilum, Gorordo Avenue, Lahug Airport. 

2:00 p.m . — Military Honors. Departure for Manila. 

4:00 p.m . — Arrival at Nichols Air Base. 

5:00 p.m. — Arrival at Malacanang to lie in state at the Ceremonial Hall. 

6:00 p.m . — Vigil will start. The public will be admitted to pay homage 
to the late President. 

Wednesday, October 25, 1961: 

9:00 a.m . — Requiem Mass by Bishop Hernando Antiporda in Malaca- 
nang. The President, the Vice President, the Senate Presi- 
dent, the Speaker, the Chief Justice, Cabinet Members, 
Heads of Diplomatic Corps, Senators and Congressmen, 
Justices of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeals, 
the Chairman and Members of the Commission on Elec- 
tions, Heads of the Armed Forces of the Philippines, rela- 
tives and close friends of the late President and their ladies 
will be present at the mass. 

10:00 a.m . — The public will be admitted to pay homage to the late Presi- 
dent. Vigil over the remains will be resumed. 

4:00 p.m . — The remains of the late President will be transferred to the 
Session Hall of the House of Representatives where it will 
lie in state until the funeral. The vigil will continue and 
the public will be admitted to pay homage to thfe late 
President. 

Thursday, October 26, 1961: 

8:00 a.m . — Necrological services in the Session Hall of the House of 
Representatives. 

10:00 a.m . — The funeral procession will start from Congress to the North 
Cemetery where the burial will take place at 12: 00 high 
noon. 


