msmmw tar 

The President 

aCBJHCTt A brief report of ths acccaepllBhnqntg of the Depart- 
nent of Health and Public half are, 

Hawflirttly upon ny assumption of duties as raoretnry of Health 

and ublio elf ore and having in alnd that the health of the people la 

one of the noet toportant concerns of our Government, X oprwintod a 

oomlttee with instruct ions to proceed at once with the reorganization 

of the Bureau of Health, so n» to enable it to noor, the needs of the 

present emergency end to rehabilitate os soon as possible the health 

services in the liberated arose , he appointment, of personnel to key 

positions in the service wee aade imcdlatoly end soon thereafter, that 

of the field personnel urns likewise antio, the ihtroau of llesilth *.me 

given instructions to cooperate closely with the various Amy units to 

prevent as ansh as possible outbreak of coinuni cable diseases. Health 

s ur ve ys in various liberated provinces were node by vto personally, by 

% 

the Acting In-Gharge of the Bureau, end by its field personnel, nad it 
is worthy to note that in all these inspection tripe, no wajor outbreak 
of eeMNMttoable diseases wee found. Diseases in sporadic forw, which 
nay endanger the health and safety of the oorwauiity, have been placed 
under control, Xn other words, the health conditions in the provinces 
visited have been found satisfactory. 



the B w w a of Health nan uleo i»otnwt.o4 to ox&mlta laevXUntttly 
veeelna ting unite, m that vnceinatiett and Isvowisation work could bo 
completed mi onrly **» poratble before the mtoy ftennon curb in. Hi 
view of the limtea i*q>?ly of vtxminee, vwocimbom mm onjotood to 
take the WtMMt OMNI lB p e vfr >W d nc SMWRitmblOR worts# 

ifcmttoe but anl urged aebivitiee an sedwla sort tuborcmloKlr am 
eontiuttad nmabemisitacOy at the i on lenoxo lioepltal. Malaria In tUo 
province** of rawpanaa and 3tw«;o«Jnnn wore looked Into In ooortfcnotioci 
with the worts of Amy eufchorltlao, including a eoaqpito aurvay mate in 
MMBi flavine* whom lama of anopholao other than the local trwie- 
atttem warn net with# Aaelgnnants of health effieere and mbord inate 
aeploywss to provinma, cmd altlae which ore net yet p>*ovldod vith tho 
nmw continue to ha mde m t a* ee conditions and aeeaesity warrant. 

This Office and the horaeoa i«6 officer wider it# Have cooperated 
wholeheartedly with the vmpiatxmt of Health of the Waited tntan jny 
which la in start • of sanitation worts In the City of siimila, to melt m 
extent that port a# cm* peroonnel me detailed to the *mid leparawnt 
in ite vartona aotivltlan# nowerver, oertuta diffloaltiee hem been net 
with *a gard to the sanitation of the City of Mamie cart ite anttma, 
especially to the proper headline end disposal of garbage# f ufflotent 
smfeer of latovme «mld net be aeeured for the eeUeetiaa ef mrirnga on 
Richly aa woe neaseaoty end the people thenaolvaa have not obnorved the 
peeper mlae with regard to the d&epoeal of wneta* and leftae, actwith- 
etMrttos the foot that the United state* >#kv boa node available on the 



•**••*• ««rty dwwe mi gerteee recepteclec. Kffb rte to clean the streets 
of Manila es wall ns to educate tho people In the use of n lapis incinerators 
hjr boring Judos in tbs loser third section of enpty druna, so as to orente 
s draft* whore they eon >mm their Garbage daily,, Instead of dtmplng thwi 
around for files and other retain to broad In, ham been nude. 

Am an oaorgowiy aooeure, this Department hoc taken upon itself 
to place under it temporarily up to Awe 30, 1945 the laboratories of 
tJ» institute of Hygiene In Ahitang, !&uil, in order to put it In e 
condition fbr the production of biolaeicnl products badly needed In 
the prevent leu end control of dlnansa. 1 «m hupny to report that the 
production of the Institute has now partially been rehabilitated, thus 
enehling ftte laboratories to nanufaotmre up to date no lees then 148,900 c.c. 
cholere^yphold-dyaentery vaccine; 49,000 o.o. of cholera vaccine; u ad 
1 VS ,000 units of dried vaccine virus, which have been reported already 
delivered to the requisitioning health sgencloe. other vaccines ore 
in the prooese of preparation, flw rehabilitation of the eerun produc- 
tion wort: of the institute is also under way* and it will not bo lots 
before sane essential antitoxic sent in anpales or in vials would be 
furnished to the public. 

With the United funds at ite disposal, the Bureau of labile rolfaro 
bee also bean reorganised to enable it to extend relief to the needy end 
to provide ears, training, end edueation^to orphaned, neglected, and 
ether dependent classes of children, include Minor delinquents end 
n a n full y defective children, as well ee the aged end inflm. It haw 



* 0 



* 

k J 



c c 



J 



• ♦ • 

alraarty taken eortplete control and iMnlitntim of the oiforeville 
Institutions and the Refugee Gawp established therein «ince the middle 
of Kay of this year by few rw for from PC/JQ 1. Ao of Jtane IS# IMS# 
than won taken MM of In elfnreville 85« orphans# 132 non-loprous 
children of leprous parents, ISfi delinquent boys# 41 delinquent girls# 

44 aged ana lnflm, 10 Mentally defective children, and 1,083 refugees. 

It han also cooperated fully with tha ‘olicc Departaont and the 
ooorta of Justice in tha city of Manila In tha prycholo/'innl and tho 
social Investigation soft tr oa t a a m t of delinquent Miners. A total of 
804 ««•« of Miner dal in quanta wae referred to the Bureau for noeitd 
Investigation Oaring tha period from April 1 to June IT'# IMS, of whan 
102 were reooewtended for probation# 14 were rooorvendod for comit*wut 
to the Philippine training ?’«hoole tor Hoys and r.irla# end tha rest of 
tbs etwee were disposed in sons other way. 

Dm Bureau# in c oo pera tion with the other departnonte of tho Covem- 
wsnt# ss well ss the Civil Affaire nootitm of the AJ»r/C# woe able to ship 
on June 8, IMS# approximtely 880 refuges* from tho various refugee 
hOMoa in Croat er Manila to the THsayfts. 

It has likewise been submitted with the distribution of used and new 
clothing received frew the Philippine «ar Belief (of the Tibi ted rotates) 
fits. 2b the city of Manila alone, there have been reentered 6,318 
applicants, who ere heeds of fmiUss# for these clothing relief. The 
distribution oerrumced cm June 8S end will and on July 80# IMS. ttxm 
throw to four boles of slothing, having on average of 060 pieces each# 



mm tent to Ia Union, tlsanle Occidental, !&x ol, Hollo City and 
Sara© city* 

The Drag Inspection Service af this Bepnrtaant has also been re- 
constituted, considering the fact that alnoe the liberation of the City 
Of ibuilla, • greet aunber of draw stores bora been operating vriLtimot 
the neoeccery penult to do eo, md the peddling of Arurw and nod loin no, 
which It prohibited by It?*, hsm been found to be ranpont In tho etrnets. 

At of Juno 15, IMS, thin ’'opurtnont h«s already issued 839 nomite to 
drag 6 torts, aB to Chinese drur* storon, va to pJiKmnooutioal Inborn tori or., 

1 to eheriienl-phiirraaeeutloal laboratory, 1 to drug deperfc'ncnb (inporter 
«Bd v holaanlc?) , tad 6 to toilet artiole laboratories* ! 1th tho Hid of 
too polio oteo frow tht City of Manila detailed to tho fvran inspection 
.lervioe of thin Department, tho otmpalnn to stop poddllng, to well no 
the salt of spurious drags tt id medicines, in the City hr.n yielded positive 
results. Hat to the look of i * — «wr1 eM transportation facilities, tho 
activities of the Office have not beta extended to tho provinces, with 
the exception of the nearby towns there a few dim; store owners have 
applied for the reopening of their oetnbliahrtaato. 

On Jim 8, 1845, the fivo floorde of xaiincrni nmely, the hoard 
of Medical *mi»«ro , the hoard of rttanmcoutiool oenninore and Inspectors, 
tht Board of Dental samtnere, the Board of xwninore for Burses, and 
tht Board tf Optical .oteninero were rte ©notitutod by reappointing the 
1941 ambers tt terra the oaexpired portion of their tome. Insedlotely 

s 

after the w unbare of tht Boards hod taken their oath of office, they 



* 

. ; 



ec 



* 



-I- 

vwt requested to took into the delicate cjueetian no to whether or not. 
exanimtiaas given by their respective board* during the Japanaeo logins 
tthoult bo eoncidered valid* 

This Peportnant deeiree to nake o t record itn deep appreciation 
cod gratitude to the United States ,\my fbr the valuable help and 
cooperation both in rervioe and in, notorial old, received fro* it* 
various uuitva which, to a greet extant, twfto poeelble tdtotavar pra- 
f reeo thus ftur ncconpliiOiod in heelth and wolfure work# Mkewirn, 
similar eeknowled&wnt. ir. due the officials of tho varioue Popart- 
rirMitc of the cavooxvioalth ' ; ovmvtiant v.hooo ef*t>rtr m ri .y 
enabled the bureaus and offices under thin bepnrtnont to carry on 
their work ea effectively as could be expected under difficult con- 
ditioner 

Uee poet fully mbnitteft. 



B^iJLXO J. vmt'V 

Secretary of Health end iublic .elfare 



