
PREWAR TOAST 

Under old chandelier, a toast by the 
President to his palace guests 
shortly before the war broke out 



President you must succeed to the of- 
fice. 

SO; That is correct, Mr. President. 
That spells out my position. 

MLQ: In facing the pending problem 
as to who shall serve as head of the 
Philippine government now exiled from 
our country, I feel that there are two 
major considerations ~ first, a legal and 
constitutional question and, second, a 
political question. 

SO: What political question do you 
have in mind, Mr. President? 

MLQ: Why, of course, the effect of 
the problem of succession to the pres- 
idency upon the morale of our people, 
their institutions, and the relations of 
the Commonwealth Government to the 
United States. 

SO: Is there no further consideration 
to reckon with, Mr, President? 

MLQ: Of course, there is the added 
consideration that I did not want to 
leave the Philippines. As you well know 
my choice was to stay with our people 
and suffer their lot no matter how bitter, 
1 decided to come to the United States 
only when President Roosevelt invited 
me here "to function in Washington as 
the head of the Commonwealth Govern- 
inent-in-exile and as the symbol of the 
redemption of the Philippines." Take 
special note of this phrase, Don Sergio, 
"as a symbol of the redemption of the 
Philippines" 

Taking all these considerations to- 
gether, I have assumed all along that 
when the President invited me to come 



to the United States he had already 
decided that under the law I could, and 
ill the interest of the prosecution of the 
war, I should continue as President of 
the Philippines until I am restored to 
the full possession of my powers and 
authority in the Philippines by the 
armed forces of the United States, 

SO: But, Mr, President, why should 
you give more validity to President 
Roosevelt's decision and not to the pro- 
visions of the Constitution? 

Does the President's desire carry more 
weight than the clear mandate of the 
Constitution terminating the term of your 
office on November 15 and providing 
for the succession of the Vice-President? 

MLQ: Don Sergio, open your eyes to 
the realities of the situation. Japan over* 
threw the constitutional Government of 
the Commonwealth with its three inde- 
pendent and separate departments — 
the legislative, executive, and judicial — 
and substituted therefor a Japanese 
military regime* Do you not remember 
that the Tydings-McDuffie Act as well 
as the Constitution of the Philippines 
say that the President of the United 
States is authorized to intervene when 
constitutional government is overthrown? 
Therefore, the intervention of Pjesident 
Roosevelt in our dispute is in accordance 
with and not in violation of the Consti- 
tution of the Philippines. In other 
words, if the President of the United 
States desires me to continue in office 
that would be in perfect accord with 
the terms of the Tydings-McDuffie Act 



In time of war, a question of leadership 

by JESUS V. MERRITT 



and the Constitution of the Philippines, 
even if I did not already have that 
right. 

SO; I cannot agree with you on that 
point, Mr. President, My conviction is 
when we fied to the United States we 
took along with us the Constitution of 
the Philippines. If the constitutional gov- 
ernment of the Philippines has been 
wiped out by the Japanese invasion, as 
you now maintain, under what govern- 
ment are we then serving in Washing- 
ton? If the Constitution is inoperative, 
as you seem to insist, where do the 
power and authority we exercise as 
heads of the government-in-exile em- 
anate? 

Or, Mr. President, do you wish me 
to understand that our government-in- 
exile is no more than a de facto organ , 
"functioning under the toleration of the 
President^ of the United States?'* 

MLQ:' (Visibly agitated) No. I assert 
that I am the constitutional President 
of the Gommonw ealth Government of 
the Philippines de jut e and the Japanese 
military regime in the Philippines is on- 
ly a de facto government 

SO; I am pleased to hear that, Mr. 
President, because it seems to me pre- 
carious to hold the theory that because 
the constitutional government of the 
Philippines was destroyed when the ene- 
my occupied the islands and established 
there a military regime the operation of 
the commonwealth government was 
thereby suspended. 

Those who argue (Osmena was re- 
ferring to Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary 
of Information and Public Relations in 
Quezon's Cabinet) that our Constitution 
was suspended would appear to be im- 
paled upon their own argument because 
we are the Constitutional government of 
the Philippines and, therefore, it does 
not lie with us, to destroy the legal 
foundation of our existence by asking 
the President of the United States to 
consider our Constitution suspended. 

MLQ: But, do you deny, Don Sergio, 
that the Constitution of the Philippines 
has become a shambles as a result of 
the Japanese invasion in the Philippines? 
Or, at least, it is in a state of suspended 
animation as a result of the Japanese 
occupation. 

SO: I disagree with you, Mn Pres- 
ident, The Constitution of the Philip- 
pines cannot be regarded as a mere geo- 
graphical expression which ceased to 
exist when the Japanese occupied our 
islands. Rather, it is a statement of liv- 
ing principles and fundamental rules of 
procedure, constituting a social compact 
which the Philippine people, after much 
thought and study, adapted as a form 
of organized society acceptable to them. 
Furthermore, the Constitution is a com* 
pact between the United States and the 
Philippines, It is for this reason that I 
regard it as a blow to the morale of 
the Philippine people and to the valid- 
ity of our accredited Government here 



to set aside the clear language and nor- 
mal functioning of the Constitution on 
any theory whatsoever, so long as no 
necessity or valid reason therefore exists. 

MLQ: Don Sergio, at the time the 
President of the United States extended 
to me the invitation to come to Wash- 
ington, the President knew that under 
the terms of the Constitution, if opera- 
tive, I could not hold office beyond 
November 15, 1943; and the President 
also knew even then that the Philip- 
pines could not possibly be liberated 
from the enemy after November 15, 
1 943. You know that the invitation 
was only extended to me and did 
not include the Vice-President. If 
under the law 1 were to cease and be 
succeeded automatically by the Vice- 
President on November 15, 1943 , he 
should have invited you to come with 
me so that the constitutional mandate 
may be put into effect in due time. 

SO: That is no argument at all, Mr. 
President. 

MLQ\ What wouM be the effec* it I 
am replaced as President? 

SO; If you are retained as President 
in violation of the clear mandate of the 
Constitution, that would be grist to the 
propaganda mill of the Japanese. They 
will attack the United States, charge the 
Americans of imposing upon the Filipi- 
nos a man who has no legal right to 
remain as President under the Constitu- 
tion, They would then regard you as a* 
US puppet. 

MLQ: Sure, indeed, the Japs will at- 
tack the United States if I continue in 
office after the 15th of November 1943- 
There is nothing they will welcome bet- 
ter than my disappearance from the 
scene for they know only too well the 
demoralizing effect it will have upon 
the Filipino people. You don't seem to 
know that since my arrival here guerrilla 
commanders by means of broadcasts and 
radiograms sent through the War Pe- 
partment and General Mac Arthur's head- 
quarters, have hailed the day when I re- 
turn to the Philippines in triumph with 
the liberating forces of the United 
States. 

Now, its effect upon the people as a 
whole? You know our people have been 
for many years supporting and follow- 
ing my leadership. They will be at a 
loss to understand how I could have 
been asked to come here to function as 
the head of my government aid then 
dropped out upon the theory thai the 
Philippine Constitution so requ 1 ' ss. 

SO: Mr. President, like you 1 can also 
speak with authority of considerable ex- 
perience in the political life of the Phil- 
ippines, I have served as Governor ef 
Cebu and for sixteen years the rec * 
nized leader of the Filipino people aiv 
the elected Speaker of the National A? 
sembly. , 
. During 
the V 



MY FATHER . . . 

From page 12 / ting accustomed to 
not having to struggle. He thought that 
there was a definite tendency away 
from strength of character. In particular, 
he thought that there was a tendency 
toward loss of good manners. I believe 
there was an incident once when he 
walked past a classroom and saw a 
student with his feet up* He gave the 
dean i calling down for tolerating that 
sort of thing, 

I think that is one difference between 
their generation and ours, a difference 
that you may also call a contributing 
factor in their poise. And it is this sense 
of discipline* 

I would say Dad had a lot of this 
discipline. Sometimes when there was 
work that had to be done, he did it 
even if he was falling apart! If you read 
his addresses, his meticulously worded 
vetoes, his proclamations — there was a 
terrific accumulation of these every day. 
Apparently, he was at it all the time, 
I have never known that he had any- 
thing approaching office hours! 

I think Dad's generation had a def- 
inite seriousness about life and what they 
were going to do about it. If they had 
a profession, they felt they had to prac- 
tice it seriously, If they were in politics, 



they really dedicated themselves to it. 
It's not that they didn't enjoy pleasures 
or family life at all But I think there was 
,a proper proportion and hierarchy of 
values that went into anybody's life — 
all of it well-balanced and properly 
subordinated among themselves. I re- 
member how a very close friend told my 
mother once, 44 Aurora, you have to real- 
ize that your husband is married to 
your country before he is married to 
you. 

What attitude did he have toward the 
role of women in national life? 

Well, you know he was largely respon- 
sible for giving women the vote. He 
really believed that if a woman had 
capabilities, they should be used — even 
if she is a woman. 

However, he never allowed my moth- 
er to interfere in any way with the run- 
ning of government* I am inclined to 
think she wouldn't have wanted to any- 
howl 

I imagine my father may have dis- 
cussed certain political situations with 
her, not in the sense of asking her what 
he should do, but in sounding out her 
opinion on bow matters stood, how cer- 
tain candidates were looked upon. My 



mother had a lot of contact with people 
and in that respect, she might have 
been a good source of information. And 
if she was considered for political help, 
it was only in a very special area; some 
people who couldn't stand my father 
were, fortunately, able to stand my 
mother. In that way, she might have 
broken down certain barriers for him! 

I think my mother was every bit as 
interesting a character as my father and 
she is much less known. My mother 
gave the impression of being a very 
quiet person but she had a character 
every bit as strong as my father. If she 
was pushed far enough, she reacted as 
strongly as my father did - without the 
colorful language! She had a very strong 
sense of dignity and of what was proper, 
but she was also lots of fun. She had 
a terrific sense of humor, even at her 
own expense, and taught us in turn, 
to take things at our own expense, with- 
out getting angry or crying. 

But here's a seemingly un-Filipino at- 
titude of Dad toward her: he always 
made her sit at the head of the table. 
I remember very clearly when the fam- 
ily was in Malacanang, mother sat at 
the head of the table with Dad at her 
right. Dad was deeply in love with my 
mother and I suppose that was one way 



he had of showing it. 

// the traditional Filipino was a I ,i; 
MotJw (or a Heavy Father!) , did your 
parents conform? 

I am not quite sure about that Filipino 
tradition! But my parents were very 
strict. If we misbehaved, we get % very 
good and proper calling down - 
also and always, an explanation why we 
were wrong. Another thing: they hardly 
ever spanked us. 

Their particular theory of upbringing 
also excluded forcing us to be v: 
thing they wanted us to be* I remember 
asking them many times what they 
wanted me to be and they always an- 
swered: "Whatever yon want to be*" 
My mother did want Nini to becc 
doctor of medicine, but never exerted 
any pressure on her. Once in a conver- 
sation with my mother, after my lather 
had died, I learned by chance that he 
looked forward to a time when he, Baby 
and I would be in a law office tog 
but he never mentioned it to me, 

If he had any political ambitions for 
me, he said the last of it when I was 
born* Seeing that I was darker than he. 
he told my mother: a Auan mauroon m 
akong in&tttrectoP -# 



QUEZON. AND 



From page II / elected President 
Woodrow Wilson to have a sympathetic 
American sent to the Philippines as gov- 
ernor-general. It was thus that Quezon, 
by a brilliant display of political strate- 
gy and tactics, practically compelled 
President Wilson to issue his now-famous 
message to the Filipino people in which 
he said that "Every step we take will 
be taken with a view of the ultimate in- 
dependence of the Islands and as a pre- 
paration for that independence. And we 
hope to move towards that end 
as rapidly as the safely and the perma- 
nent interests of the Islands will permit. 
After each step taken, experience will 
guide us to the next." 

Jones Law Passed 

It is to the credit of Quezon that al- 
though hemmed in by forces hostile to 
Philippine independence, he was able 
to maneuver Congress to pass the Jones 
Bill which ultimately became a law 
when President Wilson signed it The 
Jones Law was, so far, the best pro-in- 
dependence law that the Filipinos had 
wangled from the Americans, for it prom- 
ised independence to the Philippines 
"as soon as a stable government" could 
be established therein* More, the law 
became, in essence, the Philippines* 
Constitution which definitely defined 
the bill of rights and the structure of 
the government. By securing the pass- 
age of the Jones Law, Quezon paved the 
way for a political development that had 
no precedent or equal in the history of 
colonialism. When he left the Philip- 
pine Assembly to become Resident Com- 
missioner to the United States, the Fil- 
ipinos controlled only the Lower House; 
the Philippine Commission, which acted 
as the Upper House, was in the hands 
of the Americans. When he returned to 
the Philippines with the Tones Law, the 
Filipinos were guaranteed the control of 
both the House of Representatives and 
> the Senate. 

Quezon now believed that he had 

^^^isdut^^^i^it vvas time to 

Practice law. 

astutely 

tf>rry 




QUEZON THE FARMER 

At a Palace ceremony, President Quezon expresses his thanks to 
sculptor who pictured him in a, beautiful plaster as a rige planter. 



from the background, prevailed upon 
Quezon to run for the Senate and be- 
come its first President. Quezon, with a 
political sharpness and perception that 
characterized his public life, advised 
Osmena to run for the Senate and be- 
come its president, for he thought that 
with a bicameral lej^slature in the 
hands of the Filipinos, the Senate Pres- 
ident should logically become the lead- 
er of the Filipino representation in the 
colonial government. Quezon based his 
argument on the fact that the Senate or 
Upper House had more powers than the 
House of Representatives, particularly 
because the American governor-general 
would, in accordance with the Jones 
Law, have to depend on the Senate for 
confirmation of all his appointees in the 
government. Osmena, however, thought 
otherwise and continued to harbor the 
belief that the Speaker > as president of 
the party in power and hitherto the 
leader of Filipino representation in the 
government, was ipso facto the leader 
and should continue to be so. There is 
no evidence so far that Quezon agreed 
with Osmena on this point, but his 
election to the Senate and, ultimately. 



to the presidency of this body, showed 
that Quezon temporarily gave in to Os- 
mena — a concession that in a few years 
would be set aside in a bid to prove 
his theory that the Senate President and 
not the Speaker of the House should be 
the leader of the Filipino representation 
in the government. 

Osmena and Quezon, working like a 
well-oiled machine, practically managed 
the government, for Governor-General 
Harrison, either because of his sympathy 
for the Filipinos or because of his weak- 
ness as an executive, surrendered a part 
of his executive functions to the two 
Filipino leaders. There were under- 
standable cries from the Americans, par- 
ticularly from the Republicans, against 
what they considered Harrison's abdica- 
tion of his powers, but the genial gov- 
ernor-general continued his political 
tete-a-tete with Osmena and Quezon; 
who were astute enough to humor Har- 
rison in ways not exactly ethical. 

So far, Osmena had been wielding the 
baton of the Philippine political orches- 
tra, with Quezon playing the role of 
concert master. Rut beneath the ap- 
parently genial relations between con- 



ductor and concert master was an a- 
der current of dissatisfaction, for Quezon, 
believing that the conductor was wield 
ing his baton quite forcefully, believed 
that Osmena was monopolizing the 
political stage. There were times when 
Quezon was on the verge of a otmfcr* 
ation with Osmena, but his poiibral 
perspicacity dissuaded bim from chal- 
lenging the then powerful Speal 
the House, Quezon bided' his time, for 
he was a man who, though known for 
his impatience, could be patient enough 
to wait for the propitious time to make 

1>atience a political virtue. He ha^ not 
ong to wait In 1921, he threu the 
gauntlet at the Nacionalista convention 
and, in effect, challenged Speaker Os- 
rnena's leadership. Quezon found a con 
venient issue against his political ch">* 
in the question of leadership. CsmeiVa 
had always believed in a unipe T «onal 
leadership which would be responsible 
for the coordination and directi 
Filipino participation in the government, 
The issue, as Osmena saw it, was 'over 
the principle that there should be among 
tbe Nadonalistas in the government a 
united and responsible leadership so as 
to keep up the necessary cohesion anong 
them . ♦ " But Quezon, sensing * 
changing climate of opinion amon? . ic 
younger members of the Legislature, 
declared that he would "stand by my 
tbeory of collective leadership e^ 
I have to leave the Nacionalista Party* 
The clash of two strong wills led ft 
Quezon's forming the splinter Na v. 
ista Colecti vista. Osmena's fear of a 
party, which he thought detriment^ 
the Filipino cause, led him to : e c L 
and offered to resign as leader of the 
party in power. But Quezon sa ; the 
crack in Osmena's armor and took ad- 
vantage of it He went to the po is in 
1922 on the issue of collective aprf^ 
unipersonal leadership - and wo; 
his majority was not sufficient tc keep 
him secure in his Senate rostrum The 
weak opposition party, headed by faar 
Sumulong, Ruperto Montinola, nd 
Minority Floor Leader Claro M. Recto, 
tried its best to win the speakership nf 
the House for Recto by promising Sergio 
Osmena, the leader / To page 60 



■ 1/* 



Unless other water resources are tapped 
fast, it is not a remote possibility that 
the Novaliches reservoir will hit rock- 
bottom, crash programs notwithstanding 




off the mailc. 

As the days of the water crisis draw 
closer, harassed Nawasa men could on- 
ry point to 1967 for the water consum- 
er's salvation. 

By around October of 1967, we 
shall have abundant water/* Chairman 
Moreno pledges. 

Looking back at the original time- 
table given by the Nawasa to the pub- 
lic, water consumers could only raise a 
doubting eyebrow, 

They know only too well that Nawa- 
sa* P170 million interim project, the 
much awaited cure-all for the metro- 
politan water problem, is already 10 
months behind schedulel 

Behind Schedule 

The water source phase of the project 
(which consists of the second Ipp-Bic- 
ti tunnel, the second Bicti Novaliches 
aqueduct, and the third Novaliches-Ba- 
lara aqueduct) is going on but con- 
struction performance lags very much 
behind the agreement in the contracts* 

The contractors of the project are 
quick to hide behind the excuse of red- 
tape in the government procurement 
of needed equipment 

The laying down of 110 kilometers of 
transmission pipelines as part of the dis- 
tribution phase of the project, has been 
hamstrung by a court injunction for the 
oast 14 months. 

The injunction arose from a case filed 
by a pipe manufacturer who failed to 
join a bidding for ?5 million worth of 
piping materials. 

The acquisition of city lots for eight 
big ground reservoir and booster pump- 
ing stations is not altogether an easy 
task These reservoirs which also con- 
stitute the project's distributive phase, 
aro designed to hold five million gal- 
lons of water. 

So far, only the water treatment 
phase is going on smoothly according 
to schedule. The first 100-miliion-gai- 
lon-daily flocculation and sedimentation 



basin was completed last July. Bui 
where is the additional water for treat- 
ment? 

Chairman Moreno, to beat the dead- 
line, has started to crack the whip on 
delinquent contractors. Two such con- 
tractors have already been summoned 
by the Nawasa board, admonished and 
warned that their contracts will be 
rescinded if they fail to come up with 
the desired performance. 

The different phases of the interim 
project which is supported by a $20.2 
million World Bank loan, according to 
Moreno, have to be completed simultan- 
eously, 

"For, as the saying goes, they are 
like the bow and arrow: useless each 
without the other,* he says. 

By October 1967, Moreno further 
says with certainty and optimism, the 
Greater Manila area will have all the 
water it wants with a daily supply of 
300 million gallons daily, 

Again, after that time, what about 
1975? 

A spokesman for the Nawasa gives 
the assurance that steps are already be- 
ing undertaken to meet the second 
phase of the water crisis by 1975, 

Metcalf and Eddy, consultants for 
the WB, have already started looking 
ahead, Harrison P. Eddy, the other 
partner in the consultants firm, came 
here recently to kick off preparation for 
second phase of a waterworks improve- 
ment plan, 

Nawasa authorities, scouting around 
for new water sources, have been train- 
ing their eyes at Marikina for an ex- 
clusive water dam and the Laguna de 
Bay, 

A team of experts from the United 
Nations recently came to the country to 
explore possibilities of the bay as a 
water source, 

To the consuming public then, the 
promised oasis is only more than a year 
away but there is no guarantee that it 
will not turn out to be a mirage.— # 




by GEMMA CRUZ ARANETA 




A nascent matriarchy? 



• WILL THE world ever become one glorious matriarchy? 
Just hear how violently the men object! But I still think this 
is not impossible. Here in Oxford, the women are acutely 
perspicacious and aggressive, even more so than the men. 
It may just be a matter of survival for there are only five 
women's colleges to the 28 men's colleges. We can assume 
that these five colleges have aa many applicants as the 28 
but they have to be more rigidly screened for only the most 
prodigious and intelligent. The editor of the University pa- 
per is a woman. The secretary of the Debating Union, for once 
in its 125-year history, is a woman. Two rare achievements 
indeed. 

The American woman, it seems, is the most emancipated. 
It is she who sfeems the most self-sufficient Thus, she has 
been able to marry for something as ephemeral as love, with- 
out fear of divorce which may mean only a lavish alimony. 

Soviet Russia has the first woman cosmonaut and another 
one who steers a jet propelled ship. A satellite country in 
East Europe has a woman jet pilot. 

In the Philippines, we can also boast of extraordinary wom- 
en. We have had our Gabriela Silang and Gregoria de Jesus 
and certainly a great many, if not too many, women doctors, 
lawyers, engineers, chemists, politicians, judges, historians 
. . . Our women are undoubtedly enterprising and hold the 
most influential places, be it in the home or in business cor- 
porations. How very unlike the women of Spain and Latin 
America ! 

Today, the world anxiously watches one woman: Mrs, In- 
dira Gandhi. It is strange that from an Asian country where 
for centuries women have been restricted and docile, the 
most powerful woman in the world has emerged. 

Mrs. Indira Gandhi is from Sommerville College, Oxford, 
where she read history but did not get a degree. Like her 
father, Prime Minister Nehru, she was jailed by the British, 
The Indian women in Oxford look up to her for being bril- 
liant, dedicated, experienced, and trained in political affairs, 
and passionately addicted to the interests of India at heart. 
In India she is considered a leftwing socialist and we have 
yet to see how much Oxford has influenced her in this aspect. 

As the prime minister of India, she will be the most 
powerful woman ever. Of course, there were queens before 
her — Cleopatra, Catherine the Great, Elizabeth I, the Em- 
press Dowager but they never ruled over so vast a multitude, 
450 million, in a sub-continent afflicted with famines and 
droughts and entangled precariously in the most explosive 
international struggles. 



J 



17 




It is absurd to look 
upon the individual ills 
of Philippine society as 
isolated and mutually un- 
related since a brief re- 
flection will reveal their 
interdependence, that they 
are not disparate phenomena' 



by MANUEL L QUEZON. Jr. 



# BISHOP Fulton J. Sheen illustrat- 
ed the difference between a pessimist 
and an optimist thus; "A pessimist 
says, Isn't it terrible that roses should 
have thorns?' An optimist says, 'Isn't 
it wonderful that thorns should have 
roses?"' He also used a couplet; "Two 
men looked out of prison bars, One 
saw mud, the other stars," Those who 
look at contemporary Philippine society 
— society in the sense of the totality 
of Philippine life — see a society that 
is mortally sick. It provides a view 
of a vast expanse of mud, above it a 
few stars, but very few indeed. At 
least, that is the general impression 
one gathers from hearing people from 
all walks of life and all rungs of the 
social and economic ladder. This is es- 
pecially so when the speaker — or 
writer — is a laudator temporis acti, 
one who always praises the past to the 
disparagement of the present But even 
those who believe more in studying 
the present than in sighing after an 
irretrievable past — and somehow the 
past seems better and better as it re- 
cedes farther and farther, its rough 
outlines blurred by distance — they 
agree at least that many things, all too 
many things, are wrong and have to 
be. put to right, A not inconsiderable 
number of thinkers have tried to enu- 
merate all the things that are wrong — 
dirty politics, a weak economy, the 
growth of criminality, the ever-present 
topic of smuggling, and so on down 
the line, to form an almost intermi- 
nable litany of ills, A smaller number, 
looking upon all these items as symp- 
toms of one basic social disease, or 
perhaps a few diseases, engage in a 
guest to isolate it, or them, for iden- 
tification and treatment, 

Interdependent IDs 

It is obviously absurd to look upon 
the individual ills of Philippine society 
as isolated and mutually unrelated, 
since very brief reflection will reveal 
their interdependence. To take an in- 
stance — the plight of the national econ- 
omy is blamed, with some justice, on 

is, 



government policies, and government 
policies are partly decided by corrupt 
politics, therefore corrupt politics and 
economic instability cannot be regard- 
ed as completely disparate phenomena. 

One may agree that there is one 
basic problem or several — at the 
root of our difficulties {the favorite 
choices being economics or politics). 
From this it does not follow automatic- 
ally that the detection of the root evil 
will automatically, as though by magic, 
eliminate in one fell swoop all its con- 
sequences, all its ramifications. The 
analogy of a human body having a dis- 
ease with multiple symptoms, which 
disappear with the successful treatment 
of the disease, is all very well, but 
there is an old axiom that an analogy 
does not apply in every respect. In 
fact, even accepting the analogy, we 
must still realize that a disease, even 
when cured, may leave damage whicb 
must be repaired separately. Paraly- 
sis is -a symptom of acute polio, but 
a patient cured of acute polio may still 
have a paralyzed limb which must be 
treated surgically or otherwise. 

Vague To Concrete 

But to put the analogy aside — 
finding the very broad root cause or 
causes and suggesting a corresponding- 
ly broad and possibly vague solution 
may be like the famous saying "against 
sin and for American motherhood" — 
it will riot get us very far if it does 
.not go beyond that, Human, and 
therefore social, ills are very concrete, 
specific things; their nature and cure 
must be understood in concrete, spe- 
cific terms before remedies can be 
sought. To deal in vague generalities 
is to fail. Unless generalities are brok- 
en down into concrete realities which 
can be attached with concrete reme- 
dies, ours is a futile exercise. 

There is one feature in the general- 
ly dismal picture of our contemporary 
situation which I should like to call to 
the reader's attention. It is the lack 
of unity or homogeneity in our society* 
Stated in this fashion, this truth is al- 



most a truism, and, to say that we need 
unity is merely to voice a pious plati- 
tude. We shall not leave it at that. 

The fabric of our society is broken 
up by an awesome number of cracks, 
perhaps not clearly seen at a distance, 
but highly visible at close range, which 
deprive it of the strength and cohesion 
so necessary for a solid structure* The 
cracks run parallel, at times they in- 
tersect, at times they merge, but the 
sum total is what I am inclined to re- 
gard as a juxtaposition of groups, ra- 
ther than a single society made up of 
mutually integrated parts. Perhaps the 
past and possible future failures of gov- 
ernment may be due to be practical 
impossibility of moving such a structure 
forward* But let us get down to spe- 
cifics. I should like to discuss one of 
the cracks, the difference between what, 
for lack of better terms, I shall desig- 
nate the privileged and the underpriv- 
ileged groups, I shun the terms rich 
and poor because the question of the 
middle class would arise, and the dis- 
tinction would be economic, with which 
we are not here concerned. The eco- 
nomic differences between haves and 
have-nots are too obvious to require 
elaboration. Even though the terms 
underprivileged and privileged corre- 
spond roughly to economic differences, 
I use them in a different sense, I mean 
by the underprivileged those whose 
world of ideas, way of life, social hab- 
its, etc.,- coincide with those of the 
vast majority of the population who are 
undeniably poor (not necessarily beg- 
gars) — the unskilled laborer and the 
small farmer who may not be quite 
on the verge of starvation but are 
not too far from its danger. I desig- 
nate by the term privileged those 
whose world coincides with a relatively 
small part of the population, from the 
truly wealthy to those who need not 
worry about the necessities of life and 
a number of things besides. I ask the 
reader to keep in mind all through 
this article that we are not dealing with 
a simple distinction between rich and 
poor- 



It would not be too far-fetched, 
my opinion, to say that the two groups 
are socially — to be more exact, socio- 
logically - distinct. I will not go so 
far as to say that they are separate 
castes. In a genuine caste system, 
there is 90 fluidity, One cannot pass 
from one caste to another, one is bom 
a member of a caste, lives in it, and 
dies in it. Fortunately, and we can thank 
God for it, in our country one can 
bridge the chasm between the under- 
privileged and the privileged, but chasm 
there is. Just what is this chasm? 

Difference Of Mentality 

Basically, the chasm is a difference 
of mentality. The privileged have a 
wider view of life and its possibilities, 
Their mental horizons are coextensive 
with the wide world. They are much 
less submerged in a herd mentality, 
Blood ties are less oppressive. The 
weight of convention sits less heavily 
on their shoulders, and when they vio- 
late convention, they are much more 
likely to meet with approval, or at least 
tolerance and forgiveness; there is less 
danger and even less fear of reprisal, 
in the form of ostracism from the so- 
cial group, or effective expression oi 
condemnation. In other words, a mem- 
ber of the group can "get away** with 
behavior contrary to commonly accept- 
ed patterns in his group, For instance, 
he can stay away from a family wed- 
ding. He may, and probably does, in- 
cur displeasure, but he need not fear 
very strong or long-lasting repercus- 
sions, Manifestations of -individuality 
and even eccentricity in behavior ana 
dress and even in tnought are not on- 
ly more acceptable, they are frequent- 
ly admired and even praised* Origin- 
ality is at a premium* Aggressiveness 
(not pugnaciousness), drive, "go* are 
considered a virtue and so is indepad- 
ence. Reasons for doing things are 
more often demanded, and the answer 
that things have always been done that 
way is not in itself sufficient. 

Thus there is greater flexibility. The 
privileged are less set in the wavs, thev 



9961 '88 Areruqatf 




A HOUSE DIVIDED 



The division of our 
social organism into 
two presents a serious 
obstacle to progress 



are more susceptible to reasoning, to 
argumentation, and their patterns of 
■ thought and living are more open to 
COntintlCO change* Morally and legally, they are 
neither more nor less free than the un- 
derprivileged, but they use that free- 
dom to a far greater extent. They 
have emerged totally or almost totally 
from the life of the clan, the tribe, 
and when they adhere to tradition and 
social patterns, it is with a greater ele- 
ment of deliberation and choice, a 
smaller element of instinct and condi- 
tioned behavior than the underprivi- 
leged. They are more modern, more 
contemporary, less provincial or paro- 
chial, more Western in outlook. 
The underprivileged are hemmed in on 



all sides. Their mental horizons are 
narrow. Patterns of thought and be- 
havior are set in rigid lines, to trans- 
gress which is to_ court social disaster 
and mental torture. Life is tied up 
with the family in the widest sense of 
the word, that is, relatives who can in 
any way be considered relatives no mat- 
ter how remote, whether by blood or 
affinity. The approval of this vast 
number is eagerly sought, a prime con- 
sideration in big and small decisions. 
The desire for approval and the dread 
of disapproval will often tip the scales 
in favor of what is otherwise undesir- 
able or even positively harmful. It is 
actually the mentality of the clan, the 
tribe, where decisions and actions are 




is best for you 



Honda motorcycles are powered by econo- 
mical. 4-stroke engines built for clock-like 
precision to give outstanding performance 
and durability under the toughest conditions, 
maiimum torque at both fiigh and low 
speeds, clean; safe operation without smoke 

For every purpose 



and messy oil leaks, and to eliminate over- 
heating even after hours of riding in the hot- 
test climate, This powerhouse, plus distinct- 
ive styling, endears Honda motorcycles to 
millions of owners throughout the world. 



has a model for you. 





COMMUTING 




PEDICAB 



Your choice of eleven models from 90 to 450 cc 

^ Exclusively distributed by: 

MARIWASA distributors 

767 Aurora Boulevard, Quezon City • Tel. 7-72-19 • 7-80-80 • 7-12-1© 
WITH DEALERS THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES 

20 




collective and woe to him who does- * 
not submit. Worse, the crudely demo- 
cratic activity of * clan discussion, where ( 
the individual could at least be heard, 
has disappeared. But the mentality of 
being bound unquestioningly by custom 
has survived in the form of impersonal, 
self-justifying tradition, against which a 
voice may not be raised in protest or 
a judgment appealed t This customary 
pattern has assumed' the form of a 
built-in reflex, an almost inborn habit, 
so that the majority no more think of 
its Tightness or wrongness than they do 
of the advisability of breathing. Ad- 
herence, therefore, to social mores is 
automatic and* blind, rather than con- 
scious and free* This in turn builds a 
wall against the waves of change and 
progress break in vain. Since change 
must come from the few and affect 
the many, but the few cannot with im- 
punity differ from the many, a petri- 
fication of life is the result. Life is 
narrow, confined, parochial, archaic. 
Individuality is a cur^e and originality 
an absurdity. Blessed with moral and 
legal freedom like the rest of human- 
ity, the underprivileged are practically 
unable to use it Their freedom is a 
far cry from St, Paul's ''glorious free- 
dom of the sons of God/' 

Superiority And License 

The characteristics of the privileged 
.are of course not unmixed blessings, 
any more than those of the underpriv-. 
ileged, unmixed liabilities. The very 
fact that the privileged feel so free 
means that they easily overstep the line 
separating freedom from license. Their 
uninhibited ways can lead to non-con- 
formity for the sake of non-conformity, 
so that where others feel bound to con- 
form they feel bound not to conform. 
Their greater knowledge and wider 
capabilities can end in abuse and in a 
smug feeling of superiority over the 
underprivileged. {In this connection, 
1 recall a highly respected person tell- 
ing me; "You know, we are more in- 
telligent than these people," meaning 
the whole population of domestic help- 
ers,) This feeling of superiority easily 
equates itself with superior goodness, a 
disgusting and intolerable mistake, A 
reasonable consciousness of and concern 
for their own rights is not always ac- 
companied with a corresponding con- 
sciousness on and concern for the rights 
of the underprivileged. The aggres- 
siveness of the privileged all too often 
turns into rutblessness in the struggle 
to rise in life. Cynicism may well be 
a near-monopoly of the privileged, and 
it is hardly an endearing trait. Great- 
er freedom from the sense of family 
ties more easily allows for ugly inter- 
family rivalries and quarrels, while mu- 
tual support may be lacking when it is 
needed. The greater sense of freedom 
calls for a greater sense of responsibil- 
ity, and such responsibility is not at 
ways forthcoming. Hie obligations to 
society of those with greater knowledge 
and power is not as widely appreciat- 
ed as it should be — it is carried into 
practice even less. "While magnanimi- 
ty may be fairly common, selfishness 
and graspmess are often astonishing, 
and among the wealthy, philanthropy is 
too often a pure means to avoid taxes. 
The modem outlook frequently leads to 
the discarding of perfectly valid, but 
older, views, Westernization is too sel- 
dom selective, and may mean that sub- 
stitution of Western parochialism for 
the homegrown product 

The underprivileged, hemmed in by 
traditional thinking and traditional be- 
havior, can enjoy a degree of serenity 

^graphic 



lacking m others, The very close blood 
ties may be suffocating, but they also 
lend support in difficult situations where 
the average human being is unable to 
stand alone. "Where ignorance is 
bliss/' wrote Shakespeare, s> tis folly to 
be wise/' Limited knowledge gives 
rise to limited aspirations, and the few- 
er ones aspirations the fewer ones 
frustrations. The constant drudgery, the 
monotony, the color! essness of exist- 
ence develops patience, and patience 
is after all a virtue. Shortsightedness, 
the much criticized lack of foresight, 
veils from one's eyes the phantoms of 
distant fears and worries — bahala na 
— phantoms/ which may never material- 
ize and even if certain to materialize, 
possibly could not be remedied in any 
case, so fretting over them would be 
a waste of time and present content- 
ment. The choices open to the under- 
privileged being severely limited, the 
problem of making a choice is also 
severely limited and to that extent less 
taxing. The problem of life itself is 
reduced on the material level to earn- 
ing enough to eat reasonably, be shel- 
tered and clothed adequately, and even 
these goals are set at a low level On 
the social level, the clearly traced lines 
of conduct do not leave much place 
for confusion and if one is willing to 
conform — as most are — there can 
be little stress and strain in that area. 

If the situation of the privileged is 
compared with that of the underprivi- 
leged, it would seem that the privileg- 
ed are the roses with the thorns, the 
underprivileged the thorns with the 
roses, only the former are rosebushes 
with some thorns, the latter thorn- 
bushes with some roses* The disadvan- 
tages of the privileged amount to the 
abuse of a good thing, and what good 
thing is not subject to abuse? The ad- 
vantages is still a healthier ingredient in 
the silver lining on a cloud and, as 
the, old song put it, you have 
to "look for the silver lining/' A group 
who may abuse their liberty and ad- 
vantages is still a healther ingredient in 
a democracy than a group who can 
neither use nor abuse their liberty and 
advantages because, practically .speak- 
ing, they have neither the one nor the 
other. 

Distinction Of Types 

In contrasting the privileged and the 
underprivileged groups, I may be ac- 
cused of establishing a distinction which 
is merely a matter of degree. The 
charge would be true to certain ex- 
tent, but the distinction is also, and 
principally, a distinction of types, types 
of thinking and acting. It is of course 
clear that the privileged are not im- 
mune from the disadvantages of the 
underprivileged. Who will say that the 
privileged never kowtow to petrified 
custom? Who can deny, for instance, 
the social pressure on wealthy families 
to hold lavish weddings — how regular- 
ly such families succumb, even when 
their feelings are all to the contrary. 
Who will deny that a society woman 
will often dress in a style wholly un- 
suited to her, just because it is the 
fashion? On the other hand, there are 
cases of, say, a young man of the un- 
derprivileged group who will marry a 
girl other than the one preferred by the 
family, and then start farming on his 
own, completely independent of his 
family, and unconcerned over the en- 
suing criticism and ostracism? Or a 
young couple who have their child 
baptized without the customary expen- 
sive celebration, because they would 
have to incur debts and they would 



! B YS2 N OEVCON 



BRONZE 

***** lraraivwi 



LEAD 

^a^coj! arc-vt ***** 



OEVCON 

ALUMINUM 



****** *ar -frjtatu j*** 




J5VCON 

'he Plastic Ste< 



***** WJKrES 



It seals, 
it fills, 
it mends, 
it bonds, 
and looks like the metal it repairs ! 



DEVCON ALUMINUM 

LEAD 
BRONZE 
STAINLESS STEEL 



DEVCON ALUMINUM (Putty Type) 80% 
aluminum, 20% plastic, Use for filling 
holes in aluminum, steel or iron castings. 

DEVCON LEAD (Putty Type) 94% lead- 
Use for repairing electrical cable, lining 
tanks or protecting against corrosion. 

DEVCON BRONZE (The Bronze Putty) 
80% bronze, 20% plastic. Use for repairs 
of bronze castings and marine propellers. 

DEVCON STAINLESS STEEL 80% stain 
less sfee), 20% plastic Use for repair of 
costings. Hardens to rustproof metal. 




For permanent, durable, low- 
cost emergency and mainte- 
nance repairs ! Can be poured 
or trowelled, drilled, ground, 
threaded, etc. No tools, heat or 
pressure required. Won't sag, 
shrink* crack or flake off* The 
strongest, toughest, most versa- 
tile tooling and repair materials 
available todav! 




DEVCON is also available in 
tubes for household repairs on 
sanrtary wares, glassware, cera- 
mics, plastic, wood etc. 




IF 



FREE BROCHURE I Clip and moil this coupon. 

The Edward J. Nell Company 
P. O, Box 612, Manila 

Please send me free literature on 
Devcon products. 



NAME: 



COMPANY ; 
ADDRESS: 



Y A product of Devcon Corporation, Available ot all leading hardware stores. 



EXCLUSIVE 
PHILIPPINE 
DISTRIBUTORS 



THE EDWARD J. NELL COMPANY 

ST A, LUCIA, cot, AN DA. iNTRAMUftQS, MAN* LA P. O. BOX 612 • TEL 3-21-21 
CEBU: WHITE GOLD SLOG.. J. LUNA ST r CEBU CITY * TELEPHONE 22 11 
DAVAO; HIZON 8LDG BOLTON ST .. DAVAQ CITY • TELEPHONE 21-20 



NELL 

MILL SUPPLIES DEPARTMENT 



Ffcbruaft 23, 1966 



'21 



WHAT JITNEY 
CAN EARN ALMOST DOUBLE 

WITH EVERY TRIP? 

THE THAMES 800! 




Backed by Ford Warranty 
SIX DIFFERENT MODELS 
TO FIT EVERY ROUTE 



TheTharnes 800 carries nine passengers 

more than conventional jitneys 

— more passengers mean more profits. 

Extra savings at no extra cost ! Now fitted 

with Super Hi-Miler truck tires 

-to give you up to 41% more mileage! 






LUNETA MOTOR COMPANY 

22 29 Pas □ n o TamoExt.Mukaii.Riiai Tel. 83-8 2-23 *B8-e9-51 -C8'Q3'^1 



THAMES 800! Get more 
for your money I 
Get Thames! 

Available for cash or installment 




NATIONWIDE NETWORK Of DEALERS TO SERVE YOU 



MANILA DEALER 

Traders Merchandising Center — 

Ech affile cor, Ayala Bridge 
Family Motois Inc. — Andalnci*, 

51 a, Cruz 
SUBURBAN DEALERS 
Europe an- A me f lean Mot ors — 

Mandnluyonffr Rlzal 
Commercial Car Corporation 

CCC Building;, Ma kali. Rizal 
Ad to Mot or § Group,, Inc. — 

52 K&pafLn Extension. Quezon City 
£ Automotive Industrial and Murine 

Engine Conversion) 
LUZON DEALERS " 
Abarra CaHox Service Station — 



Cavlte CI If 
Armando Baluyot — Bulangu, 

Eataan 
Bautista 6i Cruz Co* — 

Cabanatuan City 
Dulueun Motors — ■ Po'o, Bulacan 
European American Motors, Inc. — 

Dagupan City 
F, F. Ciaudio St Co* — Santiago* 

Isabels 

F. F, Claudlo & Co* — Nucvo 
Viscava 

F. F. Ctuudio A Co. Cagayan 
Naga Ante Mart — Naga City 
Le#aspl Auto Mart — Leguspl City 
Ba tongas Auto Mart — Batangaa* 
Batangaa 



San Pablo Auto Mart — San Pabla 

City 

R & A Equipment Supply — Vis an, 

IIocob Sur 
R. E. Santos Service Center — 

Turlac, Tarlae 
Super - Motora — San Fenando, 

La Union 
Zam bales Motors — Olongapo, 

Zsmbalos 
Joteph K. Icard — 35 Harrison 

ttd„ Bsgnlo City 
VIS AY AN DEALERS 
Boliol Times Auto Supp> 

TagbUatan. Rohoi 
Bohol' Times Auto Supply — 

Sib u Ian. Negros Oriental 



Stiachan & MacMurray, Ltd. — 

Hollo City 
S traction ■ & MacMurray, Ltd. — 

Bacolod City 
Titan Motors, inc. — Cebu City 
MINDANAO DEALERS 
Escano Enterprises — Butuan City 
^sraflo Emerprises — Ozamis C ti 

%t°^ ma - 

Zamboangu City 



22. 



A HOUSE DIVIDED 

continued 

The educated can hardly 
pass their ideas on to 
the underprivileged who 
cannot understand them 



rather violate custom than incur debts? 

But I must again remind my reader 
that the distinction I have made be- 
tween privileged and underprivileged is 
not a class or an economic distinction, 
it is a distinction between two kinds of 
mental outlook and their correspond- 
ing patterns of behavior* Xt is true that 
the underprivileged in my sense of the 
word, and the underprivileged in the 
economic and social sense, largely co- 
incide* The underprivileged mental out- 
look is commonly found in the poor 
who form the immense majority of our 
population* But an economically unfor- 
tunate individual may belong to the priv- 
ileged group by reason of his mental 
outlook. This may be the result of an 
independent, individualistic character 
due to reasons which only psychologists 
and sociologists could determine. It 
may also be due to an education, for* 
mal or informal (i.e., acquired at school 
or through reading and learning on his 
own) which has enabled him to rise 
above the limitations of the mental 
outlook which burdens the poor. Thus, 
in the same poor family, you may have 
members who belong to the privileged 
and others who belong to the under- 
privileged. For that matter, you w21 
find people with an abundance of 
money who definitely belong to the un- 
derprivileged. Indeed, most individuals 
would probably be found to possess the 
characteristics of both groups, in vary- 
ing proportions. This is particularly 
true among the privileged, since they 
have arisen through a more or less 
gradual evolution, from the underprivi- 
leged and thus retain more or less of 
the underprivileged mentality. There 
is much greater homogeneity of out- 
look among the underprivileged. 

Two Unequal Groups 

I should also like to point out that 
when we distinguish the two groups 
there may be an unconscious tendency 
to think of them as about equal in 
numbers. This is by no means the case- 
The overwhelming majority of our pop- 
ulation belong to the underprivileged. 
The very poor, with very rare excep- 
tions, belong to the group. Those in 
comfortable financial circumstances are 
a small number comparatively speak- 
ing. Of these, a large number still be- 
long to the underprivileged by reason 
of their outlook. The number who are 
really well off financially, those wfio 
can be called wealthy, are even fc*er» 
and of these the older generation can 
frequently be classified as 'underprivi- 
leged. We are left, then, with the great 
majority of the young and wealthy 
generation - a small number indeed r 
plus the less prosperous who have dev- 
eloped through character and educa- 
tion the ^dependent outlook which 
keeps them from falling back into the 
underprivileged pattern — again a small 
number — plus the really poor who 
have managed to break loose from the 
clan mentality — an almost microscop- 




graphic 



ic number. Thus we have two very 
yaequal groups the privileged who are 
a fraction of the population, and the 
underprivileged, who axe the over- 
> whelming majority. 

Although the two groups are not sep- 
arate in time or space, they form two 
separate worlds. I will go so far as to 
5JV that the two may be unable to un- 
derstand each other, There is of course 
the language barrier- The privileged, 
due to their education, may be unable 
to express important ideas in the ver- 
nacular. They have been taught in 
English, they have done all their tech- 
nical or professional reading in Eng- 
lish or some other foreign tongue and 
are unable without great difficulty to 
communicate their more complex 
thoughts in the vernacular. As a result, 
they can hardly pass their ideas on to 
the underprivileged, who are at home 
onlv in the vernacular. 

Mentality Barrier 

Much more serious, however, is the 
mentality barrier* The framework with- 
in which the two groups live (what 
is sometimes called their frames of ref- 
erence) makes it almost impossible for 
the underprivileged mind to understand 
the privileged, and vice-versa. I shall 
take a very common example* A ser- 
vant, one of the underprivileged, tells 
his employer, one of the privileged, 
that he wants a two weeks' vacation. 
Actually, he has no intention of return- 
ing, but the employer either takes bis 
request at face value or is left doubt 
about his real intention. If the latter, 
the employer may ask for the truth, 
and explain that if the servant wish- 
es to leave for good, he should say 
frankly, so a replacement can be hired. 
The servant insists that he will return. 
Two weeks pass, then three, then four, 
and at least the employer realizes that 
the servant will not return. The em- 
ployer is angry. "Why" he thinks, "did 
he have to Ue? He had a perfect right 
to leave and I could not have prevent- 
ed it if I wished. In the meantime I 
would have been saved endless trou- 
ble" The incident is dismissed as typ- 
ical of the servant class, but the rea- 
son for the servant's behavior .remains 
a mystery, A mystery, that is^ to the 
employer for he would tell his employ- 
er to his face, more or less politely, but 
dearly. His attitude would be that he 
has a perfect right to leave if he so 
wishes and the employer has no right 
to interfere, The servant, on the other 
hand, would find it rude, offensive to 
his employer's feelings, to tell him out- 
right The servant wants to stay in the 
good graces of his employer, even 
though he may never see him again. 
He does not want to embarrass the 
man, w neil the employer asks for the 
tnith, the servant persists in his origin- 
al statement, because he cannot now 
admit to a lie. He would lose face, be 
^banassed in his turn, and merely 
^pound the offense to his employer, 
7«h tie wanted to avoid in the first 
place, 

. then is a very common exper- 
J***- The employer and the servant 
***** to the same racial stock, the 
*? me country, probably the same reh ; 
g^, they five in the same historical 
environment, yet their minds are sep- 
f^ted by a wall of mutual incompr e- 
k^on. Each will blame the other, 
for failing to understand - that 
* easily condoned - but for tefming 
to understand. They do not see each 
other's viewpoint and perhaps they 
"ever will. 

A social body - the Philippine m 

FeWuarr 23, 1966 




My secret is 
AN ALL NEW 
HAIR SPRAY 
that holds 
yet leaves hair 
so touchable. 






LOOKING AHEAD TO YEARS OF GOOD HEALTH 



* umjfP 




They laugh with joy for, today, they enjoy 
good health . . . and tomorrow promises to 
unfold more cheerful years. And they will 
always be thankful to Mama, who gives them 
their daily share of UNITED AMERICAN 
TIKI-TIKI which stimulates active bodily 
growth and development and prevents beri- 
beri. 

Remember, your baby can enjoy good health, 
too, with vitamin-rich UNITED AMERICAN 
TIKI-TIKI. Ask your druggist today for the 
economical 30 cc. bottle. 



GOOD HEALTH BEGINS WITH PROPER BABY CARE 
AND UNITED AMERICAN TIKI-TIKI 

FORMULA: VlUBif B-l, 160 «*».; VlwmM B-l. 10 mn.i •« "««■! NUcln.mid,, 1 m t . Pl« Vlumin B Comply Mt.nl to, 



A HOUSE DIVIDED 
continued 



tion - made up of such mutually in- 
sulated mentalities is hardly a cohesive 
whole. Perhaps the example chosen is 
unfortunate in that it involves a matter 
of little importance* but the point il- 
lustrated is a very serious thing indeed. 
A country faced with tremendous prob- 
lems on every side is heavily handi- 
capped in solving them when those 
problems cannot be understood in the 
same way by the people. Not of course 
that unanimity of opinion is necessary 
for the solution of a problem, since 
even a common understanding of a 
problem will not produce unanimity as 
to its solution. But when a problem 
cannot even be understood in broadly 
similar terms by the people, it becomes 
vastly more difficult to reach agree- 
ment on a solution. This introduces 
practical problems in the political or- 
der. 

No Popular Support 

An Administration ixi t power may 
make a very poor showing in legisla- 
tion because laws badly needed cannot 
be passed — they will he misunder- 
stood, misinterpreted, and the conse- 
quent loss of votes at election time may 
be fatal to the Administration. The 
difficulty of understanding and appre- 
ciating the objectives of legislation easi- 
ly leads to the lack of popular support 
which alone may ensure successful im- 
plementation , The social security leg- 
islation is a case in point, I will not 
say of failure, but of opposition due 
to lack of understanding. The sarisfac- 
toriness or ^unsatis f act or fries s of the laws 
as passed are not the point, it is the 
misapprehension that the government 
was taking money that it had no right 
to take from the hardpressed worker. 
The objectives of a system of social 
security, so common in modern coun- 
tries, were not easily understood, in- 
stead they were frequently resented. 
The high incidence of electoral frauds 
is due in great part to the attitude 
that the enemy's frauds are an outrage, 
but one's own are tolerable or even 
laudable. In other words, the purpose 
of an election is seen as the victory of 
one's candidates rather than the ascer- 
taining of the electorate's choice, re- 
gardless of who it may be* 

To comment on a more general lev- 
el - two groups of people, with mu- 
tually insulated ways of thought and 
life do not stand together or work to- 
gether smoothly. Goethe claimed that 
in order to know something or some- 
one, one must first love it. While this 
js true in one sense, in other sense the 
opposite is more true — one cannot 
love what one does not know* The 
split between the two groups is an im- 
pediment to strong national unity, ex- 
cept where a threat greater than the^ 
split drives the two together* Fortu- 
nately such threats are few but also un- 
fortunately the split is seldom healed. 
History records the progress of nations 
blessed with a unity of outlook, of ol> 
jeetives, of culture* Efforts in the di- 
rection of progress are better coordi- 
nated due to a geater unity of pur- 
pose. The necessary sacrifices involved 
are commonly understood and as a rule 
more commonly accepted, The division 
of our social organism into the two_ 
groups is a serious obstacle to tjie at- 
tainment of the necessary unity "con" 
ducive to progress*— # 



24 



graphic 



pendence) of the burden of administration and of 
direct responsibility for Philippine welfare." 

During the campaign led by the late President 
Roxas to accept parity — admittedly in exchange 
for rehabilitation funds — one of the "selling points** 
was the claim that parity would generate a large 
amount of American capital The record does not 
bear this out. On the contrary, if American capital 
during parity years has been remarkable, it has not 
been because of its size but because of the huge div- 
idends and other earnings that it has produced 
here and remitted to mother companies in the United 
States. In the parity decade between 1950 and I960, 
foreign capital invested in the Philippines amounted 
to only $19 million, while profits of foreign-owned 
, firms remitted abroad amounted to more than $215 
million. Despite parity, George Taylor reminds us in 
his book ("The Philippines and the United States: 
Problems of Partnership")* American investments 
in the Philippines are "considerably less than those 
in Cuba, Mexico, or Peru, where there are no special 
arrangements such as prevailed in the Philippines/ 1 

All these considerations are apart from the fact 
that American business interests are now, in the 
name of parity, engaged in another act of supreme 
opportunism and discourtesy. Disregarding both the 
clear intent and the letter of the law on retail trade 
nationalization, these American interests have 
launched a campaign, part of it through our own 
courts, to secure more advantages for themselves 
than Filipinos enjoy in their own country. While 
the law commands that a retail business should be 
100 per cent Filipino-owned, American interests, un- 
der the shield of parity, have questioned the right 
of the Philippine government to require that Amer- 
ican retail business should be 100 per cent Amer- 
ican-owned. It is argued, with incredible adventur- 
ism, that it is sufficient for a firm to qualify under 
the retail trade nationalization law, via parity, that 
majority of its stocks are owned by Americans, 
Needless to say, Americans are no longer satisfied 
with mere parity; now they must have better rights 
than Filipinos in their own country. 

To recognize American interests beyond the ter- 
mination of parity would, in the light of all these, 
perpetuate national dishonor. 

Moreover, by according recognition in any extent 
to these interests after parity, we would be permit- 
ting a rare and excellent opportunity to lapse — 
the opportunity of correcting the evils of parity. We 
believe that, inasmuch as these interests owe their 
existence to parity, they can neither legally nor mor- 
ally live beyond parity itself. This is the only view 
that is consistent with the spirit of the Constitution, 
which has been debased enough by the forced intro- 
duction of the parity provision. And we comprehend 
this spirit to be a fierce dedication to an untarnlsh* 
ed Filipino nationhood, which is no more and no less 
than the f reedom to develop and grow with indepen- 
dence and self-respect. 

It should be a simple matter to provide notice of 
the self-respecting Philippine intent to terminate 
American interests here simultaneously with parity 
itself. Any expedient that would afford Americans 
continued rights beyond the end of parity would sub- 
ject the Philippine Constitution to more impairment 
than the parity provision itself inflicts. If any ap- 
preciation is left in any quarter for really sound 
Philippine- American relations, a serious effort must 
now be made to put any further irritant out of the 
way, 

A clean, positive break with parity and its effects 
is the answer. — # 





by C PRIGO 



• WITH THE talk of looking into 
the wealth of government big 
shots, past and present, we pose 
this pertinent query : Why are 
some government big shots like a 
bra? 

Because they have invisible 

means of support, 

* * * 

Now that Gregorio "Butch' 1 Bel- 
gica has accomplished his second 
killingp is it time to escalate his 

pet name to "Butcher?" 

* * * 

Shortly after her return from a 
four-day trip to Vietnam, Sen- 
Maria Kalaw-Katigbak turned 
from dove to hawk. 

This makes us sad because we 
thought Mary would remain a true 
Kalaw, 

What if our solons have man- 
aged somehow to get some P100 f - 
000 for each of them inserted in 
the new budget? You may call 
them any number of names but 
you've got to admit that they are 
perfect gentlemen. At every chance 
they get, they always say gallant- 
ly, "Allow me." 




The president of an airline was 
arrested on charges of participat- 
ing in airborne smuggling. 

If the sleuths will sniff some 
niore, they will find big shots do- 
ing chairborne smuggling. 

* * » 

There is a lot of hue and cry 
about the P10-million check issued 
by the Central Bank to the PVTA 
during the Macapagal administra- 
tion. 

We do not believe that the check 
issued to the tobacco organization 

went up in smoke. 

* * * 

What's the difference between 
the Nawasa and the Board of Liq- 
uidators? 

Unlike the Nawasa, the Board 
of Liquidators has liquid assets 



which it can pour down the drain. 

o * 4 

Exasperated by the Nawasa*s 
failure to produce water for his 
fauqetSp a Quezon City resident 
dug a well behind his house, in- 
stalled a pipe and a pump. A Na- 
wasa inspector saw the pipe, in- 
sisted on connecting a meter to 
the system, for "sewerage costs/' 

One of these days the good Lord 
will find a water bill from the Na- 
wasa for dropping rain on parch- 
ed Manila. 

* * * 
Privileged speech^ on the floor 

of Congress were stopped 15 days 
before the end of the session. 

We do not believe in stopping 
privileged speeches at any time- 
In case you don't already know, 
privileged speeches are delivered 
for the benefit of the underpriv- 
ileged. 

* * * 

BANK REFUSES TO BARE 
RECORDS — Headline 

Is it because the records may 

reveal low fidelity in public trust? 

* * * 

Definition of the week; 
Diploma mills are sheepskin 
grafters 

* * * 

Mayor ViJIegas claimed yester- 
day that he made a lot more from 
other legitimate sources than from 
his salary as vice-mayor and later 
mayor of Manila during 1960-65. 
— News item 

The posts of vice-mayor and 
mayor are only sidelines, see? 

mm* 

RAMOS BACKS US VESTED 
RIGHTS HERE — Headline 

Is that why they call him a for- 
eign secretary? 

* # * 

Dr, Elvira O. Tan of the Phil- 
ippine Fisheries Commission was 
sent by the government to study 
fishery biology in Moscow. 

We hope Dr. Tan will come back 
to teach our intelligence agents 
how not to catch red herring I 

how to catch blue seals. 

* ♦ * 

ZAMBO CITY SCHOOL SINK- 
ING — Headline 
That's not so bad. Other schools 

are stinking. 

* ■ • « * 

The education secretary stopped 
the release of Pl,650,000 Used in 
the purchase of science reference 
books, when the law authorizing 
the amount specified "books con- 
tributing to Philippine literature/* 

Well, if the books bought by the 
bureau from a single dealer w e 
not exactly for the promotion of 
literature, at least the circum- 
stances surrounding their pur- 
chase involved some form of fic- 
tion. 



FIRST OF TWO ARTICLES 



bv MANUEL L. QUEZON, J r , 



A PARLIAMENTARY 

APPROACH TO A fc 

CONSTITUTIONAL CHANGE 



# "SIX YEARS are too short for a 
good President and too long for a bad 
one/ 1 With this argument, the National 
Assembly, our prewar unicameral legis- 
lature* changed the presidential term 
from six years with no reelection to 
four years with one reelection, 

More than 20 years later, it is pro- 
posed to return to the old system, and 
if the Constitution is amended, this pro- 
posal is very likely to be carried. The 
trouble with both changes {assuming 
that we shall have a change) is that both 
are too strongly influenced by passing 
circumstances, The return to the old 
system is inspired by what the electorate 
consider unfortunate experiences with 
incumbents. A different experience may 
lead to a demand for yet another 
change. If for example the late Pres- 
ident Magsaysay had lived, been re- 
elected, and maintained his popularity 
throughout his second term, it might 
have been necessary to remove the pro- 
hibition of a third term. 

My point is that we amend our Con- 
stitution on a patchwork basis, to suit 
every changing circumstances. We set 
up an over-rigid system which cannot 
cope with momentary changes in the 
political situation. As a result we shall 
constantly have to change it and then 
change it back again. The purpose of 
a written Constitution is, unless I am 
mistaken, to provide a broad framework 
within which normal legislative process- 
es can provide for the needs of the 



moment. That the present rigid system 
has worked in other countries — and. 
I am sure most Filipinos would think 
of the United States ojE America at 
once — is no proof that it is the right 
one for us. Our experience would, if 
anything, indicate the contrary. I believe 
a distortion in our constitutional per- 
spective has been caused by familiarity 
with the American system — what 
familiarity there is — coupled with ig- 
norance of the European Parliamentary 
system — and this ignorance is well- 
nigh total, outside of our Constitutional- 
ists, A look at the Parliamentary sys- 
tem will do us no harm. 

The Parliamentary System 

Under the Parliamentary system, in 
its broadest outline, you have a Chief 
of State whether a hereditary King or an 
elected President, who is outside politics 
and has no part in legislation or policy. 
You have a Legislative comprising a 
single House or two Houses. Where 
there are two Houses the Upper House 
may be hereditary or elective. Where it 
is hereditary it has little or no power 
over legislation or policy. If it is elec- 
tive, its role in legislation varies depend- 
ing on the particular country. The 
Lower House is always elective and be- 
ing considered the more popular body 
(that is, popular in the sense of being 
more representative of the people) it is 
by tradition and practice the more im- 
portant House. Thus, the Lower House 



is the sole or the more important body 
in legislation and policy-making. The 
executive functions of our President are 
performed by the Prime Minister, with 
his Cabinet. The Prime Minister is 
drawn from the members of the Lower 
House, as are most of his Cabinet. 

Although the Chief of State (King or 
President) appoints the Prime Minister, 
he cannot appoint whomever he pleases. 
He must appoint one who can enjoy 
the confidence of the Lower House — 
which means either the head o£ the 
majority party in the Lower House or, 
in the absence of a majority party one 
who has the support of enough parties 
or members of parties to command a 
majority of votes on important issues. 
The practice may vary somewhat from 
country to country, but in general, if the 
government (very roughly what we call 
the administration) fails to pass a bill 
which involves an important issue, the 
Prime Minister must call a new election 
to Parliament to seek a new mandate 
from the electorate, or resign and let the 
Chief of State appoint someone else who 
commands a majority in the Lower 
House, Thus, under the Parliamentary 
system, (which allows much room for 
custom) the government (or administra- 
tion) is much more sensitive and re- 
sponsive to the signs of continued pub- 
lic support because, through custom, 
the Lower House in its support or lack 
of support normally reflects the state 
of public opinion. Furthermore, a major 



change in the platform on which the 
majority party was elected cannot be 
carried out without a new mandate 
through election or a "safe" majority 
in the Lower House, This is usually 
due to custom, but in practice has the 
force of Constitutional Law, so that a 
violation would almost invariably bring 
ruin to whatever political party or po- 
litical leaders were involved. 

A Clear Example 

A clear instance of the working of 
this system is the case of the Labor 
Party of Great Britain under the Prime 
Minister Harold Wilson, The Laborite 
Party was elected with a plurality of 
votes over the Conservative Party and 
needed the support of the Liberal Party 
to stay in power against the Conserva- 
tive Party, As, even then, the Prime 
Minister had to depend on a narrow 
margin of three votes,, ultimately 
reduced to two or one, with the grow- 
ing danger of losing a "confidence" 
vote, the Prime Minister, after failing 
to build up a larger majority, decided 
to call for a new election in order to 
get (or not as the case may be) a clear 
new mandate from the etectorate, al- 
though the House of Commons (the 
British Lower House) is elected for five 
years. Thus, in a Parliamentary system, 
although the Legislative is elected for 
a definite maximum period varying 
from country to country, the represents- 
tive character of the administration is 



Our leaders should consider whether or not it is time to change 



maintained throughout, because loss of 
popularity of those who run the coun- 
try involves a change, even before the 
term of office of the Lower House is 
completed. That this does not necessarily 
lead to chronic mutability is proven by 
the experience of Great Britain, the 
Scandinavian countries, Holland, etc. 
That it can in a particular case lead to 
chronic instability is shown by France, 
under its famous Parliamentary system 



now z 

I aim not advocating the complete 
adoption of the Parliamentary system. 
My observation of our national psychol- 
ogy leads me to believe that we would 
fail into the same difficulties as France 
under the postwar Parliamentary sys- 
tem, We have had, though, two very 
eminent political figures, Recto and (I 
am told) also Laurel, who thought we 
should adopt the Parliamentary system 
and Heaven knows they had adequate 
opportunity to observe the national 
scene over a long period of public serv- 
ice. The CnnsHfartjftre proposed during 
the Revolution were of the Parliamen- 
tary type, but that is not a decisive ar- 
gument in its favor, due to the interven- 
ing change in the times and the na- 




Recto 



Laurel 



bona! experience. What is the common 
opinion of today's thinking public, 
largely unfamiliar with the Parliamen- 
tary system, cannot of course be deter- 
mined with any degree oE accuracy. I 
am inclined to think that, familiar or 
unfamiliar with Parliamentary democra- 
cy, they would reject it, favorably for 
three reasons: feeling at home with our 
own system; a marked bias in favor of 
American as contracted with European 
institutions; and the belief (in which I 
share) that Parliamentarism is not suited 
to our national temperament and own 
political "style." 



It is not necessary, however, to adopt 
toe Parliamentary system in its entirety 
m order to enjoy some of its advantages. 
Perhaps we could adopt some of its fea- 
tures to our own needs while maintain- 
ing our own system basically, Perhaps 
we could modify our system to make 
it more Bexible and responsive to the 
true wishes of the nation, insofar as 
such wishes exist. 

The President's term of office is a case 
in point. The debate between the two 
viewpoints — one six-year term against 
(possibly) two four-year terms - seems 
inconclusive. The desire for a return to 
the old system is due principally to the 
fear or a bad four-year term, wasted in 
preparation for a double second term. 
It is claimed that the six-year term will 
be good, at least more likely to be good. 
But there is no assurance, not even 
humanly speaking, that the six-year 
term will be good. If it is not, we are 
bound to suffer — in silence or vocif- 
erous protest, but still to suffer - until 
the six years end. From past experience, 
it would seem that the people could 
hardly wait to turn reelectionists out of 
Malacanang. (Whether such an attitude 
was justified or unjustified is beside the 
point, since election or reelection de- 
pends on popularity or unpopularity, 
not the reasons for it) On the other 
hand, if the voters had been satisfied 
with the reelectionists they would pre- 
sumably have reelected him* There is 
the viewpoint, of course, that our voters 
are fickle and chronically desirous of 
change, If such is the case <- which is 
doubtful — why should the country be 
compelled to retain as President for six 
years a man they do not even want for 
a full four years? It is clear that if a 
man is not wanted for four years, he 
would be even less wanted for six, 
Whether or not be^ could be wanted for 
more than four is debatable. With the 
exception of President Magsaysay, no 
one was. President Magsaysay was 
morally certain of reelection, but he 
died before election. The question is — 
does a President have to be quite as 
popular as Mr. Magsaysay to win re- 
election? If so, obviously the people 
ordinarily do not want anyone longer 
than four years. On the other hand, if 
a President is so popular, the people 



will not be satisfied even with six years. 

Of course, I may be accused of beg- 
ging the question. The argument for a 
six-year term with no reelection is that 
a man elected President under such 
conditions will be what they call a * f non- 
political" President — he will run the 
country for the good of the country, 
irrespective of political parties and per- 
sonal ambition. A four-year reelectionist 
President will be a partisan President 
rather than a "non-political" President, 
Therefore — so the argument runs — a 
six-year term with no reelection is bet- 
ter. We lack our own historical experi- 
ence to support our view or the other* 
The experience of other countries is a 
different matter. It seems to weaken the 
argument in favor of six years. To cite 
one — 

In the case of a certain South Amer- 
ican Republic, the six-year system was 
followed. It encouraged a very un- 
fortunate undercover system, The Pres- 
ident would try to select as his suc- 
cessor someone who would be his pup- 
pet, In other words, the President would 
run the country in his own name for 
six years, then run it through his pup- 
pet successor for another six. Naturally, 
the only way to do this was by con- 
trolling his party's nominations, which 
required a very strong partisan bond 
between President and party, established 
Heaven knows how. In fact, on one oc- 
casion a puppet President tried to gov- 
ern independently and was removed 
(not murdered) by intrigues of the en- 
trenched party, Surely it is better to 
vote for a candidate who runs openly, 
rather than for one who (without our 
knowledge) runs for someone else be- 
hind the scenes. 

Politics 

There is also the human element of 
ambition to be considered. Theie are 
any number of instances of so-called 
non-political Presidents who have spent 
their six-year term stuffing their pockets 
discreetly with no thought of reelection. 
When their term expired, they moved 
with their family and bank account to 
some other country, there to enjoy the 
fruits of their corruption. They were 
ambitious for wealth. 

IF the ambition of a - non-politirar 



President is limited to leaving a good 
record for history, still he is not there- 
by freed from politicking. He needs 
Congress to pass his legislative pro- 
grams, since a President does not run 
the government alone — it is President 
and Congress. To the extent that the 
President will not be a factor to reckon 
with in future elections (for that is 
what the six-year theory should effect, 
if successful), to that extent he is put 
at the mercy of Congress. Since our 
lawmakers are not always guided by the 
national interest in their choice of laws 
and programs, but are only too often 
influenced by political or personal con- 
siderations, the "lame-duck" President 
(that is what Americans call one who 
cannot run for reelection) would be 
forced to engage in a great deal of 
politicking to assure his legislative pro- 
gram success- We would be back where 
we started, a President who should be 
President of the whole nation for the 
whole nation turning into a President 
of a party for himself, Of course, such 
a President could hold fast to his non- 
political attitude, defy parties — and be 
unable to govern. 

I do not say that the considerations 
adduced tip the scales clearly in favor 
of the present system. I believe they 
are inconclusive. Neither system elim- 
inates the disadvantages of the other, 
There is another solution to the prob- 
lem — raise the level of our political 
life so that the particular system of the 
Presidential term will not matler. . The 
solution is obvious — and obviously not 
to be expected for sometime. A less 
obvious solution may be found which 
need not be a stop gap measure, since 
it would not lose its value with the 
advent of better days in politics, (We 
(have brilliant, principled, and highly 
placed politicians right now, let there 
be no doubt of that, but they contend 
against overwhelming apathy and wide- 
spread un scrupulousness, thus far with 
little success) Perhaps if we could 
strike a compromise between the very 
flexible Parliamentary term of office, 
and our own rigid one, adopting a 
more positive basis than fear of Pres- 
idents, we might find a solution that 
would include the advantage of both 
the four and the six-year terms.— # 



he rigid system in favor of a more flexible form of government 



President Marcos's "we will fight!" stance on board the US nuclear-powered carrier 
Enterprise implies a hell-bent total commitment to the American policy in Vietnam 

FEAR OF 

FREEDOM 




by HERNANDO J. ABAYA 





# LET US climb down our high horse 
and think, shall we? 

Let us take a respite from this fancied 
and obsessive challenge to greatness. 
That may come in time, but not, we 
hate to say, in four years > nor even in 
eight. Anyway, we cannot rush into 
greatness on silly slogans and regiment- 
ed rallies. 

So let us drop that and buckle down 
in earnest to the pressing and crucial 
challenge of our time; a return to rea- 
son and sanity in the conduct of our 
affairs as a sovereign and free people* 
Now then. Considering with what 
disconcerting alacrity President Marcos 
J^f, sends his debonair envoy extraordinary 
Kokoy Romualdez jet-zooming to Saigon 
or to Washington to compare notes with 
his most trusted advisers on Vietnam 
perhaps we may be forgiven the imper- 
tinence if we ask whether the makers 
of our foreign policy have made an 
honest study of the nature of this sacred 
American commitment to Vietnam? And 
if so, whether, in the light of their find- 
ings, our own blind commitment to sup- 
port the American war there can be 
justified in the national interest? 

These are pertinent questions. For 
Mr, Marcos's war-like "we will fight!" 
stance not long ago on board the US 
nuclear carrier Enterprise implies a bell- 
bent, total commitment to the American 
policy in Vietnam, and this precisely 
is at the very heart of the agonizing 
soul-searching many conscionable Amer- 
icans are going through these uneasy 
days* 

Let George K. Kennan speak. At a 
hearing on Vietnam last February 10 
before the US Senate Foreign Affairs 
Committee, this Princeton professor, 
who is recognized by fellow Americans 
as perhaps their foremost diplomatic ex- 
perts of the American commit- 
ment: 

"And finally, when I hear it said 
that to adopt a defensive strategy 
(as he had advocated) in South 
Vietnam would be to rat on our com- 
mitment to the government of that 
territory 1 am a little bewildered. 1 
would like to know what that com- 
mitment really consists of, and how 
and when it was incurred, What 
seemed to be involved here is an 
obligation on our part not only to de- 
fend the frontiers of a certain polit- 
ical entity against outside attack, but 
to assure the internal security of its 
government (the puppet Ky's) in cir- 



cumstances where the government is 
unable to assure that security by its 
own means. 

**Now, any such obligation is one 
that goes obviously considerably 
farther in its implications than the 
normal obligations of a military al- 
liance, 

"If we did not incur such an ob- 
ligation in any formal way then I 
think We should not be inventing it 
for ourselves and assuring ourselves 
that we are hound hy it today. 

"But if we did incur it, then I do 
fail to understand how it was possi- 
ble to enter into any such commit- 
ment otherwise than through the con- 
stitutional processes which were 
meant to come into play when even 
commitments of lesser import than 
this were undertaken*" 
(Parenthetically, in an earlier article 
in this magazine, we adverted to a 
scholarly paper by the distinguished 
American professors, Arthur and Don 
Larson, the former an international af- 
fairs consultant to Mr. Johnson, dis- 
proving precisely the Presidents oft- 
repeated claims that he had inherited 
from his predecessors Eisenhower and 
Kennedy the commitment to defend 
South Vietnam*) 

II 

The implication is clear. To Ken- 
nans mind, there is no valid American 
commitment to defend South Vietnam* 
Otherwise there would be a "constitu- 
tional" commitment by the US Cong- 
ress* 

But the hawks in the Fulbright Com- 
mittee were unfazed* Senator Aiken 
pressed the question: "Assuming that 
we do have a commitment there, would 
you say there is any point beyond which 
we should not go in meeting that com- 
mitment? 1 ' 

Kennan s reply: "These commitments 
as we now interpret them go very far 
indeed. They go farther than the normal 
military alliance. To commit yourself in 
any way to assure the internal security ot 
another government, means to commit 
yourself to interference in the most vital 
process of Us own internal political Ufe, 
and this seems to me a commitment of 
such seriousness that it should not he 
liatelu or casualty slipped into... 

Another hawk, Senator Symington, 
persisted: "Morally, do you think we 
have the right to desert them (the 
South Vietnamese) and go to coastaJ 



enclaves?" 

(The "enclaves theory" envisages a 
holding action by the US forces along 
the Vietnam coast to assure a strong 
bargaining position at any negotiated 
settlement. It was advanced by General 
Gavin in Ms testimony before the Ful- 
bright Committee and endorsed by such 
pundits as Walter Lippmann and Ken- 
nan,) 

Kennan, bluntly: "Senator, if their 
morale is so shaky that without an of- 
fensive strategy on their part they are 
simply going to give up the fight, I 
do not think they are worth helping 
anyway/' 

As if to put the US Senate hawks it 
their place, Kennan read to them the 
following words from John Quincy 
Adams, spoken 145 years ago on July 4, 
1821 but perhaps even more relevant 
today than it was then: 

"Wherever the standard of free- 
dom and independence has or shall 
be unfurled, there will be America's 
heart, her benedictions^ and her pray- 
ers* But she goes not abroad in search 
of monsters to destroy* She is the 
well-wisher to the freedom and in- 
dependence of all She is the cham- 
pion and vindicator only of her own. 
She will recommend the general cause 
by the countenance of her voice, and 
by the benignant sympathy of her 
example. She well knows that by 
once enlisting under other banners 
than her own, were they even ban- 
ners of foreign independence, she 
would involve herself beyond the 
power of extrication j in all the wars 
of interest and intrigue, of individual 
avarice, envy and ambition, which as- 
sume the colors and usurp the stand- 
ards of freedom* The fundamental 
maxims of hex policy would insensibly 
change from liberty to force , , - She 
might become the directress of the 
world. She would no longer be the 
ruler of her own spirit*'* 

III 

The resort to force to crush libertarian 
movements. Give that globe on your desk 
a spin. The names come quickly to mind. 
The Philippines in 1&98 . . , the US com- 
manding general's order to his men; 
Kill and bum* In more recent times: 
the coups that toppled Mossadegh in 
Iran and Arbenz in Guatemala* The 
abortive insurgeuce in Indonesia in 
1958 (and 1965, too?) the CIA-blcssecl 
coup that liquidated Diem, The Cuban 



'A 




12 



nil 

graphic 



0 Sl ENGW^: 







Choose from a complete range of Shell Rotella 
Oils for your hard-working engines: five grades 
and a multigrade of Shell Rotella Oils for normal- 
ly rated engines ; three Shell Rotella S Oils for 
moderately rated engines ; two Shell Rotella T 
Oils for super-charged engines. Shell Rotella 
Oils offer superior protection under rugged 
service and all weather conditions— in every 
grade. Suitable for gasoline engines, too! 



Whenever you need quality Shell lubricants, 
contact ARAB AY, INC. We are backed by a 
whole world of Shell experience in industrial 
research and technical service. We can send 
over expert Shell service engineers to re- 
commend the right Shell lubricants for your 
engines. We have offices in Manila, Cebu, 
Bacolod, lloilo, and Davao. 



ARABAY, INC."— 



OF SHELL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS 
THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES 




Deefeftther 7, 1966 



CIVILIZATION j 
THE DELIBERATE 



Concluding Article by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 



• ONE HEARS of a beehive being 
cfescribed as a society of bees, an ant- 
hill called a society of ants, or even a 
group of apes, a society of apes. 

This realty is stretching the meaning 
of the word "society" too far: a society 
is something properly human, But there 
is This muon truth in references to the 
examples taken from the animal world 
as societies! they are stable groupings 
of individual creatures, with a certain 
degree of organization, so that the 
group is more than a mere grouping of 
individuals. It is a kind of negation oi 
the mathematical formula that the whole 
is equal to the sum of its parts. 

In an organized group, the whole is 
more than just the sum total of its in* 
dividual parts. The relationship between 
the parts makes the whole something 
new, so that the whole is more than the 
addition of the individual units that 
make it up. 

An anthill, for instance, is a kind of 
miniature city, with the ants perform- 
ing their various tasks systematically. 
They constitute a form of organization, 
a kind of organism. 

However, in one respect, an anthill 
or a beehive is closer to a machine than 
a society or an organization in the strict 
sense of the word. The parts of a ma- 
chine are meaningless apart from the 
machine, their sole ipurpose being to 
serve the function of the machine, to 
enable the machine to work. 

The carburetor of an automobile en- 
gine has no other purpose except to en- 
able the engine to work, No one in his 
right iniiKl would make a carburetor un- 
less he intended it to be used in an en- 



gine. Nor do people make an engine for 
the sake of a carburetor. 

Similarly, an ant serves a purpose in 
the anthill, the anthill is not for the sake 
of the individual ant. True, the anthill 
is directed toward the preservation oi 
the species, but not as individuals: the 
anthill keeps die species of ants going, 
The individual ant is of no consequence. 
There is a perfect subordination of the 
ant to the anthill, no subordination of 
the anthill to the ant. 

The beehive is about the same, as are 
the apes, although the latter are some- 
what different, being a higher type of 
animal. For this reason, namely that 
animal groupings are organized but do 
not prcperly form a society or organiza- 
tion, there is no such tiling as a devel- 
oping anthill or beehive or ape society. 
As long as ants are ants, bees are bees, 
apes are apes, their "society" remains 
the same. 

A SOCIETY of men, on the other hand, 
does progress — it can of course retro- 
gress. It becomes more advanced, more 
civilized — it does sometimes unhaippily 
go in the opposite direction, It has its 
ups and downs, and very often it is mov- 
ing up in one respect and down in an- 
other, 

The type of immobility of animal 
groups is absent, at least over periods 
of time. The reason lies in the fact that 
the individuals of a human group are 
not totally integrated into the group. 
They are not mere units or mrts whose 
sole and unique put-pose is to subserve 
the grcup— society. 

They are not just parts of a machine 



whose entire reason for existence con- 
sists in keeping society in existence and 
operation. They are not entirely sub- 
merged in society, nor is their identifica- 
tion with society complete. They simply 
are not made that way. 

This is one explanation why the re- 
gime of Benito Mussolini could not be 
a complete success, or that of Hider, or 
of a Communist country. 

The word totalitarian actually origin- 
ated in Fascist Italy, whose philosophy 
was: "Everything for the State, nothing 
outside the State, nothing against the 
State." The State was to be the whole, 
the totality, and individuals were con- 
sidered entirely as functioning parts of 
the State. The State was interested in 
the welfare of the citizens so they would 
serve the State, in no way for the sake 
of the citizens themselves. 

Nazi Germany's basic philosophy was 
the race as the bc-all and end-all, 
rather than the State, In classical Com- 
munism, the class is the totality. In 
other words, human anthills. It was im- 
possible to carry out Nazism and Fas- 
cism to their ultimate conclusions, and 
Communism has also been incapable of 
total implementation. 

In the two previous cases, it might 
be argued that Nazism and Fascism 
were destroyed by force of arms and 
could have achieved success; in rite case 
of Communism it may be pleaded that 
it has not gotten a fair trial yet, due to 
the shortness of time* 

In answer, we can say that the con- 
tinuance of such systems for whatever 
length of time they did or do exist, 
rather than a shorter time, should be at- 



tributed precisely to the fact that total 
implementation was not insisted upon. 
While the theory was maintained, 
practice was and is a different matter. 

Either due to a degree of common 
sense or to force of circumstances, or 
more accurately to force of circumstances 
bringing the respective dictators to their 
senses, theory was not pushed to its log- 
ical consequences. A complete disre- 
gard for what man is, what his needs 
are, going as they do beyond and rising 
above submersion in the State, the race, 
or the class, would induce a degree of 
tension impossible, to maintain, unless 
men could be physically and psycholo- 



IL 




A-go-go teenagers swinging md j$ 

GRAPHIC 




AND 
ACT 



gically crushed. 

If history is a safe guide at all — 
and totalitarian regimes are unusual Jy 
addicted to history as a basis and justi- 
fication for their systems — we have 
two lessons to learn. 

History has seen innumerable dicta- 
torships collapse. Where a dictatorship 
- although it may not have been called 
that, nor was that in the precise modem 
sense of the word — was maintained for 
a long time, stagnation first, then regres- 
sion was the result. 

Stagnation was the result in the Iney 
Empire, in China and other cases, then 
destruction by force. Stagnation and re* 




Anting it out on the dance floor 



gression was the result in Egypt. Wher 
you try to turn human society into an 
anthill, with near-cjomplete success, you 
get, not an anthill, with its stationary 
condition, but a poor imitation of one t 
because it degenerates, where at least 
the anthill cannot , 

What makes progress possible in hu- 
man society and impossible in the ant- 
HOI? 

The reason is simple enough — the 
operations carried out by ants in an ant- 
hill are carried out entirely through 
instinct. There is no element of free 
choice* 

The ants are very much in the posi- 
tion of a guided missile aimed at a tar- 
get, the controls pre-set — except of 
course that a guided missile may go as- 
tray due to ma! functioning whereas an 
ant's instincts cannot go wrong* The 
instincts are "set"* as it were, once and 
for all, by the Creator of the ants, and 
so will not go beyond what they are 
made for, excluding — which is pos- 
sible — outside interference. 

Human beings, belonging in part to 
the animal world due to their bodies, 
have instincts, and presumably more 
highly developed ones. However, man 
belongs in part, the higher part, to the 
spiritual world* The guiding force is, 
or at least can he and should be, the 
intellectual part, intelligence and will, 
and these are not pre-set, except that 
the mind is made for the truth and the 
will is made for the good, 

Since truth is unlimited, as is good, 
there is a land of infinity in the intellec- 
tual part of man (unlike his instinctive 
part) which allows for continual prog- 
ress, if man so chooses, which is not all 
the time, 

CIVILIZATION consists precisely in 
the mind and the will exercizing con- 
trol over man's activities, and subordi- 
nating his instincts to mind and will. In- 
stincts are not destroyed — they may 
be warped, they may be suppressed, 
they may be, and would to God they 
always were, elevated. 

The extent to which men allow their 
instincts to govern their lives, in con- 
travention of the proper order of things, 
drags men down towards the anthill* 
The acluevement of a higher level of 
culture and the progress of civilization 
are, in the last analysis, dependent on 
the way they break the bonds of instinct 
tending to tie them down to quasi- 
meehanioal behavior, and use their in- 
tellect and will. This involves continual 
struggle — a struggle so relentless and 
smtainad that progress is never a con- 
tinual upward curve, it has its ups and 
downs. 

What we really mean by progress, if 
we view the history of societies and 
civilizations, is a jagged line manifesting 
a general upward direction. 

Mention of progress, and an upward 
direction, inevitably raises the question 
of what we mean by progress, for with- 
out an ujiderstanding of the term* we 
cannot gauge whether change is prog- 
ressive or regressive, whether we are 
dealing with a inoveonent of construc- 
tion or disintegration* 

Since we are dealing with society in 
the proper sense of the word - some- 
thing human - progress can only be 
gauged in human terms. Progress then 
must be qualitative rather than quanti- 
tative It is essential that we under- 
stand this, living as we do in an age 
when numbers, size, and speed arc so 
emphasized. 

With the dawn of the space age, and 



man's knowledge reaching farther and 
farther out into space by the use of ra- 
dio telescopes, it has become fashionable 
to talk of the insignificance of man 
compared to the reaches of space> of 
his being nothing and less than nothing 
compared to the material universe. The 
astonishing facts and figures culled by 
stientists from their investigations lead 
men to^ conclusions diametrically op- 
posed to the right ones — they make 
men feel dwarfed, reduced to a state, 
not of humality but of abjection, 

The mere fact that scientists, men, 
can learn so much should rather lead 
bo the conclusions so beautifully ex- 
pressed by Blaise Pascal in his "Pen- 
sees", a classic of Christian thought: 

"Man is but a feed, the most /rail 
in nature; hut U is a thinking reed. It 
is unnecessary for the entire universe to 
take up arms in order to blot man outi 
a vapor, a drop of water, is enough to 
hill him. But when the universe blots 
him out, man will still be more noble 
than that which kills him, for he knows 
that he dies, and the advantage that the 
universe has over him, the universe 
knows nothing of ... In no waif am 1 
to seek my dignity from space, but 
rather from the ordering of my thought 
. . . Through space, the universe con- 
tains and engulfs me tike a speck; 
through thought, I contain the universe. 
Reason commands w more imperiously 
than a master, for in disobeying the lot* 
ter one is unfortunate, in disobeying the 
other one is a fool" 

Progress in society and in civilization 
is to be gauged, then, in terms of 
thought. The capacity of any given so- 
ciety to produce in fantastic numbers, 
or to provide its members with physical 
comforts is at best an indication of 
progress, an indication to be handled 
with care. 

Material advances of the type men- 
tioned may be an indication of the exact 
opposite of progress. Just what purpose 
do they serve? How are they integrated 
into the true purpose of society and 
civilization , which is human progress? 

If material advances serve the purpose 
of facilitating the exercise of thought, 
of knowledge helping man to be more 
consistently and truly human rather 
than pushing him downward towards 
the anthill, material advances arc a re- 
liable index of progress. 

Civilization then is advancing, and is 
a potent force in making each indivi- 
dual more civilized, The totality is serv- 
ing its individual parts, which it is in- 
tended to do, since those parts are 
wholes in themselves* But contemporary 
facts point in the opposite direction. 

More than one contemporary thinker 
has pointed out the direction contem- 
porary civilization is taking. 

Except for those directly and, so to 
speak* professionally engaged in scien- 
tific and cultural work, the tendency 
of conternporary society is towards the 
mass society, a society bureaucratically 
and psychologically oriented towards 
the anthill* For every use of scientific 
knowledge for truly human advance- 
ment, there are 10 uses propelling man 
towards instmctive behavior. The ten- 
dency towards regimentation, towards 
the production of stereotypes, is felt by 
people, and they toy to break away 
from it, but they do not realize that the 
means they choose leads precisely to a 
justification for greater regimentation, 
and to facilitating greater regimentation. 

The break with aU forms of classical 
tradition, with established morals and 
manners, is a kind of revolt against the 
oppression of a society organized on 



mass lines. 

The unrestrained dancmg so com- 
mon today, to take just one example, 
is looked upon as a way to free one- 
self from the restraints of society, of 
civilization, It is in reality a leap from 
the frying pan into the fire. 

It is a regression from behavior de- * 
rived from, and dictated by, reason, 
which is free, to a surrender to instinct 
and passion, which are enslaving and * 
blind. 

Contemporary civilization is making 
reversion to the primitive, to the in- 
stmctive, ever easier by confusing man 

If is individual men 
who pull society up- 
ward through the 
proper use of the 
mind, the will and 
man s instincts 




STALIN 



as to what really constitutes civiliza- 
tion and masking the basic downward 
movement of civilization behind a mass 
of apparent advances. 

What happens to the individual in 
all this? It is. becoming more difficult 
for him to be a truly civilized man in 
the midst of an increasingly false civil- 
ization. Without constant reference, to 
the criterion of civilization, which is the 
rational, moral man, he is easily swept 
along with the tide of regression to 
primitive, predominantly instinctive so- 
ciety. 

And yet it is individual men who 
gradually pull a civilization upward* 
SaV-restraint, consideration for others, 
the use of the mind and the wiD to 
utilize instincts properly instead of al- 
lowing them to enslave men — these 
are increasingly regarded as old-fash- 
ioned and passe. But what can be more 
old-fashioned than the oldest thing, 
which is prinunVeness? 

It is ironic, but probably true, that 
without machines, without refrigerators 
and air-conditioners and movies and 
printed books, Cicero, who lived two 
thousand years ago, was more civilized 
than most of todays so-called civilized 
men. 

It is within the individual's power to 
continue the upward climb of civilization 
within himself and indirectly outside 
him, even if all around him it may be 
following a downward curve. It is his 
glory if he does, his shame and punish- 
ment if he does not. It is not only on 
the battlefield that courage and hero- 
ism are called for,— # 

3V 



MOTORING 



by JL H. MOMBAY 

The disc and 
drum types 
of brakes 



# THE increasing agitation for more 
safety features in a modern car has 
brought about the emergence of disc 
brakes in some 1967 models made in 
the United States. While some models 
have disc brakes as standard equipment, 
others offer it as optional accessory at 
additional cost. 

The appearance of disc brakes in 
American cars in 1967, does not mean, 
however, that these are new develop- 
ments in the automotive field. This type 
of brake first made its appearance in 
England in 1902. Today most European 
cars use disc brakes. Some use disc 



8tak% timimq—* _. 





THIS IS THE PACKAGE OF QUALITY 
YOU GET WITH EVERY MOTOLITE OR 
SUPERLITE BATTERY WE DELIVER 




AWARDS E 



C.C. Ul 

I Itt HMRA, MANILA 



eel: 



CO..IMC. 

ffL KOS. MM* * W*W * S-0*Ji 



OVER 500 DEALERS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY 



brakes on all four wheels, while others 
use discs on the front wheels and the 
old type drum brakes on the rear 
wheels. 

Why are disc brakes becoming more 
popular? What makes them better than 
drum type brakes? 

The old, drum brake utilizes a pair 
of brake shoes that are pressed outward 
against the inner surface of the brake 
drum. This system, for sometime, has 
been considered sufficient to stop ve- 
hicles within a certain distance, The 
efficiency of this system depends part- 
ly on the area of brake surface in con- 
tact with the drum and mainly on the 
diameter of the drum. The width of the 
brake shoes and lining is limited since 
wider brake shoes have a tendency to 
warp, This seriously affects the efficien- 
cy of the system so that engineers have 
to limit the width of the brake shoes. 
The diameter of the brake drum is also 
limited by the size of the wheel. To- 
day modem cars in the 3500-pound 
weight class use 9-inch brake drums. 
Ten- or 11-inch brake drums would give 
these cars better braking power, but. as 
we earlier stated, the size of the wheels 
puts a limit on how wide the drum 
could be. 

Since the drum type is almost en- 
closed on all sides, and because of the 
position of the braking surfaces, it takes 
a longer time for these brake surfaces 
to dry when a vehicle passes through 
deep water. Wet brake linings means 
loss of stopping power. The drum type 
is also subject to brake fading, a con- 
dition that becomes dangerous when the 
vehicle has to traverse an exceptionally 
long downgrade such as found on Ken- 
non Road. 

The disc brake is not easily subjected 
to brake fading and drivers riding on 
cars equipped with such brakes find 
that consistent braking power is always* 
available when driving down long and 
steep roads. The same reliability and 
consistent performance is exhibited in 
fast drives on long stretches of highway, 
even when constant braking is required. 

The disc brake operates in an entire- 
ly different manner from the drum type. 
Instead of a hollow drum, it has a disc 
which is "pinched" by a set of brake 
pads mounted between a caliper hous- 
ing (see illustrations). The operation is 
much simpler than the drum type. 
Changing the brake pads or servicing 
the brake is also much easier. 

While the drum type operates witb 
an average of 300 pounds per square 
inch at temperatures ranging up to 800 
degrees, the disc type requires an aver- 
age of 1200 pounds per Square inch 
pressure and operates at temperatures 
of more than 1000 degrees. These fac- 
tors require an entirely different typo 
of brake linings for disc brakes. The 
brake pads or linings must withstand 
higher pressures and temperatures and 
must also be resistant to wear. Because 
of this disc brakes are provided to re- 
quire less downtime and have longer 
service life than the drum type. 

Since the front wheels take the great- 
er burden in stopping, many European 
cars provide disc brakes for the front 
wheels and drum brakes for the rear, 
The pressure to the front and rear brake 
systems is controlled by a proportioning 
valve which allows pressure to be dis- 
tributed accordingly to both front and 
rear brakes. 

With the widespread use of dual 
braking systems and disc brakes in the 
1967 models, safer driving is assured 
the public. Automotive engineers are not 
content with these developments and 
constant researches are being made to 
provide better braking for cars under 
all driving conditions — # 

GRAPHIC 



82 




ORIAL 



The burdens of US aid 



• IT IS to be hoped that the sneaky manner and 
the contemptible views of US Congressman Clement 
Zablocki on Philippine-American relations do not 
represent those of the Johnson administration. For 
if they do, and President-elect Ferdinand E. Mar- 
cos stands firm in his announced desire to solve our 
economic problems without American assistance in 
the meantime, some irritations may be in store for 
the Philippine and American governments in the 
coming years. 

Fortunately, the position defined by Mr. Marcos 
whose chief virtue is that it is a long overdue as- 
sertion of Filipino dignity, also serves the added 
purpose of forestalling anxiety over any conflicts in 
future Philippine relations with the United States. 

As long as the courage and sense of independence 
reawakened by Mr. Marcos continue to exist, Fil- 
ipinos need not be uneasy, as many of them have 
been under previous administrations, about incur- 
ring American displeasure. It should even be pos- 
sible to welcome a renewal of those old acts of US 
superciliousness, its threats, impositions, and decep- 
tions, if only to provide further propulsion to Pres- 
ident-elect Marcos's economic policy of independence 

In retrospect, the wide gulf between American 
protestations of friendship for the Philippines and 
US government maneuvers to supplant that friend- 
ship with actual acts of fraud or intimidation, bears 
a strong resemblance to the behavior of Rep. Za- 
blocki during his recent visit here with eight other- 
US lawmakers. 

It will be recalled that Mr. Zablocki at one time 
during that visit declared, rather expansively, that 
' the Philippines is first in the hearts of Americans." 
Hardly a day later, he revealed the real character 
of American attitude to this country when he sug- 
gested that parity rights for Americans should be 
extended, the lease on American bases here should 
not be less than 25 years, and the Philippine gov- 
ernment should send troops to South Vietnam 



All these, said almost in the same breath as Jus 
expression of solicitude for the incoming administra- 
tion in its tackling of economic problems, provide 
an inkling that the fraudulent character of US pol- 
icy in the Philippines may not be entirely a thing 
of the past. 

There is more than passing significance, in this 
connection, in the comments of Life magazine and 
subsequently of the Wall Street Journal Both pub- 
lications meticulously portrayed the Philippines as a 
country almost hopelessly bogged in economic decay 
and corruption in government, and took special care 
to belittle President-elect Marcos's qualifications 
and ability to cope with these enormous problems. 

For publications which are themselves deeply in 
hock to vested interests, the efforts of Life and Wall 
Street Journal are indeed pathetic and strange, for 
— as Mr. Marcos himself has said — if he is in hock 
at all, he is in hock only to the national interest. 

A pattern is here discernible : with their reputa- 
tion as mouthpieces of American vested interests, 
those publications are obviously engaged in condi- 
tioning the public mind here and abroad to condemn 
as ineptitude and villainy any insistence on Mr. Mar- 
cos's part to implement an independent economic 
policy. 

a In J his way ' the US g overn ment can intimidate 
the Marcos administration into subservience Math 
the threat of continuing poverty and chaos as a re- 
sult of our failure to take advantage of American 
"benevolence." 

Meantime, it is refreshing that a Filipino could, 
as Mr. Marcos did, deliver to an influential Amer- 
ican a primer on national dignity, and a short course 
on the substance of foreign aid as well. Americans 
are tond ot proclaiming themselves as the Filipino 
people s tutors m democracy; Mr. Marcos has shown 
tnat they can themselves learn from Filipinos a few 
other valid things, such as the indispensability of 
economic independence to a nation's self-respect. — # 



December 8, 1965 




DEMOCRACY & 



by MANUEL L QUEZON, JR. 



# DEMOCRACY HAS BEEN defined 
in many ways. It has been called gov- 
ernment by public opinion. If this is 
the sole and adequate definition of 
democracy j then we have in our coun- 
try not a full-blown democracy, but its 
pale beginnings, and our pride in our 
system is sadly misplaced. But democ- 
racy is also described as a system of 
government in which those who govern 
are freely chosen by the people and may 
be freely changed by the people at le- 
gally determined times. By this standard, 
we do have a democracy and let no 
one doubt it* 

Democracy, again, is defined as self* 
government, not in the sense of being 
independent of foreign rule, but in the 
sense of the people governing them- 
selves, in a fashion more or less direct, 
to a greater or lesser degree, but ef- 
fectively. This seems to me the most ac- 
ceptable of the three chosen at random, 
expressing as it does, more explicitly 
than the other two, the democratic spir- 
it and the broad way it is to be real- 
ized. It stresses continuity in the proc- 
ess of self-government, rather than the 
sporadic activity of elections. 

There is, however, an intimate rela- 
tionship between the last definition of 
democracy and the first* The continuing 
process of self-government is possible 
only if public opinion exercises a de- 
cisive influence on the government* I 
invite the reader to consider the effec- 
tiveness of public opinion on the class- 
ical ancient example, Greek democracy, 
and on the Philippines, today. 

The Greek Consensus 

In a primary or direct democracy such 
as ancient Athens, the citizens were all 
entitled to gather together, discuss is- 
sues and pass laws together. Due to the 
closely knit character of Greek society 
and the very small territory and popula- 
tion of the Greek polis or city-state - 
about the same as our smallest prov 



8 



ince, as well as the simplicity of issues 
and problems in ancient times — it was 
easy for the entire body of citizens to 
be familiar widi issues and policies, and 
the character and mood of individuals 
eligible for public office. Under such 
conditions, it was possible for public 
opinion to crystallize into a consensus 
or into clean-cut points of view, to be 
given effectiveness by the assembly of 
citizens, or these modified or even re- 
versed in the course of free discussion. 
Although it is unlikely that all or even 
a majority of Athenian citizens attended 
the full yearly assembly — we have a 
record of an instance in which of 34,000 
odd citizens, roughly one-tenth or about 
3600 attended — nevertheless it was 
most unlikely that the assembly would 
legislate or determine on policies con- 
trary to tile people's desires. 

This was due to the previous crystal- 
lization of opinion and to the small total 
population, so that those who did go 
to the assembly consciously or uncon- 
sciously, but almost necessarily, reflect- 
ed the views of their fellow-citizens 
who failed to attend. In a small com- 
munity in which everyone's life was con- 
sidered everyone else's affair, it would 
have required a degree of individualism 
and, above all, hard-headed courage — 
perhaps the word should be brazenness 
- far beyond the average, for a man to 
go back to his neighbors, knowing that 
he had worked against their desires and 
convictions and, worse, knowing that 
they would know it. Even if the as- 
sembly discussions modified or revers- 
ed his views, it is highly probable that 
the modified or reversed views would 
reflect, almost instinctively, what would 
have happened to his neighbors' views, 
had they attended, and consequently 
what would be acceptable to them. 

The crushing weight of neighborly 
sentiment, with its effect on the individ- 
ual, is known only too well to those who 
live in villages today. While it would 



be going too far to assert that such a 
state of affairs guaranteed legislation 
and policy-making in conformity with 
public opinion in an absolutely foolproof 
manner, we are here very close to such 
an arrangement. 

Today's Complexities 

The system undoubtedly had its 
drawbacks. When the individual is so 
immersed in his community, original 
thought will hardly be at a premium, 
and is unlikely to be effective. Witness 
the political theories of Plato and Aris 
totle, influential only to the extent that 
they accorded with the pre-existent 
Greek spirit, and perhaps only in the 
less democratic states when they could 
be imposed. Nevertheless, if democracy 
is the rule of public opinion — enlight- 
ened or otherwise — democracy there 
undoubtedly was. 

We find ourselves living not in a pri- 
mary, or direct, but in a representative 
democracy. With few exceptions, today's 
representative democracies cover areas 
from thousands of square miles to mil- 
lions, and count their citizens by the 
millions, tens of millions and even hun- 
dreds of millions. Contemporary society 
is extremely complex. The average cit- 
izen is hardly in a position to under- 
stand the immense majority of the laws, 
much less take an active hand in their 
formulation. Although the concept of 
the person, individualistic and sacred, 
over and against an all-absorbing com- 
munity, has undergone development and 
refinement (not all authentic or bal- 
anced), in actual fact we are thoroughly 
enmeshed in the multitudinous tentacles 
of the all-powerful modern state. 

The Athenian farmer could go to the 
assembly, participate effectively, then go 
home and work his land, supporting 
himself and his family in almost com- 
plete economic self-sufficiency. Today's 
farmer may or may not be able to sup- 
port himself and his family, depending 



not only on weather, soil, and the pres- 
ence or absence of pests, but also on 
the interplay of economic and political 
factors, from within and without the 
local and national community, factors 
tightly interrelated, with a relationship 
possibly unknown and even unimagin- 
able to the simple fanner. 

In these circumstances, it is perhaps 
inevitable that the average citizen 
should have a growing feeling of un- 
importance, of inadequacy, of helpless- 
ness in the face of the modern state> 
democratic though it may profess and 
intend to be. He easily feels that he is 
just another statistic to the millions of 
his fellow citizens outside the immedi- 
ate circle of his friends and acquaint- 
ances. In such an environment, what be- 
comes of government by public opin- 
ion? What becomes of the desire to 
form and express opinions seemingly 
doomed to disappear in the ocean of 
anonymity? Who can indulge in dis- 
cussion vital to the formation of public 
opinion, without a sense of futility or a 
sardonic smile? 

Importance Of Public Opinion 

And yet it is precisely in the modem 
representative democracy that effective 
public opinion is of the highest impor- 
tance. Modern representative democracy 
without strong public opinion may exist 
in name, in legal formularies and tn&~ 
chinery, it cannot exist in fact, except 
in a sickly state, far from the demo- 
cratic ideal. In the complexities of mod- 
ern life, where to all practical purposes 
the business of legislation and govern- 
ing must be left in its concrete realiza- 
tion in the hands of a comparative few> 
only a nationwide public opinion, en- 
lightened, highly vocal and militant, can 
safeguard the democratic process, I* 
alone can guarantee that those who make 
policies and laws shall do so, not i° f 
personal gain or out of caprice, but for 
the good of all and — for a conscientious 

graphic 




The nation could profit if its leaders 
showed some regard for national consensus 



PUBLIC OPINION 



Jictator can also do that — in accord- 
jice with what we might call the "pub- 
ic sense," the convictions of the citizen- 
y, their aspirations and needs. 

The full choice of public officials in 
ree elections does not in itself guar- 
ntee all this- We elect public officials 
for a fixed term, and once elected they 
tie well-nigh free to do as they please, 
hort of criminal acts (if so). Nor is 
enough that we can turn those of- 
cials out on the street and elect others 
'hen their term of office expires. They 
nust feel constrained by public opinion 
t uring their incumbency, They must feel 
obligated to respond to public opinion, 
^en when legal resorts are not avail- 
able. Only thus can we claim that we 
re governing ourselves througfi our rep- 
ssentatives. 

If the last two elections have been in- 
icative of public opinion at all, they 
ave been indicative of a negative opin- 
m and a reaction of despair* A negative 
pinion, because the very divided vote 
artywise shows that the citizens do not 
see their salvation in any of the political 
parties. A reaction of despair because 
the changes of administration indicate a 
"toping for one who offers hope of a 
> hange from prior ills. Surely negation 
id despair are unsatisfactory bases for 
genuine, healthy democracy. They 
'.armot be equated with public opinion 
as a dynamic factor in democratic gov- 
ernment. 

Certain Examples 

If public opinion is so important, it 
'Wains for us to evaluate our system 
terms of its relation to public opin- 
■n How does our democracy measure 
) to the standard of effective public 
>inion? Rather poorly, it seems. 
We had a classic test of the impo- 
nce of our public opinion, for once 
idely voiced and almost unanimously 
k outside the halls of Congress, I re- 
r to the notorious Congressional al- 

Jeeember ^1965 



lowances* Here was an instance when 
voice after voice was raised, singly and 
collectively, in outraged protest* It 
would be sheer . hypocrisy for anyone 
with a feel for public sentiment to deny 
the universal opposition to the measure. 
If Congress were duly responsive to pub- 
lic opinion, such a measure would not 
even have been entertained, much Jess 
passed and it would have been vetoed 
instantly. That there was any opposi- 
tion at aU in Confess and that the bill 
was ultimately vetoed indicates a mod- 
icum of responsiveness to public opin- 
ion. Whether and to what extent that 
responsiveness was dictated by the spec- 




RALLY 

Rallies often express popular 
indignation, as this one directed 
igainst huge solan's allowances. 



tre of impending elections, it is neither 
necessary nor fair to Judge. But a cer- 
tain degree of responsiveness in this 
particular instance saves our democra- 
cy from a grade of zero out of a hun- 
dred. In a grading system from A to 
F, what would you give? 

I shall cite two other examples* Take 
the issue of help to Vietnam. First of 
all, military help was requested. The 
reaction of our officials was, first, to 
disguise the proposed help as **technic- 
aF army engineers for supposed non- 
combatant: work, but fighting men none- 
theless. Then, before anything approach- 
ing adequate ventilation and public dis- 
cussion of the issue, the proposal was 
rammed through the House of Repre- 
sentatives. Other matters prevented the 
Senate from acting favorably or un- 
favorably. There was not only a failure 
to allow the formation of public opin- 
ion, one can easily suspect a deliberate 
effort to confuse the public and to fore- 
stall opposition with an approved law* 
Such maneuvering was hardly necessary 
if favorable public reaction was expect- 
ed. There was some expression of opin- 
ion on the issue, for and against, with 
the scales probably tipped slightly 
against, but certainly the measure pass- 
ed the House before any clean tide of 
public opinion could be detected* 

Remember, here was an issue of in- 
evitable impact on our foreign policy 
and foreign relations, with many other 
potential repercussions* To make mat- 
ters worse, it is not absurd to suspect 
outside pressure which could heighten 
even more the unnecesary tension in our 
relations with a friendly nation. How 
do we grade our democracy here? 

The electoral campaign, mercifully 
past, is the last case 1 shall ask my 
overtaxed reader to consider. The man- 
ner in which some rabid partisans con- 
ducted the campaign undoubtedly elic- 
ited in our fellow citizens a feeling of 
disgust — the word is not too strong. I 



am afraid the sense of relief at the end 
of elections greatly exceeded the elation 
of the victorious and the disappoint- 
ment of the defeated voter* This state 
of affairs has led other nations to dis- 
card the entire democratic machinery of 
elections in favor of to talitar ianism. Rut 
the rabid partisans — I do not by any 
means condemn all campaigners ■ and 
campaigning - went their merry way, 
unaware or careless of possible con- 
sequences, blatantly callous to public 
displeasure* If politicians had a proper 
regard for pubfic opinion, there would 
have been no question of who started 
it — such a campaign could never have 
taken place* Anyone in touch with the 
public — and the politicians were not 
merely in touch, they hounded the pub- 
lic — could not ignore the fact of gen- 
era! revulsion* Yet candidates could he 
confident of riding to victory roughshod 
over public opinion. 

Fearful Diagnosis 

If the force of public opinion is a 
criterion of democracy, the diagnosis is 
fearful. If public opinion means noth- 
ing more than its free but ineffectual 
expression, even a sufficiently powerful 
dictatorship could allow the same and 
claim the title and honor of a democ- 
racy. 

Fortunately, there are other criteria 
besides public opinion for taking stock 
of our democracy, and by these criteria 
the prospect is not quite so bleak. Al- 
though public opinion is not now, 
crystallized, enlightened, and effective, 
there is no insurmountable obstacle to 
its becoming such. We have the free- 
dom and some of the means to make 
public opinion truly effective. We can 
establish other means* It is up to you 
and me to encourage discussion and find 
ways of giving compelling force to its 
results. But time is running out If we 
do not strengthen our democracy quick- 
ly, we shall not do it at all*-# 





THE CATHOLIC UllfEiSIl i I 



by AURELIO B. CALDERON 

f 

With a firm hold on history, the list of Filipino heroes, statesmen it weaned is simply outstanding 




SCHOLARLY HUBBUB % . 

Tfee *peri/fe end is intellectual but more vital is the Christian orientation to intellectual life 



* WHAT IS A Catholic university? 

Years ago, an eminent Oxonian, Car- 
dinal Newman, said — "A university, I 
should lay down, by its very name pro- 
fesses to teach universal knowledge." 

Well and good. But where does one 
draw the line between the broad term 
"university" and the determinate term 
"Catholic university?" Moreover, how 
does one set apart one Catholic univer- 
sity from another? 

It is hard enough for a university to 
be what it ought to be. But rarely has 
the burden of being a university — and 
a Catholic one at that — been as heavy 
to carry as it has been the historic mis- 
sion or the University of Santo Tomas 
to do so, throughout her 320 years of 
existence. 

For one thing, a title as challenging 
as "The Catholic University" — even be- 
fore it is defined — attracts all sorts of 
criticisms some of which, quite often, 
are ill-disguised reproofs. 

Perhaps there is an element of the 
pompous in the term which serves as 
an unwitting bait for prejudice. But 
then perhaps prejudice, an effect, should 
not be confused with ignorance, the 
cause. 

After all, the term "university" itself 
has become frayed in our time through 
endless argument over its meaning, not 
to mention the absurdities which have 

10 



been allowed to cover the once ven- 
erated name. 

And of the term "Catholic," how are 
universities like the Ateneo to be dis- 
tinguished from San Carlos, Xavier from 
San Agustin, St. Louis from Santo To- 
mas? 

Identity, it would seem, could be as 
baffling as the intricacy of university 
functions. 

Venerable History 

Actually, however, there is little to 
dispute, more so when identity is a mat- 
ter of designation by the Holy See. For 
in 1948, even before controversy had 
been allowed to brew, UST - known 
as the "Pontifical" university since 1902 
- was designated as the "Catholic Uni- 
versity of the Philippines." 

And not without reason. 

When Philip III granted the Domin- 
ican Fathers in Manila permission to 
found a college, the precursor of the 
University of Santo Tomas in 1611, Wil- 
liam Shakespeare - having left London 
in 1610 - was living the life of a re- 
tired gentleman at Stratford, tending 
mostly to his garden with its lone mul- 
berry tree. 

When Santo Tomas was elevated to 
the rank of university in 1645, a pro- 
fessor at the University of Padua whose 
classes overflowed the largest hall and 



who succeeded in getting even cardinals 
and popes to look at the planets re- 
volving around the sun had been dead 
for only three years. His name was Ga- 
lileo. 

In 1645, John Dryden was 14 years 
old, Moliere was 23, and an upperclass 
Virginian named George Washington 
was not yet born. Louis XIV who was 
King of France, the mother of European 
culture, was only in his second year of 
reign in an age that was destined to 
usher in the Enlightenment. 

Santo Tomas, no doubt, has a hold on 
history. It is the oldest university in the 
Far East. The rest had their foundations 
laid only either in the last century or 
the present one. 

Thus the University of Rangoon was 
established in 1920, Peking University 
in 1867, National Taiwan University in 
1928, University of Indonesia in 1920, 
Sophia University (Japan) in 1928, Keio 
University in 1858, Kobe University in 
1904, Korea University in 1905, Chula- 
longkom University (Thailand) and Sai- 
gon University (Vietnam) in 1917. 

There is, to be sure, the Sung Kyung 
Kwan University in Korea, reported to 
have been founded in 1400. But it 
ceased to function for many years and 
was only revived in 1945. 

Again, there is the San Carlos Uni- 
versity in Cebu, said to have been estab- 



lished in 1595. As a university, however, 
this institution dates only to 1948, 
whereas the University of Santo Tomas 
became a university as early as 1645. 

Furthermore, wherever the line is 
drawn by this or that historian, Santo 
Tomas, by universal consent, has pro- 
duced more heroes than any other edu- 
cational institution in this country. 

Illustrious Alumni 

Dr. Jose Rizal, the national hero, was 
educated in this university. And so were 
Marcelo H. del Pilar, Apolinario Ma- 
bini, Graciano Lopez Jaena, Felipe 
Agoncillo, Mariano Ponce, FeBpe Cal- 
deron, Gen. Antonio Luna, Father Jose 
Burgos, and Emilio Jacinto. 

No less than four Presidents of the 
Philippines are alumni of UST. They 
are Manuel L. Quezon, Sergio Osmena, 
Jose P. Laurel, and Diosdado Macapagal. 

Centuries-old Santo Tomas, in the 
realm of the Church, has produced 12 
beatified martyrs, one cardinal, five 
archbishops, 43 bishops, and two Mas- 
ters General. 

However, one inescapable fact is that 
the educational temper of the current 
generation is seldom known to place a 
complete trust in history or even hold it 
in awe. History, one might observe, 
seems to have gone under a cloud. 

So too has there been a fade-out in 



mi 



graphi 



zon and Rep* Joaquin P. Races — recog- 
nized the reality that unemployment is 
still very much a big headache of the 
government when they recently intro- 
duced bills which would relieve the prob- 
lem. 

A comparison of the unemployment 
iigures during the Macapagal administra- 
tion and those of the present Administra- 
tion should prove interesting. During the 
last year of the Macapagal administra- 
tion, the number of unemployed ranged 
from 569,000 to 757,000. But in only 
the tenth month of the Marcos Admin- 
istration, the number of unemployment 
had increased by some 100,000, The un- 
employment figure ranged from 832,000 
to 952,000, Is this not proof that instead 
of being lessened, as the President had 
promised, unemployment has become 
worse under the present Administration? 

EIGHTH PROMISE. - President 
Marcos promised he would testate law 
and order in tiw country. 

One does not have to read the statis- 
tics of the NBI, the PC, and the local 
police agencies to know that the inci- 
dence of crime has gone up during the 
present Administration, Last year, there 
was a resurgence of Huk activities in 
Central Luzon, Late last month, there 



was a iBSi 



;h of 



cam; 



in Ma- 



nila and the suburbs. The criminals must 
have been emboldened by the inefficien- 
cy and the indifference of the police 
agencies because they became as brave 
as to steal even the cars of Vice-Pres- 
ident Lopez and Senate President Tolen* 



had to issue a ban on the carrying of 
firearms outside residences. 

NINTH PROMISE- - President Mar- 
cos promised that his Administration 
would insure the people of honest tax 
collection so that the money they pay to 
the government would go back to them 
in the form of essential services and facil- 
ities, 

The Administration says that tax col- 
lection has improved, and cites statistics 
to support its claim. But these axe all 
press release claims. If the Marco* Ad- 
ministration has really improved the col- 
lection of taxes, there would be little 
need for imposing new taxes, and yet we 
know that several tax proposals are be- 
ing prepared for certification to Congress 
in the present regular session, The Ad- 
ministration should first improve and in- 
tensify the collection of taxes before it 
imposes new ones on the already tax- 
burdened public. 

TENTH PROMISE. - President Mar- 
cos promised he would institute economy 
in the government by reducing th& na- 
tional budget to essential services. 

Has he really been economical in the 
use of public funds? On the contrary, 
has he not been a very extravagant and 
spendthrift President? Did he not go on 
extended state visits to the United States 
and Japan, bringing with him scores, if 
not hundreds, of hangers-on who did not 
contribute a bit to the accomplishment 
of anything? 

The state visits to the United States 
and Japan looked more like junkets and 




erein Marcos, in the author's view, failed the people 



tino. The theft of the can of these high- 
ranking officials were virtual challenges 
flung in the face of the law, 

In Manila alone, the incidence of 
crime has increased by 27 per cent* This 
was revealed by Police Chief Ricardo 
Papa himself when he testified before 
the House Good Government Committee 
last January 11- General Papa said that 
crimes against persons increased from 
1308 in 1981, to 1481 in 1902, to 1700 
in 1963, to 1675 in 1964, to 1467 in 
1965, and to 1868 in 1966. Crimes 
against property, Papa said, totalled II,- 
000 in 1962, 11,900 to 1963, 11,270 in 
1964, and 9000 in 1965. 

But one only has to read the daily 
newspapers to realize how serious the 
crime situation has become lately* It has 
reached such a point that the President 



safari es befitting rich Oriental potentates 
instead of dignified state visits by the 
President of an admittedly poor nation in 
Asia. Up to now, despite demands by 
opposition leaders, like Senate Minority 
Floor Leader Ambrosio Pad ilia, Pres- 
ident Marcos and Malacanang have re- 
fused to give a public accounting of the 
expenses incurred during the state visits 
to the United States and Japan, 

Estimates of the expenditure in these 
junkets, however, run from ^1 million 
to P2 million. Some V2 million in public 
funds — two million pesos of the people's 
money — was spent just to obtain tre- 
mendous publicity for the First Couple, 
not to mention President Johnson, who 
at the time was campaigning for the 
election of a Democratic majority in the 
US Congress, 



If the state visits were expensive, the 
Manila Summit Conference was lavish. 
And just like the state visits, it accom- 
plished nothing. It was billed at the be- 
ginning as a peace conference, but it 
did not contribute to efforts to bring 
about peace in Vietnam. If anything, it 
further stiffened the hardline of the bel- 
ligerents on the side of United States and 
South Vietnam, in the Vietnam war. It 
was a war council, not a peace con- 
ference. It was another vehicle for pro- 
jecting President Marcos into the lime- 
light, creating a false image of him as 
a so-called "New Leader of Asia/' The 
summit conference was also used by 
President Johnson to refurbish his poor 
image at the home political front I 
doubt whether it helped either President 
Johnson or President Marcos gain stature 
in the field of international diplomacy. 
A reputation in foreign affairs is not 
gained by tons of publicity or image 
building or propaganda; it has to be 
earned the hard way by hard, quiet, but 
statesman like diplomatic work. 

Estimate of expenses in the summit 
conference also run from PI million to 
■ P2 million. I heard that even the funds 
of government institutions, like the Gov- 
ernment Service Insurance System, were 
tapped just so President Marcos could 
impress his guests with a display of ex- 
travagance never before seen in Malaca- 
nang. While millions of his countrymen 
were going hungry, President Marcos 
and bis friends were enjoying themselves 
in a showy and lavish barrio fiesta in 
Malacanang. 

ELEVENTH PROMISE. - Mr, Mar- 
cos promised he would not practise nep- 
otism — that he would not \emplou his 
relatives in the government. 

Has he fulfilled his promise? Is it not 
a fact that Finance Secretary Eduardo Z, 
Romualdez is a relative of President Mar- 
cos by affinity? Is it not a fact that Spe- 
cial Ambassador Benjamin Romualdez is 
a relative of President Marcos by affin- 
ity? Is it not a fact that a sister of Mrs* 
Marcos has been suddenly promoted to 
a high position in the Central Bank? Is 
it not a fact that President Marcos, con- 
trary to his promise, has packed the gov- 
ernment with hundreds of relatives and 
fellow Hoc an as in sensitive and key posi- 
tions? 

TWELFTH PROMISE. - President 
Marcos promised he would abide by the 
rule of taw. 

So far, there is no indication that he 
is transgressing the rule of law. We hope 
that he keeps following the rule of law 
because it would be tragic for the coun- 
try if it has a President who does not 
abide by the law but only by the dic- 
tates of political and personal expedien- 
cy. 

THIRTEENTH PROMISE. - Fres* 
idem Marcos promised he would not per- 
secute political enemas. 

At the beginning of his term, the Pres- 
ident seemed to be carrying out his 
promise. He even came out with a state- 
ment early last year that he would not 
tolerate vindictiveness toward former 
political enemies. But Mr. Marcos is 
human, and being human, he has not 
forgotten his grudges against the people 
who made life hard for him during the 
last presidential campaign. That is why, 
he is now reviving and raking up old 
charges against Senate Minority Floor 
Leader Padilla, Mayor Villegas, former 



RCA Chairman and General Manager 
Jose Y. Feliciano, and former National 
Treasurer Amable Aguiluz. The next Lib- 
eral who is slated too for the chopping 
block, I hear, is former OEG Adminis- 
trator Eleuterio Adevosa 

FOURTEENTH PROMISE. President 
Marcos promised he would pursue na- 
tionalistic policies. 

But it is one thing to make promises 
and public statements and another to 
translate these statements into decision 
and action. 

Let us ask: Was President Marcos be- 
ing nationalistic when he sent the Phil- 
ippine Civic Action Group to South Viet- 
nam at the prodding of the United 
States? 

Was he being nationalistic when he 
decided to spend P35 million of the peo- 
ple's money on a foreign adventure, on 
a mission of unwarranted interference in 
South Vietnam, when his own govern- 
ment needs that money to provide es- 
sential services and facilities for his own 
people? 

Was President Marcos being nationa- 
listic when he legalized the illegal situa- 
tion of so-called Japanese liaison officers 
in the Philippines, allowing them to do 
business here in the absence of a treaty 
or agreement governing their transac- 
tions in the country? Has this presiden- 
tial order not prejudiced the interests ot 
Filipinos and Filipino businessmen? 

Was President Marcos being nationa- 
listic when he declared that Americans 
and American entities are exempted from 
the purview of the retail trade nationali- 
zation law? Would it not have been the 
more prudent in this case to nave wait- 
ed for a decision by the Supreme Court, 
which, after all, is the final arbiter in 
the interpretation of the Jaw? 

It is easy to beat one's breast and pro- 
claim himself a nationalist, but it is- hard, 
especially for a man who has subservient 
attitude and a colonial mentality, to 
think, and decide and act as a real, in- 
dependent Filipino, 

FIFTEENTH PROMISE. - President 
Marcos promised he would provide the 
country with heroic leadership. 

But how heroic has been the leader- 
ship of President Marcos so far? Has he 
inspired his countrymen 3 by deeds and 
example, and not merely by speeches 
and press releases, to work so as to make 
their nation economically and socially 
and politically strong? Has he inspired 
them with his leadership so that they 
would practice self-discipline, sacrificing 
present comforts in the hope of attain- 
ing a better life in the future? Indeed, 
has he even begun to give the momen- 
tum which would make the nation, to 
quote his own words, "great again"? Has 
the country progressed even a little dur- 
ing the first year of his Administration? 

President Marcos made 15 campaign 
promises in 1965, but it now seems that 
he may not be able to fulfill substantial- 
ly any one of them. At any rate, it is still 
too early to give a final assessment of 
the achievements of Mn Marcos as Pres- 
ident. But if his first year is an indica- 
tion of how he will perform for the rest 
of his term of office, then I am afraid 
the Marcos Administration will go down 
in history as a mediocre Administration- 
I do hope, however, that I am wrong 
because, ultimately, it is our people who 
will suffer if the, Ad^ninistration of Pres- 
ident Marcos fails.— £ 



February 8, 1967 



16 



DEMOCRACY- 
DIRECT AND 

REPRESENTATIVE 



by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 

Is it necessary in a democracy for 
every citizen to be heard by all? 




# OVER 2000 years ago Aristotle 
created the classical division of different 
forms of government into the categories 
of monarchy, aristocracy, and ochlocra- 
cy (which we today take to mean de- 
mocracy ) s according to the number of 
rulers who governed, He also classified, 
the possible perversions of each form of 
government; tyranny, oligarchy and de- 
mocracy (what we today call mob-rule). 
This Aristotlean classification, based 
principally on the Greek political experi- 
ence, is still in currency today, even if 
its source. is largely forgotten and true 
monarchies and aristocracies have al- 
most disappeared. 

Today, only that portion of his work 
dealing with democracy seems to have 
any great relevance. And it is precisely 
this aspect of Aristotle's thought that 
gives rise to the greatest misunderstand- 
ings, 

It is very doubtful whether what we 
call democracy today would be accepted 
as such by Aristotle or by any of the 
ancient Greeks. To the ancient Greeks, 
democracy meant direct democracy; to 
us it means representative democracy. 
Although Athens itself had representa- 
tive bodies to deliberate occasionally on 
certain matters and make decisions and 
laws, the most important decisions as 
well as a good number of the lesser 
ones, were by right, decided on by a 
full assembly of citizens. 

A system whereby a group of persons 
would be chosen to legislate and gov- 
ern for the citizens so that the citizens 
themselves cannot directly participate in 
such activities, such as is the case with 
our contemporary system of representa- 
tive government, would hardly have 
gained acceptance as democracy among 
the ancient Greeks, They would, how- 
ever, probably recognize democratic 
elements in such a system. 

Which is preferable, the direct de- 

}6 



mocracy of the ancient Greeks or our 
contemporary form of representative de- 
mocracy? The answer is not quite as 
simple as one might suppose. There is 
something to be said for both sides. 

Democracy has, no doubt, undergone 
a certain amount of watering-down in its 
change from the direct to the represen- 
tative variety. In other words, the phrase 
"rule by the many" has undergone a 
considerable change in meaning without, 
however, losing entirely its original sense 
It is easy to find illustrations of the 
change, A recurrent phrase in modern 
democratic constitutions is that "the peo- 
ple do not deliberate except through 
their lawful representatives." In Greek 
democracy, it was precisely the function 
of the full assembly of citizens to de- 
liberate. 

Again, the ordinary citizen cannot ad- 
dress today's del iberative assembly {the 
legislature) unless invited to do so by 
that body; he can only reach its ears 
or its eyes indirectly, through the mails, 
the press, radio or television— methods 
inconvenient and impractical for the 
average citizen. Moreover, due to the 
wide divergence of interests co-existing 
in today's democracies, as in all present- 
day nations, unbalanced legislation re- 
garding the various interests is much 
more likely to be enacted when those 
interests are not proportionally represent- 
ed in the deliberative body, a situation 
that comes about easily when voters 
do not turn up at the polls in sufficient 
numbers* In democratic ancient Greece, 
even if only a small number of those 
entitled to participate in the deliberative 
assembly turned up, the narrow range 
of interests existing within the State ren- 
dered unlikely the enactment of legisla- 
tion prejudicial to portions of the pop- 
ulation. The dangers of one-sidediiess 
in modern, legislation is recognized by 
the common constitutional provision 



aimed against discriminatory and class 
legislation. 

The most telling difference between 
old direct democracy and the modem 
representative type, however, probably 
has no do with the citizens feeling of 
being able to influence public affairs. 
Self-rule, however vaguely or inaccurate- 
ly it may be understood, cannot be 
separated from the idea of democracy, 
Direct democracy necessarily gives the 
citizen a feeling that he really can ef- 
fectively influence legislation and gov- 
ernment, that he is, at least potentially 
but very truly, his own ruler* In view 
of the fact that direct democracy is pos- 
sible only in a very small country im- 
buing a citizen of todays large represen- 
tative democracy with lite feelings is a 
big problem indeed. Certainly, the aver- 
age citizen can hardly hope to sway legis- 
lation in a manner even approaching 
that in ancient Greece. A sense of fu- 
tility arises from this situation. The in- 
dividual frequently asks; "What can I 
doF' a question that expresses an at- 
titude fatal to democracy, 



Basic Ideas 
On Democracy 
Reviewed 



The question then arises: Is represen- 
tative democracy a democracy at all? 
Disregarding cynics, skeptics, and other 
enemies of democracy, I believe I must 
answer with a 'yes, Such a system can 
truly he a democracy, th*t is, unless 
the conditions for its existence are ab- 
sent or are destroyed. The conditions 
I refer to do not involve any begging 
of the question. I am not saying that 
representative democracy is democracy 
if the conditions for democracy exist, 



meaning by those conditions the ones 
present in and constituting Greek direct 
democracy. That would indeed be beg- 
ging the question. No, by "conditions 
for its existence," I mean conditions 
commonly acknowledged as necessary for 
the existence olc "representative democ- 
racy" whether or not this last system 
can be deemed true democracy* 

I would say that provided a represen- 
tative democracy as commonly under- 
stood be a reality, it is truly democrat- 
ic. If in theory and in practice it cor- 
responds with what is commonly under- 
stood as representative democracy, then, 
it is genuine. 

To understand this clearly, it is nec- 
essary to return to basic ideas, even at 
the cost of being trite. Democracy is a 
form of government which, like any 
other form of government, must be ca- 
pable of functioning as a government, 
otherwise the term would be meaning- 
less. Under present circumstances, direct 
democracy in the ancient model cannot 
be a practical possibility for nations 
which number millions. It does not take 
intellectual effort to realize that a mil- 
Won citizens deliberating on laws and 
the activity of governing would not on- 
ly be difficult, it would be impossible. 
And how many States have populations 
of only one million? It is not only huge 
populations, however, that render direct 
democracy impossible today. The mod- 
ern State and its interests and activities 
have become bewilderingly complex, so 
that legislation on details of its opera- 
tions could simply not be deliberated 
on, in the sense in which we used the 
word previously, by millions; only a lim- 
ited few could possibly equip them- 
selves with the requisite knowledge and 
experience. Again, even under the im- 
possible supposition that all citizens were 
endowed with the requisite knowledge 
and experience, the pressures of modem 

GRAPHIC 



living which engage individuals in other 
fields of activity, would prevent partici- 
pation by more than a relative few in 
such deliberations. 

Direct democracy is then a practical 
impossibility today, except perhaps in 
some tiny city-state, perhaps a protec- 
torate of some larger state or sustained 
economically by the latter* 

Should we, therefore, conclude that 
democracy is logically impossible? No, 
Here it is necessary to go deeper into 
the notion of democracy, to discover 
its truly constituent elements. Is it nec- 
essary in a true democracy for the in- 
dividual citizen to take part directly in 
legislation or in the running of the gov- 
ernment? Must he actually be heard by 
all? Must he, all alone, actually exert 
decisive pressure or influence on legis- 
lation or government? If the answer to 
these questions were affirmative, then 
we would have to conclude that de- 
mocracy did not exist even in ancient 
Greece. We know for certain that the 
general assembly of citizens didUnot in- 
clude all citizens in any of its delibera- 
tions. Some would not go, others could 
not. Whatever the reason, an actual 
gathering of all citizens does not seem 
to have been a practical possibility even 
then. The citizens, however, who did 
attend the general assembly were rep- 
resentative of the views of the citizenry, 
so that decisions reached in the assembly 
reflected the general opinion and desire 
of the citizens; refinements might per- 
haps be introduced in the course of dis- 
cussions, but such modifications would 
most likely be representative of the think- 
ing of other citizens. Thus, although le- 
gally and in theory, the assembly was 
supposed to be composed of all citizens, 
thereby constituting a direct democracy, 
in actual fact the general assembly func- 
tioned as a representative assembly, dif- 
fering from modern democratic assera- 

February 8, 1967 



blies only in that under the former sys- 
tems every citizen had a right to sit, 
although he did not necessarily exer- 
cise this right. It is otherwise in modem 
assemblies. Besides, as was already 
pointed - out, certain representative 
-groups were explicitly chosen as such, 
Therefore, it is quite enough that the 
individual citizen participate in legisla- 
tion and the running of government by 
choosing those who shall do so and who 
he believes reflect his views; in broad 
terms they shall act for him in delibera- 
tive assemblies or in other government 
organs under their own initiative, enjoy- 
ing a wide scope of action and judg- 
ment necessary for government to carry 
on intelligently and efficiently. 



Requirements 
For A Truly 
Representative Government 

It is obviously not necessary for the 
individual citizen to be heard actually 
by all. While the individual citizen has 
the right to speak out, there is no cor- 
responding obligation on the part of his 
fellow citizens to listen, so long as they 
recognize his right to air his views with- 
out endangering the State or the com- 
mon good. But the means to make a 
citizen heard should be made available 
to him* 

It is true that under present condi- 
tions the individual seems lost in the 
crowd. It was not much different in the 
past. Unless he enjoyed wide support, 
the individual was likely to be a voice 
in the wilderness. Today, however, a 
small group can make itself heard in a 
manner out of all proportion to its size 
and strength. That was how Fascist 
groups made headway in the past and 



how Communist groups are making 
headway today. Modern circumstances^ 
in fact, render more likely the danger 
of small minorities giving the impres- 
sion of majorities, an impression diffi- 
cult to project in the past. 

The possibility of making himself 
heard today increases the individual's 
capacity to influence legislation. It is 
not necessary for him actually to do so; 
the possibility is enough* If an outstand- 
ing individual wishes to influence pub* 
lie life, he can do so today as in the 
past, However, just as the run-of-the- 
mill individual could not sway the gen- 
eral assembly of times past, he cannot 
hope to do so today. 

What then are the requirements that 
make a representative form of govern- 
ment genuinely democratic? What are 
some of the means that can restore to a 
certain extent the advantages of direct 
democracy? 

Because democracy is predicated on 
the rule of the majority, it is necessary 
that those who represent the citizenry 
be truly representative of the majority. 
Democracy is distinguished from mob 
rule in that the former respects the 
rights of minorities so long as they are 
not inimical to the rights of the majority. 
An adequate guarantee of minority rights 
should therefore be safeguarded as an 
essential ingredient 

Those elected or appointed to posi- 
tions of responsibility in government 
must remain under the surveillance of 
those who place them in such positions, 
and be legally and practically - not just 
theoretically — accountable to the cit- 
izenry at stated maximum periods. Such 
a provision would render it unnecessary 
for the citizenry to resort to violence 
as a defense against bureaucratic tyran- 
ny and oppression 

Since a majority view can only be con- 
sidered truly such if there is adequate 



and intelligent discussion of issues, fa- 
cilities for such discussions must be pre- 
served and expanded, surely not an im- 
possibility in view of present technical 
advances. Fundamental freedoms must 
be guaranteed and protected. Are these 
essentials present within modern repre- 
sentative democracies? They undoubted- 
ly are, but in varying degrees* They are, 
therefore, truly democracies, although 
perhaps more or less imperfect. 

They could be made to correspond 
more closely with the old ideal of direct 
democracy and this goal is already be- 
ing pursued in some countries. The de- 
vices of the referendum and the recall 
are being revived in some countries to 
extend the power of the citizens beyond 
that of electing representatives and then 
calling them to account for any misdeeds. 
So is the element of initiative. 

The pressure of public opinion is be- 
coming an ever more powerful instru- 
ment of democracy, posing the peat 
threat to democracy of representatives 
taking for public opinion in the sense 
of the desire of the majority what is 
in reality only the view of a highly vocal 
minority/ as against the true majority, 
As education advances and as the 
means made available by technology are 
increasingly utilized, a representative de- 
mocracy approaching in practice the old 
direct democracy should be possible. 
Government today is more and more 
complex, a fact which tends to justify 
bureaucratization, It is one of the tasks, 
therefore, of the present age to put its 
knowledge to work and shove our sys- 
tem in the proper direction of democ- 
racy, the direction most consonant with 
and upholding the dignity of man un- 
der God, Let us do what we can to 
make our present system more and more 
effectively democratic* 

The alternative, if we should fail, is 
horrible to con template, — # 

n 




» li a a <p i\iv u ® a u tt Q) a u 1 



— II " a u qm u a en a a <? a 



I 




JAPANESE 
DRAMA 
AND DANCE 



by REBECCA OSIAS 

GRAPHIC Correspondent in Japan 



In drama and in the dance, the theater keeps 
faith with the original conceptions 



# JAPAN'S dramas and dances today 
give evidence to their 1300 years of un- 
interrupted history. In an Asia where 
changes are lapped up even while tra- 
ditions are respected, Japan stands out 
as the only country whose theater in its 
entirely has never been renovated. 

The Chinese theater might be docu- 
mented as thoroughly but when it comes 
to living examples true to a theatrical 
tradition , it cannot hope to surpass Ja- 
pan, Both in drama and in the dance, 
the Japanese keep faith with their orig- 
inal conceptions. They have preserved 
their traditions of hereditary acting fam- 
ilies, conventionalized stagecraft, and 
archaic costuming. 

One of the most impressive aspects 
of Japan's theaters is that they are pro- 
fit-making and supported by a ticket- 
buying public. The Japanese theater is, 
therefore, genuinely professional. There 
are about 4000 theaters in Japan. All 
dancers and actors regardless of their 
specialization or theatrical type have that 
keen professionalism that is demanded 
by a critical international audience. 
Moreover, Japanese theater is dominated 
by a creative urge. 



The varied theatrical schools that de- 
veloped in the country over the centu- 
ries, while indebted to India and China, 
are nonetheless original and unique in 
their final Japanese forms* There is, as 
well, a considerable bit of inventiveness 
about the Japanese stage. 

Nearly three hundred years ago, the 
Japanese constructed a revolving stage, 
freely using such devices as trap doors 
through which actors could rise and sink 
at will. They also developed lighting 
techniques which bathed the actors in 
sunlight or shadow. Moreover, their mu- 
sical development was obliged to keep 
pace with their theatrical strides. 

Japan is the only country in Asia that 
has a professional body of critics. Every 
newspaper has a staff of regularly paid 
special critics. A set is assigned to class- 
ical plays, another to modern plays. Crit- 
ical articles by guest reviewers cram the 
pages of the country's several theatrical 
magazines and intellectual periodicals, 
the existence of critics and the profession 
of criticism being another by-product of 
good, professional theater* 

The formidable presence of an ancient, 
classical theater has not at all intimi- 

GRAPHIC 



18 






• YSMAEL - 81, YCO - 76! 

An arsenal still has to be found to stop thfc 
black-shirted Admirals in the games that couni 
Despite the yanking out of erstwhile coach Fely 
Fajardo on the eve of the two-out-of-three 
championship series and the indefinite suspen- 
sion slapped on team captain Manny Jocson for 
slugging referee Tito del Rosario in the second 
game, the Admirals ran roughshod over the 
YCO hoopsters Thursday last week to retain 
their fourth MICAA title in the last five years, 
handing owner-coach Felipe "Baby" Ysmael his 
first championship. 

Star forward Narciso Bernardo was unbe- 
lievably unstoppable, defying with aplomb 
YCO's double-teaming up on him, racking up 
26 points in the process. Guard Orlando Bau- 
zon was a revelation - his 16 points were the 
games second highest - "Big Boy" Reynoso 
towered in the keyhole, hatchetman Alfonso 
Marquez was unerring in the pass-off s, and tiny 
Joaquin Roxas was magical in his interceptions. 

After a 2-0 lead by YCO on a Pacheco jump- 
shot, it was Ysmael all the way, taking the first 
half by 14 (55-41), and nursing the lead which 
the Painters, stout-hearted all, kept nibbling at 
till time and luck ran out, despite the blurred 
streaks that were Eddie Ocampo and Freddie 
Webb and the clutch-hitting of Felix Flores ancS 
the "graduation" into the benches of five 
Ysmael aces.— # 





MICAA SIDELIGHTS 

Left: The brawl which caused the disqualification of YsmaeVs 
Manny Jocson from further MICAA games. Top: Narciso Ber- 
nardo scores off YCO's Freddie Webb. Above: Part of the overflow 
crowd which attended championship game won by Ysmael, 81-76. 



**5 




A PEOPLE S 
SOUL 

The reproach is not in learning a foreign language, 
it lies in not knowing one s own as well 



# ANOTHER National Language Week 
has passed and it is highly significant 
that more than 30 years after the adop- 
tion of tlie present Constitution with its 
provision regarding a national language, 
the question is still a question* 

To many, the national language — 
Filipino as it is now called — is a land 
of fetish connected with nationalism and 
defended as such. From my personal ex- 
perience, I find that those who attack 
the whole-hearted adoption of Filipino 
are all too often people who cannot ex- 
press themselves in it with anything ap- 
proaching accuracy, elegance, or ease. 
This general atmosphere is hardly con- 
ducive to ending the ambivalent atti- 
tude toward Pilipino. Meanwhile, cultu- 
ral development in the fields affected 
by language — and pretty nearly all 
fields are affected — is hampered, more 
seriously than we think. 

The ambivalent attitude toward the 
national language — perhaps we should 
say a national language — is noted in 
our history. There could obviously be 
no thought of a national language for 
these islands before the advent of polit- 
ical unity. 

Under Spain, although the language 
of government and Spanish society was 
naturally Spanish, the native tongues 
thrived. Even the Filipino households 
which formed part and parcel of the 
colonial society — and* therefore, used 
Spanish widely — never gave up the use 
of their respective local languages. This 
is in contrast with Spanish America 
where Spanish became the exclusive 
language of society and the various In- 
dian languages took the form of a kind 
of exotic survival, spoken only by the 
uneducated, numerous though they 
might be* 

At the time of the Revolution, a com- 



IB 



pletely unequivocal attitude toward our 
language failed to develop. The proposal 
for a provisional Constitution prepared 
by Mariano Ponce in April of 1898, by 
order of Emilio Aguinaldo, made no 
mention of an official or national lan- 
guage. 

The Constitution submitted by Apoli- 
nario Mabini to the Revolutionary Gov- 
ernment in Kawit on June 6, 1898 un- 
der Title X — On Public Instruction, 
first requires the teaching of "the offi- 
cial language, which is Tagalog," at the 
elementary level, then the teaching of 
English at the next level, and the whole 
section ends with the statement that 
"When the English language shall have 
been sufficiently spread throughout the 
Philippine Archipelago "se declarara 
idioma oficUd! 9 Whether this meant that 
English would become an .official lan- 
guage or the official language, there was 
no clear-cut preference for a native 
tongue. 

The Malolos Constitution, under Ar- 
ticle 93, stated that the languages in use 
in the Philippines could continue in 
use, their use could not be regulated ex- 
cept by law and only for the acts of 
public authority and judicial processes. 
For the latter two, Spanish was to be 
used for the time being. Again, a rather 
amorphous situation. 

Article XIII, Section 3 of the Consti- 
tution of the Philippines, at the time of 
its adoption by the Constitutional Con- 
vention on February 8, 1935, provided 
that "the National Assembly shall take 
steps toward the development and adop- 
tion of a common national language 
based on one of the existing native lan- 
guages. Until otherwise provided by law, 
English and Spanish shall continue as 
official language/* Frobably our of re- 
gard for regional sensibilities, it was not 



deemed wise to select one native lan- 
guage* Consequently, the provision reads 
as though a fabricated language, a kind 
of Esperanto, was intended. 

As we all know, an Institute of the 
National Language was established and 
Tagalog chosen as the basis of the na- 
tional language, by a commission which 
included among others Don Vicente 
Sot to, a Ccbuano. The Constitutional 
provision still plagues us, however, a 
standing witness to the strength of re- 
gionalism winch makes an appearance at 
the most unexpected times. 

Confused Attitude 

Spme years ago a lawmaker made a 
speech in Congress in the national lan- 
guage, only to have two or three other 
lawmakers (I forget the exact number) 
speak in their respective languages of 
their regions, producing a most unedify- 
ing Babel in the halls of Congress. I 
b eheve the alleged justification for the 
incident was that the original speaker 
was speaking Tagalog, not the national 
language. It would hardly have made 
sense to admit that the original speaker 
was using the national language, and 
then protest that he could Tiot be un- 
derstood. Surely, it is the duty of our 
lawmakers, more than anyone else's, to 
know our national language, and if they 
do not, none is to blame but them- 
selves. However, let that pass. 

Since at the present time, there is still 
a contused general attitude toward the 
national language, notwithstanding the 
Constitution, and legislative and Ixecu- 

ETtCT im P ie . m6nting and d ^ermin- 
ng the Constitution mandate, I should 
hke to offer the readers a few 'Jfi 
Uons on the subject. 

neLar^fl^v 1 kngUage rf ° ur ™ 
necessary^ U ex P«nence is a safe guide, 



and we view language from the view 
point of communications, a national Ian 
guage certainly is necessary. How raaii) 
Filipinos can speak English with east 
ana accuracy even after receiving tfeei 
entire schooling in English? CompJft 
to the total population of the oountr- 
the number is astonishingly small Evf; 
among our school teachers, the nnmem^ 
majority cannot in all honesty be said U 
know English well* 

I am not being fastidious about th^ 
nor am I referring' to elegance in tbi 
use of the language — after ali> how 
ny people ever attain elegance even e 
the language of their birth and whic 
they speak all their lives? But it i* ^ l 
too obvious that teachers, who presuma- 
bly know the English language beties 
than most Filipinos since they vse :i 
for communicating knowledge to tfcc 1 
students, are frequently and seriou^ 
defective in its use, As a matter of I* 1 : 
even among those with advanced u£ 
versity degrees errors crop up in the utf 
of English which in English-speakin? 
countries are to be found only arn^; 
those with a very elementary educati. 
or none at all. 

The statistics, therefore, on the 
centage of the population who 
English are deceptive. The majority L 
them have only a rudimentary b 10 ^ 
edge of English, they fumble with *JJ 
the topics on which they can e^ 
themselves adequately are very I 1 
They are not at home in the la»g^ L 
and obviously never will be. 

Contrast this situation with that ^ 
non-Tagalogs who learn the 
language (based on Tagalog) j» 
schools in non-Tagafog-speaking r£g*7 
Their pronunciation may at tioi^;. 
jarring to the ears of a Bul£ *^^ 
then so is the pronunciation of °^ 





by MANUEL L QUEZON. Jr. 



TagaJogs. But those non-TagaJogs often 
get to speak the language with greater 
technical perfection and a purer vocabu- 
lary than the Tagalogs themselves* 

If those who come to Manila without 
any knowledge of Tagalog and just learn 
it by hearing and practice are an indica- 
tion, the great practicality of the na- 
tional language as a common language 
is beyond doubt. It takes a remarkablv 
short time for them to speak fluently 
and with an accuracy which only a fussy 
person could criticize. Ordinarily, one 
without any knowledge of Tagalog 
could start speaking in two or three 
weeks* in a little over a month be no 
longer finds much difficulty and in a 
matter of months is at home in it. 

When, therefore, statistics claim that 
a certain percentage of the population 
speaks Tagalog, the statistics are not as 
deceptive as those on English- I do not 
know just exactly how the statistics are 
compiled, but I believe that if , being at 
ease with the language were included 
as a criterion, the relative statistics on 
English and Tagalog or Puipino (what- 
ever you may want to call it) would 
demand a considerable readjustment in 
favor of the latter. 

Nothing Mysterious 

This phenomenon — I have no doubt 
it would be the same if the basis of 
Filipino were Ilocano, Pampango, Bicol, 
Cebuano, Ilongo, Waray, or any of the 
languages of the Muslim area, or for that 
matter any of the languages of the 
smaller minorities — is nothing myste- 
rious. 

No mystique of the blood or the race 
is involved. The explanation is to be 
found in the linguistic relationship be- 
tween the languages and their parallel 

August 24, 1966 



development over a span of centuries. 
These factors are entirely missing when 
it is a question of learning English. In 
fact, for some reason I have not troubled 
to investigate, Spanish would actually he 
less unsuited to our native linguistic abil- 
ities than English, 

It is a fact that Filipinos who know 
Spanish well express themselves "Span- 
ish-ly," whereas Filipinos who know 
English well in its American form do 
not in general express themselves 
"American-ly/' The Filipino mentality 
and psychology are too far removed 
from the American for a language de- 
veloped for the latter (we are taught 
American English, which is different 
from British English) to be an effective 
medium of expression of the Filipino, 
Whatever the region and the language 
of a Filipino, he can more easily adjust 
to Pilipino than to English, 

We have, of course, Filipinos who are 
at home in English. They know English 
better than the average American, have 
a wider vocabulary and wield it more 
accurately. They are the more vocal por- 
tion of the population and exert an in- 
fluence in intellectual circles out of all 
proportion to. their numbers. They com- 
monly use English among themselves 
precisely because they do know the lan- 
guage welL This is not a reproach to 
them, it is all to their credit that they 
should know a foreign language so welL 
(It is a reproach, however, when some 
are unable to express themselves reason- 
ably well in our own language). But it 
would be absurd to require the immense 
majority of Filipinos, who cannot ac- 
quire the same familiarity with English, 
to adjust themselves to the convenience 
of a small minority. It should be the 
other way around. 

(To be concluded) 




US 



by GEMMA CRUZ ARANETA 




By any other name 



• DURING THE pre-Hispanic times, it seemed easy enough 
to name children. They were usually named after the circum- 
stances surrounding their birth — Vktn if it had been raining 
or Bukang4iwayway if one were born at dawn. When the 
Spaniards decided to Christianize and Hispanize our names, 
things became a bit more complicated. For instance, in Davao, 
I met a girl whom everyone called Nena. To my surprise, she 
was really called Nina and could not figure out why non- 
Davaoeiias like me insisted on spelling her name as it was 
pronounced there, Nena. She should be glad she is not called 
Eulalia or Pretexta, both saintly but terribly unevocative. 

The Americans came and with them names of movie idols 
and American heroes and of course names like Boy and Girlie, 
so odiously redundant and dreadfully obvious. 

But why be so concerned about names? Shakespeare wisely 
said, "What's in a name? A rose by any other name would 
smell as sweet." It is really more sensible to consider the 
character and merits of a person rather than just his name. 
However, we cannot help but continue to be wildly concerned 
and give great importance to names and name-giving. 

President Sukarno relates in his latest autobiography that 
he was originally called Kusno. But this name seemed to be 
unsuitable as he was always so miserably sick as a child. His 
father decided to change his name to Kama or Karno, the 
legendary hero of the Mahabharata, fighter for his country 
and devoted patriot. To give more potency and puissance to 
the name, Su, which means best or good in Indonesia, was 
prefixed to Karno. It may all sound a trifle superstitious but 
Sukarno's destiny certainly changed after all that. 

What is most amusing are people who are touchy about 
names. In college, I remember having met an affable young 
man who insisted on being called by his initials or his inno- 
cuous nickname, Jun. Later I found out he was named after 
a Greek orator, and an obscure one at that. 

I have an aunt who, in an outburst of motherly affection 
and pride, nicknamed her daughter Lovely. No one thought 
much about it until a society columnist wrote that mothers 
who named their daughters "Princess" or "Lovely" were in- 
ordinately optimistic for the girls might fail to live up to 
their beautiful names. Naturally, this allusion made my aunt 
fly into a rage. She spent no less than a day drafting caustic 
letters and sent the most scathing ones to the unsuspecting 
writer. She accused her of not being able to live up to her 
own name for she was christened Virginia and had married 
and raised a brood of children. 

Another aunt, on the other side of the family, named her 
youngest daughter Caresse, the heroine of a French novel she 
had read during her pregnancy. To her dismay, a nail polish 
with exactly the same name was introduced in the market* 
No, she had sense enough not to sue the manufacturer but 
her daughter had to use her less romantic second name Con- 
ception, which she again had to change because she studies 
in Switzerland and the people there could not understand why 
she was named after a biological event. 

I was given my name with no little trouble. It is one of my 
mother's favorite stories. She and my uncle, her elder brother, 
were involved in some sibling battle about whose child was 
to be named Gemma:, the name of an older sister who had 
died in infancy. Luckily for my mother, I was born first and 
besides, my uncle's child turned out to be a boy- But how I 
hated the name because none of my school teachers could 
pronounce it nor figure out what it meant or where I got the 
name I planned to change it as soon as I would be able to. I 
had many secret names which I scrawled in the inner pages 
of my textbooks until one day it dawned on me that they were 
all so insipid compared to being called a Jewel (which is what 
Gemma means) and named after one of the first modern 
saints, Gemma Galgani, an Italian factory girl.— # 



17 



PROMENADE 

Below : Night life at the Luneta. Middle : Convalescing patient 
takes in sea breeze. Bottom: Nuns pose for souvenir photo. 






• AN AURA of charm and clean- 
liness; tropical fish and multi-col- 
ored fountains; children gamboling 
and band music on Sundays — 
these one finds today at the new 
Luneta, and people are again be- 
ing drawn to it as they were in the 
old days when it was still called 
Bagumbayan. On any Sunday, a 
likely promenader might be a con- 
valescing patient and his nurse; a 
priest with his Bible; a young cou- 
ple on an inexpensive date; or a 
group of nuns. Thanks to a devel- 
opment committee headed by Teo- 
doro F. Valencia, the new Luneta 
has become a national park Mani- 
lans can be proud of. Some of its 
new features include properly 
maintained rest rooms, ice cream 
and soft drink kiosks, a children's 
playground, trash cans at strate- 
gic places, and a police patrol ear- 
to chase unauthorized vendors 
away.— # 



"■"•""graphic 



5/ ' fCC 



CONCLUSION 



LANGUAGE. 



A PEOPLE'S SOUL 

by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 

Progress is closely linked to development of Pilipino 



• LET IT be borne in mind that even 
those at home in English are not usually 
the products of an American environ- 
ment: they belong to the Filipino envi- 
ronment like everyone else and thus 
would not require a change in mentality 

— unless a colonial mentality be involved 

— to express themselves better in the na- 
tional language, it is just a matter of ex- 
panding their Pilipino vocabulary and 
haunting tiyaga. Surely it is not too 
much to ask, It is high time that Pilipino 
was given its proper place in literary, 
intellectual, and technical circles. 

But has it, can it have, a proper place 
in such circles? Many would answer in 
the negative. They charge Pilipino with 
poverty* If they are referring to non- 
technical fields , their accusation is ex- 
cusable only on the ground of inculpable 
ignorance. Let them open the Dicdona- 
jfio Tagalo g-H isp ano por Pedro Serrano 
Laktaw published in 1914. 

The volume I have* which is Tagalog- 
Spanish without a Spanish pot, has 1392 
pages of pure vocabulary* apart from the 
introduction* It is enough to make the 
average Tagalog educated in English feel 
that it is presumption for him to speak 
Tagalog or claim to know it. The wealth 
of synonyms and the precision of the 
meanings of words, the richness of their 
connotations, is positively staggering. 
For literary purposes, I doubt if more 
could be desired. There are probably 
more words than a writer could need or 
use in a lifetime. 

Scientific Terms 

Of course, there are those who, with 
an air of irrefutable wisdom will askr 
"How do you say 'automobile,* 'tele- 
gram/ 'hydraulic/ or 'atomic* in Taga- 
log?" (These people will seldom use the 
word Pilipino.) Well, how do you say 
them in English? As a matter of fact, 
you don t> at least not in the sense in 
which these people demand that we say 
them in Pilipino or else admit that Pili- 
pino is a hopeless thing. 

Scientific terms are, or have been in 
the past, commonly produced by taking 
Greek and Latin words, sticking them 
together, usually with some degree of 
mutilation, and tacking on an ending in 
keeping with whatever language is in- 
volved. 

The scientific term, originally thought 
up in accordance with the language of 
the country in which it is invented, is 
taken over by other languages, modified 
or not as the case may be. Anyone who 
does not already know and is interested 
in learning the origins of the words I 
cited as examples can look them up in 
a dictionary. He will see that not one 
can be called native English, 

As to philosophical terms, it should 
be noted that philosophical terminology 
| develops as philosophy itself develops, 



terms are coined or given a new mean- 
ing as the need arises. 

English has become a rich language 
through unashamed borrowing from oth- 
er languages and was correspondingly 
poorer before those borrowings, which 
have become permanent acquisitions. I 
am not insinuating that our language is 
an impoverished one. I recall that when 
1 studied high school German (which I 
never learned), I found words which I 
could not translate accurately into Eng- 
lish and had to translate in my note- 
book by using Tagalog terms or phrases. 

I am merely pointing out that the 
adoption of foreign words is perfectly 
natural development of any language 
and the outstanding flexibility of our 
language makes it possible to a degree 
and in a manner impossible in the for- 
eign languages that Filipinos learn. 

We have a national language beauti- 
ful in the extreme, rich in vocabulary 
except for some technical terms, we have 
an Institute of National Language, and 
a population quick at learning Pilipino 
if they do not already know it. What do 
we lack? Basically, a proper appreciation 
of the language, 

Many Tagalogs, whose native language 
is the basis of Pilipino, treat the na- 
tional language like a poor relation or 
even a skeleton in the closet. The non- 
Tagalogs sometimes treat Pilipino as 
though it were a strange import, instead 
of something which is just as much their 
own, national language that it is, as it 
is the Tagalogs*. 

Such attitudes on the part of Filipi- 
nos > whatever linguistic group they may 
be, coupled as they are with a preference 
for English as opposed to the national 
language, is a clear indication of a colo- 
nial mentality. It is a continuation of the 
mentality which caused native peoples 
to cooperate with foreign conquerors 
against their own kind and made the 
maxim of divide and rule a success. 

On the part of the government, the 
lack of appreciation of Pilipino is shown 
by the budget starvation of the Institute 
of National Language. The much- criti- 
cized Institute, ridiculed and caricatured 
as it is, is expected to accomplish its 
mission on an appropriation ridiculous- 
ly small for its needs. The lack of ap- 
preciation is shown by the use of Filipi- 
no by our officials. When they use it in 
public addresses, they use it more foi 
palabas than as the proper means of 
commun ication. 

Those who write and, in general, those 
who belong to intellectual circles would 
be doing a great service to the people 
if they were to start using Pilipino, even 
at die cost of some effort. Unless they 
believe in establishing a kind of intel- 
lectual foreign-oriented elite from which 
the generality of the population are to 
be excluded, they must logically use Pi- 



lipino more and more both to reach those 
who already know it well and to help 
spread it among those who do not. 

They may have some difficulty in ex- 
pressing in Pilipino what they can easily 
reel off in English. What they turn out 
may not meet the highest standards of 
purism — whatever those standards may 
be. Those disadvantages should, in my 
opinion be outweighed by the possibility 
of reaching people they have never 
reached before. They would be saving 
Pilipino readers from dependence on 
translations of foreign works. They would 
be helping to integrate large segments of 
the population into true cultural and 
intellectual Jrfe of the country. There is, 
also, the consideration that they would 
be molding the language as a common 
vehicle of thought and action at all lev- 
els, and that is where our writers and 
other intellectuals would stand* if they 
were to use Pilipino more. 

Language Barrier 

We cannot go on being two or more 
nations linguistically without damaging 
or paralyzing any higher cultural devel- 
opment of the nation as a whole. The 
highly educated circles may well develop 
more and more culturally, but the rest 
of the population will be left out, be- 
cause of a language barrier. What T, S. 
Eliot calls the culture-making minorities 
would not be exercising their functions 
in relation to the rest of the people be- 
cause the medium of communication — 
a language in which both would be ar- 
ticulated — would be missing or at any 
rate severely limited. The spectacle of 
the majority of the population picking 
up bits and pieces of culture — or «n- 
culture, such as Beatlemania, etc, — 
would continue at an accelerated pace 
and the present danger of our Filipino 
culture flying apart altogether would be 
immeasurably increased. A split culture 
which I believe is actually in its initial 
stages, would almost inevitably be the 
result. 

That a limited group should develop 
a high culture which would be inacces- 
sible to the immense majority of the 
population, not because of any inborn 
incapacity of individuals but because of 
a language hairier, should be an intolera- 
ble prospect for a democracy. The de- 
velopment of Pilipino as a true medium 
of the communication of thought is, after 
all and in the last analysis, linked with 
the possibility of developing a genuine 
democracy in which one moves up or 
down politically, financially, and even 
culturally not because of artificial bar- 
riers but because of ability and qualifica- 
tions. 

If we want all Filipinos to be able to 
participate in the life of the country at 
all levels, we had better support Pilipino 
to the full,-# 



^"graphic 




£SS4 



COMICS FESTIVAL 





WALT DISNEY COMIC BOOKS 
FOR YOUR KIDS ! 

any m ffr your esso servicenters 

Drive in to your nearest Esso Servicenter* With a minimum 10 liters 
purchase of Eiso gasoline, you can avail of this wonderful offer. 
Your kids will surely enjoy reading about the adventures of Donald 
Duck, Mickey Mouse, and other lovable Walt Disney characters. 
Drive in nowl 





issa 



Happy Motoring I 



August 31, 1966 



83 




From Elpidio Quirino, the clarity ot 
mind and the risks of alienation from 
the masses. 

From Ramon Magsaysay, the insight 
that a popular leader, precisely because 
he could get away with anything, must 
have a sincere concern for and a high 
sense of responsibility, toward the com- 
mon folk. 

From Carlos F* Garcia, the exemplary 
tolerance of opposition and dissent, and 
the dangers of passivity toward events 
and problems. 

" And from Diosdado Macapagal, the 
hitherto concealed dynamism and the 
fact that the buck stops in that office* 
President Macapagal showed what the 
office could be in the hands of a de- 
termined innovator, but he also showed, 
by failure, the importance of persuasion 
— the consent of the governed. 

The Marcos Style 

Needless to say, learning is not imita- 
tion, and Marcos can no more be an- 
other Magsaysay than he can be another 
Quezon. He has displayed in the cam- 
paign his own style of operating: secre- 
tive and prone to keep to himself the 
general outlines of the campaign, en- 
trusting details to aides and political 
lieutenants. And he judges aides by re- 
sults. 

As the sixth President, Marcos will 
necessarily be somewhat severed from 
the wider constituency — if he expects 
to get anything done. His number one 
problem will be delegation of authority, 
but not of responsibility; that he has 
to assume entirely. 

On the other hand, Marcos had gath- 
ered for his campaign enclaves of bril- 
liant "brain-trusts who, as special as- 
sistants, could be valuable to him in the 

November 17, 1965 



daily management of national affairs, but 
most important, in mapping out the 
long-range objectives of toe presidency. 

But all this will depend on the "spell" 
that President Marcos is able to cast on 
his subalterns in particular and the Fil- 
ipino people in general The tone of the 
presidency is fundamentally important, 
for it is soon reflected down the line. 

One thing about the New Man in 
Malacanang: he never forgets the as- 
signments he farms out This is an in* 
valuable presidential asset, since much 
of the success of leadership depends on 
the follow through, Great purposes and 
noble projects have fizzled out simply 
because many a President, believing too 
much in the prodding power of his nod 
and signature, assumed that his ideas 
were self-implementing, No, At all times, 
the will of the President must be a pres- 
ence in the minds of the bureaucracy 
— and the people. 

Hamlet complained that the times 
were out of joint, that he had "to set 
it right/* 

This is the ultimate sense of Ferdi- 
nand E, Marcos's campaign appeal, ex- 
cept that he was not complaining, eager 
as he was for the challenge. No other 
President has had to face and solve so 
much as the incoming overseer at Mala- 
canang. 

Every past President rode to power- 
on the rising aspirations of the Filipino 
people, who were more often than not 
disappointed. There is a limit to dis- 
appointed hopes. Perhaps, with Presi- 
ident-elect Marcos, that limit has been 
reached. 

But Marcos has always played against 
great odds. Is he fated as well to triumph 
in the final ordeal that is the presidency? 
A republic in crisis ~ waits.— # 



-CONSENSUS 
OF ONE 

by CARMEN GUERRERO NAKPIL 




A restoration 



• I HAVE NOT been so proud of being a Roman Catholic 
as I have been recently, It has nothing to do with who has 
won or not won the elections. That is a question that one can 
happily, in fact, thumb one's nose at from Peter's Rock. 

I refer to having the Church rescued from the tight-lipped, 
beady-eyed Pharisees on the tv political programs and the 
agonizingly vulnerable positions some Catholics took, and hav- 
ing her restored to us all in her glory, A little less than a 
decade ago I feareH it would not be possible to continue to be 
both a Catholic and a Filipino, A choice between the two 
seemed almost inevitable. A section of the American Cath- 
olic press had taken a stand against nationalism; the local 
clergymen and nuns were teaching little children that neu- 
tralists would burn in hell; a Catholic bishop resigned his 
diocese rather than affix his signature to a pastoral letter 
condemning the Noli-Fili bill; the novels of Rizal, he main- 
tained, were not heretical and should be read by the Filipino 
youth, I had hallucinations of myself standing in sackcloth 
and ashes like Henry at Canossa waiting to be shriven from 
papal excommunication for writing in support of Senator 
Recto, 

But today the darkness has lightened. Pope Paul has been 
to the United Nations to speak of generosity and of reaching 
out to the 850 millions in Indonesia and China and to urge 
"a fruitful formula" of coexistence (that dread unmention- 
able in the Philippines!), The Vatican Council has given the 
final reenf orcement to the doctrine of religious liberty, cau- 
tioning Catholics against propagating their faith at the ex- 
pense of the rights of others. And our own bishops, after an 
unfortunate fumble by one of them, gently turned the other 
cheek at the embattled Iglesia Ni Kristo with its solid phalanx 
of vote and declared that the Catholic had no political can- 
didates of its own, indeed, and that Filipino Catholics should 
vote only according to their individual consciences. 

It was an old truism, proved decisively for the first time 
in the 13th century by the French scholars and jurists of 
the great Christian universities who broke through with the 
concept of the state as a natural and autonomous entity, with 
supreme authority resting with the citizens, not the faithful. 
It was appalling to have that ancient doctrinal revolution still 
considered revolutionary in mid-20th century Philippines. 
But there it was — the Dark Ages for a few terrible days. 

But soon the dialogue of reason and faith was restored and 
the Church no longer loomed in monolithic bigotry, thanks 
to the bishops' statement. It was possible once more to think 
of Innocent XIII who saw clearly the need for living with 
Protestantism, of Leo XIII and his encyclicals on tolerance 
and ''social Catholicism" and of Pope John who, for the first 
time in seven centuries, had dared take the name of the apostle 
of love. 

Here again was the Church of gentleness, wisdom, human- 
ity, perception and, above all, courage, the Church in which 
Christ who supped with publicans and sinners and gave life 
to the daughter of the alien centurion and took the good 
thief with him to paradise would have felt at home, It's great 
to have it back, — # 



We violate the democratic 
spirit by withholding from 
the unlettered citizen 
the right of suffrage 



by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 




• TALK OF CONSTITUTIONAL 
amendments has been in the air for 
year? now, so much so that it is fair 
to conclude that those who think about 
the subject at all are agreed, by and 
large, on the desirability of Constitu- 
tional change. Unfortunately, much of 
the discussion has centered on issues 
like whether or not the President should 
have a six-year term with no reelection* 
Little thought, if any, has been given to 
basic Constitutional change. 

We have tended to regard - or pro- 
fess to regard — the Constitution as 
something sacrosanct* We have sur- 
rounded the Constitution with an aura 
of holiness. We look on it more with su- 
perstitious awe than respect. I believe 
this is understandable rather than jus- 
tifiable, That a charter drawn up after 
careful study by a Constitutional As- 
sembly composed of true luminaries like 
the lute Claro Becto, at a time when 
the country was mercifully free of to- 
day's political exacerbation, when hopes 
were nigh, principles solid, and con- 
sciences clear, and the awareness of re- 
sponsibility to future generations of Fil- 
ipinos lay heavy and inescapable on the 
minds of its writers — could all these 
fail to invest the Constitution with the 
character of unassailability? It was to be 
approached with downcast eyes, rather 
than a clear gaze* Under the circums- 
tances, there is little cause for wonder 
that minor modifications should be con- 
sidered debatable, but basic questioning 
aud basic revision are tantamount to 
sacrilege. 

What The Constitution Is 

It is ironic that one of the very few 
to suggest a bask change was precise- 
ly Claro Recto, who is said to have 
favored a Parliamentary instead of the 
presidential system* 

I shall presume to pose the follow- 
ing question to the reader - what is the 
Constitution? It is often possible to 
know what a thing is by considering 
what it is meant to do. What is the 
purpose of the Constitution? I shall 
leave the reader to think up his an- 
swers while X give my own. 

12 




The Constitution is a series of af- 
firmations, principles, and rules intend- 
ed to define, safeguard, and further the 
rights and the interests of the Filipino 
people. It lays down the form of gov- 
ernment and defines the limits within 
which that government must function so 
as to increase the welfare of the peo- 
ple. It is then what we might caU a 
service document — it is a document, 
a program, a scheme whose sole pur- 
pose and justification is the progressive 
attainment of the common good — the 
good of ALL, not just the greatest good 
of the greatest number. The desirability 
of the present form of the Constitution 
must be measured and measured sole- 
ly by the attainment of its purpose, The 
Constitution is good to the extent, and 
only to the extent, that it achieves its 
objective. To the extent that it fails, 
to the extent it is bad and must be 
changed. 

Let us be sufficiently open-minded to 
say that if the Constitution fails entire- 
ly, it should be changed entirely. Let 
us be detained by no fear except that 
of falling short of the common good, 
Once we have the attitude that the 
whole Constitution can be critically 
scrutinized, we shall have fewer scruples 
about reconsidering individual pro- 
visions of the Constitution. 

The Test Of Literacy 

1 am concerned with one in particu- 
lar The preamble states that the gov- 
ernment shall be "a regime of justice, 
liberty, and DEMOCRACY" And, five 
articles later, the Constitution enshrines 
an undemocratic principle, Article V - 
Suffrage, Section 1 reads: "Suffrage 
may be exercised by male citizens of the 
Philippines not otherwise disqualified 
bv law, who are 21 years of age or 
over and ARE ABLE TO READ AND 
WRITE, , . etc/' The Constitution it* 
self provided for the women of the land 
to decide whether or not they should 
vote, with obvious results, It also de- 
termined the age of 21 as the minimum 
voting age, probably since that is when 
one legally comes of age. Whether or 
not that is the age at which most peo- 



ple have attained the sense of responsi- 
bility presumed necessary for the exer- 
cise of the vote is not my concern at 
this point. Rut I am deeply concerned 
that the ability to read and write should 
be consecrated as a test of a citizen's 
qualification to vote, I maintain it is 
not. 

The reasons for the adoption of this 
criterion can probably be ascertained by 
means of a historical study of the pro- 
ceedings of the Constitutional Conven- 
tion, It is possible that the Fathers 
found overwhelming precedent In other 
Constitutions, The norm may have 
stemmed from the established practice 
of the pre-Commonwealth governments. 
Be that as it may, the literary qualifica- 
tion seems to equate ability to read 
and write with the capacity to form 
an intelligent political judgment. This 
seems to me an obvious fallacy. If the 
ability to form an intelligent political 
judgment (no doubt an ideal situation) 
is the criterion for voting, I wonder 
how many voters we would have. Not 
very many, I am afraid. 

Government By Computer? 

First of all, what is meant by an 
intelligent political judgment? To des- 
cend to the absurd, should not an in- 
telligence test sift the wheat from the 
chaff? It seems much more logical to 
deny the vote to those who, while not 
abnormal, are still substantially below 
average, Or, if intelligent political judg- 
ment is to be equated with sound poli- 
tical judgment, who is to say in what 
sound political judgment consists in a 
concrete instance? 

With the political picture normally 
blurred, with so many factors involved, 



with so many shades of gray rather 
than pure black and white, who can af- 
firm without at least unconscious pre- 
sumption, that he has not overlooked 
some important factors or given dispro- 
portionate importance to. some considera- 
tion, thus distorting his judgment? Is 
not the logical alternative a government 
by computer? Scientism of the rankest 
sort, and the very antithesis of demo- 
cracy, the system on which I believe 
we ar e all agreed* Certainly the Con- 
stitution is unequivocal in its preamble, 

A Broader View 

Again, when political judgment is 
mentioned, it is vital to consider: "po- 
litical judgment on what?" Personalities? 
Party platforms? Broad issues? Fine dis- 
tinctions? Concrete details understand- 
able only to experts, who will then draw 
varving and even opposing conclusions? 
Where do we draw the line? People 
with an academic mind may be inclined 
to require a very high capability in this 
respect. And yet Plato, the academician 
par excellence (the very word academy 
derives from his school) could do noth- 
ing with concrete politics. Surely a 
inuch broader view must be taken. Let 
him who can make no mistake cast the 
first stone. 

If we presume that literacy indicates 
a certain degree of education adequate 
for the citizen to form a sensible opin- 
ion in the very widest extension of the 
phrase, still the opposite proposition is> 
unwarranted i that an illiterate is un- 
able to form a sensible opinion. The 
Incas developed an advanced civiliza- 
tion and governed an immense and 
prasperous empire — not one could read 
or write. And if a certain degree of 



A retiring scholar, the son of the late great President analyzes in this in- 
cisive piece, the first article he has ever written for publication, a facet 
of the existing political system that in his opinion renders the Constitution 
less than flawless. Manuel Quezon, Jr. has consented to write similar 
thought-provoking articles exclusively for the Weekly GBAFHIC<-Ed. 



graphic 








education is a prerequisite in a simple 
voter, surely a far higher level of edu- 
cation is needed in one who is to gov- 
ern; yet our Constitution makes no such 
demand, neither do any Jaws passed 
within the framework of the Constitu- 
tion. In fact, such Jaws would probably 
be tantamount to class legislation, 

Misinformation As Well 

The last argument I can think of to 
justify the literacy requirement (doubt- 
less there are others) is that literacy 
enables the citizen to read the mass 
media of inf ormation and acquire knowl- 

*" - l 1 — o — — * tr — - 

mass media can be excellent sources of 
misinformation as well as information, 
and therefore of rnisjudgment as well 
as sound judgment The citizen has eyes 
to see with as well as read and ears 
to hear. The general public is unaware 
that much of the influence of the press 
on the non-urban areas (the bulk of 
the nation) is due to what people hear 
about what is in the newspapers and 
magazines, rather than to what they 
read themselves* Th e tremendous in- 
fluence of the spoken word is attested 
by the exhausting campaigning of al) 
candidates and on the great hopes 
pinned by one political group on the 
barrio transistors. As to those who read, 
who is to say that they exercise their 
ability sensibly when so much of that 
reading is concentrated on comics and 
literature of similar ilk? 

Democracy Of The Mind 

Some intellectuals may sigh for an 
aristocracy of the mind- I believe the 
ideal is a democracy of the mind, a na- 
tion universally educated to the point 
of being able to weigh issues and per- 
sonalities at least broadly, and vote ac- 
cordingly. But unless and until such a 
time has arrived, we are drawing an 
arbitrary line between literates and il- 
literates, placing the latter in the ca- 
tegory of the child, the insane, and the 
alien. We are depriving ft vast number 
of fellow citizens of the right to a say 
in the vital choice of officials. We are 
mutilating democracy,—/ 

November 17, 1965 



KOTENTONG KUTSERO 



by NARCISO PIMENTEL JR. 



Travails of a voter 



• I HAVE JUST received a letter signed by 
one who calls himself "Worried & Distraught" 
1 was going to throw It into the waste-paper 
basket, but then I thought that perhaps you 
who usually gloss over this column might wish 
to compare notes on the past elections with 
Worried & Distraught 1 ' The letter reads: 

Now I must go to confession, You see, I did 
not vote on election day, and I remember read- 
ing in some pastoral or other before elections 
that it is a sin not to vote. But then, what 
could I do? This is what happened. 

Bright and early Tuesday morning I dressed 
up, had my breakfast and went out to vote in 
my precinct. I wanted to be early in order to 
avoid the rush. As I was walking down the 
street, my neighbor Mang Kario waved to me 
from the window of his house asking (as is 
our nosey custom) where I was going, I told 
him I was going to vote. Immediately he told 
me to wait as he was coming down. So I did, 
and when he arrived: 

"You're going to vote this early? 7 ' 

"Yes. I want to avoid the rush/' 

"You're crazy. Nobody votes this early. 
You've got to wait until the late afternoon, or 
else you'll destroy the prices." 

"Prices? What prices?" 

"The best price you can get at this time is 
50 centavos per. If you wait till the afternoon, 
we can get as much as S pesos per,'* 

At this point, another neighbor, Mang Bin- 
doy, approached us. 

ed. 

"This guy wants to go and vote already. Can 
you imagine! 5 * 

"Ah, you have plenty of time/' Mang Bin- 
doy said, putting an arm around my shoulders. . 
And he continued; "Look, fellows, I have a bot- 
tle of rare and well-aged lambanog stashed 
away in the house. How about coming over, 
you two, and sharing it with me " 

Without waiting for me to say "'yes/' both 
Mang Bindoy and Mang Kario practically 
dragged me to the former's house. 

After a convivial hour full of song, I insisted 
on leaving my neighbors and going to do my 
duty as a citizen. On reaching the corner, two 
men came rushing toward me from the direc- 
tion of my precinct, I stopped one. 

"What's up?" 

"Congressman Binong is there with his body- 
guards." 
"So what?" ■ 

"But his rival from the other town is there 
too with his bodyguards." 
"And so?" 

"And they're beginning to exchange hot 
words. So we left running before they begin 
exchanging hot lead. You'd better run too. 

Now, I consider myself brave, but not exact- 
ly a hero. So I said to myself: maybe m an 
hour or so there will be no more bodyguards 
in the precinct either because they're all dead 
or because they've all run away, I decided to 
go back home and wait. 

As I was turning into my street, an open 
truck full of people standing passed by and 



came to a stop with a screech of tires. Some- 
one yelled, "Ayan pa ang isa!" I looked at him 
and recognized my bosom pal, Tino. 

"We're all going to vote. Come with us " 

1 said: "Good" and jauntily jumped onto the 
open truck as it lurched forward, Tino is an 
engaging conversationalist. I was listening to 
him attentively and laughing at his stories 
and jokes, when suddenly I realised that the 
truck had left the town where my precinct 
was and we were entering the next town. 

"Tino, I thought you said we were going to 
vote. My precinct is in the other town." 

"Confidentially, we're going on a picnic. The 
owner of this truck is the rival of Cong. Bi- 
nong and all these people here are sympathy 
izers of Binong, So that they won't go and vote 
for him, we're giving them a wholeday picnic 
plus a few pesos afterwards," 

"But I don't want to go to a picnic." 

"It's near lunch-time anyway. Stick around 
for a while and after you've eaten Utson and 
caldereta you can leave." 

It was hard to say "no" to Tino, my bosom 
pal. I decided to stick around for the Utson, 
but I vowed that, few pesos or not, I was go- 
ing to leave immediately after lunch. 

I kept my word two hours after lunch. But 
I found I couldn't get any bus, jeepney or car- 
retela. They had all been commandeered by 
candidates, leaders or just plain joy-riders. Si 
I had to walk the 15 kms. home. When I 'go! 
to my town it was already getting dark, A 

llVvl™ "i'Jl^J '.V 1 * -"Wl* 13 j^Jt^LI'lLl 

I was attracted by a group of people to whom 
somebody was distributing something. Think- 
ing they were sample ballots and needing one, 
I approached the group just in time to receive 
from the "distributor" a crisp ten peso bill, 
Astonished, I murmured my thanks and when 
he finished distributing the money the Mis- 
tributor" ordered in a commanding tone: 
"Okay. You're fixed. Now go home." 

I protested: "But, sir, I want to go and vote 
It's late already. I have to hurry." 

"What!", roared the "distributor.' 1 " "You 
get my money and still you want to vote for 
that sonuvagun. Now, go on home or I'll — . 7T 

To make a long story short, by thfc time I 
was able to slip through past the gun-wielding 
distributor of money, it was two minutes be- 
fore seven and the precinct was about to close, 
Jaded and tired, but triumphant, I asked the 
inspector for a ballot. The inspector looked 
through his list of voters, and then he threw 
me a look as if I had committed or was about 
to commit a crime. 

"Do you want to vote twice, wise guy? Our 
records show you have already voted." I ar- 
gued furiously, but he cut me short with: 

"Do you want me to call the police?' 

So 1 went home without voting, and now my 
conscience is bothering me. I consulted J. V. 
Cruz who is an expert in things religious and 
he told me he cannot hear confessions and ab- 
solve sins; he can only interpret pastorals. So 
I'm appealing to you. What shall I do? — (Sgd.) 
WORRIED & DISTRAUGHT,— # 



J 



IS 



The Philippines 
and Vietnam: 



AN UNCANNY EA 

US gunboat diplomacy, successfully employed to suppress a popular revolt in the Philippines, is again in evidence 



# ANY ANALYSIS of American for- 
eign policy, to be rational must be 
based not on the pledged word, but on 
the accomplished deed. Actually, Amer- 
ican techniques may have changed since 
the years of "manifest destiny/* but the 
ends remain the same — in IS98 or in 
1965 — the protection and promotion 
of American vested interests which come 
under the category of safeguarding 
Americas security — whether it is in 
the jungles of the Congo or in the side- 
streets of Santo Domingo or in the 
swamps of Vietnam. 

There is an uncanny parallel between 
the Philippines in 1893 and Vietnam 
from 1954 to date, insofar as US of- 
ficial thinking matched military opera- 
tions. In both of these countries, Amer- 
icans came in — to use a diplomatic eu- 
phemism - to fill the vacuum left, in 
cur case, by a bankrupt and decadent 
Spanish colonialism, and in Vietnam's 
case, by a defeated and equally deca- 
dent French colonialism. The wars 
Americans subsequently fought in these 
-two countries were revolutionary wars. 
In each case, American intervention 
meant the denial of the fruits of hard- 
won popular revolutions. 

A Contingent Necessity 

It may be claimed that the United 

JLut^i was at war witn spam and that 
the Philippines was a war booty. This 
is idle sophistry. The fact remains that 
General Aguinaldo and his revolution- 
aries were in effective control in the 
country, when Spain sold us at two 
dollars a head to America. And in Viet- 
nam, the US stepped in after Dien Bien 
Phu fell France kept up the fight only 
because of massive US aid, but when 
this failed, America came in and the re- 
volutionary war, as Bernard Fall writes 
in The Two Vietnam*, was transformed 
by American propaganda into an anfcL- 
communist "crusade/* 

Let us go back to 1898, the dawn of 
America's "manifest destiny," when 
America, under McKinley, began active 
intervention in the affairs of Asia by 
the brazen force of gunboat diplomacy. 

The American imperialists at the time 
maintained that the Philippine action 
was a ^contingent necessity," that is to- 
say, unless America took the Philippines, 
somebody else would, either the British 
or the Germans, or the Japanese, 

It was also a "contingent necessity" 
that .compelled America to shore up 
French imperialism in Vietnam. 'The 
loss of Indo-China/* General Eisenhower 
said on April 7, 1954, Vill cause the 
fall of Southeast Asia like a set of dom- 
inoes,* A month later Dien Bien Phu 
fell And America had to take over, or 
the Chinese would, so we have been 
assured. 

In both campaigns US propaganda 
played an insidious role. The Americans 



labeled the Filipino revolutionaries "in- 
surgents" to justify their ruthless sup- 
pression by superior force. The fierce 
resistance of the Vietcong "terrorists" 
has caused the Pentagon to employ eve- 
ry device in its war laboratory, short of 
nuclear weapons. 

The story of the Philippine campaign 
is dramatically told by Leon Wolff in 
Little Brown Brother. 

"All gugus look alike to me/* the 
American GIs of 1898 said, and they 
sang: 

Damn, damn, damn the Filipino 
Pockmarked Kbadiak ladronel 
Underneath the starry flag 
Civilize him with a Krag 
and return us to our own beloved 

home (p. 250) 

To the Americans at home, stirred to 
a feverish pitch by a wave of chauvin- 
ism that swept the country following De- 
wey's "glorious" victory in Manila Bay, 
the Filipino revolutionaries consisted of 
little more than "a few hundred canni- 
bals and ladrones." 

The New York Tinies described Agui- 
naldo and his men in these words: 
* . . these babes of the jungle from 
Aguinaldo down . , . are veritable chil- 
dren. They show the weaknesses and 
the vices of the resourceless and 
unmoral human infant. Aguinaldo is a 

popinjay, a wicked liar, and a per- 
fectly incapable leader. His men are 
dupes, a foolish, incredulous mob," 
(p. 228) 

So it was all right to trick him, as 
Dewey did, and for this treachery we, 
£i grateful people, honored him by nam- 
ing our finest boulevard after him, and 
casting Aguinaldo into oblivion. 

The war was an uneven one. The 
Americans had all the advantages of 
trained manpower, arms, logistics sup- 



port, unlimited resources. But the Fili- 
pinos more than made up for their lack 
of the basics of war with their guts and 
cunning. 

In 1900 a War Department official 
in Washington reported that to date 14,- 
643 Filipinos had been killed and 3,297 
wounded. The ratio of nearly five to one 
was strange as it reversed the figures 
of the Civil War and the then current 
Boer War. General MacArthur (father 
of Douglas) explained it this way: **Our 
soldiers are trained in what we call 'fire 
discipline'; that is, target practice. In 
other words, they know how to shoot." 
(p. 306) 

Uneven Odds 

This was how the American freedom 
fighters of that day did it (all quoted 
from Little Brown Brother): 

"As the Filipino survivors fled with 
their wounded, the Kansans pursued 
them for two miles. It was an 
old picture; white men efficiently 
pumping bullets into the backs of lit- 
tle brown men floundering through 
the underbrush in search of cover . . " 
(p. 222) 

"(General Pio) del Pilar had never 
expected to retreat, nor had his men, 
and suddenly they were trapped. 
Their natural impulse was to swim 

back across the river. It was like 
shooting fish in a barrel. The volun- 
teers, most of whom had been marks- 
men since boyhood, thronged to the 
west bank of the river and leisurely 
selected their targets. By 10 o'clock 
the episode was over, the river was 
pink with Filipino blood . . " (p. 224) 
*\ : . It was really going too far- 
there was a limit even to America's 
patience. Since the Filipinos had 
started it, they, cried the Washington 



Star, "must be taught obedience and 
must be forced to observe, even if 
they cannot comprehend, th e prac- 
tices of civilization," (p. 227) 
So with cold efficiency, the GIs oi 
1898 relentlessly compelled the Filipino 
guerrillas to observe the practices of 
civilization: 

*\ , , The governor (Otis) conceived 
his duties as almost exclusively milita- 
ry in character. His attitude was un- 
derscored by General Shafter in the 
Soston Transcript, dated January 12, 
1900; 'My plan would be to disarm 
the natives of the Philippine Islands, 
even if we have to kill half of them 
to do it. Then I would treat the rest 
of them with perfect justice."* (p. 
299) 

xxx 

* , . Last night one of our boy? 
was found shot and his stomach cut 
open," wrote Private A. A. Barnes of 
the 3rd Artillery to his brother in 
Indiana. "Immediately orders were re- 
ceived from General Wheaton to burn 
the town and kill every native in 
sight; which was done ... I am prob- 
ably growing hard-hearted, for I am 
in my glory when I can sight my gun 
on some dark skin and pull the trig- 
ger ..." (p, 253) 

"To the Fairfield, Maine Journal, 

Sergeant Howard McFarlane of the 
43rd Infantry wrote: e On Thursday, 
March 29, 18 of my company killed 
75 nigger bolomen and 10 of the 
nigger gunners . - . When we find 
i one that is not dead, we have bayo- 
nets'? (p. 305). 

, . , And in its July 26 issue, the Netv 
fork World carried this story: 

* . our soldiers here and there 
resort to horrible measures with the 
natives. Captains and lieutenants are 




Left photo shcios American regiment of 1898 taking position 



HISTORY REPEATED 

on Philippine beach. GI's relive this to 



Weakly 



graphic 











iiliwwiwg; Jo MP«C#tfW 






men onto* 


THE 


- -ft- ■* > _ 
MOWTf C 


■- _jf rfj, 


CIRCULATION 


awl Cqot|4M 




DEPARTMENT 














\\ [. f 


k.j. ) tt a 11 f- n 


w\ i, \ z I > E 




every 




ERMAC 

OINNERWARE I 






KERMAC Ceramics, Inc. 



Etdmke Ditfrihttoru 



STATE Methodising Corp. 



Let's Reflect 
a Little 

I)} IbniBl ftlBKBl as broadcast over DZWS 




4 



ONE of Hie greatest contributions possible to the stability and progress of 
any country Is the intelligent use of the ballot There are many import- 
' ant factors that work in favor of the ballot and many that work against it 
Among those that work In favor of it are the citizens' active interest in pub- 
lic affairs, a firm grasp of sound political principles and of the country's or 
the locality's needs, accurate information on the candidates' qualifications, ab- 
sence of blinding passions and, certainly not the least in importance, the vot- 
ers* conviction that they are answerable to Almighty God for the way they 
exercise their vote. With this list we have, by no means, exhausted all the 
positive factors. 

On the other hand there are the negative factors: apathy regarding pub- 
lic affairs, ignorance of the country's or the locality's needs, biased sources 
of information (which make it weU impossible to know the truth about the 
candidates) and, again by no means the least in importance; failure to see 
the necessary connection between careful voting and one's duties to God and 
one's fellow men. Again we have not exhausted the negative factors- 

I would like to discuss a very important factor hi Philippine affairs which 
nullifies very important positive factors from the outset I refer to the ex- 
cessively personal quality of Philippine politics. 

During elections we invariably hear remarks like the following; **I shall 
vote for Mr. X because he is a friend or relative of myself or my wife or 
because he comes from the samg locality or linguistic group; or works in the 
office." 

Let us here make two of the many possible observations on these re- 
marks- The first is that the underlying principle in the choice of a candidate 
is made to consist fat his relation to the private individual, to "me/* Mr. X 
will get my vote because he knows "me," because he is related to "me." be- 
cause he has done "me* 1 a favor, because he is from the same* region as 
"mine" The second consideration is that the really important factors to be 
taken into account, are either outweighed or entirely overlooked, so that the 
definitive decision stems from the personal factor — *ine." 

Now, to make the choice ~A a candidate depend on his relationship to 
oneself is to invert the whole procedure of choice. Officials are logically elected; 
not because of any relationship to any particular individual or group. The 
purpose of electing people to government office is to provide liar the common 
temporal welfare, which includes the peace and security In which families and 
individual citizens may have the free exercise of their rights and at the same 
time enjoy the greatest spiritual and temporal prosperity possible hi this life 
through the mutual union and coordination of the work of alL Hie central 
consideration, therefore, should not be "What personal ties exist between the 
candidate and myself?" but "How qualified is he to serve the common wel- 
fare?" I refer not to mere legal qualifications . ■ . these can be met by almost 
anyone. I refer to concrete qualities and abilities which give us assurance that 
the candidate, if elected, not only can, but will serve the public interest Cer- 
tainly the mere personal connection of the candidate with myself gives no 
such guarantee. How logical does this sound: "Mr, X will propose good laws 
because his grandmother and mine are sisters." 

Let us repeat: Government has for Its purpose the public welfare, which 
does not exclude the private welfare, but is far nobler. Therefore those who 
will exercise the powers of go v er nm ent must be chosen with reference to the 
public good. 

Does this mean that any personal consideration must be completely exclud- 
ed? No. When there are two or more fully qualified candidates, we are en- 
tirely justified in preferring one to the other on the basis of personal rela- 
tionship. The mistake consists in giving a predominant position to the per- 
sonal factor. This distorts the whole/process of selection. It subordinates the 
good of all to fortuitous circumstances of friendship or relationship. It gives 
weight to matters of small importance to the public; whOe ignoring the pur- 
pose of government— the good of all, not only as individuals but as forming 
a community. It is like considering the good of the human hand or foot as 
paramount— and the rest of the man— mind and body«*oWy from a consider- 
ation of the hand or foot Such a view is obviously way off the mark. Just 
consider the abnormal life procedures to which it would give rise. 

Let us not lose our sense of proportion. First things first The public 
good is the purpose of government and therefore, in the choice of candidates, 
the public good must also come first 



10 



WEEKLY WOMnre MAG V9 




V \BER?> 



7^ *>4e ofe/tcwwd 



(serves 8 to 10) 

% cup sugar 
% cup water 
10 egg yolks 

1 cup sugar 

m cups 1 1 tall con) undiluted LIBERTY 
Grated rind of orange or If me (dayap) 



Combine % cup sugar and % cup water; boil 
together without stirring until light brown syrup 
is obtained Pour into tin moid, Combine egg 
yolks, 1 cup sugar and LIBERTY; blend welt. 
Strain, Add finely grated rind. Pour into syrup- 
lined mold and set mold in pan of boiling water 
in moderate oven (350 P F). Bake until set, or 
about 30-40 minutes. You may also cook Flan in 
pan of boiling water on top of stove. 



E *APORATf£ 

filled 
milk 




NOW IN THE CONVENIENT 
TALL ft SMALL SIZES. 



GENERAL MILK CO. (Phil.), INC. 
An Affiliate of CARNATION COMPANY, Los Angles, U.S.A. 





FRICTION wiJI start this car 
-jt^st a toy of course — roll- 
1 Jug- Ami it will cover several 
foefc of floor before it stops. 
Mo more the winding and the 
waiting before the child can 
onjoy the toy. All you do is 
hold the automobile firmly 
and roll the wheels hard ag- 
ainst the floor, lifting the car 
right after. And while the 
wheels are roiling fast, you 
just set the toy down — and 
there it goes. Great enjoy- 
ment for the kid. You'll spend 
P2L50 to give him that en- 
;oyment* 




AND FOR THE HOME 



ANY hostess will love a serv- 
ing tray that's white and 
gay. If you have at least 
P3&50 with which to buy the 
gift you're thinking of giving 
to that wonderful friend, who 
is also such a good hostess, 
you can buy something like 
this in downtown store that 
has been wide awake to the 
leeds of people to whom en* 
tertiining has become im- 
• jr, *nt. 




Happy Holidays! 



MAYBE the little girl you 
must give a gift to already 
owns a doll, in which case, 
maybe she would appreciate 
a doll carriage complete with 
a pretty canopy. That win 
cost you - but then 

you'll be giving away with it 
a long-lasting happiness. Not 
all dolls have a carriage ia. 
which to go around the neigh- 
borhoods 




IN YOUR RECIPES MAKES 
DELICIOUS HOLIDAY DISHES 

and it's so economical to use! 

m 




Planning a special holiday meal? Here's 
a thrifty and convenient way to do your 
cooking and baking. Whenever your re- 
cipe calls for milk, simply use LIBERTY. 
Your family will enjoy LIBERTY'S rich, 
creamy flavor in soups, main dishes and 
desserts. The next time you shop, ask for 
LIBERTY — a Carnation quality product. 



bfolO) 



34 cup sugar 
% cup water 
10 egg yolks 



1 cup i 

Ittcupsft toll can) undiluted i 
Grated rind of orange or lime {dayap) 



Combine 34 cup sugar ami % cup water; bail 
together without stirring until light brawn syrup 
is ob tamed. Pour into tin maid. Combine egg 
yolks, 1 cup sugar and LIBERTY; blend well 
Strain. Add finely grated rind- Pour into syrup- 
lined mold and set mold in pan of barling water 
in moderate oven (350°F). Bake until set, or 
about 30-40 minutes. You may also cook Flan in 
pan of boiling water an tap of stove. 



Don't miss the LIBERTY shows over OZXL — 
"ALSA 6ALUTAN", every Saturday, 6:30 — 7;Q0 P.M. 
T1A DELY SHOW", Monday thru Saturday, 3:30 — 4.00 
P.M. 




filled 

milk 

^ * 



NOW IN THE 
CONVBtiBfT 
TAIL & SMALL. 
SIZES. 




GENERAL MILK CO. (Phil.), INC. 

An Affiliate of CARNATION COMPANY, Los Angeles, U.S.A. 



ifiCEMBER 12, 1958 




HAVE AN EYE 
ON WHAT 
TO BUY FOR 



CHRISTMAS CARDS AND GAY GIFT 
WRAPPINGS 



egt in eards designed Uy local 
artists and some really tfeliglit- 
ful examples are available. Quite 
«l«irt 'froiu tlteir popular appeal, 
tliev are speeinllv suitable to 
send to distant friends to snow 
thvm what our fauna and flora 
look like. 

Tia> religious card continues to 
grow tu j copula ritr, as do cards 
that reflect the rkuiteas of stained 
glass windows. Christinas eard* 



This Is a meutoraMe year for 
Christinas tarda because of the 
volume and variety that are 
available. The volume is audi that 
it has already been forecast that 
jiast produeriou records the workl 



over will In? broken; while tlit 
varicty is so extensive that you 
have hat to examine the range 
showing in the stores to he able 
'to find whatever tyjic you waut. 
This v«ir there is special inter- 





ne* ar* 



lied #r kikrW f m u 
pfck, fcaepiag Is mm tPj 
for whoa tfcey t« fc£ 
Cards for eailare* tfi « 
>tf place m all eslbetk^ 8 
bT 

To eater t*\i 
designers a*d riMidU— i 
to II that bo* ^ 
are taken hits ^ 
can! mmm**—*: 



work the year round t* fc,^ 
greetings with freak aa* 
iug messages. Just he* 
have sueeeeded k obv^ 
an emnsttioB of stoi 
Ehswuig at your favoo; 



STYLE CHIPPENDALE 



Within this exquisite encase- 
ment lie the famous Domingo fir 
Sons Piano tone and keyboard 
response tonal values of in- 



credible richness and depth. 
Available on easy budget terms 
or cash terms with a big dis~ 
coun: 



p. e. Dommoo & co.. inc. 

PIANO & ORGAN MAKERS 

4-* N H DOMINGO AVENUE. QUEZON CITY * TEL. 7-35-3* 

DISPLAY 207-309 Escolta, Manila + Phone: 3-22 96 * 3351-3357 Sta Men Boulevard 
ROOMS 1420 A Habinl, Manila * Phone: 94£-3S * 1135 Azcamga 

BKANCHn AMD AGiNCifS ALL OVf* TH$ WiiUFPlNtt 



built around tlic Nativity story 
are plentiful and much in demand. 

Uniformity in tuie and shape 
is a thing of tfie past insofar as 
Christinas cards are concerned, 
for tliev vary In size these days 
from delightful canteaweos of 
visiting-card iiie to folded affairs 
which, when opened, approximate 
the rise of a small poster* Alt 
appeal in their va Hons vays. 
Cards in cat-out shapes, too, are 
more plentiful than formerly. 

Cards can Ije grave, flay, digni 




— AND WRAPPINGS Tf 
Gmy ifi« wrappings, toe, i 



LAST WEEK we spofce about tne intelligent use o 
ballot and how, unfortunately, too many citizen 
ride their vote on the basis of their relationship wit! 
candidates. We referred to the need for accurate info 
tkm about the candidates and the issues as among th 
sential elements for a wise choice. I^et us think 
more about the question of information. 

What kind of information are we interested in? 
viously, accurate information- Now, accurate inff 
tkm is not entirely dependent on reliable sources. It v 
of course be ideal if all the sources at our command 
press* the radio, information given us by our friend* 
—were all accurate anil unbiased HowtiMtit, such i 




Let's 
Reflec 
a Littl 



10 



by Manuel Quezon 

as broadcast over DZWS 



always the case. When elections are approaching, snor 
of information are deliberately used by candidate* 
political parties to advance their own cause and diff 
that of their opponents* often at the expense of in 
This refers of course to space bought In the newsptt 
and time bought on the air. But, aside from that at tii 
even an entire newspaper or station is known to be slar 
in favor of a candidate or a party. Even our frfe 
may, we must presume unwittingly, give us inaocurat 
altogether false reports. 

There are remedies for this situation. Th* bask i 
is to keep well informer! about the relevant acts of P? 
teal and other public figures, not only during deetkn* 
but all the year round. There is less danger of 

WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZI? 





. the p juwa a 4 nar* virori 
rt v tb* em iiefofe. This ii «t 
Aottia be* fur ft truiu&g gilt, 
putlr wrapped sad oearisg on- 
'fckftbto erideiKse of tlte loving 
$ bdtoired upon it, is often 
# wekoroe than & more coetly 
t tBmt is wrapped haphazardly 
| beatowed iodiiferontly* In the 
,"i c*ae, the recipient appieet- 
« the thought behind the gift, 
ike second, the indifference of 
t periling ami prmntatntB ^ 
^ lack- of ainceriijv That is 
r pft p«ekagiag warrants all 
; ferine enre yon can beatow 
«a it 

j tarktTf origmal in ctangM and 
ttnctiw in eatour* They include 
iper noreftien of manj aerfe^ 
*ta and tag*, fan#itnl coloured 
ffp«a» mnlti-eolonred tl—ti, 
'eettertirta'' streamer* that open 
nt to extend acroaa the room for 
Infltmaft ornamentation, collap- 
Mb pnper Christmas tree* that 
m ean stow away after use and 
iriug ont again season after 
eaioa f gleaming balls, glitter 
irnaawnts> Imitation snow-flakes. 




^ too, thai it ia alt 
too easy, if ynu leave your shop 
pro* late, to he unable to get |ngt 
the type of fancy box in which to 
endue* a particular gift WLcn 
thia happens, wnppin(r paparr eaa 
*g"in fM» fa yvmr aid, as yosj 
ran nae old boxes that are to bo 
fbaatF *mm# the hew. Ten 
simply cut them down to the slxe 
jun want then reewrer them with a 
fancy paper of yonr own ehooslBg. 

The demand for sea 1b, tags, 
Scotch tape, wrapping papers, etau, 
is extraordinary at this time of 
the year; so boy them early while 
choice is at its peak. 



Lion in tile sources of information when the passions of 
an election are not running high. 

In using sources of information we should inquire 
about the general character of the source, A source may 
&e habitually in favor of certain men or certain legal mea- 
sures- If we know this we can make allowances for car- 
rain inaccuracies or for bias in the presentation and 
evaluation of the information we get. Nor should we 
Sink that such inaccuracies or bias are always deliberate. 
They often creep in unnoticed, despite honest efforts to 
atfoid them- However, the effect is the same — unre- 
liability. 

The character and the tendencies of our sources should 
be even more carefully looked into during elections* This 
wiU enable us to form a more balanced judgment on the 
more extreme utterances for or against candidates 01 
issues. It will also help us to consider factors that may 
simply be left out in reports about candidates or issues. 
Let us take a case in point. 

Today when a man runs for public office he often 
emphasizes that he is poor, and poverty is commonly taken 
as a good sign. Well, It may or it may not be. If a man 
has remained poor while in public office because he hat 
rejected illegal means of enrichment, certainly he can lay 
claim to one good quality, though not the only one needed 
to deserve the vote. However, If before seeking public 
rfSce, the man was poor because of laziness or incom- 
petence, no one should say that his poverty is a goo<J 
>ign. In the first case bis poverty may prove his honesty. 
n the second it could simply prove his unfitness for pub- 
ic office. Biased sources can easily present fact in a man- 
ner that wiU give rise to an entirely wrong interpretation- 
fte voter therefore must consider how to correct his 
auras to avoid falling into error. 

Information from our friends also requires careful 
valuation.. Because someone is our friend does not 
iitomaticaily make him a prophet of truth. All too often 
ur friends are also victims of misinformation or emotion, 
ife know our friends and their inclinations. We should 
nake due allowances when appraising any information 
tpy give us. 

We should try- to gather first-hand information. This 
i sometimes impossible. However, due to the relative 
a* with which we can reach candidates today, the 
athering of first-hand information is generally not as dif- 
out as it seems. We can at least have contact with 
taw dose to the candidates, who are therefore capablf- 
f giving us a closer view of these candidates. But again, 
e must make due allowances for the influence of personal 
^cumstances on our information. 

A correct appraisal of facts does not so much depend 
ithe sources of information as on the discretion with 
hWi we sift the true from the false and place events in 
leir proper perspective. We must develop this discretion 
*or else our choice of officiate will continue to be hap- 
izard. 

ECEMBER 12, 1958 







Make it a complete 
Christmas by getting 
M. Y. SAN biscuits. . 
so crisp, so tasty and 
so-o-o-delicious! 



Made only by 



M.Y. SAN & CO., INC 



Display Room : Factory : 

275 Escolta, Manila Tel. 3-38-56 74 Valenzuela. San Juan, Rizal 

Tel. 7-43-73 



11 




at least 50 writers and their 
W guests to be seen and heard at 
the first National Writers' Confer* 
ence. Pines Hotel Baguio City, De- 
cember 26 to 29 this year, I have 
seen at one time or another 14 of the 
writers, I think I know five of those, 
bat only two of them well and one 
too well. And I have heard three of 
the guest speakers and of these three 
i appreciate one, have no opinion one 
*ray or the other about another and 
ietest the third on principle. 

I am no more isolated from Philip- 
pine writers as a group than anybody 
else. For this conference, there are 
writers inviting writers who do not 
know what kind of people they are, 
where they live, how they live or if 
they live or died yesterday. 

And yesterday a person, who 
thinks I ought to meet other writers, 
that it would do me good and them 
no harm, offered to underwrite my 
attendance at the conference, that is, 
pay the costs, now decides to under- 
write two other writers through me 
on condition that "they're worth it" 
I am to decide which two whom I do 
not know are worth it, and I am not 
to tell him who they are or tell them 
who put up the P50 each for them. 
While other people's Christmas may 
i improved by this, mine will be 
more confused. Please just send 
checks, money orders or telegraphic 
transfers to Miss Virginia Moreno, 
Treasurer of the Philippine Center, 
International P.RN., 2457 Juan Luna, 
Tondo, Manila, It is said that Bliss 
Moreno is unconfutable. 

All in all, at P100 a writer, P50 
from him and P50 from anybody who 
wants to be a realistic Santa Clatts* 
the conference is about as inclusive 
as the shrewdness and humor of 
P-ELN. (Poets, Playwrights* Editors, 
Essayists and Novelists — people 
like me fall in the spaces between) 
can make it. A furtive squint at my 
own inner processes convinces me 
that I am going to the conference 
at my own full expense (cutting 
down on cigarettes and cheap lotion) , 
because I wouldn't dream of missing 
the bad any more than the good. I 
hope some of the speakers choke to 
death on their own tongues, While 
awaiting these small but satisfying 
events, I shall have the pleasure of 
meeting the young elite in elegant 
surroundfngs, and four days in Ba* 
guio plus meals and round-trip trans* 
portation at P25 a day is a bargain 
any day in the year — and Decem- 
ber in Baguio is so much better than 
April that People keep if a secret 

*nie real theme of the conference 
is "The Freedom of the Writer/' anc 
this can only mean eventually the 
conscious opposition ot a write" to 
anything that hampers or crushes his 
self-expression and the reaping of 
the rewards thereof, Pasternak, the 



Russian writer, whose government 
forced him to renounce the Nobel 
prize because in his novel the polit- 
ical views differed with those of the 
party in power, may never be men- 
tioned, but Pasternak will be a sub- 
ject In every head that holds a mind 
and in every heart that has courage 
The announced 4 theme of the con- 
ference is <4 The Filipino Writer and 
National Growth/* A country cannot 
grow without writers- Writers can- 
not grow without freedom. Freedom 
cannot grow without protection. Who 
will protect the freedom that pro- 
tects the writer who protects the 
country? Inner instincts as well as 



Writers' 

by Yay 



physical ears will be listening. 

"The Role of the Filipino Writer 
in National Growth" is the topic of- 
fered President Carjos P. Garcia, ad- 
mittedly as articulate a President as 
the Philippines has had. It is possible 
that the topic was chosen to stimulate 
the speaker's own mind and to invite 
him to commit himself to a course of 
action. The younger writers don't 
have to be told that their country 
needs them. They know this. Per- 
haps they would like to be -told who 
else knows it. 

In a tight-packed schedule, theme 
after theme, lecture after lecture, dis- 
cussion after discussion follow each 
other in logical order. The only 
breaks are for meals and sleep. 

The only provision for sightseeing, 
unsponsored, is Sunday morning, of- 
ficially declared free. The writers 
will be at a loose end or on their own, 
to go where they will and get back 
if they can. They will probably sleep 
late in pure exhaustion after partic- 
ipation in discussions of "The Tradi- 
tion of Freedom in Filipino Writing/' 
'The Challenge of Nationalism to 
Filipino Writing," "The Aims of Pop- 
ular Publications and their Contri- 
bution to National Growth," 'The pro. 
blent of Publishing Creative Work," 
"The Encouragement of the Arts by 
the State and Private Institutions/' 
"The Writer and Our Educational 
System" and 'The Literary Form " 

Nothing in the program keynotes, 
the conference quite so definitely as 
the closing speech: 'The First An- 
nual Jose Rizal Lecture.* 1 No coun- 
try needs a Pasternak who had a 
Rizal. Reports on the conference and 
the papers presented will be published 
in the magazine Comment. 

AS far as personality and achieve- 
ment go, the writers so far com- 
mitted to attend are as varied and es- 
tablished as in any cross-section of a 
vital profession. The percentage of 
hard working, serious, realistic writ- 
ers is high. Most are better educated 
and of wider experience than pre- 
war writers in their own time Some 
are traveled All are sincerely con- 
scious of country and self. 




Raul Ingles, editor and columnist, 

by nature reserved, and industrials 
Vicente Rivera, Jn, editor, hort^ 
story writer and novelist, are the con- 
ference's co-ordinators. Conference 
editors and rapporteurs include 
scalpel-minded G. Burce Bunao, edi- 
tor, poet acknowledged one of the fin* 
est sonneteers in the Philippines; 
Adrian Cristobal, noisily and hap- 
pily involved in fiction and criticis'.n; 
boisterous, friendly Andres Cristobal 
Cruz, bilingual poet and short-styry 
writer, who also paints; the studious 
Neal Cruz, a literary editor; the 
equally quiet Rony V. Diaz, teacher 
of creative writing at the State Uni- 
versity and a consistent award winner 
in fiction; chairmannlng the afore- 
mentioned will be Juan T. Gatbonton, 
responsible, industrious staff mem I ?t 
of the Sunday Times Magazine, and 
the articulate, social-minded Bias P. 
Ople, a labor specialist, who was one 
of the late President's bright young 
men. Cheerful Godofredo M. Roperos 
—"nobody can down hiro ,r — a short 
story writer and magazine staff man, 
will act as public information officer, 

Discussion leaders include O. IX I 
Corpuz, an erudite man with a 
Ph. D. from Harvard University, au- 
thor of "Bureaucracy in the Philip- 
pines," secretary of a graduate school 
and one of the editors of the intel- 
lectual magazine Comment; Fran- 
cisco Arcellana, a Rockefeller sc f a 
iar, short story writer and cruicr 
^eopoldo Yates, professor of Et 
at the University of the PhUippints; I 
the equally sober Jose Luna Castro, 
associate editor of the Manila Times; 
the gregarious Amador Daguio, poet 
and fictionist ; and I. P. Soliongc x * 
newspaper columnist with cannon- I 
ball opinions delivered the same way* 
Brilliant Carmen Guerrero Nakpil, 
foremost columnist among women 
writers, will be first to stand in dis- 
cussion. With her will be the amiable, 
also impatient and blunt, E, Ag a? 
Cruz, columnist, editor, social hit; 
torian, art critic, gourmet, raconteur 
i somebody told me this; wary of him, 
1 eye him from afar); Alejandro 
Roces, dignified, also stubborn, co~ 
lumnist, story writer, dean of Far 
Eastern University's Institute of Arts 
and Sciences* reportedly a cockfight 
enthusiast; the scholarly EdiUierrx, 
Tiempo, head of the English depart* 
ment at Silliman University, scholar 
critic, married to the poet Edith 
Tiempo; and Alfredo Gonzalez, the 
classical essayist. 

First to stand in another discus* 
aion group wijl be Father Miguel Ber- 
nad, of the Ateneo where he 
teaches literature and edits the quar- 
terly. A friendly non-Catholic writ- 
er describes Father Bernad as ''dog- 
matic because he can't help it ( he's a 
Jesuit, in spite of that he's all right" 
With him will be the genuinely hum- 
ble angel of many writers, Alberto 
Benipayo, a publisher who checks his 
profits with one eye to measure with 
the other how much he can stand to 
lose again for art's sake — and ne 
knows his arts and his economics; 
Carlos Fernandez, president of tie 
Columbian Club, another "regular 
guy in spite of being a millionaire" ; 
and an assortment of notables in mag* 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 



P. E. N. FOR PEACE continued 



avoid friction but we also 
should avoid great occa- 
sions/' 

The final Charter came 
into existence at the Con- 
gress at Copenhagen in 1948 
—the product of the whole 
histdry of the P,E.N. and of 
all the past resolutions that 
had been so heatedly argued 
out. It had required alert- 
ness as well as idealism, for 
good Intentions sometimes 
can be almost as damaging 
as deliberate destructiveness. 
Two years before the Char- 
ter was adopted, for in- 
stance, the American delega- 
tion offered a resolution re- 
affirming the RKN. cham-' 
pionship of free speech but 
qualifying it with the phrase 
"so far as it is consistent 
with public order/' The pe- 
rennial justification of ty- 
rannical censorship always 
has been the plea of "public 
order" and the French and 
Belgium delegations prompt- 
ly moved to have the reso- 
lution altered. 

The delegates to the Con- 
gresses do not, of course, 
spend 'all their ttoe weighing 
matters of policy. The yearly 
meetings are also delightful 
social events, a gathering of 
writers from all over the 
world who want to enjoy one 
another's ideas and company 
and to exchange notes on 
the problems of the craft. 



During the rest of the year 
there is a great deal of in- 
formal visiting back and 
forth, with each P.KN- 
member made welcome in 
any country he visits that 
has a REN. center. 

Most writers enjoy talk- 
ing to their fellow profes- 
sionals especially if the dis- 
cussion is brisk, well inform- 
ed „a n d argumentative. 
When the American center 
gave its first dinner in 1922 t 



Journalism allows its 
readers to imtness history. 
Fiction gipes its readers 
the opportunity to live it. 

— JOHN HERSEY 



at the Coffee House Ciub in 
New York, the youthful edi- 
tor of The Bookman noted 
with approval the liveliness 
of the conversation. "If there 
were not some good quarrel- 
ing; f# he remarked on one 
occasion or the din- 
ners, "they would be fail- 
ures;" When he himself be- 
came president in ho 
started a system of his own 
to assure some "good quar- 
reling 1 —a -panel of speakers 



at each monthly 'dinner who 
were chosen for the intelli- 
gence and vigor of their 
opinions. They were firmly 
e Slowed five minutes apiece, 
and a brass elephant bell 
from India kept them from 
indulging in overtime. 

. HE increased social live- 
1 liness that John Farrar 
brought to the American 
Center in 1951 coincided* 
with a period in which the 
United States was gathering 
momentum in its swing to- 
ward internationalism. The 
headquarters of the United 
Nations is an outward sign 
of a new state of things. 
Some people say that writ- 
ers are so individualistic 
that they cannot stick toge- 
ther. Nevertheless, thou- 
sands of writers of alien cul- 
tures and differing points 
of view have stayed toge- 
ther in a world organization 
for 35 years and, what is 
more to the point, have nev* 
er betrayed the basic ideal- 
ism that brought them toge- 
ther in the first place. 

Writers have their me- 
lancholy moments, and they 
sometimes feel -they have 
very little influence in a 
gray world of armaments 
and power politics. As Tots- 
ter said in 1944 t "We can- 
not hope to cut any ice," but 
he added cheerAitiy, "we 
may succeed in melting a lit- 
tle," and it is to that mag- 
nificently realistic objective 
that the International P.E.N, 
has addressed itself. 

— March ette Chute 



(fid ** UtAMty* uj&* ail— 



PRUDENTIAL RANK AND TRUST COMPANY 



head office: 
branches: 



cable addrewi 



plaza golti, manila 

angeies, pampanga 
malabon. rizal 
olongapo, zambales 
no. 2227 legarda, manila 
FRUBANTC 



Let's 

Reflect 
a Little WW 




by Manuel Quezon 



as broadcast over DZWS 



MUCH of civilized living consists of doing things according 
to a set of rules called good manners. Fundamental 
right and wrong ordinarily are not involved in themselves. 
It makes absolutely no difference whether you use a spoon* 
a fork or a knife to put a piece of meat into your mouth. 
But it is human psychology to do frequently repeated actions 
in more or less the same way. This is so true that those who 
decide not to follow convention in reality adopt the rule not 
to follow rules. Going back to the piece of meat, today 
we are surprised if we see someone spear a piece of n™at 
with a knife to eat it. Still, in itself it really makes no dif- 
ference at all T except perhaps for the danger of cutting one's 
mouth. The case is entirely different if oru> uses that same 
knife to spear an innocent human being deliberately. The 
act would be wrong even if a big group of people got toge- 
ther and said it was all right. 

Because of the conventional value of manners, some dis- 
regard them or even treat the subject with contempt. We 
are familiar with the phrases "a diamond in the rouph" and 
"he really has a heart of gold." It sometimes takes sustain- 
ed effort to dig deep enough to find that heart of gold buried 
under thick layers of crude manners. 

People who have a low. regard for good manners are 
frequently sincere about it. Some people identify politeness 
*with e/fermmatenrss or inferiority complex. They miss the 
point entirely. 

Good manners am anything but effeminate. Here the 
old Spanish proverb applies— "Jo cortes no quita k> vatiewte" 
{ one's bravery is not lessened a bit by politeness). 

Least of all are good manners a sign of inferiority com' 
plex. On the contrary, they impart dignity to a person. 
One of the most obvious signs of a man* who has money and 
little else is his faulty manners. Today we frequently see 
a group of noisy individuals lumber into a restaurant, spi awl 
all over the chairs at a table, summon a waiter roughly, 
gorge themselves and pull out a big fat roll of paper bills to 
pay. They think they are showing everyone in the restau- 
rant how much they are worth. But the poor waiter who 
politely serves them shows that he is worth much more 
than all of them put together. It is these people who h 
inferiority complex— an inferiority complex is an inferiority 
complex, even when turned inside out. 

, It is unfortunate that there seems to be a widespread 
tendency to give up fee Filipino tradition of good mcxL^rv 
and mutual respect Many consider it ail right to be rude, 
to be offensive in their humor. They think that politeness 

<*nd respect are against the democratic spirit 

When a man has to depend on rudeness to make an im- 
piession, or to show that he is as good as anyone else, he 
deserves our pity. He impresses no one. And as to show- 
ing that he is as gdod as the next, he is fooling himself. Er* 
certainly is fooling no one else. Our tradition of good man- 
ners and mutual respect is worth more than ail the shiny 
cars and baubles, which often are considered a fitting subs- 
titute. 




lkm\ miss 
the important ones, 

Take note of these 
twenty masterpieces 
of modem fiction 
that should be 
in the library 



of every 
well-read person 




The Grapes of Wrath 

bp John Steinbeck, 1939 

This great document of the thirties 
will heJp the present prosperity -nur- 
tured gH*eration to understand the 
minds of their older contemporaries 
to whom the Depression was a more 
disturbing experience than war. The 
members of the Joad family, wnose 
struggles and misfortunes and pov- 
erty in those cruel years is the theme 
of the novel, serve to remind us of 
our common humanity and move us 
to admire the patience and fortitude 
of the average man. 

Man*s Fate 

by Andre Malnaux, 1934 

Set in revolutionary (and counter- 
revolutionary) Ciiina in 1926. Marts 
Fobs, like Kosstler's Darkness at 
Noon and Silone's Bread and Wine, 
examines communist promise and ac- 
complishment It dramatically por- 
trays the revolutionist who sacrifices 
the present, himself, and others, in 
the belief that he is aiding humanity 
to obtain a happier future, but who 
fails to see that he is sacrificing ends 
for means. 

i, Claudius 

brj Robert Graves, 1934 

One of the best of the modern his- 
torical novels. It is remarkable not 
only for the scholarship which is the 
foundation for its convincing evoca- 
tion of the times, hut also for the 
revelation of the character of the cen- 
tral figure. It serves to remind us that 
the men of the past were similar to 
the men of the present and that our 
troubles are eternal. 

rgOTTKMBKR 26, 1998 



lire Sound and the Fury 

btf WSIiam FavJOcmr, 1929 

Using the radically different view- 
points of three sans — Benjy, Jason, 
and Quentin Compson — Faulkner 
shows the disintegration of an aristo- 
cratic Southern family and the wrek- 
age of a oace-satisfactory way of life 
on the shoals of modernity. There i& 
f mt mm to the stony* however, than 
this. In the stream of corasciauEiiess 
of the idiot Benjy, the author tries to 
comprehend a \iie of pure, timeless 
sensation. In Quenttn, we are shown a 
sensitiveness that leads To despair and 
suicide. And in Jason we see a nar- 
rowness and cruelty which assure 
survival but which -cast doubt upon 
the value of a survival bought under 
these terms, 

Swann V Way (The Remem- 
brance of Tilings Past) 

by Mortal Proust, 
1913 

Regarded by all critics as one of 
the supremely great works of the 
twentieth century, this novel explores 
characters of extraordinary complex- 
ity with marvelous subtlety and pene- 
tration. It presents the world as seen 
from the inner consciousness of the 
individual, in such a way as to create 
a special intimacy between the char- 
acter and the reader. Because of its 
viewpoint and the unconventional na- 
ture of much of its material, it was 
important in the development of the 
modern novel* 

Ulysses 

by James Joyce, 1922 

One of the greatest novels ever, 
written. With Proust's Tiie Remem- 
brance of Things Past and Mann's Th>s 
Magic Mountain^ it stands in the very 
forefront not only of modern litera- 
ture but of the literature of 'all time* 
It is almost impossible to exaggerate 
me effect of this work on all succeed- 
ing novelists. It gave them a way of 
exploring the soul of man by use of 
interior monologue, myth, and sym- 
bol. It showed great virtuosity in ex- 
ploiting and revitalizing the English 
language. 

The Plague 

by Albert Camus, 1948 

On the surface, the novel is ac- 
count of a visitation of bubonic plague 
to Oran, Algeria. Underneath the 
more obvious story (which is grip- 
ping in itself), it is an allegory of 
man's fate The plague may be inter- 
preted as life itself, and the different 
characters as different ways of res- 
ponding to the problem of human mi- 
sery. Camus says that the means of 
coping with the irrationality of the 
human condition is not to be found 
in reason or in any fixed moral 
standard, Man cannot be sure that he 
is acting for good, but he can make 
an effort not to add to suffering. Hu- 
man contact is necessary for every 
man. Like the character Rambert in 
the novel, we can find spiritual com- 
fort only in combating a common 
evil. 



iHk ISflin Alsti Rises 
Ernest Hemingway^ 1926 

The horrors of the First World 
War, which seemed to expose alt the 
ideals of Christian civilization as hoi-' 
low pretenses, made the twenties a 
period of despair for many who Mt 
that life had lost its meaning, A con- 
siderable number of the most creative 
spirits of the time felt there was no 
place for them in an America which 
liad repudiated the league of Na- 
tions and elected Harding to replace 
Wilson. They lingered on in Paris as 
expatriates- The Sun AUo Rises gave 
voice to their disillusionment and to 
that of a whole generation. 




The Trial 

by Franz Kafka, 
1937 

Although many have seen in this 
book a symbolic representation of 
man's relation to God, its chief appeal 
and influence has rested on the qual- 
ity of horror it evokes at the help- 
lessness of modern man in the face 
of authorities and social processes he 
cannot understand. 

The Heart of the Matter 

by Graham Greene, 1948 

The story is laid on the humid West 
African coast It concerns the strug- 
gle of a virtuous police officer with 
his conscience when he finds himself 
caught in a conflict between loyalty 
and duty. For unselfish motives, he 
chooses death,though he thereby loses 
heaven. The novel is one more state- 
ment of the bewildering complexity of 
modern life. 



The Magic Motrntaoi 

by Thomas Mann, 1925 

Generally regarded as one of 4he 
greatest novels of the twentieth cen- 
tury, this philosophical novel, set In 
a Swiss sanatorium just before the 
First World War, goes beyond physi- 
cal disease to reveal the moral disease 
of the age. It is a landmark in the 
development of the symbolic novel. 



by John Do* Passoi, 
1930, 1932, 1936 

This trilogy presents a complete 
cross section of American life from 
the beginning of the century to the 
start of the Depression. It is the wid- 
est panorama of modern America at- 
tempted by any writer. We see a do- 
zen major characters — from a public 
relatkms executive and a movie star 
to a labor organizer and a common 
seaman — swept by these decades' in- 
creasingly turbulent currents through 
war and peace. 

A Passage to India 

by E* AT. Forster, 1924 

A thoughtful and sensitive consid- 
eration of the clash of cultures as im- 
perialism recedes and peoples long in 
subjection to alien overlords struggle 
to assert their independence and to re- 
establish themselves in their old way a 
with only the shattered remain 
their former customs. A large element 
of the book is the attempt to under- 
stand Oriental religion and to present 
it fairly- 

Women in Love 
by 0. H. iowrente, 
1921 

This is one of the most imports t 
novels to appear after World War L 
In it Lawrence expresses with eh- 
acteristic vigor and passion his hif 
ly personal philosophy, Ms rebellion 
against the structured society which 
he felt was stifling man- The charac- 
ters in the novel represent different 
degrees of success and failure in fac 
♦ing and coping with this problem. 
The most successful, Lawrence sug- 
gests, are those who achieve the m 
intense, enveloping, whole relation 
ship between male and female and be- 
tween man and nature. These alon* 
sustain themselves as individuals, i- 
filling themselves, asserting their 
uniqueness, and rejecting our corrupt* 
mg civilization. 




For Soft Curls 
Specify 



and save your hair 



COLD WAVE 
LOTIONS 



BUFFAL 



neys would be advantageous, 

GENERAL OUTOOKf On the material 
side you need to plan carefully, but 
tnere is no indication of disaster or 
setbacks during the twelve months. 
If you are hoping to get on in the 
world you will find women more 
kindly allies than men. Travel if you 
can. If you cannot, do your best to 
keep the family atmosphere serene* 



CAPRICORN 

The Goat 

DEC. 21 -JANUARY 19 



YOUR 1959 program is likely to be 
a varied one. On the one hand 
you should be going fall speed for 
success in your career and the ac- 
cumulation of money. On the other 
hrnd there is much hard work ahead 
of you and probably some difficul- 
ties of a personal kind. It is fortu- 
nate that you have unusual tenacity 
and so will be able to face up to any 
difficult moments, 

FINANCES: These should be easy 
enough, generally speaking, but dur- 
ing 1959 you should aim at improve 
: ng your reputation, rather than add- 
ing to your bank balance. It would 
be better to take a job that leads you 
on the right path in life than to con- 
citrate on soemthing that is well 
paid but not particularly good for 
you. 

Money will come in, other than 
through your working life. Possibly 
family conditions will improve and 
relatives could help you. . There is a 
definite possibility of legacies or 
windfalls of some kind that will help 
; m to cope not only with your usual 
expenditure, but also with holidays 
and personal luxuries. 

FAMILY LIFE: Here you must face 
the possibility of change, Whatever 
your relatives may try to do, don't 
criticize them too much. There must 
be alterations in your present way 
of life and you would be wise to ac- 
cept them. Give your loved ones full 
range to do as seems good to them. 

FRIENDSHIPS AND MARRIAGE: So- 
cially you are now in the midst of a 
very interesting period. You have 
already made some useful contacts 
and they will prove invaluable as 
x9ZB goes by. If you are contemplat- 
ing marriage you will get an oppor- 
tunity to settle down this year, in 
spite of a certain amount of opposi- 
tion to your plans* For most people 
born in this period, though, friend* 
ships will matter more than intimate 
Delations, 

HEALTH: You could build up your 
health successfully, particularly in the 
laSt six months of the year. Any 
health difficulties would be obvious 



s 



e 
o 
u 



(Soon/ l*v~tt<e' WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 

If widowhood should come 



USE 



Suave 




FOR MEN 
AND WOMEN 



Don't ruin your hair with greasy 
and oily hairdressings. Keep it in 
place all day long with Suave, the only 
hairdressing that is grease less 
and soluble in water. Start using 
Suave today. 



See HELENE CURTIS TV Pro- 
gram, "Alfred Hitchcock Pre- 
sents," over DZAQ-TV, 7;3fl*8:G* 
every Sunday evening, it |« tJi* 
best TV program now! 



World-famous products are 
a vail Able at all beauty salons, 
beauty parlor supply dealers, - 
supermarkets, r osmetic an* 
drug counters. 



JANUARY 2. 1B59 



17 



DEMOCRACY has become so thoroughly Imbedded in 
our consciousness that we naturally tend to identify 
th* democratic forfn of government with just government, 
to the exclusion of any other. form. However, democra- 
cy is not synonymous with just government, but rather 
the safest mons for insuring just government. 

What is Just government? It is a government that 
is just in its possession and exercise of power, as well as 
in the philosophy behind that power and its exercise. In 
judging the merits of a particular government we must 
ask a fundamental question: Does it, or does it not, re- 
cognize any limits to the power of the State? Does it, 
or does it not, recognize that there are areas of human 
life outside the scope ol its power? In this lies a far 
more basic difference between governments than that be- 
tween power in the hands of one, a few or many. It is 
the touchstone that first tells us whether a particular gov- 
ernment can possibly &e good. 

When a government is founded on the premise that 
it has a monopoly of ail power and all right over every 
aspect of human lif£, it is basically unjust, It destroys 
the very concept of human nature, of human life which 
a government ought to protect It reduces men to the 
status of so many cogs with a meaning only in relation 



Let's Reflect a 



to trie macninery of the State, nothing else. The very 
notion of human dignity and human personality is erased, 
It was such an absolute concept of the state that gave 
rise to the attempted extermination of a whole people in 
the case of Nazi Germany^ 

On the other hand, a government founded on the 
conviction that its powers have definite limits, beyond 
which all attempted exercise of power Is an abuse — such 
a government has passed the first test for a just govern- 
ment, A government must recognize that its field of 



Littl. 



by Manuel Quezon 



as broadcast over D2WS 



in the first three months of 1959 and 
would tend to fade out in the middle 
yf the year, Remember that your 
weakness arise more from semi-cro- 
nic conditions, such as anaemia or 
arthritis. 

TRAVEL: As a rule Sun Capricornians 
are not eager travelers. There are 
indications, though, that you would 
move about more than usual this 
year, either early in the period or 
towards your next birthday. There 
is also the likelihood that you would 
an opportunity to move away 
from your present neighborhood or 
to go to another country. 

GENERAL OIHIOOK: You should be 
making great headway in the world 
in 1959 and the chances are that you 
will be better known by Christmas, 
Your income will be satisfactory, 
though not as much as you would 
wish. Windfalls are likely during 
the course pt the year. Your emo- 
tional life should be pleasant enough, 
provided you make the most of 
friendships that are already deve- 
loping. Don't force changes, though 
you may have to accept one or two 
in the family group. 



WHAT IS THERE FOR YOU IN COMING ISSUES 
OF THE WEEKLY "WOMEN'S MAGAZINE? 



AQUARIUS 

The Witerbearer 

JANUARY 20-FEB. 18 



PEOPLE born under this Sign of 
the Zodiac have been experien- 
cing a great deal of tension for some 
lime past. For many of them chan- 




ges materialized in 1958. If they 
did not, then early 1959 should bring 
some readjustments. Onee they have 
been made, existence should be calm- 
. er and the conditions at the end of 
the year should be pretty favorable, 

FINANCES; From this point of view 
life is due to improve. Though you 
may have to take certain chances 
absurd a year or two ago, you will 
not be short of money. Indeed you 
are likely to build up reserves and 
these will serve you well if you are 
thinking of launching out in a new 
way of life next year. 

It would be foolish, though, to 
worry too much about the distant 
future. You will gain security 
through inheritance or through the 
family at the end of 1959, but, where 
your job is concerned, you must take 
a few risks. However well you may 
be doing, don't hope for too much 
permanence, 

FAMILY LIFE: Here, again, troubled 
moments will loom up in the next 
two months of the year and to a less- 
er extent towards Christmas time. 
There must be certain changes in 
your domestic group before times 
become more settled Don't resist 
alterations in your daily round or 
try to tie relatives too closely to you. 



a miracle 
to remember 

The Story of 
Bernadette Soubirous 



FRIENDSHIPS AND MARRIAGE: If you 

are planning marriage, you will get 
your opportunity to marry before the 
year is half through,. Before you 
can achieve happiness, though, there 
is a decision to be made that you 
have possibly hoped to avoid* So- 
cially you will seem to be doing well 
and you will realize by the end of 
the year that you have made some 
useful friends. Don't forget those 
who have been good to you in the 
past, since they will still be helpful 
and comforting this year. 

HEALTH: You may be stiff ering from 
emotional exhaustion at the moment 
or from a certain amount of heart 
strain. In 1959 you will be wiser to 
look after yourself a littld more than 
usual and to avoid fatigue as much 
as you conveniently can. The months 
when you might be more conscious 
of health strain would be February, 
May, August and November. 

TRAVEL; This could have developed 
late in 1958 and you should be on the 
move again this year. If you are 
planning journeys, aim at completing 
them before the end of August, It 
would be wise to be near home in 
the last three months of the year. 

GENERAL OUTLOOKtFrom a material 
angle this should be a more prosper- 



ous year than yoti have had lately, 
Moves and opportunities in the m% 
die of the period should do you a 
world of good in your career. 3 
could also gain through windfalls, in 
personal life there may be one 
two changes still ahead, but, once 
they are completed, your mfcd will L 
at rest- One old friend vf J \ become 
nearer and dearer to you r he year 
progresses* 



PISCES 

The Rsfc 



FEBRUARY 19-MARCH 20 



r PlMES are improving for peo^ 
J- born under the Sign of the, Fish- 
es. Early in 1959 they will emerge 
from what has beenri a period of res- 
triction and testing and, by the end 
of the year, they should be doing wriL 
If you are a Sun Piscean be patient 
for a month or two- You will ft 
that after that you am all set for ha? 
pier days, 

FINANCES: There should have bt 
evidence of security in the 
twelve months. The outlook grows 
steadily better throughout 1959 ?nd 
is exceptionally good after Ma 
or April, and again after September 
Do all you can to save, since yew 
have a full and exciting life ahead 
of you and you will need to spend 
lavishly. 

There is every prospect of a in- 
heritance or money out of the bl 
Also, as the months go by t you will 
realize that you are better equipped 
for money making than you rea * 
i7e, Events of the coming ye&r 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 




activity is limlted^-and limited not because the govern- 
ment chooses to inhibit itself, but because the nature of 
government is itself limited. A just government must re- 
cognize that its people are not .solely parts of the whole, 
without any meaning aside from the whole. There are 
aspects of a human being that are entirely outside the 
scope of the State, whether or not the State chooses to 
recognize the fact. A man's right to develop his person- 
ality, to seek his own perfection and his happiness within 
the limits of morality, to acquire the truth, to perform 
his duties to God — these, and others, are rights which the 
State cannot invade without the greatest injustice. 

In itself it is indifferent whether government be in 
the hands of one, a few or many— it may be just or un- 
just. Even a democracy may be basically unjust if the 
idea of inviolable rights independent of the State is not 
accepted. It does not help to say that the people agree to 
grant certain rights or to suppress them, all in a democra- 
tic fashion. Where fundamental rights are concerned, it 
does no good for the people to attempt to create them* A 
group of people without such fundamental rights cannot 
give themselves those, rights by mere agreement, No one 
gives that which he does not have in any way. It is a 
matter of recognizing rights already in existence. And 



then any attempt 10 abolish such rights does not affect 
their existence one whit. It merely makes the government 
unjust 

On the other hand a government of one man may 
recognize the basic human rights and not invade them* 
As the one man governing could be governing alone by the 
legitimate mandate of a democratic majority, in view of 
the needs of the country, how could we doubt the justice 
of the process? 

Nevertheless, In practice a democratic government 
gives a greater degree of safety in the matter of just gov- 
ernment It is very unlikely that people at large will ad- 
mit that they have no Inviolable rights. 

But we must be continually on our guard against the 
tendency to violate rights simply on the basis of majority 
rule. That is mob rule, a pure matter of greater physical 
power, which does not of itself grant moral power. 

We must see to it that our leaders, In the exercise of 
their powers, do not pass measures destructive of the hu- 
man person. When our government begins to act as though 
a thing were just simply because they, the people's repre- 
sentatives, so desire, we must beware. We may retain the 
outward form of democracy but actually be under the ty- 
ranny of the mob. 



a ould do rouen to build up your seit- 
confidence. 

FAMILY Itttz There is a house move 
i prospect, unless you have uproot- 
ed yourself late in 1958. Them is a 
possibility that you could convert 
your present house or in some way 
radically alter your present way of 
lite. It is highly improbable, though, 
That you would be allowed to stay 
In your present groove or carry on 
>s you have done in the last few 
years, 

^'ENOSHIFS AND MARRIAGE; Chan- 
ges will work out for good and you 
leed not dread them. If you are 
thinking of marrying or re-marrying 
vou will take the first step towards 
such an undertaking half-way 
through this year. Until Easter be 
?s patient as you can with friends 
nd relatives who could be tiresome 
^nd exacting. Don't take on any 
fresh responsibilities this year. 

HEALTH: Sun Pisceans' health is 
usually a problem, but in 1959 this 
s not likely to get out of hand, Pro- 
:ided you take reasonable care of 
aurself, particularly in June and 
September, you should have, few, if 
any, physical setbacks. 

TRAVEL: Opportunities to travel will 
undoubtedly come your way and you 
should take advantage of them. You 
will not only make money through 
)urneys f but you will also make 
useful social contacts, , However in- 
convenient travel may be, seize all 
*lie chances that come your way, 

GENERAL OUTLOOK: In material 
maters you are now heading for very 
°ood times- You may have a few 
moments of doubt or difficulty early 
m the year, but they will be short 
uved* As your prospects improve, 
so will your connections abroad 
strengthen. Where people are con- 
cerned, be patient for a time and 
tfon't commit yourself too far. There 

f e changes ahead and, when they 
do occur, they will bring you greater 
^ppiness than you can at the mo- 

lent visualize. 



TOMMY SANDS, capitoi records' star, current hit/SING BOY SING" 





Vbui can always tell a HALO girl' 

Her. hair has thai*look~agairi look 



You can always tell a Halo G>;\ t 
You can teli by the shine of her hair. 
The magic glow of a Halo Girl, 
Goes with her everywhere. 

, Hold's dean sing ingredients are the 

■mildest, purest * possible, 

* Halo** rich b righten i ng -ond-*mooth inj 
father adds satiny shine to your hair, 

HALO glorifies as it eleans . . . only 89$ everywhere. 




19 



JANUARY 2, 1959 



there 



is 



^ * ,he just o««ome «/ «*> 



and this trag* 

preoccupation dating Christmas 
WM "* reajfy 



Unir nporta m 



6e. 



to 



by Gloria Garehitorena-Goloy 




FIRST, it comes as a vague 
hint of fatigue. It is 
hard to tell whether one 
teets it In the bones or in the 
muscles — so vagrant and 
diffused it is, But one rec- 
ognizes it as a sense of real, 
very real, physical tiredness. 

Soon, the feeling develops 
into a kind of lassitude that 
is more than just physical. 
It is as though the body, 
•sing its vigor, seeks to pass 
o tha soul a correspond- 
ing deflation of energy and 
animation. One vainly tries 
to rest or sleep off the (phys- 
ical) fatigue in an effort to 
shake off, too, the (spiritual) 
ennui, but failing in circum- 
venting it, one plunges anew 
into frenzied activity, regard- 
less of the consequent lapse 
into physical exhaustion- 
Something like this will 
happen to us come the day 
after Three Kings and on the 
days thereafter. 

By turns, we 'win brim 
over with exceeding self-suf- 
ficiency, then with distress* 
ing listiessness; in one mo- 
ment, we shall have reached 
the acme of fulfillment and in 
the next, wonder about its 
worth. 

Whether this is an ill-de- 
served emotional aftermath 
is beside the point, although 
one must safely infer that 
indulgence in the holiday 
bacchanalia can only lead not 
to its gradual dissipation 
but to its abrupt curtailment. 



Eventually, this feeling be- 
comes identified as a strong 
sense of loss, which, while 
apparently an fJJogical con- 
sequence, seems to be the 
closest representation of the 
post-holiday mood, 

NOW, Christmas is hardly 
the event to associate 
with anything remotely de- 
pressing. Indeed, Christmas 
being what it is — the birth 
of the Redeemer — it should 
by all means be heralded 
among men with a greater 
rejoicing than the angels 
stirred up among themselves, 
considering that men have so 
much to profit from the Na- 
tivity than do the angels. 

But that, I suppose, is only 
to be expected since our idea 
of the Christmas holidays 
and our manner of partici- 
pating in it hardly conforms 
with the spiritual value it 
properly deserves. 

Consider how a typical 
family anticipates the coming 
of Christmas. 

Weeks in advance, the 
mother shops for some of the 
items included in the aU-Im- 
portant L.N.P. (List of Nec- 
essary Purchases) . What 

are they? 
■ 

There is the inevitable 
Chinese iem which will hang 
at its appointed place in the 
kitchen for all the household 
to view ana sniff in order to 
be filled with the proper 
Yuletide spirit. Mama must 



also bring home from the 
market a couple of young 
fowls — as well as a pig, if 
shp can afford one. They 
will be fed and fattened and 
pampered, living in style, we 
might say, until the Eve of 
Christmas when everything 
will have to come to a swift 
and alas, bloody end* (In un- 
feeling parody, perhaps of 
the Immolated Lamb?) 

A varied assortment of 
fruits, nuts, delicacies, etc., 
will also be brought home 
from the shops, as if in antic- 
ipation of the enormous ap- 
petites which every family 
member suddenly develops 
overnight. It is perhaps with 
this prospect in mind that 
Mama strives to create an 
impression of abundance by 
hauling in an infinite variety 
of appetisers. 

While Mama takes care of 
her culinary obligations. Pa- 
pa, (if he is the homebody, 
do-it-yourself-t y p e ) busies 
himself with his craftwork- 
Now is the time for all good 
men like him to come to the 
aid of their children who will* 
think nothing of stringing 
up all shapes and all sizes of 
lanterns, and the season's 
thingamajigs in every aper- 
ture in the house. Where be- 
fore, the star-shaped parol 
was the traditional Christ- 
mas decorative motif, today 
one finds huge fishes, clever- 
ly contrived flowers, gigantic 
asterisks, fantastic abstrac- 



tions, and life-sized Santa 
Clauses hung like woe-begone 
monstrosities on their re- 
spective scaffolds. It has got- 
ten to be so that one wonders 
whether man's relish for this 
small-scale sadism come 
Christmastime is not actual- 
ly a betrayal of his ancient 
guilt complex for having 
hung on a cross, centuries 
ago, the guiltless Nazarene. 
It is pathetic that, in at- 
tempting to demonstrate a 
convincing show of comme- 
morating His yearly Birth, 
man merely succeeds in pro- 
jecting a revised forecast of 
the Crucifixion. 

But let's not spoil the Yule- 
tide mood by dwelling on the 
macabre. For all we know, 
our participation in the sea- 
sonal festivies may really 
be nothing more than a cul- 
tural hangover,, in which we 
may harmlessly indulge. 

So, the lanterns are hung, 
the food is stored away, the 
Christmas tree is set up and 
the seasonal paraphernalia is 
brought out once more for 
the annual display. Neglect- 
ed corners of the house get 
a thorough cleaning out and 
the floors are burnished to 
high polish. Tables, book- 
shelves and any box-like 
contraption acquire their re- 
spective covers while flowers, 
both the artificial and the 
real, suddenly chortle the 
frequently ignored glass con- 
tainers on the walls. 



The curtains, too, are not 
to be left out. How drab the 
house would look during 
holidays if it is not rigged 
up with crisp, new curtains 
blaring their loud, Christmas- 
sy colors! And with almost 
every house putting on its 
best appearance, one would 
think a nationwide Home- 
Beautif ication-Week had been 
launched. 

AT about this time, fa- 
vorite dressmakers and 
haberdasheries have their 
hands full with orders for 
new clothes for the sea 
Patrons come in for fittings 
not only for one dress but for 
three — one for the Misa de 
Gallo, another for the New 
Year's Eve shindig, and a 
third for the family reunion 
on the Feast of the Epipha- 
ny. The more affluent q<*es 
will probably have more than 
the usual sartorial repertoire, 
depending on the number of 
occasions at which they will 
be worn. Needless to say, the 
quality of the clothing ma- 
terial will be luxurious be- 
cause on Christmas, only the 
best will be donned, even if 
it is worth a fortune. For on 
Christmas, the family, strut- 
ting around in its special 
holiday wear (clothes, shoes, 
and all) must rate an appre- 
ciative sizing up — foetA**r 
still, one that provokes an 

continued on page 26 



SO 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 



Let's Reflect 
a Little 

by Manuel Quezon as broadcast over dzws 



DO we really want democracy? I sometimes wonder. We 
talk enough about it We are certainly vocal enough 
about our rights and prerogatives as free citizens of a 
free republic, We talk about our individual rights ana 
how the government cannot do this, that or the other to 
us. The government cannot deprive us of this, that or 
■ the other thing. Our constitutional rights- • . and so on 
and so forth. 

Well and good. But that alone will not ensure de- 
mocracy. Hie general affirmation of rights alone will 
lead not to democracy, but to anarchy. After all, de- 
mocracy is a form of government— and any government 
must maintain unity. If we give weight exclusively to 
individual rights, which tend to pull society apart* we shall 
not have democracy, because we shall not have even gov- 
ernment, or at best we shall have weak, ineffective gov- 
ernment, which is almost equivalent to having no govern- 
ment at alL 

In life we do not get anything truly worthwhile for 
nothing. If we want democracy we must be willing to do 
what democracy requires. We must be as deeply con- 
vinced about our duties as about our rights. 

Some of those duties are difficult to identify, because 
they are not marked out by legislation- Such is the obli- 
gation to be well informeS about issues of common in- 
terest, to form an intelligent judgment on them and, if 
necessary, to express that judgment — in other words, to 
form a sound and vigorous public opinion. 

Public opinion is vital to a democracy. In fact, de- 
mocracy has on occasion been defined as government by 
public opinion. The idea of democracy is that the whole 
people should have some part In government In a re- 
presentative democracy, such as ours, the part of the 
people consists in choosing their representatives who shall 
govern and in exerting influence on those representatives 
so that the latter, once elected, will govern according to 
the mind of the people and for the benefit of the people. 
The process of choosing elective officials will be a failure 
if the people are* not well informed about the character, 
the jrecord and the platform of each individual running 
for office. Above all, the process will be a failure if the 
people do not have a sound set of principles against which 
to measure candidates and public issues. And the people 
will not be able to influence those who are elected to gov- 
ern unless the people know the facts and have sound prin- 
ciples—and unless the elected officials realize that public 
opinion is a force to be reckoned with. 

We must confess that if our government and our way 
Of life suffer from marked defects, we must lay the blame 
largely on the lack of a strong and sound public opinion. 
There is as yet too much apathy in the citizens — even on 
issues of vital public interest. 

True, we cannot expect a well-formed public opinion 
in the large uneducated section of the citizenry, But we 
do not get the response we should — even from those in 
a position to form a judgment on public affairs. 

Perhaps people are just too lazy to gather facts and 
draw conclusions. Perhaps disappointment over the ob- 
vious blemishes on politics is to blame. But, whatever 
the cause, we must take an interest in the affairs that 
concern us all- It must be an interest kept free as much 
as possible from passions and i noons i deration. 

We are seriously remiss* in the fulfilment of our civic 
. duty if we 3d not take part in public life at least to the 
extent of forming a sound opinion on public issues and 
expressing that opinion if need be. Is it too much to ask 
that we put some of our time into acquiring sound prin- 
ciples to be used as criteria for judging public issues? is 
it too much to ask that we gather the facts and see how 
they measure up to those principles? If it is too much 
to ask, it is also too much to expect our democracy to 
survive in anything but name. 



FOR WOMEN 
OF FASHION 




POMPEIA 

Perfume 

A creation of L. T. Piver of Paris 
who also brings you POMPEIA Powder 

Available at all leading cosmetic counters. 



OCEANIC COMMERCIAL, INC. 

299 Escotto 
Manila, Philippines 



FOR V 
STRONG 
BONES... 




DUTCH BABY milk 



The Very Best - at the Lowest Price Ever! 




from Holland 



NOVEMBER 14, 1958 



WHERE A COUNTRY BEGINS 



by Yay Marking 

BULLYING is the bane of the 
backwoods. It was bad enough 
twenty years ago* Now it's worse 
To be kicked around by a lot of little 
ones is no better than being stomped 
on by a big one. Tyranny is tyran- 
ny. 

Time was every province had one 
big bully, rooted to his knees, stretch- 
ing clear to the sky; or two medi- 
um-sized bullies with horns peren- 
nially locked; or three bullies of as- 
sorted sizes, the smallest, of neces- 
sity the smartest, maneuvering the 
other two, battle-scarred and punch- 
drunk too, into a mutual defeat that 
would be his silver-plattered victory. 

There is no such thing today as a 
really big one, as bullies go* One by 
one, they make their stand and go 
under, in Cavite, in Negros, in Viz- 
caya- They are not a dying breed. 
They are a breed deliberately killed 
off, one way or another, under the 
auspices of a new ideology, then mul- 
tiplied and reborn. In the wake of 
the felled molave comes the crop of 
poisonous mushrooms. 

Old patterns and old habits are 
with us yet. The uttermost-top long 
having been the goal, there's still, 
emotionally, only one way to go: up, 
i \ a staright line up, whoosh. 1 , all the 
up, -angf, preferably with the 
t on somebody's head, and more 
feet feeling for a head than there 
are heads. 

Now, a multiplicity of bullies Is a 
good sign, if you believe in signs, 
more, if you believe in democracy. 
It indicates the break-through, the 
adjustment of the individual to self- 
government, the affirmation at least 
of spirit if not of principle, so the 
wrong way is still the right idea — 
what's good for one is good for all 
or it's bad for everybody: comes the 
great regimentation, admittedly, but 
by free will, not by force, which 
again is the great difference- As 
imperfect human beings (this is the 
qtorm cellar where humanity hides 
when it can't finish what it starts), 
we feel it our mortal right to be 
wrong and our privilege to be stupid. 
Democracy is the latest thing we've 
started that we can't stop. It began 
as a theory. Now it's an assembly 
line that has produced bullies by the 
million* It must in the end be the 
machinery to scrap its own product, 
or the next time we come out of the 
cellar there won't be anything left. 
The province that doesn't have a 
scorn or a hundred or a thousand 
bullies banded together or breaking 
up or reforming, trying to keep each 
other down but mostly having to keep 
the people down not to go under 
themselves, is a province either un- 
awakened or never there. 

All this churning up and trampling 
down makes living in the province so- 
dally unbearable: If the latest brand 
Gf bullies just settled their little 

12 



struggle for power among themselves, 
fair enough, the best gladiators are 
bom, not made, but as part of the 
ammo they scoop up and cannonbali 
the helpless bystander That's what 
makes provincial living a misery in- 
stead of the spectator sport it ought 
to be. 

The only cure for a bully is a big- 
ger one. People are beginning to 
idealize this, and to do this or that 
about it- When they can't produce a 
bigger bully locally, they import one 
from a nearby province, where some- 
body else grows them burlier, or they 
send direct to Manila for a product 
more surly than burly but quicker 
in the head, better armed and, if 
known to the police, also huiured to 
them* Or they invite a hero to their 
hometown and maybe the hero gets 
a taste of something more than the 
local fiesta. 

This last alternative happened by 
accident. Right in the guerrilla 
family, too, and no better place for 



it to happen: what "family" in the 
national grouping, has produced nas* 
tier bullies faster and in greater 
number? And who can line one up 
better than a hundred others? This 
is what Is going on now in the pri- 
vacy of the guerrilla family: a pro* 
vincial group of genuine resistants, 
unable to control the local bully or 
to produce or import a bigger one to 
break him, invited — for a different 
reason — a known hero, a leader, to 
their emotional-misery spot or blot, 
on the map. They needed his advice 
and legal assistance in routine vete- 

ran s affairs* 
Unwittingly, unintentionally, but 

certainly because they had no control 
over their local situation, the host 
guerrillas exposed their guest hero 
to the kind of humiliation they them- 
selves have endured, for lack of a 
better idea, for some 15 years. The 
local bully, partly the cause of their 
difficulties, they failed to reckon 
with because they underestimated 



both his courage and his stupidity. 
Too, like them, he was a "genuine" 
guerrilla and therefore, no matter 
how loutish, better than the best non- 
guerrilla* They not only ignored him 
as one way to oppose him without 
hurting him, or getting hurt them- 
selves, but they failed to keep track 
of him. He was the last thing in 
their minds as they waited for the 
guerrilla leader who would come and 
straighten out their paper work and 
do other little things like their think- 
ing for them. 

Now, they knew everything about 
their expected guest-hero except the 
man himself. They knew his war 
record- They knew his record of 
government service. They knew his 
humble beginnings and his seeming 
simplicity. They knew he had 
friends from Malacafian to Munting* 
lupa and that, in retirement, he was 
devoting himself to veterans affairs. 
TTiat was more or less all they knew. 




They did not know that he had never 
in his life been bullied. Challenged, 
yes, but never pinned down, never 
licked. 

If anything, in his youth he had 
been himself a bully, a glad hearted 
one — many of them are — inviting 
challenge or accepting it and having 
a brawling good time of it- As a 
young bully, Ije had never met a big- 
ger one. Almost *?very ***ar on him 
— bolo, blackjack, knife — was a 
purple heart before the war, not dur- 
ing it On most he put scars as big 
as the scars they put on him. One 
he killed, not by accident; he meant 
to; a fair fight had gone foul and he 
won by crushing the victim's heart, 
driving down on the ribs with his 
heel, cooling the heel behind bars for 
six months while a lawyer, now him- 
self a national leader, proved self- 
defense and got his client free, free 
of diarge. Not even enemy invasion 
constituted "the bigger one 1 ' because 
in the resistance over and over again 

WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 





dmcaffoined enough 
for any ago £ 








Better co&ee 




SOLUBLE 

CAFE 
BUENO 

Young and old, in the 
morning or at anytime of 
the day — will love to have 
the refreshing Soluble 
Cafe Bueno drink, There's 
no "coffee-nerve*' because 
just enough caffeine has 
been removed. 

Try the delicious mildness 
of Soluble Cafe Bueno — 
there's not the slightest 
"burnt taste" and it is the 
most economical soluble 
coffee in the market to- 
day. 

Jet Processed by: 

COMMONWEALTH FOODS, INC. 

Pasong Tamo, Makati, Rizal * Tel 8-46-66 




Let's Reflect 
a Little 




by Manuel Quezon 



as broadcast over DZWS 



Vj[T 1THIN a period of two weeks, news came of the first British and 
W American commercial jet crossings of the Atlantic. These events 
only serve to underline the fact that today the man in the middle of 
Africa and the man in the middle of Australia, the woman cooking a 
meal in an Eskimo igloo and the woman setting the automatic stove in 
her New York apartment can no longer live in blissful unconcern for 
one another. Their centuries-old ways of life no longer run parallel 
courses. They intersect — and not once, but again and again- How the 
French African colonies voted on whether to remain within the French 
Union or strike out on their own may well vitally affect the market for 
our hemp and copra. A change in the Middle East situation may easily 
affect the availability of farming supplies in a Mindanao barrio. 

But our life, besides bring altered in an economic or military 
sense by the unincreased international dependence, will be even more 
seriously affected in a cultural sense. We will be exposed more and 
more to cultural currents from countries of a very different background- 
historically and racially. It is welJ for us to consider what attitude 
we should adopt. 

We have entered into the arena of independent national exist- 
ence. This is something of which we should justly be proud* It is the 
result of the efforts of Filipinos, not a gift handed to us on a silver 
platter, as some would have us believe. Together with the acquisition 
of a recognized international individuality, we like to think of ourselves 
as also possessing an individual national culture. Do we possess such 
$ thing? I would unhesitatingly say that we do. We possess a culture 
and a way of life distinctly and unmistakably Filipino, 

. Some say that what we call our culture is not our own, that it 
is something mainly imported from outside. But has there ever been 
an advanced civilization of any sort which viewed nothing from the 
outside? Rome, Greece, China, India all underwent influence to a 
greater or lesser extent. What makes a culture one's own is not being 
all home grown. A culture becomes one's own when the elements en- 
tering into it, be they foreign or native, are amalgamated and given 
a distinctive stamp by the notional genius* Certainly the elements of 
our culture, be they originally Malay or Chinese or European, have 
formed a combination stamped very 'distinctively by the Filipino char- 
acter- Just as so many of us have a mixture of the blood of different 
races running in our veins, yet such people are Filipinos, and not the 
nationalities that entered into the mixture, so the elements of our 
culture may be amalgam, but the result is Filipino, 

To wish to eradicate all foreign 'traces from our culture i? to 
destroy what is so characteristically and wonderfully Filipino — the 
pleasant blending of the old and the new, the East and the West. It is 
to destroy our peculiar position as a bridge foetwetn East and West, be- 
longing to both partly, yet not entirely either, and therefore able to 
sympathize with both and to disagree with either. 

We should be proud rather than ashamed of what some disdain- 
fully call our hybrid culture. All great cultures have to a large extent 
been hybrid. And the tendency towards cultural blending is growing 
stronger all over the world. It is a natural result of the growing 
together of peoples. 

No, we must take culture as it is, basically a blend of East and 
West, distinctively stamped as our own. Remember, truth and beauty 
are the rightful heritage of all men — and when we possess them, they 
are our own, no longer alien. We must not be ashamed of our cultural 
heritage, although naturally we must be willing to change what is un- 
desirable, while clinging to the eternal values which we are fortunate 
enough to possess. With this firm hold on the unchangeable moral and 
spiritual values of our past, we must face the cultural changes of the 
future unafraid, eager to take the good and the beautiful, while uncom- 
promisingly rejecting the rest. We may be sure that addition to our 
culture, even if they should come from outside, will be assimilations, 
not mere juxtapositions, and the end result will still be decidedly 
Filipino. 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 




(Ebrtatmaa 




TYPICAL of the cute little 
ceramic pieces fashioned in 
the modem mannei to appeal 
to the educated taste, these 
giraffes strike the eye with 
thir black spots pleasantly 
set against the yellow color 
that gives the clean straight 
lines, along which the figures 
have been designed, the gen- 
tle approach desired by the 
designer- Costing P8.50 a 
piece, these decorative leasts, 
so small that you can lWd 
them in the palm n* yov.r 
hand, introduce a long and va- 
ried line of figurines execut- 
ed in the same style — and 
selling approximately the 
same price. 



INFORMATION regarding the stores from which the items included 
in this section may be bought will be given upon written request 
Please address att inquiries to Shopper's Guide, Weekly Women'* 
Magazine, and enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope. 




FACTS ABOUT DANISH NATURAL MILK 

Cleanliness and purify achieved through 
quality control 



Specialized breeding carefully 
planned feeding find strict vet 
urinary control coupled jsrfth 
sixty years of ceasclere research 
h as es rr eri for D enmark the 
proud reputation to be the first 
country to conquer completely 
bovine tuberculosis amongst her 
renowned dairy herds Denmark 
is also considered as the leading 
country in the world for dairy 
products of unsurpassable high 
tjualily 

One of Denmark' 5 famous 
milk products is Child Brand 
Natural Sterilized Mi lit. which 
is sold in more than sixty 
countries. Every single tin con- 
tains safe, wholesome milk, col- 
lected straight from Danish 
farms and dairies In sterilized, 
bright stainless steel chums and 
tanks. The milk is absolutely 
tic an, and canned under the 
closest control of dairy experts* 
whose vast knowledge of the 
milk industry. technical skill 
and vigilance are employed 
from first to last lo make Child 
Brand Natural Milk the most 
healthful and hygienic pure na- 
tural cew's milk available . 

The East Asiatic Company s 
canning plants in Denmark: are 
as clean as a new pin The air 
which passes through them Is 
filtered and sterilized at frc- 
qucnt intervals throughout each 
working day. These plants are 
i 'quipped with up-lo date dairy 
machines, the control of which 



is as careful as that of the milk 
itself. The qualified chemists 
in Its laboratories test and test 
again for nurity and quality 
ana nothing whatever Is left to 
chance. Every posisble precau- 
tion is taken to guarantee Child 
Brand being the safest and best 
Ihere is^ 

Child Brand Natural Milk is 
invaluable in every home. It 1$ 
one of nature's most nourishing 
foods, in which all the vitamin* 
and body-building proteins of 
ordinary cow's milk are prcs 
cnt When you require pure 
cow's milk just open a can oE 
Child Brand and simply pour, 
add a little sugar to taste* and 
drink. 

Child. Brand Natural Milk is 
a first class, nourishing food for 
infant feeding and it is highly 
recommended ior this purpose. 
Modern Child specialists agree 
that mixed with the right 
amount of cod liver oil, or fresh 
orange juice, Child Brand Nat- 
ural Milk provide the additional 
vitamins whicn bottle-fed bab- 
ies need. 

Doctors speak highly of tue 
health and strength gained by 
drinking more milk. Therefore* 
cultivate this healthy habit — 
drink more Child Brand Natural 
Sterilized milk, a most nourish- 
ing and health. giving drink, 
which can be enjoyed with 
preal benefil by both young 
*md old. 



TALKING POINT 



What passes for wont- 
en's intuition is often 
nothing wore than man's 
transparency. 

—GEORGE JEAN NATHAN 



There are some people 
who read too much- I 
know some who are cons- 
tantly drunk on books. 

— K L. MENCKEN 




COOKING APPLIANCES 



Cooking is a real . pleasure 
when you prepare the family 
foods wfth COOKRITE Cook- 
ing Appliances. Their modern 
features assure you easier, 
speedier meats aft the time. 
And at economical cosh to 
you, too ! 






FaakriTt* 

I ELECTRIC RANGE 

8 Ap*rhn«frt Stat 
■ (MODEL C49) 

i 3 Hi-speed chroma* 
R tox micro-tube units; 
M 3.75 cu. ft. oven. 



ONLY 



MERCHANDISING HUM 
Of THE TffM 



fhafrrftr 

OVCNETTC 



SiLRrrsnH inthury Inc. 

»«ILI»»lPtl* 

Rita Ugardft Bldg.. Sta. Mesa 
and Goitt Bldg., Manila 
Tel, 6-25-41 

Branches at Cebu — Iloilo — Bacotod — Da*ao 

— Zarabo&ctKa — Caspayan de Oro — Sua Patrto 

— San Fernando, Pampanff* — Tarlac — 
Dadupan — Bairuio — Naga — Cabanatuan — 
LaoBK — Tadoban — Lejtaept — Cotabato — 
Tu*ue*arto — llignn — Hons City — Omnia 

— Makrtos — Tagbilaran — AND NOW CATBA- 
I OfiAN and BIJTUAN CITY 





2 Hi-spaad calrod ***tU: 

insulated QV#n, tflfl 1 9 iKf it 4)t- 

comron«*, FASTEST 
SELLING MOST POPULAR 
OV6NETTE IN THE MAR- 
KET TODAY I 



. * . the mellow aroma, freshness and delicious flavor 
of your own home-made breads and rolls. 



• * . when you bake with Fleischmann's Active Dry 
Yeast. Treat your family soon— to home-made, 
yeast-raised menenda specials. They'll ask for morel 



FLEtSCHM ANN'S Active Dry Yeast is sold in 95 gram 
sealed jars - convenient for home use* Free recipe pam- 
phlet with every jar. 




NOVEMBER 28, 1958 



7 



1 i!\* VlJ t} jIKE tc P It, P° sc for y° ur consideration some 
i^lTrn^? 1 the workin B s °f the human will. These 
thk j P us answer a question we proposed once in 
ims column. The question was this: "When precisely does 

wJ, vi C 6 WW the riEht and whe " **s « choose tht? 
•m™^" i mCE choice is illV0 'ved. it seems logical to con- 
sider how that choice comes about. 

»«» Z hilo *°P hers c »» our will a rational appetite. When 
L WOrd a PP etite we connect it with the idea of 
ton . Weil, the word has a broader meaning than just a 
tendency or inclination towards food. An appetite is a ten- 
a^ncy or inclination towards something, be St food or any- 
rmng else. Thus when a body is released in mid-air It 



Let's Reflect 



a Little 



by Manuel Quezon 

as broadcast over OZWS 



ft 



drops towards the center of the earth. It is thus said tc 
have a tendency to go to the center of the earth. This ten- 
dene;/ is correctly called an appetite. The philosophers call 
it a natural appetite to distinguish it from what they call 
an elicited appetite. 

An elicited appetite is what we ordinarily call an appe- 
tite, an inclination which results from knowledge. The ap- 
petite for food is such an appetite. It Is stimulated when the 
senses perceive food. 

Now the will is also an elicited appetite. Just as the 
appetite for food results from sense knowledge about food, 
m the appetite called the will moves when the mind presents 
-t with its object, which is the good. 

tfow, notice that the appetite for food does not itself 
ptrt&ive the food- The senses perceive the food and then 
the appetite is stimulated. The appetite itself is blind. 

The same can be said of the will. The will does not 
sec xhe good. The intellect perceives the good and then 
the win moves towards the good. When, therefore, we call 

/ill rational we do not mean that it can reason. We 
only mean that rational knowledge puts the will in opera- 
tion, just as knowledge of the senses moves the appetite to- 
wards food. 

We said that the object of the will is the good. 
That is ~the will tends towards the good as the appetite for 
food tends towards food. This Is a fact of common experi- 
ence, which requires no proof. Even when we take vile- 
tasting medicine we do so because the will is attracted 
strongly enough by health, which is a good, to accept the 
;reeable means to regain health. 
But t as we said, the will is blind. The mind must per* 
t-sive a thing as good, and so present it to the will In order 
1 - the will to move towards that good. If, therefore, the 
*?i should present something to the will without the as- 
pi good, the will remains at rest Or if the mind should 
fnt an object as bad, the will moves away instead and 
P^ts the object- Thus, for example, if the mind of a sick 
man considers a doctor as someone who will cure him, his 
will is attracted to the doctor. But if the sick man's mind 
considers only the perhaps unavoidably painful methods 
used by the doctor, and does not consider the cure itself, 
the will turns away from the doctor. In the first case the 
doctor is considered as something good and, therefore, the 
will is attracted. In the second case the will is repelled. 
It is dear that in reality the doctor is a good, but the 
mind is able to consider him as a good or an evil. The will, 
therefore, can move towards him or away from him. 
Where the mind must present something to the will as 
gcodp without any possibility of presenting it as not good, 
the will necessarily desires that thing and is not free to do 
otherwise. Such is good in general. The will necessarily 




tSSSf 1^ T M whatever * fcswbly con- 
oTnof, Jl g00d to * enen * The will is free to desire 
ZTL*^ SOmethll, *> * to <*«« bet^en one thing 
and another, because the mind is able to present a thing 
in different aspects of good or not good, 

V* oi th * ^1 between right and wron* is 

that which in reality is good-the will tteid^"^ 
nght~-or the mind may present as good that JS^rS? 

parent good. We hope to discuss that problem some other 



NOVEMBER 7, 1958 



- — 





OHAIN OF GOOD LUCK, it says. 

i could use some 1\kVi. Anybody 
canuselucfc I*r s go buy us some 
luck. Can't b«V «t? 8 6° 

some. Cui't steal!*? Maytx^ U 
to work for ^ if we work 



right army instead of a colonel in the 
wrong one. I shoulda known. All 
these years t been faithfully buying 
my 1/4 share of a whole ticket, never 
mind the flapping shoe-sole, never 
mind old bills that haunt and a mort- 
gage to be paid, that 1/4 I buy and 
eat a late lunch and an early break- 
fast because a horse is going to win 
me a dinner to last me a lifetime. But 
have I ever won even a digit prize?, 
and I know the manager from away 
back tor Even he hasn't won a 
prize: h. can't get that near the 
horses. Only an AFP private can hit 
the jackpot. 

Somebody else had luck too: 





by Yay Marking 



k of my 13th copy: at 96 t I 
^President of the Philippines, 
s power of the chain limited 
dius of Washington, D.C? 

cf the United States then 
"s a dream to wish on , . , 
here I come, spry too. 
\t us read on: ''President 
ay is said to have sent the 
I rely 24 hours before be re- 
pe news of his landslide vlc- 
the last election." Some- 
tilling us. That election was 
24 months before Magsay- 
heard of Adevoso's destiny, 
■ willing to bet that 24 hours 
te elections, the Philippines' 
re President was writing 
nents, not chain letters, 
}mes bad news; "On the other 
et. Villanneva of Bagnio City 
at the chain and in an in- 
ith claimed him." Tsk, tsk, 
tare wasn't a bullet in his 
| Or a knife? 

said that President Rous 
and ignored the chain and 
h passing came." Moral: Don't 
[ It is also said that President 
said that he couldn't get 
' sleep, that no sooner had he 



of his public life than the 
private would actually with forefinger 
and thumb hold his eyelids open and 
harangue him for not having dis- 
creetly closed his eyes at certain op- 
portune moments of the day. It is 
said that he said that he would some- 
day die for lack of rest not due to 
insomnia. 

The last paragraph ot the letter 
slips back into that offensive tone of 
command: 41 After reading this chain, 
say a silent prayer of thanksgiving 
to God Almighty and ask Hint for 
such grace and favor yon might 
desire oat of this chain from the bot- 
tom of your heart," 

That's right. Thank God that you 
have time and stationery and stamps 
enough to bedevil 13 other people 
with superstitious nonsense, either in 
the name of fun or in the name of 
God Almighty. Ask the Lord for 
what you want out of the chain, be* 
cause out of the chain you are not 
going to got it, not the good nor " e *gr i - 
the bad. Ask it from the bottom of 
your heart for lack of a bottom to 
your mind. 

The religious wind-up to one chain 
letter must have given somebody 
else an idea for another kind of chain 
letter; Two months later this came 
in the mail : **We are asking a Kovi- 
na of Our Lady of Perpetual Help to 
propagate the peace. It consists of 
nine (ft) Hail Mary's for «dne eve- 
nings. Make twelve (155) copies ot 
this and send them to your friends 
that you wish luck. Don't ignore 
this: Six (6) days after complj 
to this novlna you will receive a g& 
favor — " Let's see: 81 prayers, 
copies and 144 hours of grace, 
up? 

But, here we go again: **Mr. 
lasco of the Treasurer's Office /, 
banatuan City was promoted 
position with big pay, fc«t Hi'- 1 
venture of Bagnio City lost his Jo* 
because he laugh at this novina." 
Lose your life, lose your job, that's 
Baguio, two casualties so far and 
more to go while the chain letters 
have the chair. 

When I think of all the bad luck 
I've had, all the bad luck I brought 
on myself, Industriously and com- 
petently, almost inspiredly, I think 
the only good luck I could have would 
be to be born again with the same 
mother and this time listen to her! 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 



15 »1 



rami 



n V-ORK h€ favors re- 
e a i < h f administration 
industry, commerce, 
rvice, engineering), 
AMBITIONS: , Wants to 
make good" in his own es- 
timation. Works with brain 
lone, is rarely satisfied. 
i^iSUR^ • Contrasting 
*work ,f is his relaxation — 
t ^ion T reading, letter 
ting. HOME LIFE: Diffi- 
and moody in all person- 
iuuonships* Must admire 
he loves, to those he 
o* i s not , admire is cold and 
indifferent FRIENDS : 
Makes many mistakes over 
pie. Admiring intelligence, 
>Eten blind to character 
fs hypersensitive to critici- 
sm. Head ruling heart, he 
is to become colder and 
alculating as time goes 



2n. 



Is lie this mani 



IN WORK prefers orgaiv 
'/alien and animation (execu- 
controller, "boss man" 
<r> ?_U). AMBITIONS: Sees 
/lien he starts, devotes 
ri to achieving it. Has 
med vitality. LEISURE s 
s the more vigorous and 
irous sports, loves thea- 
parties, high-level social 
mover. HOME LIFE: Excel- 
r* father- and fervent 
. md. loves and >?x- 
handles entertaining. 
*N»S: Many, but out- 
s old ones and finds new 
as he moves up. Strong 
e of responsibility and 
iassion come later in life r 
u dy, generous. 



R 



fie this man? 



IS WORK is attracted to 
useful service (building, ca- 
ig, small owner-business, 
agriculture, skilled art). AM- 
BITIONS: Seeks content- 
ed is a hard and conscien- 
worker, will often 
h jobs to find what he 
s. LEISURE: Relaxa- 
with family and friends, 
d activities with liking for 
neighborliness. HOME 
. - r B : Benevolent father, 
husband. Single-purpos- 
id trusting, FRIENDS: 
es friends mostly within 
nily, always gives without 
i : ting on returns. Best 
id possible, is able to 
k and feel inside others. 



Have you spotted 
him? 




NEXT WEEK THE WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGA7INT 
BEGINS A FULL INQUIRY INTO 
HUSBANDS AND THEIR HABITS 



Make friends with I ^ - — * >l 




ITS ihe friendliest party poing 
. [ . with friendly, sparkling 
Pepsi -Cola to break the tee ? 

Any nutHtjuerade is mare fun 
with Pepsi . , . I>ecnuse it's the one 
jruest you're bound to know ! 
There";; no hiding distinctive 
good tasl e. You can tell it 
iinywMLi e ! Pepsi's line quaiit> 
and purity never change . . . 
wherever, whenever you enjoy U. 
Have fun ! Have i\ Pepsi ! 



LISTEN to "STUDENT CANTEEN". Monday through 

.Saturday, 12:00 noon over DZXL — 960 on your dial- 
11 YOUR PEPSI-COLA COMMUNITY STATION" 

830 on your diul 
la always at your service* 
Hiivt- your important announcements aired by mailing yojir 
requi^ts to DZMY. CBN Bldg.. Manila, or dial tclppW<> 



OCTOBER 10, 1958 





R£G. PHIL. PAT. OFF. 



Doctors and Mothers Agree 

on What Baby Powder Must Do 





( 1 ) To keep the skin of infants dry and 
thus prevent rashes, it is important that 
moisture and salt excreted by the body 
through the skin be absorbed by powder. 

(2) Powder must function as a suitable 
antiseptic and also serve as a protective 
film over the skin which otherwise 
would be exposed to germs, 

(3) Chafing and other forms of §kin irritation 
must be prevented by the lubricating 
action of powder, particularly in folds of 
the skin, where foreign matter collects. 

Only the softest, smoothest, silkiest powder 
in the world can do all these — 



Johnson's Baby Powder Affords the Best Protection ! 




Let's 

Reflect 
a Little 



In everyday life we are ojte 
words or phrases withoi 
evaluating tlie meaning common 
are not doing Justice to our mettle. 



rpHIS short talk starts off a series we shall 
A having every week, God willing; It may-no* 
a bad idea to reflect a little on talking itself. 

We speak in order to pass on our thoughts a. 
feelings to others, and such is the natural 
pose of language. This is why even the biggest li; 
tell many more truths than lies. Of course, n: r 
do sometimes use words as a camouflage for £h:: 
thoughts; but this is the exception, not the rult- 

Yet very often, despite the best of intentic. 
a man will fail to give others a clear idea oi 
thoughts. Why? Sometimes, he has a poor cc 
mand of language. Sometimes, and this is what 
often overlook, the man himself does not haw 
clear idea of what he wants to communicate 
others. He uses words without knowing just 
they mean, I wonder if we have not all had i 
experience. We are asked the meaning oi a w 
and we answer: I know what it means, but I c 
not express it. Well, that is seldom true. A 1 3 
iule, one is unable to explain a word because 
does not know exactly what it means. A va: 
idea, yes, but that is not knowing the meani & 
Arid because there is no clear idea, there can. A 
be a clear transmission of the idea. Clear wz 
spoken into a telephone will come out as clear wor iz 
at the other end. Mumbled words spoken int 
a telephone will come out as mumbled words. r 
transmitting mechanism is there — in one case ^ 
telephone, in the other language, but the thing .: 
be transmitted is not. In language, the case 
much worse. The words used can and often do i 
the impression of logical coherence. But if 
listener thinks about the meaning of the words 
may fipd confusion. 

In everyday life we are often guilty of Mi 
words or phrases without knowing what they w 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAJA^' 



i* 1 



by 

aniiel Quezon 

as broadcast 
over DZWS 




uilty of using 

nowing what they mean or 
assigned to them. TJiis way ice 
powers, so we must fight the habit 



evaluating the meaning commonly assigned tc 
mem. We live in an age of aaver Using when slo- 
i?s are coined and repeated, but too seldom pon- 
ereti upon. 

In this connection, I remember hearing this 

ogan years ago. "Progress means off with the old, 
cn with the new. 11 It is a very catchy phrase and, 
an the surface, true. But is it? During the Mid- 
tie Ages the art of making stained-glass windows 
vas brought to perfection, but the secret was lost, 
u later centuries stained glass was of a very infe- 
nor quality. In fact, good stained-glass windows 
lave again been made only in relatively recent 

cars, ftio, during the centuries that immediately 
i allowed the Middle Ages, was it right to apply "off 
with the old and on with the new" to stained-glass 
vindows? Progress means off with the old, only 
the old is undesirable, and on with the new is 
letter, and at times the new must be a great deal 
better than the old for the change to constitute 

ogress. But we shall talk about this some other 

ime. 

As I was saying, when we toss words and 
hrases around without understanding them, we are 
not being very rational. We are not doing justice 
) our own mental powers* Nearly all of us use 
nguage in this way at times, but we must fight 
le habit. I believe that the effort will be well re- 
arded and will give us a great deal of satisfaction. 

The list of words bandied around without a 
clear idea of their meaning is almost endless. "Un- 
democratic," "antisocial," "free," "the masses', — 
^ e could go on and on. During the coming weeks 
ou and I take some of these words and study 
hem together and see whether we cannot get a 
learer idea of what they mean. 




LIBERTY S QUALITY 
MEANS GOOD HEALTH 
FOR YOU ! 




Tastes so good 

so economical, too! 

LIBERTY tastes good. 
You'll enjoy its rich, creamy 
flavor. LIBERTY is nutri- 
tious. It's a most healthful 
drink and so economical, 
too! Next time you buy 
canned milk... 
CHOOSE QUALITY — BUY LIBERTY! 

Always use LIBERTY for - 



v \BER}v 





NOW IN 
CONVENIENT 
SIZES 



CREAMING - Pour LIBERTY straight 
from the can to creom your coffee, choco- 
late or your favorite cereal 



BAKING — Try pure undiluted LIBERTY 

in cakes, pies, and pastries. You bake U 
better and tastier desserts with LIBERTY. 



r fl ^ 

(am-ation 



GENERAL MILK CO. (Phil.), INC. 
An Affiliate of CARNATION COMPANY, Los Angeles, U.S.A. 
Exclusive Distributors: CONNELL BROS. CO. 



OCTOBER 10, 1958 



early 

^ wet ^ed io read 
an account of an 1 1-year-old 
boy who. for no apparent 
reason, coldbloodedly shot to 
death his father and his 
mother, a brother and a sister 
and several persons, with an 
old-fashioned man -sized 
hunting rifle. 

How a kid his size could 
have manipulated the weapon 
is no more startling than the 
fact that he had used it — 
and against so many people. 

Since then, and even be- 
fore that gruesome incident, 
there have been countless 
juveniles — mere boys (and 
girls) not quite grown out of 
adolescence— figuring in sim- 
ilar violent criminal cases. 
Their offenses range from 
the more serious crime of 
murder to petty but destruc- 
tive vandalism. s 

It appears from the above 
case, and other parallel de- 
linquencies, that criminal po- 
tentiality in the young is a 
matter of spurious develop- 
ment springing from a re- 
pressed neurosis, perhaps, or 
from long-standing mental 
unbalance. No delinquent. 

\en the confirmed re- 
cidivist, gets involved in 
crime merely for its sheer 
pleasure. 

The actuations of the 11- 
year-old killer, for instance, 
eted in 

4*tft of his i IlPjjjP* 13 ^ 
aod mental aberrations, pre- 
iisposing causes of which 
ire traceable to certain trau- 
matic upheavals during his 
earlier years. If only these 
had been carefully noted and 
promptly remedied during 

uocess of growing up, 
he may never have been 
goaded to the bloody deed. 

FORTUNATELY it is now 
possible for every parent 
snd teacher to find out years 
in advance whether or not a 
child is likely to become a 
juvenile delinquent. A re- 
markable study of 5,29S 
children by the New York 



State Youth Commission has 
brought out warning signals 
of future maladjustment and 
possible delinquency in any 
child by the time he reaches 
the age of seven. 

listed below are the be- 
havior symptoms in the de- 
linquency-prone youngster as 
evolved from the delinquen- 
cy-prediction table used suc- 
cessfully by the New York 
Youth Commission in its mass 
study of New York school 
children; 

1- Aggressive. Under this 
heading come frequent tem- 
per tantrums, long periods 
of surliness and persistent ly- 
ing. Also hostility against pa- 
rents, teachers and play- 
mates, habitual use of bad 
language, destructive behav- 
ior at home, in the neighbor- 
hood or at school. The ag- 
gressive child is impatient, 
unable to settle down to any 
activity for long* He craves 
adventure. 

2. Withdrawn* This is 
characteristic of the day- 
dreamer, the oddly quiet child 
who consistently plays by 
himself *or merely idles away 
his time. Unnaturally polite 
for his age, he may appear to 
be a "model child" and yet 
lapses into occasional sudden 
bursts of temper. He is like- 
ly to be sulky at times, un- 



willing to talk over his trou- 
bles with his parents. Both 
the aggressive child possess 
some other nervous habit 
such as bedwetting, nail-bit- 
ing, etc. 

3. Exaggerated suspicion 
of friendliness or kindness 
shown him by other children 
and adults. 

4. Unpopularity with class- 



Mothers*. 




BRING RELIEF TO 
TEETHING BABIES 

get DELABARRE 

Dentition 
Syf 

Sold Mt all 
leading Drug 
Stores 






1$ your child headed 

for trouble? 



by Soledad H. Leynes 



No child is ever born baa\ but in the process of 

growing up he may acquire and develop certain 
undesirable traits that build up into delinquency 



OCEANIC COMMERCIAL, INC. 



299 Escolta. Manila 



10 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAG^ 21 ^ 



Let's 



Reflect a Little 

as broadcast over DZWS 

by Manuel Quezon 



T THOUGHT we might use our time 
just trying to answer this ques- 
tion: When is a man niost truly free? 
To begin with, I would like to bring 
up the words of a wise man many 
centuries ago. He said that to do wrong 
is a sign of freedom, but only in the 
sense that sickness is a sign of life. 
Now, what do you suppose he meant 
by that? I would say he meant this: 
for you to do wrong, you have to be 
free, just as for you to be sick you 
have to be alive. If you are dead, you 
are not sick, you cannot get sick, you 
are just dead. So, if you are sick, it is 
a sure sign that you are alive. 

In the case of freedom, we have the 
same situation. If you are not free, 
you cannot do wrong. Take the ex- 
ample of a brick. If a brick is dis- 
lodged from a building and falls on a 
pedestrian's head, no one says the 
brick did wrong. It cannot do wrong, 
because it is not free. Or take an 
earthquake, even if it should wipe out 
an entire city and every one in it, the 
quake does no wrong. It does harm, 
but not wrong, because it is not free. 

New, take a man who deliberately 
and out of pure spite hurts someone's 
feelings. He does wrong, because he 
is free. Notice the difference. In the 
examples we gave of non-free courses 
the amount of harm done, objectively 
speaking, is very much greater — a 
cracked skull and vast human misery, 
as against hurt feelings, but we can- 
not blame the brick or the quake, at 
least not in the sense that we can 
blame the man, The whole difference 
lies in the nature of the cause of the 
harm, in the first two cases not free, 
in the last, free. To do wrong, there- 
fore, is a sign of freedom. 

But it is only a sign. It is not part 
of freedom as such. Let us get back to 
our parallelism between sickness and 
wrong-doing. Today, thank God, med- 
ical science constantly turns out new 
inoculations against all sorts of di- 
seases. Now, let us suppose that a 
time were to come when a man could 
be inoculated against every disease, 
so that he could not get sick. Would 
he be less alive? Biologically speaking, 
he would be enjoying the fulness of 





life. Sickness, therefore, is more ac- 
curately a sign of defective, imperfect 
life, rather than of life as such. In 
fact, the greater the disease, the less 
life, until the disease progresses to the 
point where it destroys life altogether. 
So the best proof of life is normal, per- 
fect functioning of the living being. 

To do wrong is the disease of free- 
dom. When a man does wrong, he 
merely proves that human freedom is 
imperfect — we can use it to choose 
evil rather than good. But imperfec- 
tion does not constitute the essence of 
a thing. We do not say that a knife 
is an instrument that cuts poorly, or 
that a camera is a mechanism for 
taking blurred photographs. Or bet- 
ter still, we do not say that John's ca- 
mera is better than Peter's, because 
John takes bad photographs as well 
as good. 

If I use my freedom to do wrong, I 
am like the knife which cuts poorly 
or the camera which takes poor pic- 
tures. I am not doing the job well. 
I am most truly free when I use my 
freedom to choose the good, because 
that is when my will works unhinder- 
ed by the imperfections, the disease, 
of wrong. 

You may well ask: when precisely 
does the will choose the right and 
when does it choose the wrong? We 
shall talk about that later. 




Symbol of Excellence * 



Chase t 
Sanborn 

COFFEE 




At home m , * 

The rich aroma and delicious flavor of fuB-bodied Chete 
ft Sanborn Coffee gives every meal a trff and males it 
"special." Enjoy Chase ft Sanborn with your guests, 
TheyH recognize and appreciate the Philippines* 
finest coffee. 

When you aof out * » * 

Chances are. you*! enjoy Chase ft Sanborn — because 
it Is served at more fine hotels and restaurants than any 
other coffee. 



Alihe 



r S «-»< 

, „ & Sank 07 ™ 



Chaset\ 

horn 



Chase & Sanborn Coffee 5s sold 
e v er yw here in hJ-weight. one- 
pound and half-pound pads. 




OCTOBER 17, 1958 




BABY! 



BEST " 



Again * « , and again s .. , and again 

doctors, nurses and mothers 
insist on fVENRO NUtSUS because 
they make baby-feeding easier, 
more like breast-feeding, safe. Only 
EVEN FLO NURSE Jt$ have the follow- 
ing exclusive features: 

* Patented twin air valve nipples for preci- 
sion feeding; 

* Wide Mouth— easy to Oil, ew to clean; 

* Sanitarily sealed— ready for feeding* 

* Hexagonal — eaty to hold, no slip grip; 

* Nipple, bottle, cop— all in-one; 

* Self-regulating— baby nurses happily by 
ruction— nelps prevent colic and 





Tke Greateit Nutters Evet Made 



New Vkks IMPACT 'Tablets 

STOP ACHES AND 
PAINS OF COLDS! 



Do more than ordinary pain tablets! 



New Vieks impact not only stops 
aches and pains, it stops that 
tired, worn -out feeling, too— 
restores your pep! Take Vicks 
Impact at the first sign of a 
cold... and for added comfort, 
rub Vlcks VapoRub on chest, 
throat and back at bedtime. 





MISS KAFRAWI makes notes as four-year-old boys and girls 
climb a metal arc climber devised by the Vassar College 
Laboratory Nursery School, where Miss Kafrawi is a student 
in child study. At the riant is a tubular ladder, which 
may be used instead of the inclined ladder at the 
left. This equipment is easy to duplicate in bamboo. 



fHe Makers of Vtcfa VapoRub 



The Modern 
Nursery School 

in the United States is something after which we should 

pattern our own children s institutions of learning 
Protecting and promoting the child s physical and emotional 

health should he 
a chief objective 
along with education 




PLAYING with dolls is a major activity for girls in nur- 
sery schools, Here are two little pupils at rhe Beauvoir 
Nursery School feeding a doll. At the right, ready to 
give the doll a spoon of imaginary cereal, is Zailah Binte 
Ismail, daughter of the Malayan Ambassador to the IKS* 



NURSERY SCHOOLS In 
the United States (for 
children from 2 1/2 tb 5 
years) are especially adapted 
to the needs of the young 
child and offer him an oppor- 
tunity to play and learn wit : 
others of his own age undc-' 
trained supervision. 

The nursery school pro- 
gram provides a gradual in- 
troduction to responsibility 
and preparation for acaderm 
activity. The child's keen ii 



WEEKLY WOMEWS MAGAZINE 



Let's Reflect a Little 



as broadcast over DZWS 



WE ENDED last week's chat with a 
question: "What precisely does the 
will choose the right and when does it 
choose the wrong?" I had hoped we 
could work out an answer this week, but 
the answer will have to wait: the recent 
observance of National Heroes 1 Day de- 
mands our attention. The past events we 
commemorate have a significance for 
the present. When we Filipinos think of 
the heroic past, we ought to engage in a 
little self-examination. What am I doing 
!to make our country the great country 
'our forebears lived and died to forge? 
What am I doing to make our democra- 
' cy an ever greater success? Well, first of 
all, what is democracy? We hear many 
definitions of democracy. This is due in 
large part to viewing democracy from 
I different angles. Democracy, like all 
great ideals, cannot be grasped with a 
single concept. It is like a majestic 
\ mountain — a view of one side of the 
mountain does not give us a complete 
I picture, It is only often that we have 
gone all around the mountain, seeing it 
from all directions, that we know how it 
looks. And even then, when we see all 
the mountain later, we can visualize only 
one view of it at a time, I would like to 
dwell briefly on a single aspect of demo- 
cracy, the cooperative spirit that is indis- 
pensable to its success. 

We are all familiar with the tradi- 
tional division of the forms of govern- 
ment into rule by one, rule by a few, and 
rule by the many. The last is what we 
call democracy. It differs from other 
forms of government in a number of 
ways. Let us recall just one characteris- 
tic of genuine democracy, its tendency 
to allow, its citizens as much legal free- 
dom as is compatible with the good of 
ail, thus keeping coercive measures to a 
minimum, This policy leaves the well-be- 
ing, the progress, and even the very ex- 
istence of the state very largely at the 
mercy of private initiative. 

When the people lack the cooperative 
spirit, events take the following course: 
\ the stronger elements of the population, 
I the powerful personalities, those with 
drive, the vested interests, we might 
say, those with dynamic initiative — these 
•'get; ahead, which is good, but to the de- 
triment of others, which is bad. The 
weaker elements of the population — the 
;imid, the unintelligent, the uneducated, 
jfi,he poor — are all left behind, or meta- 
phorically trampled under the onward 
rush of the successful. Pride and conceit 
and an overbeaming attitude character- 
ize the successful, while an atmosphere 
lof gloom, and even despair, surrounds 
|the rest. The social forces are centrifugal 
[rather than centripetal, Society tends to 
Weak apart, driven apart by the egoistic 
tendencies of men. Government must 
then resort to more and more restrictive 
| measures to preserve the unity of society, 
1 This contradicts the democratic aims 01 
maximum freedom and minimum coer- 
; cion. The democratic spirit is imperiled— 
and may be totally destroyed, 




by Manuel Quezon 



The cooperative spirit is, therefore, 
absolutely necessary to avoid or remedy 
such a state of affairs. More than a 
feeling, it is a surging, almost compul- 
sive, conviction that our democracy is the 
personal interest of each one of us, in- 
dividually and of all of us together. I say 
that it is a conviction because it must be 
based not on sentiment or emotion, but 
on solid reasons. This is not the oppor- 
tune moment to enumerate or discuss 
those reasons, among others — reasons 
derived from the nature of man and so- 
ciety. 

We shall limit ourselves to the reason 
why the spirit of cooperation is vital. 

We citizens are all equal before the 
law, We have the same patriotic end in 
view — to, make our Philippines a country 
where free men and women can live an 
abundant life with decency, honor and 
security under God, We want a country 
with a well educated citizenry second to 
none. We want a society which an indiv- 
idual's possibilities for self -improvement 
will be limited only by the quality of his 
own abilities, a society in which freedom 
will be given a maximum field of action 
and license a minimum of toleration. 

Legislation alone cannot give us these 
things. Remember, in a democracy, as 
much as possible the citizens should be 
the source of social movements. To ex- 
pect everything from the government is 
to weaken democracy. 

We must realize that each one of us 
has an important role to play in the de- 
velopment of our democratic national 
life. We must realize that all of us are 
striving in the whole national commun- 
ity, all building towards the same goals. 
The strong must moderate their activity 
so as to contribute what they can to- 
wards the same end. This undoubtedly 
calls for sacrifice on many occasions, but 
that is where the spirit of cooperation 
comes in. If we look upon ourselves as 
working together towards the same goal, 
we shall be willing to make those sacri- 
fices. The intimate conviction that the 
good of all at times demands sacrifice 
from some will save us from the disas- 
trous economic liberalism of the nine- 
teenth century. The spontaneity of coop- 
erative activity wUl save us from exces- 
sive legal restrictions which threaten de- 
mocracy. 

The surging spirit of cooperation will 
cause us to put into practice the convic- 
tion that the good of all is the good of 
each — and the good of each is the good 
of all 




A PRODUCT OF BRISTOL-MYERS 



Why wait tor others to tell you? MUM not 
only eliminates unpleasant body odor but 
also prevents it MUM is so tested that it 
gives you that carefree, confident feeling 
even when you are 



drenched with 
perspiration. Use 
MUM regularly/ 



. . Exclusive Distributors: 

ED. A, KELLER fr CO.. LTD. 
258 Juan Luna, Manila 
TeL 2-98-26 



•OCTOBER 24, 1958 



MUM R O LLETTE 

MUM MMMk 
R O LLETTE 
is perfectly 
safe for nor- 
mal skin. 
Its gentle 
lotion 
checks pers- 
piration t . , 
stops odor 
for a full 24 
hours. No 
mess, no 
drip, no 
waste. 




WE MUST REMEMBER THAT TO A CHILD DISAPPOINTMENTS 

ARE SO MUCH MORE BITTER, HAPPINESS SO MUCH MORE INTENSE 

Growing up can be difficult 

Life always seems to be full of problems and frustrations to the adolescent, 

and a parents intelligent sympathy 
and her patience are very important during this awkward age 



T ONCE ASKED ten of my younger friends (all 
A under twenty-five) if they would like to have 
their childhood over again, and with one excep- 
tion they all (though with differing emphasis) 
said "No. M Those I questioned were of both sexes 
and varying ages. Many of them had had delight- 
ful homes, though others had not been so fortun- 
ate, but although^ some of them would have liked 
:o have their nursery days over again, only one 
was prepared to go once more through the whole 
experience of growing up. 

It was a young minister who put the matter most 
emphatically. He had, as I knew, had an excel- 
lent mother to whom he was devoted, a father whom 
he liked and respected, and several brothers and 
sisters for- whom he had a warm affection, but 
he said that the thought of going through his 
boyhood again filled him with horror. "It isn't" 
he explained, "so much the people you are with 
who make life difficult while you are growing up, 
it is you yourself/' I pointed out that he had been, 
as far as I could remember, a very nice little 
boy, a little too sensitive perhaps, physically not 
particularly brave, but morally rather above the 
average in his desire to do the right thing, and 
I was sure that everybody had always liked him, 

My praise, however, did nothing to alter his 
view that, even though other people had generally 
liked him, there were far too many occasions when 
he hadn J t liked himself. The other young people 
who were present when I posed this question, though 
differing in the intensity of their objection to 
reliving their childhood, were very clear that, since 
schooldays (particularly the seven-to-eighteen-year 
period) were essentially a time of trial and error, 
there must of necessity be a lack of that poise and 
assurance, in the absence of which life can be far 
too full of pricks to be at all comfortable. There 
is so much to be learned in those early years, par- 
ticularly control of emotions, whether it be the 
too easy tears or the too raucous laughter, the 
tendency to sulk or the desire to hit out at every- 
thing in sight. , 

Properly guided and helped, control will he ac- 
quired in time, but to the sensitve child each fail- 
ure may well cause much more annoyance and 
shame to himself than it does even to his par- 
ents—though, being sensitive, he would not dream 



of admitting such a thing. Then there is the ever 
present fear of being laughed at for doing the 
wrong thing, which constantly hurts the sensitive 
child. Anyone who has anything to do with ani- 
mals knows that one must never laugh at them, 
yet there are people, who may pride themselves 
on their management of their dogs or cats, who 
will often laugh without disguise at a child's (pos- 
sibly ludicrous) efforts to copy some adult proce- 
dure — and by so doing will produce in him an agony 
of suppressed humiliation, 

Very few of us, moreover, are as patient as we 
might be with the manifold failures of our chil- 
dren as they slowly, and with many setbacks, stum- 
ble their way towards good manners, thoughtful 



by Anne Cuthbert 



ness, truth honesty, physical and moral courage 
and the various other virtues which, by the time 
they are six or seven years old, they are dimly 
beginning to realize are desirable qualities which 
they would rather like to possess. But what we 
fail to realize is that the child's impatience at his 
failures may be quite as keen as ours, though 
hidden under a "don't care'* attitude. 

During the first six or seven years of life most 
children do not worry at all about such matters 
and, if the home is well managed, the child's 
health good and the .parents skilful, they should 
he mam often happy than not. Naturally there 
will be occasional storms and tears, but, properly 
dealt with, they are soon over and soon forgotten. 

Life is more complicated 

A FTER the sixth birthday has been passed, how- 
ever, life begins to be much more complicat- 
ed, vhich Is one of the reasons why mother is 
stm so important Now, however, the role she ha* 
to play is rather different from what it was In 
the earlier years. Then she needed to be aiwavs 
In touch, constantly, even If unobtrusively, on th* 



watch to guide her little son or daughter along wm 
right path, to explain why some things are right 
and some wrong — and to ensure by her presence 
that they feel secure and happy. Once the? have 
outgrown this stage, however, she merely needs 
to be always available if wanted, rather than al- 
ways present. And it is now that suggestions begin 
to be so much more valuable than reproof, an** 
comfort more necessary than punishment. This 
presupposes, of course, that the happy, carefre* 
early years have established in the child's mind 
the general view that Mama and Papa really wane 
to help one to be Rood — and that goodness itself la. 
on the whole, a desirable end, if It doesn't inter* 
fere too drastically with one's enjoyment, 

The growth of conscience in a child is a very 
slow affair and can be very painful. For gradually, 
in a well-run, happy home, he will begin to under- 
stand that so many of the things he wants anp 
considered undesirable by his parents aiiti teach- 
ers and he must be forever choosing between do- 
ing what Is frowned upon, if not actually forbid- 
den, and (as a consequence) feeling uiicomfortablp 
Inside, or else refraining from doing sometiting 
undesirable and feeling thoroughly frustrated — 
though rathtir virtuous. 

It seems a little unfair that the boys and the 
girls who most desire to do right are less likely 
to have happy memories of childhood than are 
their lighter-hearted brothers or sisters who take 
a less conscientious view of life, Ihey t however, 
may well in their turn be more concerned with 
their social failures, which can be so very tragic 
to those who long to shine, but cannot quite man* 
age to do so. 

How tan parents belp? 

FOR parents the important question to consid- 
er is how their maddening but much-loved off- 
spring can best be helped over this difficult period. 
For help Is what they need, even if they don't al- 
ways realise it themselves. Children of all ages 
must of course be told when they have been de- 
liberately naugthy or careless, or even merely fool- 
ish, but there are better ways of bringing home 
to them, as they grow older, the undesirability of 
their conduct than by punishment, or even by re* 



?8 



WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGAZINE 




Let's 
Reflect 
Little 



by 

Manuel Quezon 



as broadcast over DZWS 



T^HE DESTRUCTION caused in our country by 
World War II and our failure thus far to get 
firmly on our feet economically have focused our 
attention on the problem of unenjploymeat end 
wages as never before. Just now the President and 
Congress are looking for ways to control the skyrock- 
eting prices, even of essential products like food. 
The danger is mainly that those in the low-income 
brackets will be unable to buy what they need. As 
things stand, many barely manage to keep body and 
soul together with what they earn, to say nothing of 
the millions who do not earn at all — the unemploy- 
ed. History teaches us that when such a state of af- 
fairs continues for a long time, society is rocked to 
its foundations. We all have reason to worry about 
the present and the future. We can not close our 
eyes to the sufferings which inadequate wages cause 
so many people. All too many do not have enough 
to eat. They live in hovels and are inadequately 
clothed. When they get sick, they cannot get pro- 
per medical attention. 

To solve this difficulty some would make a math- 
ematical computation of what the wage earner 
should get. They assign so much for food, so much 
for clothing, so much for housing, so much for med- 
icine. Well, first of all, conditions sometimes make 
it impossible to pay even the resulting sum, But 
even when it is possible to pay a salary enough for 
all of a man's bodily needs and those of his family, 
that salary is not enough. Does this sound para- 
doxical? It should not — "Not by bread alone does 
man live/* 

Remember that man is a rational animal When 
you provide a man with his bodily needs, you axe 
only supplying him with part (the less, important 
part) of his needs. Man has a right to a human 
life, and a human life, as distinguished from the 
life of the brutes, has to give the place of honor to 
things of the mind. A man must be able to give 
some satisfaction to his unquenchable thirst for 
knowledge. He must have time to devote to the con- 
templation of beauty — the fine arts. He must have 
time to devote to social interchange with other hu- 
man beings, so that from the mutual exchange of 
ideas his mental powers may be stretched and per- 
fected. He must have ample time for his religious 
duties. For all these and more, a man must have 
more than a mere subsistence wage, so that he will 
have the indispensable leisure time. 

If then you give a man just what he needs to 
live and keep his family alive, if you make him work 
so much that he has no time or energy left for any- 
thing else, you are frustrating human nature itself. 
You are treating man like a brute beast. 

9 We have to beware, therefore, of a state of af- 
fairs in which so many of our fellow humans are liv- 
ing a life barely above that of the brutes. We have 
to work, towards the goal— even though it be a long- 
range goal— of a truly human life for all. We must 
do so not only to avoid physical suffering and the 
danger of unrest and violence. We have to do it so 
as not to deprive man of the life of the mind, that 
life which in the order of nature is like the life of 
God. 



makes the 

BEAUTIFUL 
DIFFERENCE! 




XED MMl 




You too, con paint 
BETTER for LESS- 



When you point with YCO, you ore 
investing in beauty and durability— in pro- 
tection from the beatings of tropical wind 
and sun and rain to which your house is 
exposed every <kiy of the year. And because 
YCO resists the vagaries of local weather 
lonaer and better, you save more in terms 
of tanner- lasting, better- looking point 
protection? 

So, insist on YCO points — proved in use by 
homeowners and construction men alike! 



mmwg comrtAcrs acc&tm — **n nrmAm 



mode in the tropics 
• best for the tropics 



YCO 



EUZALDE PAINT & OIL FACTORY INC 



Tim im ** Mr **J Mr»." ft+r+m ***** M m § w* *** fito Omm my W ^mt ^ r ? p * » DZMH 



OCTOBER 31, 1958 



ILLUSTRATION BY EI>WIN PHILl 



Girls who use Attid 

can answer these questions. Can you ? 



Q. Is there a safe, sure 
way to prevent body 
odor? 

A, Yes! Arrid Cream Deo- 
dorant protects all day - 
with just one application. 
Arrid safely, effectively stops 
perspiration — so you never 
need worry about body odor! 





Q* Con you foe sure of 
daintiness — when you 
dance? 

A* Yes! Arrid Cream Deo* 
dorant applied in the morn- 
ing keeps underarms sweet 
and dry right through the 
evening! Even when you 
dance fast, modern tempos, 
you stay fragrant, alluring 
when you use Arrid! 



- 



Q. Is there a sure way to 
prevent perspiration 
stains? 

A. Yesl Arrid Cream Deo- 
dorant* used daily, stops 
perspiration — prevents 
stains and saves your pretty 
dresses from wear! 




i 




Isn't a daily bath 
enough protection? 

Yesl — when you use Arrid 
Cream Deodorant after your 
bath. Creamy-soft Arrid is 
the sure way to avoid under- 
arm perspiration the whole 
day! 



Girls who know the answers use Anid, 
itie deodorant cream tfiat- 



O Stops odor and perspiration 

• Prevents staining clothes 

• Keeps you fresh and dainty 
all day 



L D. SEYMOUR & CO, (MANILA) INC 

Manufacturer's Representative 





"You're in love ultli him, aren't you? 1 
Francie demanded. Susan looked across 
the room and her e\f s grew dark. 



by Florence Jane Soman 



£4 



ISN'T he a divine specimen of 
manhood?" Francie said. Susan, 
lair-haired and pretty, looked up 
from her desk and across the office 
to where Joe Sanders was standing 
talking to Mr, Wilson, the head of 
the Production Department. 

As usual, at the sight of Joe her 
eyes went dark and she heaved a 
sigh. 



10 



"Very nice/' she said. One didn't 
pour out one's secret hopes and 
dreams to a seventeen-year-old filing 
clerk like Francie. 

"You're in love with him; aren't 
you?" Francie said. 

Susan colored, refusing to feast 
her eyes further on Joe while Francie 
looked on. "Don't be silly. I — " 

"Of course you are," Francie said 

WEEKLY WOMEN'S MAGA2H vf 



LITERS 
LETTERS 

your magazine can publish chess ©rob* 
lems. r 

Mr, and Mrs. WOfredo Chua 
Malangas, Zaraboanga del Sur 

DESIGN ENTHUSIAST 

Avante-Garde But Modest (WG, 
June 22), by dress designer Bikki Ji- 
menez was one of the best designs fea- 
tured in your magazine. 

Let us have more of him and more 
power to your magazine, 

Danilo de los Santos 

^ Calasiao, Fangaslnan 

SUGGESTED AMENDMENTS 

In connection with the article of Mr* 
Manuel L. Quezon, Jn on possible 
amendments to the Constitution (WG, 
May 25) f I have the following surges' 
tions to offer: 

1) The composition of Congress 
S r£ uld be mai ntained, but the terms of 
office for congressmen, provincial board 
members, and city and municipal coun- 
cilors should be three years, while those 
of the senators should be six years, with 
one half of them to be elected every 
three years* 

2) The terms of office of the Pres- 
ident, provincial governors, and city 




.-.AMD WALLS/ 



and municipal mayors should be six 
years without reelection. 

A President eligible for reelection will 
be politicking while in office to insure 
his reelection, Ditto the governors and 
mayors* 

Mr. Quezon proposes the ouster of 
the President after three years in case 
of failure and the selection by Congress 
of one to serve for the remaining three 
years. This will make the President use 
all his powers while in office to have 
his men elected to Congress, thus re- 
sulting in wholesale fraud, terrorism, 
vote-buying, eta* during that election* 
Who can be more powerful than the 
President if ho knowj that he is in 
danger of being ousted as a result of 
the election? 

I would Hke to propose further that 
tlip amendment of the Constitution shall 
[one by d 1c gj i * ; 1 ) a cons titutiona 1 

cust 3, 1966 




is Marty Pina s 

Special 
really as good 
as they say? 



Bet your apron strings it is. So 
good that it's guaranteed to put 
a punch in your cooking. . .and 
eating, because Marca Pina Spe- 
cial Soy Sauce is made the same 
old fashioned Mandarin way 
with the same authentic ingre- 
dients; the costliest syrups and 
the freshest, richest soya beans - 
carefully selected and culled to 
bring out a treasure trove of 
especial relish in your food. 
Marca Pina's Special makes the 
most of any recipe. Try it and 
you'll agree. 



Manufactured by: 

NATIONAL SOY FACTORY 

Cxclusiye Distributor for Visayas & Mindanao 

GETZ BROS. & CO., INC. 

PASONG , TAMO 

MAKATl, RIZAL TEL. 88-74-31 




HONDA. 

PORTABLE 
GENERATOR- 




(also available on installment) 







for, tv viewing 



tor beach houses 



For emergency use 





for fighftng stores 




for fishing 



...even for charging 
your car battery 



Anywhere you are ♦ . , anywhere you go, this portable generator can 
give you "instant electricity" up to 300 watts! Watch your favorite tv 
program, light 3 bulbs and run an electric, fan or any combination of 
appliances up to 300 watts . . . all at the same time . . . and for only 10 
centavos-an hour. This generator will even charge your car batteries. 
It's so light and easy to carry, measures only 13 in. x 8-1/2 in x8 in. 



This 300- watt generator is powered by a dependable HONDA 4-stroke ^i*" 
engine. There is no smoke, no overheating, and it runs on ordinary 

gasoline. It's completely safe, and simple to operate. For harder work, there's the 

„ £ _ , , \ - ' ' - ■ _ HONDA E-1000 generator — 

See your Safeway dealer and ask him all about the HONDA portable powers anything up to 1000 

generator, watts. 




*f* 691,00 in the provinces 



Go to your ORB store or any of there Safeway dealers ! 



Exclusive Distributor of Honda Generators 



MANILA 
M><n*fv* Trading 

615 Rnol A**.. CftiOMSft Crly Anliqiii 
Jofimy't B*c*rie*l k H*fd*r*r* Mclo Entirpri 



Conpinco Meeting Go*p. 



f\2 Qunon Blvd.. Quiipo 

tUZON 
V. P B Bnnito 

Oc*mpo't Olon^po, Inc. 



linatl St., Ikulo Oily 
BohoF Timti Aattf Supply 
Toqbilarsn, BaHol 
Uybingl«i i C*, 
JH) J. L-.i"..i SI.. C»bu Cply 
Go Litrng And So** 
Tjclobon Cily- 



Celbaynq Cily Pagai<0*\ 2d whofl^ga d«J Su* 

fttnti T#fi CMvrprii«> Jim'* 0#pt. Sit** 

PfO- Prificft*.o, Pdlgwen B^tuflf! City 

MINDANAO M3m^i B.»*r 

Sin P«dro H«dwr, Oi^ii Oly 

94 C M, R«<c Sr., DavaO Gly P** 1 & ™S™ J , - ft - , , 



G»npr#l Horn* Svppfy 

29 L Magna Sf 
Ze<nbo»nq« City 




Alt 



FORMERLY DRB- HONDA 

45 Buendia Ave , Makati. Rizul 
Tel No 62541 Loc 205 



LETTERS 
LETTERS 



convention elected by the people during 
trie elections of 1967, The delegates 
shall be two from every representative 
district. All persons including teachers, 
government employes, etc., shall be al- 
lowed to run for delegates without be- 
ing considered resigned from the pres- 
ent offices upon filing their candidacie: 
if they are government employes, 

There is a great danger of our con- 
gressmen and senators proposing the 
amendments, for the simple reason tha: 
they will possibly do it only to suit their 
own conveniences. 

Usttaldo F. Laguitar 
Ex-City Councilor 
Ormoc City 

* * * 
CEBITS PRIDE 

We would like to call your attention 
to your mistake in connection with your 
publication of a photo of candidates for 
Buiibining Pilipinas (WG, July 6) t 




In the line up of me picture, in J 
extreme right, you mistakenly placed the 
name of Connie Gonzales when it should 
be Sally de Jos Reyes representing Ce- 
bu. Miss De los Reyes is a doctor of 
optometry and was topnotcher in the 
recent board examinations. She is the 
manager of the De los Reyes Optical 
and Music Supply of this city. 

Dr. Emma Ybafiez, OJD + 
29-31 P, Gullas st, Corner Balintaw^k 

Cebu City 

* * # 
BRILLIANT, BUT UN APPRECIATED 

Thank you for your coverage of the 
Manila Film Festival (WG, July 6)* To 
Mayor Antonio J. Villegas; Yebal 

I have observed that nobody among 
the WG readers whose letters are 
lished seems to notice the brilliance of 
the column of C Prigo {Top Of The 
Week), By the way, is C. Prigo a he 
or a she? Whatever it is, he is such a 
bright and talented writer. How abroit 
printing a write-up about him? 

La Rainne' Garcia 
616 Mabini Extension 
Cabanatuan City 



(C, Prigo is a he. He is a well-kmnun 
writer [addicted to physical culture] 
slaving in a government office that cmt» 
not appreciate the brand of his humor 
and wit; hence the pseudonym — Ed. 
* * / * 

INSULTING IMAGE 

The producers of the picture Mar p 
Biday have insulted Uocanas. Th? * 

grap 





Best for salads, 
real Italian dishes. 
So easy to cook, 
so easy to serve, k ^ 
Economical too, ? 





manufactured by REPUBUC FLOUR MIUS d 1S i r .bui^ by H* |»«Wk i.ou**Rd*t*4 c«ir*#r»*i«m 

RUST IN THE PWUPflNB H tt, ' (~<3 SZZTn\ 

Pfonetr SL, Pasig, Riz^ * Tel. 6*25-21 *y£M . S^l ^Sfllf^ 



LETTERS 
LETTERS 

tribute that Asians can produce jurists 
who are on the same level as Occiden- 
tals. 

RAFAEL L. PESA 
Far Eastern University 
Manila 

GRAPHIC ADDICT 

I want to honestly convey my appre- 
ciation of and interest in GRAPHIC, Al- 
low me to tell you that 1 am a pre-war 
lover of the pre-war GRAPHIC, 

Although the new GRAPHIC is in dif- 
ferent format and in new hands* I still 
enjoy reading it not only because of its 
immense coverage of important issues 
and events but also because of its Stu- 
dents* literary Contest, Fiction, and 
Poetry. 

PERFECTO B> CATAN 
Tanauan, Leyte 

4 * ♦ , * 

T ABOUT MLQ, JR. 

Were the parents of Manuel L< Que • 
zon, Jr., still alive, they would have 
been very proud of him. When any or 
his articles appears in GRAPHIC, I turn 
to it first. I get disappointed when I 
don't find an article by him. 

I would be very happy if an article 
about him would be published. What is 
his calling? Educational attainment? 
Why is he single until bow? Has he not 
yet met his ideal girl? What are the 
qualities he wants his ideal girl to have? 

SEVERA ASUNCION 
Cebu City 

* * * . 
OBSESSED 

The article of Rev, Fr, Francisco Ara- 
neta, S.J., entitled Love under your 
God And Man column {GRAPBV7, 
Oct, 19) has kept me thfcking. 

1 would appreciate it Very much if 
you could publish this letter in your 
magazine to let Fr. Araneta know that 
I am very interested in knowing where 
and how to get in touch with him. 

1 do enjoy reading your magazine — 
its my favorite weekly. Kudos to the 
entire staff! 

ROSEMARY PEffALOSA 
College of Commerce and 
Business Administration 
University of Santo Tomas 
Manila 

* * >> 

who's being: used? 

I write to inform Mr, Reynaldo B, 
Fua of San Jose, Samar, that what he 
saw on the picture about the Philcag 
(GRAPHIC, Sept, 21, p. 14) shows that 
the Filipinos are using American tools, 
not that we are being used as tools of 
American interests* 

ANTONIO SAN JO 
25 San } 
: Morong. 

WIDOWS CLAIM IGNOREO 

I am the widow of the late Nicome- 
des Juanga, a deceased USAFFE soldier, 
For many years now my claim for gra- 
tuity benefits has been pending payment 
in the Philippine Veterans Administra- 
tion, Veterans Memorial Bldg., Arroce- 
ros st f Manila, 

I wrote to the FVA, Manila about 10 
long months ago, but until now I have 
not received any reply, in spite of the 
fact that 1 knew the PVA received my 
letter because it was sent through the 



GRAPHIC Second Christmas Number 





i 




Every mother wants 
the best for her child 

that's why mothers buy Milkmaid 




Milkmaid 

SWEETENED 

M 



When it comes to your children's 
health and well-being a few cent- 
os should not matter. 

j*»r Milkmaid it's true you pay a little more 
but remember Milkmaid is pure cow's milk 
rich in Butterfat(that costly ingredient found 
only in real cow's milk). 

MILKMAID. 



Milkmaid promotes faster growth and gives 
baby stronger resistance to infection. 
Milkmaid has all the extra vitamins and 
extra nourishment necessary for your child- 
ren's health, strength and vitality. 
Milkmaid is guara/hteed by Nestle known 
the world over for quality milk products for 
a hundred years now. 




Milkmaid is a Nestle product 




• •certainly worth the difference in price 
A part of the Filipino home for over 50 years 



100 years hi the service 
of Nvtrition throughout 
the world 



December 21, 1966 



induced *tb come to the Philippines. 
Reciprocal tax concessions between the 
two countries will go far toward attract- 
ing fresh Swiss capital investments for 
Philippine enterprises. 

It should be interesting to our people 
to know that Swiss-Philippine unions 
have been generally happy and fruitful 
whether living in the ^Philippines or in 
Switzerland, While in the Philippines the 
case of Col. Hans Menzi is well known, 
it is not as well known either in Swit- 
zerland or the Philippines that the Post- 
master-General of Switzerland, Dr. Vi- 
cente Tuason, is a Filipino descendant. 
His father had come to study here but 
having met a girl, whom he later mar- 
ried, he settled down in his wife's home- 
land. Besides Dr. Tuason, there is a 
daughter borne of that union, who is a 
well-known star on the local stage. 

Tagalog-Speaking 

There are other unions in Switzerland 
or products thereof, The former Rosita 
Rivera of the early Philippine films is 
now a grandmother living in retirement 
in this country with her husband, Mr. 
Frederick Schaer, whom some will re- 
member as the owner of the popular 
Astoria restaurant on the Escolla dur- 
ing prewar days, famous for its confec- 
tioneries, They had met in Hongkong 
while Mr. Schaer was chef de cuisine of 
the old Hongkong hoteJL They have chil- 
dren and grandchildren in Switzerland 
and Manila., It is remarkable that the 
children speak Tagalog as often and well 
as they speak English and Swiss. 

This continuing and widening inter- 
course goes on. One of my early pleasant 
duties in Berne was to attend the wed- 
ding of a young Filipino lawyer, who, 
while taking his doctorate m Madrid, 
met a Swiss girl in the Swiss Embassy 
of that city. They came to get married 
early this year in the girl's home city. 
The groom is the son of Congressman 
Castillo of Bohol. With more young peo- 
ple coming to this country to study, more 
and more are falling in love with Swiss 
girls and are following the precedent set 
by the elder Tuason. 

Is Philippine attachment to Switzer- 
land due to Risal, to whom I credit the 
early beginning? of Philippine-Swiss re- 
lationship? We cannot be too precise but 
there are certain significant happenings 
that make it look so. Consider these facts; 

Rizal came here and stayed in Swit- 
zerland during May and June in 1887 in 
the company of Dr. Maximo Viola. Ap- 
parently they were merely tourists but 
they certainly observed carefully, record- 
ing almost every detail of their impres- 
sions and experiences- He visited ScBaff- 
hausen to where he crossed the Rhine 
from Germany below the scenic falls, 
staying at the Hotel Muller in that city; 
Basel, staying in the Alte Bayrische Bier- 
haUe (a hotel-restaurant and beer hall); 
Berne, staying at the Schweizerhof Ho- 
tel; and in Geneva, where he passed his 
26th birthday. 

While certainly Rizal must have 
thought of the possibility of death at a 
not-too-distant future while enjoying 
Swiss hospitality, perhaps even a heroic 
death, could anybody have even dreamed 
then that it would take a Swiss to make 
the first and best revered monument to 
his memory? But that's what happened. 
And so, that is another thread that was 
woven into the mystic design that has 
guided the spontaneous development of 
Philippine-Swiss relations. 

When a committee was organized in 
Manila in 1905 to set up the first na- 
tional monument to Rizal, largely in- 
spired by the well-known publicist, Don 
Pascual Poblete, it was decided that an 



Bonds of friendship 




GEMMA IN SWITZERLAND 

Gemma Cruz Araneta with Swiss Philippine couples, Mr. and 
Mrs. Paul Wett&tein, nee Mila Montenegro of Dumaguete 
City, left, and Mr, and Mrs, Jean Mairet, nee Betty Mateos 
of Manila, Photo was taken during Gemma's recent Swiss tour. 




SWISS-PHIIJPF1NE BUSINESSMEN 

Swiss business interests in the Philippines are manifested by 
Dr. Zuellig (now a Filipino citizen) of Zuellig and Co., Dr 
Luk Keller of Ed. A. Keller and Co., and Ernest Pfenninger 
formerly of Menzi and Co., now honorary Philippine consul in 
Zurich. Lady is Mrs. Theodore Seller, gen. manager's wife 




n T7 . , SPECIAL RELATIONS 

Dr Vicente Ttiamn, center, postmaster general of Switzer- 
land, ts shown with Ambassador Modesto Farolan (right) and 
Mr, and Mrs. F Schaer (left). Mrs, Schaer is the former 
Kosita Rivera of Filipino movies and Mr. Schaer owned the 
plush prewar Astoria restaurant, located on Escolta. Manila, 



international competition was the best 
means of producing an appropriate de- 
sign. This competition was won by an 
Italian artist but when the contract for 
the job of making the monument came, 
he failed to meet the guarantee require- 
ments. The committee, therefore, called 
upon the winner of the second prize, Dr. 
Richard Kissling, a well-known sculptor 
of Zurich, who had already gained fame 
in designing and building such well- 
known Swiss monuments as the William 
Tell, Fontana amj Vadian, and the 
Escher Fountain, to undertake the job. 
Kissling accepted the commission. 

As at that time, Kissling was already 
advanced in years, he enlisted the assist- 
ance of another well-known sculptor by 
the name of Pessina, of Ligornetto, of 
Canton Tessin, in Italian Switzerland, 
with his own pupil and understudy, R. 
Wening, working with Pessina, Wening 
is a distinguished sculptor also now ad- 
vancing in years but still active and 
prospering in his own specialty, animal 
sculpture, He is making a trip to Africa 
for this purpose this January. He was 
the source of all this information as Dr, 
Kissling passed away in 1926 or 1927. 

It is obvious that Kissling, whose crea- 
tion is still the best interpretation of 
and tribute to Rizal in stone and bronze, 
is not just an ordinary artist. He had 
studied art and married in Rome, His 
doctorate, honoris causa, was conferred 
by the University of Zurich in recogni- 
tion of his achievements. He was also 
given the honorary citizenship of Zurich, 
having been born in Wolfwil in the 
Canton of Solothom on April 15, 1948. 
He had one daughter Stella. His grand- 
daughter, Mine. Jacques Brocher-Koller 
lives in Chemin Bryon, Geneva. 

"Stella" 

The Kissling design and model was 
entered in the Rizal competition under 
the nom de plume of "Stella," which is 
the name of his only daughter. He re- 
ceived the order for the job through the 
Swiss consul in Manila, Mr. SprunglL 
The execution of the full-size statue and 
other sculptural details, as they appear 
today on the monument in Manila, was 
done in 191142, with Pessina modeling 
the figures and a J. Grau doing the plas- 
ter cast. The casting in bronze was en- 
trusted to the Fonderie d'Art in Paris. 
The stone used for the base and the 
obelisk or shaft of the monument is the 
far-famed Gotthard granite quarried in 
Wassen, Canton of Uri< The obelisk was 
originally one whole solid piece of gran- 
ite but it was so heavy no shipping com- 
pany could handle it, so it had to be 
cut into three parts. 

The monument was finally accepted 
by a Philippine commission especially 
sent for the purpose and it was shipped 
to Manila in 1913. Due to initial difficul- 
ties with the ground set aside for its 
erection, following inspection by Wening, 
Kissling s assistant, who went to Manila 
to supervise construction, and later on 
because World War I broke out soon 
alter the monument reached Manila, ac- 
tual construction and unveiling did not 
take place until after the end of the 
war. 

That's how by the mysterious inter- 
vention of events Rizal had helped to 
open the way for and make possible 
close Swiss-Philippine relationship. The 
national hero had come to Switzerland 
to find inspiration and Swiss artists had 
turned into a beautiful and much re- 
vered monument now standing on Phil- 
ippine soil an admiring understanding 
and high concept of Rizals great ideals 
and patriotic life. What happy coinci- 
dences indeed!— # 



January 5 f 1966 



17 



7 




SCIENTIST or HUMANIST? 




by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr 



# IF THE question were asked, <4 What 
distinguishes contemporary civilization 
from every civilization which preceded 
it?" and the answer had to be given in 
a single word, I believe the answer 
would be "machines " or, to use a broad- 
er term, "technology " "physical sci- 
ence/' Not, of course, that there was 
a total absence of anything that could 
be called a machine in times past, Hie 
steam locomotive and the steamship 
have been with us a good many years, 
the Roman ballista or catapult for hurl- 
ing stones at the enemy was in essence 
a cannon, and even the primitive water- 
wheel used for irrigation can lay claim 
to being some sort of machine. But the 
all-pervading presence and use of ma- 
chines is something distinctively contem- 
porary. 

Modern life depends on machines to 
a degree impossible 50 years earlier 
and unthinkable a century ago. The re- 
cent power failure in the Northeastern 
section of the United States practically 
brought life to a standstill for many 
hours and showed how easily modem 
man can be crippled, at least temporari- 
ly, by the failure of a single technolo- 
gical invention in the vast power net* 
work of a highly industrialized area. 

Our sustenance depends increasingly 
on machines - starvation has been ward- 
ed off from millions in India and other 
countries by the surplus wheat of the 
United States, produced by the use of 
machines. Our health depends on ma- 
chines - medicines, ranging from the 
lowly aspirin to the proud wide-spec- 
trum antibiotic, are produced by ma- 
chines* Our movement depends on ma- 
chines — from the jeepney and auto- 
mobile to the jet to the space vehicle 
to the apartment dwellers elevator. Ex- 
cept for short distances, no one is will- 
ing to walk, unless out of unavoidable 
necessity or for relaxation or exercise, 
and some forms of exercise are now done 
with the help of machines — take tie 
much advertised relacizor or the electric 
horse for losing weight. 

Our enjoyment depends more and 
more on machines — we see motion pic- 
tures produced and projected by ma- 
chines in a theater air-conditioned by 
machines, and possibly, as we watch, 
we eat candy gotten from a vending 
machine. Some people even use me- 
chanical toothbrushes. It would be an 
entertaining pastime, if we had nothing 
better to do, to imagine one day's exist- 
ence, if every modern machine and 

18 



v«- «^mlm The fight against illiteracy is as scientific and technologically perfect 
.very product of a modern machme ™ aLd, and meanwhile, as men could be at the time. Humanity 

were sudderdy to -d»^. °g £ "SlL -pply the defect by provid ; was treated to the bdeous of 



were suddenly to uisappcrti* - - * l 

member of the most backward tribe in ^^^^ mass^dTs'semination of those same scientists using captured Al- 
the most inaccessible part of the eartn > n | ormation tQ other wise isolated vil- lied flyers for tests on the effect of ex- 
knows the experience. , Swift transportation enables peo- plosive decompression on the eardrums 
The term "Machine Age" is a very apt kges. J** V _ ^ f , > eardrums burst and ^ 
one indeed to describe our tones. Were plefwia e!j separat y suffe red torture, which was all observed, 
it not for the dramatic military use to customs to meet § hed d duJ noted with ^ 

^rwJsasra: e^v^^^>* v 

Sation T might not even think of spreading education and culture all over 

can^rthis tlie Atomic Age. We would the world are at hand, thanks to tech- 

look on nuclear fission as another means nology. - • 

o power machines, as did pre-World It is incumbent upon modem man to 

WarH textbooks of chemistry and phys- give every encouragement to science 

ics We do everything by means of and technology, to its progress and ever- 

machines. We have reached the point widening use. In fact, his survival large- 

where machines run other machines - ly depends upon it. Human society and 

automation - and we talk of "thinking" its individual members must further sci- 

machines - the computers - grossly entific advance. Insofar as we fail to 

misunderstanding and abusing the word do so, especially we Filipinos in this 
"think." 

The Machine Age 

This then is the Machine Age, or the 
Age of Technology, or the Age of Phys- 



country of ours which can profit so 
much from technology, we shall bear 
the burden of guilt and we shall answer 
for it to history. 



might read a room thermometer. Hu- 
man flesh, if reports are to be believed, 
was turned into soap, just as horses are 
turned into glue, 

A human being, if given a purely 
"scientific" mentality - I put the word 
in quotation marks, for this is not true 
science — can be as efficient and im- 
partial as a machine. A meat grinder 
will, with equal efficiency, grind pork, 
beef, chicken and, if you put it in the 
right, that is, the wrong place, your 
hand with the same unfeeling impartial- 
ity; and a dehumanized man will, with 
the same efficiency and impartiality, 



"Which is very far from saying that wipe out weeds, insects, and men it 



colonial neonles, the age of modern art the temple or moaern civmzauon. " , . „ " 7 — r , r ", 

1 XateVS P to maf mean to those ence does in fact sit a God over our Jacques Mantain Modern man placed 
quaUfied to judge - it is the age of destinies - we have allowed it to do his hope m machines in technique, and 
freedom; this with more than a grain so through our own fault. Modem man in mechanical and industrial civilization 
of salt - but it is THE MACHINE has been so impressed by the achieve- -without wisdom to dominate them and 
AGE, with a vengeance. And therein ments of science that he has forgotten put them at the service of human good 
tea threat to humanity which would one basic fact - that modern science and freedom, for he expected freedom 
not disappear even if/by some un- is a tool, just as the first stick used to from the development of external tech- 
deserved mercy of God, the very notion bury a seed was a tool, meant to serve mques themselves, not from any ascetic 
of atomic destruction were to vanish him and comfort him, not him into a effort toward the internal possession of 
irretrievably from the mind of every monster in whose presence he alternate- self. And how can one who does not 
man woman, and child on this earth; ly dances and cowers. More, he is in possess the standards of human life, 
What is the effect of the machine danger of turning into a machine him- which are metaphysical, apply them tc 
on men? Only an insane man would self. our use of the machine? The law of the 
deny die uncounted benefits of modern ^ Dan£er machine, which is the law of matter, 
technology. There are precious few who B will ^apply itself to him, and enslave 
advocate a return to the jungle, and I The Bible tells us that God made man him." ( 
doubt whether any would persist in in His image and likeness. Man is in Man feels that he is almost in contro. 



The tremendous spread of knowledge machine, and the Spanish proverb is in alternative is all too often chosen. flnC 

has been made possible by the cheap ever greater danger of being applicable nuclear power, which should be li$ ti!1 - 

mass production of all sorts of printed to the situation. We demand more and our cities, is instead poised to destroy 

materials, which in turn are rapidly dis- more technology, more and more sci- them. Thus, knowledge of bacteria > ? 

tributed all over the world. More pro- enoe, and we are right, but we must used not only to destroy them, but 

gressive methods of education are pos- be aware and must beware of the dan- control or destrov people by means <» 

sible because of scientific inventions ger. bacteria. Thus, mass media are used V 

such as educational television and tape The Nazi scientists were just about degrade rather than elevate men, to o«" 

-graphic 




vert rather than convert. 

A scientific education, thea> is not the 
solution to our ills. It is not the solu- 
tion if it is divorced from studies of an- 
other and higher order. Science pres- 
ents us with. facts and hypotheses. But 
bare facts and hypotheses are of little 
use in themselves, where the good life 
is concerned. All the knowledge about 
vibrations, their frequencies and the 
ways and means of producing and con- 
trolling them are of little value, unless, 
to use an example, we use that knowl- 
edge to record a musical performance 
with greater purity and fidelity, in or- 
der to uplift the soul of a man who is 
unable to attend the performance him- 
self. It will do a man no good to arrive 
hours sooner by the forthcoming super- 
sonic transports if he does not know 
what to do with the time he has saved. 
What am I trying to say by all this? 



We demand more and more 
technology, more and more 
science, and we are right. 
But we must be aware that 
this has some dangers, too 



Simply that if we are to live meaningful 
ives, there are other disciplines which 
are of even greater importance than 
■ethnology. We can build a more truly 
wman Me, in the best sense of the 
'Old, if we give its rightful due to the 
tody of the humanities- The develop- 
ment of a technological civilization de- 
mands more, not less, appreciation of 
^ humanities — arts, letters, politics, 
Aiiosophy, religion, etc., and a more 
trough grounding in them. 
Science itself cannot tell us how it 
houid be used, A scientist can tell us 
' -ow to freeze a living human body, he 
^aot tell us, purely and solely as a 
-tentist, whether or not it ought to be 
°ae + He can tell us how to transmit 
formation, he cannot tell us, purely 
^ solely as a scientist, whether a pri- 
* misdeed ought to be turned into 



a public scandal He can produce new 
paints for a painter, he cannot, purely 
and solely as a scientist, tell the painter 
how to produce a masterpiece. He can 
tell us how to keep healthy, how to feel 
comfortable, he cannot tell us why we 
should keep healthy or why we are en- 
titled to comfort. He cannot tell us how 
to be good or how to be happy or why. 
Those fields in which the scientist as 
such is incompetent are the fields in 
which man as man, a 'rational, moral, 
esthetic, loving being, lives the life prop- 
er to himself, as distinct from and su 
perior to the rest of visible Creation, 
How science can benefit mankind can 
be determined only by disciplines out- 
side the realm of science. Goodness can 
be understood and inculcated only 
through religion and ethics. Art can be 
produced and improved only through 
the canons of art Vast areas of truth 
are beyond the pale of physical science 
and can be explored and ascertained 
only through other means. It is only 
through the humanities that science can 
perform its true function, which is to 
help in the attainment of human self- 
fulfillment. The proper role of science, 
and therefore its highest achievement, 
can be attained only in the context of 
a truly humanist civilization, what Ma- 
ritain calls integral humanism. 

Emphasis On Humanities 

Our Constitution imposes on the 
state the obligation to encourage and aid 
science and the humanities. Few of its 
provisions are wiser, and few are more 
sadly neglected. That- the constitution 
al mandate has thus far been ineffec- 
tively implemented, despite the most 
strenuous efforts of our educators, is a 
standing reproach to our government. 
Attempts are more easily discerned in 
the line of the sciences, but in the hu- 
manities. . , With the accelerated growth 
of science and its impact on contem- 
porary life, a growth undreamed of by 
the Fathers of the Constitution in 1934, 
the emphasis on the humanities cannot 
be delayed, 

Our knowledge of the humanities 
must grow and be given every encour- 
agement to do so. The place of the 
thinker, the historian, the artist must 
be secured in our esteem, which alone 
will make it secure in our society. We 
must get a firm grasp of values, of the 
proper place of different kinds of knowl- 
edge and endeavor, their interrelation 
and mutual subordination and their 
proper objectives, and this we can do 
only with the aid of the humanities. We 
must strengthen our faith in the value 
of man and the subordinate value of 
things, as intended to serve us, individ- 
ually and collectively. Man rightly pins 
high hopes on science only when sci- 
ence is held in the grip of man, not 
man in the grip of science. 

In the so-called advanced countries, 
technology has already outpaced the 
humanities, in some with disastrous re- 
sults, in others with impending disaster, 
but massive and, we hope, ultimately 
successful exertions are being made to 
correct the imbalance. Here we are al- 
most at the bare beginnings of both, 
quantitatively certainly, and also, to a 
lesser extent, qualitatively. It is within 
our power to achieve and maintain a 
balanced growth of the two. In our 
present economic and political plight it 
is easy to overlook the importance of 
both but more especially of the human- 
ities/ We can ill afford to do so. We 
dare not— # 



A brain-side view of inventors: 

What makes 
an inventor tick 

by JESUS PEMPENGCO, JR. 



• THE POPULAR image of an in- 
ventor is a man with disheveled Jong 
hair and unshaved beard. He is usual- 
ly caricatured with a wrapped box con* 
taining his latest brainchild while pa- 
tiently waiting at the reception room 
of a patent attorney. 

My long association with local in- 
ventors as secretary and public relations 
officer of the Filipino Inventors Society 
Inc. has proved the contrary. During 
meetings, our local inventors are gen- 
erally neat in their well-pressed Barong 
Tagalog or shirt and tie. Certainly none 
of that disheveled look. Their ages 
range from 25 to 65. Distinguishing 
them from ordinary people is a difficult 
task. 

What makes our inventors different? 

Inventors have some common charac- 
teristics. They have keen observation 
of necessities, patience in experiment- 
ing, creative minds, and jealous secrecy 
about their inventions. 

Necessity is often the "mother of in- 
vention/' Inventors easily become aware 
of necessities, whether they are the 
small daily necessities of everyone or 
the special necessities of a particular 
group. No inventor in his right mind 
will work on an invention that is not 
needed, 

Unlimited Patience 

A person who gives up an experiment 
after the first 10 or more failures can- 
not be an inventor. Rare are the in- 
ventions that succeed in such a small 
number of attempts. If an inventor can- 
not solve a problem frontally, he at- 
tacks it from underneath, from above, 
rom behind; or laterally, When asked 
why he would not give up after so ma- 
ny failures in an experiment that did 
not give any positive answer, Edison rep- 
lied that each failure was a negative 
answer that showed him what would 
not work. His technique was to ask Na- 
ture for the correct answer again and 
again through experiments until She gave 
herself away. 

The experimental stage is the most dif- 
ficult part, as any inventor will tell you. 
Usually inventors are rich only in ideas. 
Hence, it is very difficult for them to 
make experiments at their expense with- 
out sacrificing the family budget. 

Creative thinking is inborn among in- 
ventors althought it may be developed 
in almost everyone. This is the ability 
to create something new out of exist- 
ing laws and principles unlike in judi- 
cial thinking which is merely deciding 
on what should be done according to 
laws and principles, Thus, a lawyer or 
a doctor studies a case to see what law 
or remedy should he applied and there- 
by makes use of judicial thinking to 
produce something new out of the prin- 
ciples he has studied. 

There was a housewife who was faced 
with an ordinary household problem 
which she solved through creative think- 
ing. Two families were living in their 
house and their two lavanderas frequent- 
ly quarrel about the scanty water be- 
cause they got their water for laundry 



from the same faucet. If one of them 
allowed the other to fill up her big 
banyera first, she would be delayed in 
her washing because of the very low 
water pressure and neither would want 
to give way. One way of solving this 
problem was to have a two-faucet out- 
let but tills would entail too much ex- 
pense. 

After giving much thought to the 
problem for some time, she got an emp- 
ty powdered milk can, bore two holes 
near the top and inserted a wire through 
them so that she had a pail-like contain- 
er. Then she bore two holes opposite 
sides of the can near the bottom. She 
hung this pail-like contraption on the 
faucet and opened it. The water came 
out in equal spurts in opposite direc- 
tions from the bottom of the can and 
fell into the waiting banyera. Thus, she 
solved a common problem with simple 
housewife creativeness. 

By nature inventors are jealously sec- 
retive about their ideas and inventions. 
Perhaps this is due to the fact that no- 
body has a monopoly of ideas and a lit- 
tle hint about a good invention indis- 
creetly mentioned to another inventor 
may enable the latter to develop a bet- 
ter idea about it Inventors generally 
have to keep quiet about their Inven- 
tions until they are patented. 

Usually ideas about an invention 
come at such unholy hour as midnight. 
When they do, the inventor has to get 
up and write them down lest they are 
forgotten. Sometimes, they come out of 
the blue while an inventor is walking or 
riding in a bus or jeepney. 

Steps In Inventing 

How does, an inventors mind work? 
More or less it follows the same proced- 
ure done by the housewife mentioned 
above. First step is getting aware of the 
problem — how to divide the scanty 
water between the two lavanderas at 
minimum expense. Second step is ex- 
perimenting with the use of creative 
thinking. Before the housewife got the 
idea of using the pail-like contraption, 
she first tried placing the two banyeras 
together under the faucet but much of 
the water fell inside the space between 
them and was wasted, Hence, the idea 
of a middle container that will serve 
as an intermediary vessel came up. By 
experiment she also found that it was 
better to have the opposite holes near 
the bottom of the can instead of half- 
way along the sides. Lastly, the final 
testing and the results, 

There is a new government office, 
the Philippine Inventors Commission, 
that will not only give financial, tech- 
nical, and legal assistance to local in- 
ventors but also promote creativeness 
among our people* it was created under 
R.A. 3850 which was signed into law 
by President Diosdado Macapagal last 
yean This Commission will give Pres- 
idential Awards in cash and medals to 
ideas that will solve our national prob- 
lems through a "Best Idea Contest" It 
has its offices at room 223-228 Shurdut 
Building, in Intramuros, Manila.— # 

19 



STATE 
OF AFFAIRS 



by ADRIAN 
E. CRISTOBAL 




A conservative ambition 



• PLATO, in many ways a young man's philosopher, never- 
theless placed the political power of his Republic in the hands 
of olderly men. These Guardians are, of course, distinguished 
for wisdom, experience, prestige, and integrity, that seem to 
be evident with age, when the earthly passions have cooled. 
Needless to say, their leadership is conservative, for in Plato's 
Republic, an ideal one, change would be inconceivable. 

Now President Marcos has picked for his cabinet men way 
beyond their sixties — Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo. These 
men will preside over three sensitive areas in our public life: 
the administration of justice, our relations with other na- 
tions, and the education of the young. The fear is that they 
might conserve what is not worth conserving (the influence 
of traditional relationships), but then, it must not be for- 
gotten that they have a young President. • 

It is significant that President Marcos explained their 
choice on the basis of their moral qualities — prestige and 
integrity — and not for their dynamic views. The suggestion 
is that Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo will behave with rectitude 
in office, something which the Republic has not had for a 
long, long time. 

If for nothing else, the presence of these three men in 
the cabinet, recalling to national memory the less corrupt, 
perhaps uncorrupted, times of the Commonwealth, will help 
restore popular faith and respect for the government. This 
is naturally a conservative ambition. 

However, Marcos has never displayed a mystical reverence 
for age as such. Young and dynamic himself, he has known, 
in the public career that reached its high point in the pres- 
idential campaign, what the young could do in critical times. 
For this reason, he will continue to command the services of 
the young, as shown, to begin with, in his choice of Rafael 
M. Salas as executive secretary and Jose D. Aspiras as press 
secretary* 

It is most likely also (indeed, if they had not been ap- 
pointed yet) that he will "balance" Yulo with the young law- 
yer, Johnny Ponce Enrile; Ramos with Minister Manuel Col- 
lantes (who, being a bachelor, could but for his age qualify 
for a guardianship in Plato's Republic), and Romulo with O, 
D. Corpus of the UP, There is even talk of making James 
Barbers, another young man, deputy police chief of Manila, 

These young men, considering the pressures of public of- 
fice, will most likely act as some sort of executive vice 
presidents to Secretaries Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo who could, 
if they choose, perform like British ministers leaving the ex- 
ecutive business to their undersecretaries. 

In any case, this looks like a* logical arrangement — age 
and youth, experience and enthusiasm, policy and action. It 
should be given a chance to work out in practice. National 
greatness could lie there as in anywhere else. — # 



V 



J 



Some men have more energy 
than other men, and it is all 
in a built-in power house 
in each man/ not in some 
magic potion or supernatural 
gift Filipinos have this 
extraordinary resource and 
could profit from it once 
they conquer one bad habit 




4 



# THOSE OF US who had been fot 
lowing through the papers the prodi- 
gious leap-frogging of the three presiden- 
tial aspirants in the months before the 
last elections are amazed at their seem- 
ingly inexhaustible energies. Whence 
comes that tremendous endurance? 
What is the source of such physical stam- 
ina? What provides men like these with 
that mysterious extra propulsion? \ 
I- would not myself he able to do 
even a mere fraction of what they had 
been doing — their moving from place 
to place, I mean. Naturally 1 would 
not, you would say, since I am older 
than any of the three. That is correct, 
but I don't think a few years can ac- 
tually explain the difference, In fact, I 
believe I can outstrip them any time 
and handily, too, in the short sprints, 
for I was quite a hundred-yard dasher 
in my younger days. I am sure I am 
physically stronger, being a physical 
culturist of sorts (barbells, shadow- 
boxing, yogai and all that sort of thing 
- in short, I have been afflicted with 
the mania for keeping fit). But then, 
after reading The Energies Of Men by 
William James, I came to discover that 
the sources of these men's tremendous 
energies are more than merely physical 

Secret Of Second Wind 

I had not before bothered with Wil- 
liam, knowing his brother Henry whom 
I consider rather too heavy for my 
mental health. But this particular piece 
by William is surprisingly popular in 
" style and not a bit ponderous. It was 
while I was puzzling out the myste- 
rious vitality of our national candidates 
that I came upon this essay which gave 
me, aside from an hour of delightful 
reading, the answer not only to our 
original question on man's amazing 
endurance, but also to the national 
habit of inferiority, which has made us 
blind to our full potentials as a peo- 
ple* 

The essay, The Energies Of Men, 
starts with a discussion of the univer- 
sally known phenomenon known as 
"second wind. Too often, to para- 
phrase James, we desist from further 
exertion as soon as we feel the initial 
signs of fatigue. We say we have had 
enough. But there are times when an 
unusual necessity forces us to go on 
(perhaps a deadline to meet, or a per- 
sonal need to finish whatever work we 



20 



may be doing at the moment - for 
this, or perhaps another reason" — may- 
be a word of honor given not to ful- 
fill which would mean more than death 
to us, and suddenly this surprising 
'hing we call "second wind" occurs. 
The fatigue which but a moment ago 
we thought would certainly exhaust us 
to death if we did not heed it, passes 
away and we are strong again and feel 
as fresh if not fresher than when first 
we started. 

Hidden Sources 

What has happened? We Jiave evi- 
dently tapped, according to James, a 
new source of energy which was, until 
then, unbiown to us or "masked from 
us by the fatigue-obstacle which we 
had just obeyed/' We are all aware of 
this thing known as "second irind" but 
pnly a few of us have used it to ad- 
vantage. In fact, James suspects, there 
must be layer upon layer ofi energies 
— a third or even a fourth "wind" of 
which we may hardly be conscious, 

James extends this to mental activity. 
Mental activity, he says, slpws the 
phenomenon as well as does jthe phys- 
ical, and "in exceptional cases we may 
find, beyond the very extremity of fa- 
tigue-distress, amounts of case and 
power that we never dreamed ourselves 
to own, — sources of strength habitual- 
ly not taxed at all, because jiabitually 
we neyer push through the obstruction, 
never pass these early criticajl points," 
By which he means the obstruction of 
first fatigue to which we invariably 
succumb as a matter of habit. 

The human body is a wonderful mech- 
anism composed of organisms with 
stored up reserves of energy. How 
else can we explain where the amount 
of food we take three times a' day goes 
— surely not all of it goes down the 
pit? This energy is seldom called upon 
to work for us, with the result that we 
accomplish only so much and no more. 
We have, in other words, formed the 
bad habit of supposing that we have 
worked quite enough that this is all we 
are actually capable of doing in the 
first place. But if we discover that we 
have layers of untapped energies stashed 
away somewhere within us, \yaitjng to 
be used for our good — I am sure the 
result will be truly amazing. That is, if 
we actually use these energies and not 
merely discover them. 

^graphic 



be induced to come to the Philippines. 
Reciprocal tax concessions between the 
two countries wi]< go far toward attract- 
ing fresh Swiss capital investments for 
Philippine enterprises* 

It should be interesting to our people 
to know that Swiss-Philippine unions 
have been generally happy and fruitful 
whether living in the ^Philippines or in 
Switzerland, While in the Philippines the 
case of Col. Hans Menzi is well known, 
it is not as well known either in Swit- 
zerland or the Philippines that the Post- 
master-General of Switzerland, Dr. Vi- 
cente Tuason, is a Filipino descendant. 
His father had come to study here but 
having met a girl, whom he later mar- 
ried, he settled down in his wife's home- 
land* Besides Drv Tuason, there is a 
daughter borne of that union, who is a 
well-known star on the local stage* 

Tagalog-Speaking 

There are other unions in Switzerland 
or products thereof. The former Rosita 
Rivera of the early Philippine films is 
now a grandmother living in retirement 
in this country with her husband, Mr. 
Frederick Schaer, whom some will re- 
member as the owner of the popular 
Astoria restaurant on the Eseolta dur- 
ing prewar days, famous for its confec- 
tioneries. They had met in Hongkong 
while Mr. Schaer was chef de cuisine of 
the old Hongkong hotel* They have chil- 
dren and grandchildren in Switzerland 
and Manila. t It is remarkable that the 
children speak Tagalog as often and well 
as they speak English and Swiss* 

This continuing and widening inter* 
course goes on. One of my early pleasant 
duties in Berne was to attend the wed- 
ding of a young Filipino lawyer, who, 
while taking his doctorate in Madrid, 
met a Swiss girl in the Swiss Embassy 
of that city* They came to get married 
' early this year in the girl's home city. 
The groom is the son of Congressman 
Castillo of Bohol. With more young peo- 
ple coming to this country to study, more 
and more are falling in love with Swiss 
girls and are following the precedent set 
by the elder Tuason. 

Is Philippine attachment to Switzer- 
land due to Rizal, to whom I credit the 
early beginnings of Philippine- Swiss re- 
lationship? We cannot be too precise but 
there are certain significant happenings 
that make it look so* Consider these facts: 

Rizal came here and stayed in Swit- 
zerland during May and June in 1887 in 
the company of Dr. Maximo Viola. Ap- 
parently they were merely tourists but 
they certainly observed carefully, record- 
ing almost every detail of their impres- 
sions and experiences. He visited Schaff- 
hausen to where he crossed the Rhine 
from Germany below the scenic falls, 
staying at the Hotel Muller in that city; 
Basel, staying in the Alte Bayrische Bier- 
halle (a hotel-restaurant and beer hall); 
Berne, staying at the Schweizerhof Ho- 
tel; and in Geneva, where he passed his 
26th birthday. 

While certainly Rizal must have 
thought of the possibility of death at a 
not-too-distant future while enjoying 
Swiss hospitality', perhaps even a heroic 
death, could anybody have even dreamed 
then that it would take a Swiss to make 
the first and best revered monument to 
his memory? But that's what happened. 
And so, that is another thread that was 
woven into the mystic design that has 
guided the spontaneous development of 
Philippine-Swiss relations* 

When a committee was organized in 
Manila in 1905 to set up the first na- 
tional monument to Rizal, largely in- 
spired by the well-known publicist, Don 
Pascual Poblete, it was decided that an 



Bonds of friendship 




GEMMA IN SWITZERLAND 

Gemma Cruz Aranela with Swiss Philippine cotiples, Mr. and 
Mrs, Paul Wettstein, nee Mila Montenegro of Dumaguete 
City, left, and Mr* and Mrs. Jean Mairei, nee Betty Mateos 
of Manila, Photo was taken during Gemma's recent Swiss tour. 




SWISS-PHILIPPINE BUSINESSMEN 

Swiss business interests in the Philippines are manifested by 
Dr. Zuellig (now a Filipino citizen) of Zuellig and Co., Dr. 
Luk Keller of Ed. A. Keller and Co., and Ernest Pfenninger, 
formerly of Menzi and Co., now honorary Philippine consul in 
Zurich. Lady is Mrs. Theodore Seller, gen. manager's wife. 




SPECIAL RELATIONS 

Dr. Vicente Tuason, center, posi7iiaster general of Switzer- 
land, is shown with Ambassador Modesto Farolan (right) and 
Mr. and Mrs. F. Schaer (left). Mrs. Schaer is the former 
Rosita Rivera of Filipino movies and Mr. Schaer owned the 
plush prewar Astoria restaurant, located on Eseolta, Manila, 



international competition was the best 
means of producing an appropriate de- 
sign. This competition was won by an 
Italian artist but when the contract for 
the job of making the monument came, 
he failed to meet the guarantee require- 
ments. The committee, therefore, called 
upon the winner of the second prize, Dr. 
Richard Kissling, a well-known sculptor 
of Zurich, who had already gained fame 
in designing and building such well- 
known Swiss monuments as the William 
Tell, Fontana and Vadian, and the 
Escher Fountain, to undertake the job. 
Kissling accepted the commission. 

As at that time, Kissling was already 
advanced in years, he enlisted the assist- 
ance of another well-known sculptor, by 
the name of Pessina, of Ligornetto, of 
Canton Tessin, in Italian Switzerland, 
with his own pupil and understudy, R. 
Wening, working with Pessina. Wening 
is a distinguished sculptor also now ad- 
vancing in years but still active and 
prospering in his own specialty, animal 
sculpture. He is making a trip to Africa 
for this purpose this January. He was 
the source of all this information as Dr. 
Kissling passed away in 1926 or 1927. 

It is obvious that Kissling, whose crea- 
tion is still the best interpretation of 
and tribute to Rizal in stone and bronze, 
is not just an ordinary artist. He had 
studied art and married in Rome. His 
doctorate, honoris causa, was conferred 
by the University of Zurich in recogni- 
tion of his achievements. He was also 
given the honorary citizenship of Zurich, 
having been born in Wolfwil in the 
Canton of Solothorn on April 15, 1948. 
He had one daughter Stella. His grand- 
daughter, Mme, Jacques Brocher-Koiler 
lives in Chemin iSryon, Geneva, 

"Stella* 

The Kissling design and model was 
entered in the Rizal competition under 
the nom de plume of "Stella/' which is 
the name of his only daughter* He re- 
ceived the order for the job through the 
Swiss consul in Manila, Mr. Sprungli. 
The execution of the full-size statue and 
other sculptural details, as they appear 
today on the monument in Manila, was 
done in 1911-12, with Pessina modeling 
the figures and a J. Grau doing the plas- 
ter cast. The casting in bronze was en- 
trusted to the Fonderie d*Art in Paris. 
The stone used for the base and the 
obelisk or shaft of the monument is the 
far-famed Gotthard granite quarried in 
Wassen, Canton of Uri, The obelisk was 
Originally one whole solid piece of gran- 
ite but it was so heavy no shipping com- 
pany could handle it, so it had to be 
cut into three parts* 

The monument was finally accepted 
by a Philippine commission especially 
sent for the purpose and it was shipped 
to Manila in 1913. Due to initial difficul- 
ties with the ground set aside for its 
erection, following inspection by Wening t 
Kisshng's assistant, who went to Manila 
to supervise construction, and later on 
because World War I broke out soon 
after the monument reached Manila, ac- 
tual construction and unveiling did not 
take place until after the end of the 
war. 

That's how by the mysterious inter- 
vention of events Rizal had helped to 
open the way for and make possible 
close Swiss-Philippine relationship. The 
national hero had come to Switzerland 
to find inspiration and Swiss artists had 
turned into a beautiful and much re- 
vered monument now standing on Phil- 
ippine soil an admiring understanding 
and high concept of RizaTs great ideals 
and patriotic life. What happy coinci- 
dences indeed!— # 



January 5, 1966 



17 




oulENTIST or HUMANIST? 





by MANUEL L QUEZON. Jr. 



ft IF THE question were asked, "What 
distinguishes contemporary civilization 
from every civilization which preceded 
it?" and the answer had to be given in 
i a single word, I believe the answer 
would be "machines/* or, to use a broad- 
er term, "technology,** "physical sci- 
ence/* Not, of course, that there was 
a total absence of anything that could 
be called a machine in times past. The 
steam locomotive and the steamship 
have been with us a good many years, 
the Roman hallista or catapult for hurl- 
ing stones at the enemy was in essence 
a cannon, and even the primitive water- 
wheel used for irrigation can lay claim 
to being some sort of machine. But the 
all-pervading presence and use of ma- 
chines is something distinctively contem- 
porary. 

Modern life depends on machines to 
a degree impossible 50 years earlier 
and unthinkable a century ago. The re- 
cent power failure in the Northeastern 
section of the United States practically 
brought life to a standstill for many 
hours and showed how easily modern 
man can be crippled, at least temporari- 
ly, by the failure of a single technolo- 
gical invention in the vast power net- 
work of a highly industrialized area* 

Our sustenance depends increasingly 
on machines — starvation has been ward- 
ed off from millions in India and other 
countries by the surplus wheat of the 
United States, produced by the use of 
machines. Our health depends on ma- 
chines — medicines, ranging from the 
lowlv aspirin to the proud wide-spec- 
trum antibiotic, are produced by ma- 
chines, Our movement depends on ma- 
chines — from the jeepney and auto- 
mobile to the jet to the space vehicle 
to the apartment dweller's elevator. Ex- 
cept for short distances, no one is will- 
ing to walk, unless out of unavoidable 
necessity or for relaxation or exercise, 
and some forms of exercise are now done 
with the help of machines — take the 
much advertised relacizor or the electric 
horse for losing weight. 

Our enjoyment depends more and 
more on machines — we see motion pic- 
tures produced and projected by ma- 
chines in a theater air-conditioned by 
machines, and possibly, as we watch, 
we eat candy gotten from a vending 
machine. Some people even use me- 
chanical toothbrushes, It would be an 
entertaining pastime, if we had nothing 
better to do, to imagine one day's exist- 
ence, if every modern machine and 

18 



every product of a modem machine 
were suddenly to disappear. Only a 
member of the most backward tribe in 
the most inaccessible part of the earth 
knows the experience* 

The term "Machine Age" is a very apt 
one indeed to describe our times. Were 
it not for the dramatic military use to 
which atomic power has so lamentably 
been put, with its threat of human an- 
nihilation, we might not even think of 
calling this the Atomic Age, We would 
look on nuclear fission as another means 
to power machines, as did pre- World 
War II textbooks of chemistry and phys- 
ics* We do everything by ' means of 
machines. We have reached the point 
where machines run other machines — 
automation — and we talk of "thinking*' 
machines - the computers — grossly 
misunderstanding and abusing the word 
"think,** 

The Machine Age 

This then is the Machine Age, or the 
Age of Technology, or the Age of Phys- 
ical Science, as you may wish. It is 
also the age of the emancipation of 
colonial peoples, the age of modern art 
— whatever that may mean to those 
qualified to judge — it is the age of 
freedom; this with more than a grain 
of salt - but it is THE MACHINE 
AGE, with a vengeance. And therein 
lies a threat to humanity which would 
not disappear even if, by some un- 
deserved mercy of God, the very notion 
of atomic destruction were to vanish 
irretrievably from the mind of every 
man, woman, and child on this earth, 

What is the effect of the machine 
on men? Only an insane man would 
deny the uncounted benefits of modem 
teclinology. There are precious few who 
advocate a return to the jungle, and I 
doubt whether any would persist in 
their advocacy if they were asked to do 
it first, The most ingrained humanist, 
the educator, the man of letters, the art- 
ist, the philosopher, the theologian — 
all are indebted to modern technology 
and would be most ungrateful not to 
acknowledge the debt* 

The tremendous spread of knowledge 
has been made possible by the cheap 
mass production of all sorts of printed 
materials, which in turn are rapidly dis- 
tributed all over the world. More pro- 
gressive methods of education are pos- 
sible because of scientific inventions 
such as educational television and tape 



recorders. The fight against illiteracy is as scientific and technologically perfect 
being pushed ahead, and meanwhile, as men could be at the time* Humanity 
transistors supply the defect by provid- was treated to the hideous spectacle of 
ing the means for mass dissemination of those same scientists using captured AI- 
information to otherwise isolated vil- lied flyers for tests on the effect of ex- 
lages, Swift transportation enables peo- plosive decompression on the eardrums 
pies widely separated by distance and — the flyers' eardrums burst and they 
customs to meet, with a resulting suffered torture, which was all observed, 
growth in mutual understanding and photographed, and duly noted with the 
lessening of tensions. The means for same detachment with which you or I 
spreading education and culture all over might read a room thermometer* Hu-; 
the world are at hand, thanks to tech- man flesh, if reports are to be believed, 
nology. was turned into soap, just as horses are 

It is incumbent upon modern man to turned into glue, 
give every encouragement to science A human being, if given a purely 
and technology, to its progress and ever- "sdentific* mentality — I pat the word 
widening use. In fact, his survival large- in quotation marks, for this is not true 
ly depends upon it. Human society and science — , can be as efficient and im- 
its individual members must further sci- partial as a machine. A meat grinder 
entific advance* Insofar as we fail to will, with equal efficiency, grind pork, 
do so, especially we Filipinos in this beef, chicken and, it you put it in the 
country of ours which can profit so right, that is, the wrong, place, your 
much from technology, we shall bear hand with the same unfeeling impartta!- 
the burden of guilt and we shall answer ity; and a dehumanized man will, with 
for it to history, the same efficiency and impartiality, 

Which is very far from saying that wipe out weeds, insects, and men if 



science, technology, the machine ought 
to have the highest place of honor in 
the temple of modern civilization. Sci- 
ence does in fact sit a God over our 
destinies ~ we have allowed it to do 
so through our own fault. Modern man 
has been so impressed by the achieve* 
ments of science that he has forgotten 
one basic fact — that modern science 
is a tool, just as the first stick used to 
bury a seed was a tool, meant to serve 
him and comfort him, not turn into a 
monster in whose presence he alternate- 
ly dances and cowers, More, he is in 
danger of turning into a machine him- 
self. 

The Dan ger 

The Bible tells us that God made man 
in His image and likeness, Man is in 
danger of remaking himself in the image 
and likeness of his machines, There is a 
Spanish proverb which runs: dime con 



and when his "scientific" mind so de- 
cides (again I put the word in quotes). 
In the words of the French philosopher 
Jacques Maritain, "Modern man placed 
his hope in machines, in technique, and 
in mechanical and industrial civilization 
— without wisdom to dominate them and 
put them at the service of human good 
and freedom, for he expected freedom 
from the development of external tech- 
niques themselves, not from any ascetic 
effort toward the internal possession of 
self. And how can one who does not 
possess the standards of human life, 
which are metaphysical, apply them to 
our use of the machine? The law of 
machine, which is the law of matter, 
will apply itself to him, and enslave 
him* 

Man feels that he is almost in control 
of the universe. Perhaps he is. But, 
what is more important, he is not in 
control of himself. Technology holds a 



quien andas y te dire quien eres - tell ^vast potential for good or for evil, - 

me the company you keep and I shall because in itself this potential is indif- 

tell you what sort of man you are. Mod- ferent or neutral, and because mm % 

em mans inseparable companion is the not in control of himself, the second 

machine, and the Spanish proverb is in alternative is all too often chosen, thus. 



Z lhf 1 *k °5 beiB ! a PP Ucable n ^Iear power, which should be BtfUto? 

more technology, more and more sci- them, Thus, knowledge of bacteria 



more and our cities, is instead poised to destroy 

more sci- them. Thus, knowledge of bacteria & 

be awT ?J3 ar YL Sht> b * W ^ mUSt not to destroy them, h*» 

beware and must beware of the dan- control or destroy people by means 

The Navi crvWn e *o * , bacteria. Thus, mass media are used t< 

The Nazi scientists were just about degrade rather than elevate men, to x#' 

^graphic 




rert rather than convert 

A scientific education, then, is not the 
solution to our ills. It is not the solu- 
tion if it is divorced from studies of an- 
other and higher order. Science pres- 
ets us with , facts and hypotheses* But 
bare facts and hypotheses are of little 
jse in themselves, where the good life 
$ concerned. All the knowledge about 
ribrations, their frequencies and the 
vvays and means of producing and con- 
soiling them are of little value, unless, 
:o use an example, we use that knowl- 
edge to record a musical performance 
with greater purity and fidelity, in or- 
der to uplift the soul of a man who is 
unable to attend the performance him- 
-elf. It will do a man no good to arrive 
aotirs sooner by the forthcoming super- 
sonic transports if he does not know 
what to do with the time he has saved. 

What am I trying to say by all this? 



We demand more and more 
technology, more and more 
science, and we are right 
But we must be aware that 
this has some dangers, too 



Simply that if we are to live meaningful 
lives, there are other disciplines which 
are of even greater importance than 
technology. We can build a more truly 
human Hfe ? in the best sense of the 
word, if we give its rightful due to the 
>tudy of the humanities. The develop- 
ment of a technological civilization de- 
mands more, not less, appreciation ^ of 
the humanities - arts, letters, politics, 
philosophy, religion, etc., and a more 
thorough grounding in them* 

Science itself cannot tell us how it 
should be used, A scientist can tell us 
how to freeze a living human body, be 
cafifcot tell us, purely and solely as a 
scientist, whether or not it ought to be 
done. He can tell us how to transmit 
formation, he cannot tell us, purely 
®td solely as a scientist, whether a pn- 
v *te misdeed ought to be turned into 



a public scandal He can produce new 
paints for a painter, he cannot, purely 
and solely as a scientist, tell the painter 
how to produce a masterpiece. He can 
tell us how to keep healthy, how to feel 
comfortable, he cannot tell ns why we 
should keep healthy or why we are en- 
titled to comfort. He cannot tell us how 
to be good or how to be happy or why. 

Those fields in which the scientist as 
such is incompetent are the fields in 
which man as man, a rational, moral, 
esthetic, loving being, lives the life prop- 
er to himself, as distinct from and su- 
perior to the rest of visible Creation, 
How science can benefit mankind can 
be determined only by disciplines out- 
side the realm of science. Goodness can 
be understood and inculcated only 
through religion and ethics- Art can be 
produced and improved only through 
the canons of art Vast areas of truth 
are beyond the pale of physical science 
and can be explored and ascertained 
only through other means. It is only 
through the humanities that science can 
perform its true function, which is to 
help in the attainment of human self- 
fulfillment The proper role of science, 
and therefore its highest achievement, 
can be attained only in the context of 
a truly humanist civilization, what Ma< 
ritain calls integral humanism. 

Emphasis On Humanities 

Our Constitution imposes on the 
state the obligation to encourage and aid 
science and the humanities, Few of its 
provisions are wiser, and few are more 
sadly neglected. That the constitution- 
al mandate has thus far been ineffec- 
tively implemented, despite the most 
strenuous efforts of our educators, is a 
standing reproach to our government. 
Attempts are more easily discerned in 
the line of the sciences, but in the hu- 
manities. • . With the accelerated growth 
of science and its impact on contem- 
porary life, a growth undreamed of by 
the Fathers of the Constitution in 1934, 
the emphasis on the humanities cannot 
be delayed. 

Our knowledge of the humanities 
must grow and be given every encour- 
agement to do so. The place of the 
thinker, the historian, the artist must 
be secured in our esteem, which alone 
will make it secure in our society. We 
must get a firm grasp of values, of the 
proper place of different kinds of knowl- 
edge and endeavor, their interrelation 
and mutual subordination and their 
proper objectives, and this we can do 
only with the aid, of the humanities. We 
must strengthen our faith in the value 
of man and the subordinate value of 
things, as intended to serve us, Individ 
tially and collectively. Man rightly pins 
high hopes on science only when sci- 
ence is held in the grip of man, not 
man in the grip of science. 

In the so-called advanced countries, 
technology has already outpaced the 
humanities, in some with disastrous re- 
sults, in others with impending disaster, 
but massive and, we hope, ultimately 
successful exertions are being made to 
correct the imbalance. Here we are al- 
most at the bare beginnings of both, 
quantitatively certainly, and also, to a 
lesser extent, qualitatively. It is within 
our power to achieve and maintain a 
balanced growth of the two. In our 
present economic and political plight it 
is easy to overlook the importance of 
both, but more especially of the human- 
ities. We can iU afford to do so. We 
dare not — # 



A brain-side view of inventors: 

What makes 
an inventor tick 



by JESUS PEMPENGCO, JR. 



• THE POPULAR image of an in- 
ventor is a man with disheveled long 
hair and un shaved beard. He is usual- 
ly caricatured with a wrapped box con- 
taining his latest brainchild while pa- 
tiently waiting at the reception room 
of a patent attorney. 

My long association with local in- 
ventors as secretary and public relations 
officer of the Filipino Inventors Society 
Inc. has proved the contrary* During 
meetings, our local inventors are gen- 
erally neat in their well-pressed Barong 
Tagalog or shirt and tie. Certainly none 
of that disheveled look, Their ages 
range from 25 to 65. Distinguishing 
them from ordinary people is a difficult 
task. 

What makes our inventors different? 

Inventors have some common charac- 
teristics. They have keen observation 
of necessities, patience in experiment- 
ing, creative minds, and jealous secrecy 
about their inventions. 

Necessity is often the "mother of in- 
vention." Inventors easily become aware 
of necessities, whether they are the 
small daily necessities of everyone or 
the special necessities of a particular 
group. No inventor in his right mind 
will work on an invention that is not 
needed, 

Unlimited Patience 

A person who gives up an experiment 
after the first 10 or more failures can- 
not be an inventor. Rare are the in- 
ventions that succeed in such a small 
number of attempts. If an inventor can- 
not solve a problem frontally, he at* 
tacks it from underneath, from above, 
from behind, or laterally. When asked 
why he would not give up after so ma- 
ny failures in an experiment that did 
not give any positive answer, Edison rep- 
lied that each failure was a negative 
answer that showed him what would 
not work. His technique was to ask Na- 
ture for the correct answer again and 
again through experiments until She gave 
herself away. 

The experimental stage is the most dif- 
ficult part, as any inventor will tell you. 
Usually inventors are rich only in ideas. 
Hence, it is very difficult for them to 
make experiments at their expense with- 
out sacrificing the family budget. 

Creative thinking is inborn among in- 
ventors althought it may be developed 
in almost everyone. This is the ability 
to create something new out of exist- 
ing laws and principles unlike in judi- 
cial thinking which is merely deciding 
on what should be done according to 
laws and principles. Thus, a lawyer or 
a doctor studies a case to see what law 
or remedy should be applied and there- 
by makes use of judicial thinking to 
produce something new out of the prin- 
ciples he has studied. 

There was a housewife who was faced 
with an ordinary household problem 
which she solved through creative think- 
ing. Two families were living in their 
house and their two lavanderas frequent- 
ly quarrel about the scanty water be- 
cause they got their water for laundry 



from the same faucet. If one of them 
allowed the other to fill up her big 
hamjera first, she would be delayed in 
her washing because of the very low 
water pressure and neither would want 
to give way. One way of solving this 
problem was to have a two-faucet out- 
let but this would entail too much ex- 
pense. 

After giving much thought to the 
problem for some time, she got an emp- 
ty powdered milk can, bore two holes 
near the top and inserted a wire through 
them so that she had a pail-like contain- 
er. Then she bore two holes opposite 
sides of the can near the bottom. She 
hung this pail-like contraption on the 
faucet and opened it. The water came 
out in equal spurts in opposite direc- 
tions from the bottom of the can and 
fell into the waiting bony era. Thus, she 
solved a common problem with simple 
housewife creativeness. 

By nature inventors are jealously sec- 
retive about their ideas and inventions. 
Perhaps this is due to the fact that no- 
body has a monopoly of ideas and a lit- 
tle hint about a good invention indis- 
creetly mentioned to another inventor 
may enable the latter to develop a bet- 
ter idea about it Inventors generally 
have to keep quiet about their Inven- 
tions until they are patented. 

Usually ideas about an invention 
come at such unholy hour as midnight. 
When they do, the inventor has to get 
up and write them down lest they are 
forgotten. Sometimes, they come out of 
the blue while an inventor is walking or 
riding in a bus or jeepney. 

Steps In Inventing 

How does h an inventors mind work? 
More or less it follows the same proced- 
ure done by the housewife mentioned 
above. First step is getting aware of the 
problem — how to divide the scanty 
water between the two lavanderas at 
minimum expense. Second step is ex- 
perimenting with the use of creative 
thinking. Before the housewife got the 
idea of using the paiUike contraption, 
she first tried placing the two banyeras 
together under the faucet but much of 
the water fell inside the space between 
them and was wasted. Hence, the idea 
of a middle container that will serve 
as an intermediary vessel came up. By 
experiment she also found that it was 
better to have the opposite holes near 
the bottom of the can instead of half- 
way along the sides. Lastly, the final 
testing and the results. 

There is a new government office, 
the Philippine Inventors Commission, 
that will not only give financial, tech- 
nical, and legal assistance to local in- 
ventors but also promote creativeness 
among our people. It was created under 
R.A. 3850 which was signed into law 
by President Diosdado Macapagal last 
year. This Commission will give Pres- 
idential Awards in cash and medals to 
ideas that will solve our national prob- 
lems through a "Best Idea Contest" It 
has its offices at room 223-223 Shurdut 
Building, in Intramuros, Manila.— # 

19 



January 5, 1966 



r 



STATE 
OF AFFAIRS 



by ADRIAN 
E. CRISTOBAL 




A conservative ambition 



# PLATO, in many ways a young man's philosopher, never- 
theless placed the political power of his Republic in the hands 
of olderly men. These Guardians are, of course, distinguished 
for wisdom, experience, prestige, and integrity, that seem to 
be evident with age, when the earthly passions have cooled* 
Needless to say, their leadership is conservative, for in Plato's 
Republic, an ideal one, change would be inconceivable. 

Now President Marco&\has picked for his cabinet men way 
beyond their sixties — Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo. These 
men will preside over three sensitive areas in our public life: 
the administration of justice, our relations with other na- 
tions, and the education of the young. The fear is that they 
might conserve what is not worth conserving (the influence 
of traditional relationships) , but then, it must not be for- 
gotten that they have a young President, * 

It is significant that President Marcos explained their 
choice on the basis of their moral qualities — prestige and 
integrity — and not for their dynamic views. The suggestion 
is that Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo will behave with rectitude 
in office, something which the Republic has not had for a 
long, long time. 

If for nothing else, the presence of these three men in 
the cabinet, recalling to national memory the less corrupt, 
perhaps uncorrupted, times of the Commonwealth, will help 
restore popular faith and respect for the government. This 
is naturally a conservative ambition. 

However, Marcos has never displayed a mystical reverence 
for age as such. Young and dynamic himself, he has known, 
in the public career that reached its high point in the pres- 
idential campaign, what the young could do in critical times. 
For this reason, he will continue to command the services of 
the young, as shown, to begin with, in his choice of Rafael 
M. Salas as executive secretary and Jose D. Aspiras as press 
secretary. 

It is most likely also (indeed, if they had not been ap- 
pointed yet) that he will "balance" Yulo with the young law- 
yer, Johnny Ponce Enrile; *Ramos with Minister Manuel Col- 
lantes (who, being a bachelor, could but for his age qualify 
for a guardianship in Plato's Republic), and Romulo with 0. 
D, Corpus of the UP, There is even talk of making James 
Barbers, another young man, deputy police chief of Manila, 

These young men, considering the pressures of public of- 
fice, will most likely act as some sort of executive vice 
presidents to Secretaries Yulo, Ramos, and Romulo who could, 
if they choose, perform like British ministers leaving the ex- 
ecutive business to their undersecretaries. 

In any case, this looks like a 1 logical arrangement — age 
and youth, experience and enthusiasm, policy and action. It 
should be given a chance to work out in practice. National 
greatness could lie there as in anywhere else. — # 



Some men have more energy 
than other men, and it is all 
in a built-in power house 
in each man/ not in some 
magic potion or supernatural 
gift. Filipinos have this 
extraordinary resource and 
could profit from it once 
they conquer one bad habit 



4 



« THOSE OF US who had been fojk 
lowing through the papers the prodi- 
gious leap-frogging of the three presiden- 
tial aspirants in the months before the 
last elections are amazed at their seem- 
ingly inexhaustible energies. Whence 
comes that tremendous endurance? 
What is the source of such physical stam- 
ina?, What provides men like these with 
that mysterious . extra propulsion? 

I. would not myself be able to do \ 
even a mere fraction of what, they had 
been doing — their moving from place 
to place, I mean. Naturally I would 
not, you would say, since I am older 
than any of the three* That is correct, 
but I don't think a few years can ac- 
tually explain the difference. In fact, I 
believe I can outstrip them any time 
and handily, too, in the short sprints, 
for I was quite a hundred-yard dasher 
in' my younger days* I am sure I am 
physically stronger, being a physical 
culturist of sorts (barbells, shadow- 
boxing, yoga, and all that sort of thing 
— in short, I have been afflicted with 
the mania for keeping fit). But then, 
after reading The Energies Of Men by 
William James, I came to discover that 
the sources of these men's tremendous 
energies are more than merely physical 

Secret Of Second Wind 

" I had not before bothered with Wil- 
liam, knowing his brother Henry whom 
1 consider rather too heavy for my 
mental health. But this particular piece 
by William is surprisingly popular in 
style and not a bit ponderous. It was 
while I was puzzling out the myste- 
rious vitality of our national candidates 
that I came upon this essay which gave 
me, aside from an hour of delightful 
reading, the answer not only to our 
original question on man's amazing 
endurance, but also to the national 
habit of inferiority, which has made us 
blind to our full potentials as a peo- 
ple. 

The essay, The Energies Of Men, 
starts with a discussion of the univer- 
sally known phenomenon known as 
"second wind. Too often, to para- 
phrase lames, we desist from further 
exertion as soon as we feel the initial 
signs of fatigue, We say we have had 
enough. But there are times when an 
unusual necessity forces us to go on 
(perhaps a deadline to meet, or a per- 
sonal need to finish whatever work we 



may be doing at the moment — for 
this, or perhaps another reason — may- 
be a word of honor given not to ful- 
fill which would mean more than death 
to us, and suddenly this surprising 
Jiing we call "second wind" occurs. 
The fatigue which but a moment ago 
we thought would certainly exhaust us 
to death if we did not heed it, passes 
away and we are strong again and feel 
as fresh if not fresher than when first 
we started* 

Hidden Sources 

What has happened? We have evi- 
dently tapped, according to James, a 
new source of energy which was, until 
then, unknown to us or "masked from 
us by the fatigue-obstacle which we 
had just obeyed. We are all aware of 
this thing known as '"second >vind f> but 
only a few of us have used it to .ad- 
vantage* In fact, James suspects, there 
must be layer upon layer ol energies 

— a third or even a fourth jwind' of 
which we may hardly be conscious. 

James extends this to mental activity* 
Mental activity, he says> snows the 
phenomenon as well as does the phys- 
ical, and "in exceptional cases we may 
find, beyond the very extremity of fa- 
tigue-distress, amounts of ease and 
power that we never dreamed | ourselves 
to own, - sources of strength! habitual- 
ly not taxed at all, because habitually 
we never push through the obstruction, 
never pass these early critical points.*' 
By which he means the obstruction of 
first fatigue to which we invariably 
succumb as a matter of habit. 

The human body is a wonderful mech- 
anism composed of organisms with 
stored up reserves of energy. How 
else can we explain where the amount 
of food we take three times a day goes 

— surely not all of it goes down the 
pit? This energy is seldom called upon 
to work for us, with the result that we 
accomplish only so much and no more* 
We have, in other words, formed the 
bad habit of supposing that we have 
worked quite enough that this is all we 
are actually capable of doing in the 
first place* But if we discover that we 
have layers of untapped energies stashed 
away somewhere within us, waiting to 
be used for our good — I am sure the 
result will be truly amazing. That is, if 
we actually use these energies, and not 

* merely discover them. 

graphic 




V 





( -7 



tM;.C 



MY FATHER WAS PROUD 
OF THE FILIPINO 

by MANUEL L QUEZON Jr. # 

In air interview by MONINA A. MERCADO, Staff Member 



THE FOLLOWING IS A TRANSCRIP- 
TION OF THE TAPE-RECORDED 
INTERVIEW, 

Question: Would you remember any 
statement of President Quezon regard- 
ing his concept of a Filipino? 

Manuel L. Quezon, Jr.: 1 suppose it 
would be that speech which went: "My 
fellow countrymen, There is only one 
thing I want you to bear in mind and 
that is, the Philippines is your own coun- 
try, the only country that God has given 
you. You must live for it and die for it, 
if necessary. Yon must keep it for your 
children and your children s children 
until the world is no more." I think my 
father at that time was sick in the Unit- 
ed States and had intended to send 
a message to the Filipino people, It was 
made into a record, one side in English, 
the other in Spanish. This speech must 
have originally been prepared when I 
was still a very small boy, probably 
around 1930; yet I recall lately some 
people mentioning to me that they re- 
member the speech. 

If you were to draw a picture of Pres- 
ident Quezon as Filipino nationalist, 
what certain elements would you point 
out — in externals, for instance? 

For -one tiling, his speech was trilingual 
— which is typical of an educated Fili- 
pino, He was brought up speaking Taga- 
log and his education was Spanish and 
he teamed English only as an adult. So 
possibly he was more at home in Taga- 
log than in English; it was very often 
that he delivered long speeches in Ta- 
galog, Later on, he wrote his speeches 
in English and sometimes delivered them 
in English and Tagalog I don't remem- 
ber my father delivering a speech in 
Spanish; although possibly on his birth- 
day celebrations in Letran, he might 
have addressed them in Spanish. At 
home, he must have spoken to me in 
Tagalog al! the time when I was a child 



because I was not at borne in Spanish 
until after the war. 

How was the President Filipino in man- 
ner? 

He was quite unsophisticated, the small- 
town Filipino, you might say. His home- 
town Baler was never known for much 
sophistication. There were no upper or 
lower classes; everyone seemed to be 
from the farming class. And so my fa- 
ther had the simplicity of a smalltown 
boy, though he was not provinciano — 
in the derogatory narrow sense of the 
term — at all! He was very, very at- 
tached to his hometown — isn't that 
typical of the Filipino? People there were 
very close to him* We were brought up 
to consider ourselves as being from Ba- 
ler although we never lived there. I 
never realized that I am what they call 
"a Manila boy" until I was in my mid- 
dle 20s, And I suppose the idea of go- 
ing to Baler was connected in my mind 
of going home. 

Toward the elders of Baler, many of 
whom were his relatives, he showed a 
tremendous respect, again a very Fili- 
pino trait A lot of them called him 
Fresideitie, but to some he was Nonong 
— and 1 think he liked that. 

Another very Filipino external, I might 
point out, is his manner of eating. He 
liked Filipino food very much — sini- 
gang, especially — and I think he en- 
joyed eating with his hands, 

The strange thing was that people 
gave him the nickname Kastila, perhaps 
on the basis that he looked like one! 
If he was Castilian at all, it was per- 
haps in his famous mercurial temper — 
but then again, that was an individual 
matter. And yet neither was he very 
Oriental — it by Oriental, you mean 
smooth and inscrutable. You could tell 
immediately what he was thinking of. 
You can tell his reaction (ust by look- 
ing at him, you can see if be was wor- 
ried or happy, I think this open face is 
fairly common among Filipinos, Yes, they 



may hide it when they feel hurt; this 
you might not see in their faces. But if 
they are very angry, or very glad, or 
very worried, you can tell right away 
by the face of the Filipino. 

What was his manner of dealing with 
people? 

He was very much at ease with every 
one, Filipino or foreigner, I remember 
on occasions when he was driving out 
in the province, he would order the 
driver to stop at a tienda. He men got 
down and talked to the men very easily, 
very unpretentiously. I remember too 
how he often consulted his barber about 
scuttlebutt and prevailing opinion. On 
the other hand, he hadn't a superior 
way of dealing with people either, I 
suppose the parallel would be the way 
that an elderly respected Filipino was 
regarded in the community. There was 
fatherliness toward the young, dignity, 
and mutual respect toward the old. 

With foreigners, too, he was perfectly 
relaxed and quite natural without a def- 
erential or aggressive attitude. I think 
the only adjustment he made was in 
language, using Spanish to Spaniards or 
English to Americans, And I'd say this 
much, he shouted at his American subor- 
dinates with every bit of loudness and 
violence as he did at any Filipino or 
Spanish subordinates. 

Definitely he never knew the mean- 
ing of dungo. People still recall how he 
danced with enjoyment even with 
American women taller than he, He had 
extensive social relationship with Amer- 
icans, of course — many of them were 
his bridge partners. And in so far as 
It was possible to deal equally with a 
head of state, they dealt with him so 
but always with a great deal of respect. 
He was not the kind of man with whom 
one could get fresh, after all. He 
wouldn't have stood for that. 

But though he never knew what it 
was to be aungo or subservient to any- 
body, he never with- / To page 12 



Like a small town Filipino, he was quite unsophisticated 



10 




by C. PRIGO 



# AFTER scrapping the realty 
tax in Manila, Mayor Villegas is 
all set to lift the taxes on food, 
clothing, shelter, medicines, and 
books. 

We'd be happy if the Gatpuno 
would also lift the tax on our cre- 
dulity, 

* * * 

Not to be outdone by his Manila 
counterpart, Pasay's Mayor Cune- 
ta bas abolished the fee on birth 
certificates. 

We can now say that population 
explosion has attained the status 

of a tax-exempt home industry. 

* * * 

EQUAL TREATMENT FOR 
ALL OFFENDERS — Column 
head 

But the scions of the rich and 
the influential get a treat, not a 
treatment. 




It is said that the shooting spree 
in Texas by Charles Whitman was 
caused by a tumor in his brain. 

Here, shootings are caused by 
rumor in the ear, or lack of hu- 
mor, 

* * m 

T Vhy can children of the high 
and mighty get away with may- 
hem and murder, while the sons 
of ^he lowly cannot? 

Because the children of the high 

and mighty are above the low, 

* * * 

Let everybody be forewarned: 
Mayor Villegas will hold a Filipi- 
no Food Festival for 15 days in 
lila, featuring only local food. 

Let's eat and drink and be mer- 
ry today, for tomorrow we diet, 

* * * 

Some banks are proudly an- 
nouncing their computers that are 
supposed to make depositing your 
cash a pleasure. 

What's so wonderful and new 
about computers? Every husband 

is married to one. 

* » * 

Arbor Week reminds us that in 
"is age, the fellow who rises 
best is the sap of the family 
tree, 

* * * 

Noting that they are often quick 
:<* dismiss cases after a "sketchy 5 * 
.liminary investigation, Pres- 

Aaaruat 17. 1966 



ident Marcos chided the fiscals, 
telling them to "go out and get the 
evidence yourselves, if necessary. 11 
What does the President think 
they are — fiscals? 

* * * 

Market Administrator Pete de 
Jesus has launched a drive against 
illegal and defective weights and 
measures in Manila public mar- 
kets. 

There is of course a lot of wail- 
ing among the vendors, protesta- 
tions of honest errors and such. 
To Pete, their words, like their 

scales, do not carry much weight, 

* * * 

Now it seems that this term 
("Number One") in Saigon is 
used as a sort of slang to denote 
the best or something extraordi- 
narily good or anything they like 
very much. — Extract from col- 

Here it's "Number Two." 

TAAl/S MAIN CRATER 
QUIET, EXPERTS SAY — Head- 
line 

But not the experts. 

The country may not be able to 
lick TB with anti-TB stamps, but 

at least you can lick the stamps. 

* * * 

Several officials close to the 
President have paved the way for 
the President's trip to Washing- 
ton. 

And yet we do not see anything 
concrete. Or is the road to Wash- 
ington paved with good inven- 
tions? 

* * * 

Judging by the number of by- 
standers hit by cops and security 
guards, we advise these arms of 
the law to aim at bystanders. 

Only then will they hit the prop- 
er target, 

* * ■ m 

On the first day of the resump- 
tion of the antiJitterinjr drive, 
40 pedestrians were nabbed by 
cops disguised as civilians. 

This should be a warning to peo- 
ple who think that cigarette and 
ticket stubs are not rubbish* It's 

litter than you think. 

* * + 

LEFT TO DIE — Tabloid head- 
l%7ie 

They should be left to die only 
those who have no right to live, 

* * * 

Fashion note: Lines might be 
returning to softer sweeps, but 
the darned knees must be exposed. 

That's good news to us red- 
blooded males. We like the knees 
because, unlike other parts of the 
female anatomy, only in church 
pews are they padded with rub- 
ber.— 4 




AMERICAS FIRST WATCH 



WALTHAM 
CENTEN- 
NIAL 100 Jewel* 
Available in Yel- 
low G.F. and 
Stainless Steel 



Enjoy life! Have a great time — with 
a WALTHAM watch. Elegantly de- 
signed. Over 100 years of proven 
matchless precision. With umbreak- 
able permaforce mainspring and gua- 
ranteed shockproof system that as- 
sure to-the second accuracy always. 



Wear a WALTHAM. , .your choice 
from more than 100 models, each 
carrying the high mark of metic- 
ulous craftsmanship that has made 
WALTHAM outstanding for over a 
century. For men and women. 



Walthsm LadieV Watch 
Available in white and 
yellow G.F. 




Available at all leading jewelry stores. 



national Aiiport on Nov. 25 and was 
able to attend the meeting called by 
the team captain that morning. 

With this obstacle hurdled, new prob- 
lems beleaguered the shooters. Six days 
before departure date, Mendoza, a mem- 
ber of the cent erf ire pistol team that 
was to fire in the first shooting evefrit 
on Dec. 10, contracted a severe case 
of influenza accompanied by vomiting, 
Still weak and leaner by 10 pounds, 
Tony managed to join his teammates at 
the airport on Dec. 4, carrying medicine 
and doctor's orders to follow in case 
of a relapse. 

Upon their arrival at the Asian Games 
Village in Bangkok, the shooters learned 
that rifle shooter Ang, who had arrived 
on Dec. 1 with the first batch of RP 
athletes, was also down with the flu. 
Ang also managed to recover in time 
for his event, but the shooters were 
further bothered by minor illnesses, such 
as upset stomachs, diarrhea, and skin 
disorders caused by Bangkok's drinking 
water, the sticky, humid weather, and 
the insects that invaded their quarters 
every night. 

Kalaw arrived in Bangkok on Dec. 6 
with the much-needed Remington .38 
cal. ammunition which he had bought 
in Hongkong with funds donated by 



to buy and get to buy in Manila, but 
these were not enough. Hardest hit by 
kck of ammo were the ISU centerfire 
pistol shooters, for ,38 cal. factory loads 
were out of stock in Manila, Kalaw s 
arrival with the goods saved the day 
for them t and he was greeted with 
shouts of relief from all shooters. 

Under the close supervision of Herre- 
ra and Kalaw, all the RP shooters prac- 
ticed daily at the Hua Mak Range for 
four days, Dec 5 to Dec. 8 inclusive. 
When competition began on Saturday, 
Dec. 10, shooters who were not firing 
continued to practice for their event 

The first shooting competition was the 
ISU centerfire pistol event. Tension in- 
creased as everyone knew that the entire 
team's morale depended on the first per- 
formance of their teammates, If the RP 
centerfire pistol shooters made good, the 
rest of the shooters - rifle, free pistol, 
and rapid fire pistol — would be in- 
spired to win more metlals; if they 
failed, the damage to their fighting 
spirit would Ije great. 

But the centerfire pistol shooters 
overcame the tension, the pressure, and 
the oppressive heat and blazed an aus- 
picious start for the Philippine Shoot- 
ing Team. 

* Bond, national pistol champion and 



The air rifle event followed on Mon- 
day, Dee. 12. The RP rifle shooters were 
least prepared for this competition. They 
were unable to practice with the air 
rifle before leaving for Bangkok, be- 
cause none of them, except Adolfo 
"Chito** Feliciano, owned a target air 
rifle. No air rifle competitions have ever 
been held in Manila, and the air rifle 
is not included in the Philippine Shoot- 
ing Associations eliminations or national 
championship matches. 

Feliciano was also unable to practice 
with his air rifle, for Manila airport cus- 
toms authorities released his air rifle on- 
ly a few days before the shooting team 
enplaned for Bangkok. The air rifle had 
been deposited by him at the airport 
on his return from the World Shoot held 
in Germany last July, and his subsequent 
efforts to claim it were rebuffed by 
customs men for four months until the 
Asiad came up. 

Del Castillo and Ang held air rifles 
for the first time in Bangkok, when 
Kalaw arrived on Dec, 6 with air rifles 
he had bought for them in Hongkong, 
Espinosa was also a tyro with the air 
rifle; the one he was to use in the 
Asiad was lent him by Miranda, who 
had bought it in Germany* 

Miranda returned to Manila only on 



own, but look at their haul of medals / by aida SEVILLA MENDOZA 




heft: Vfiito Felicwmo (right) won the silver medal in the standard rifle (3 positions), China's Wu 
Tao Yuan (center) won the gold medal while Japan's Takao Ishii got the bronze. Above, seated, left 
to right : Nestor de Castro, Team Captain Bernardo Herrera, PSA President Gen, Alfredo Santos 
(ret), NRPA Pres. P.B. Dionisio, Delegation Head Teodoro Kalaw, NRPA Vice-Pres. C>C. de Castro, 
Raymundo Quitoriano. Standing: Leopoldo Ang, Roberto del Castillo, Moises Gines, Jr., Ludovieo Es~ 
pirvosa f Edgar Bond, Jr., Paterno Miranda, Antonio Arguelles Mendoza, and Horacio Miranda* 



Crescenciano C. de Castro, vice-pres- 
ident of the National Rifle and Pistol 
Association. 

Before Kalaw's arrival, the RP center- 
fire pistol team had been using bullets 
reloaded in Manila during practice at 
the Hua Mak Shooting Range, much to 
the amusement of the South Korean 
shooters, who repeatedly warned them 
that reloaded bullets were "no good" 
in that they are inaccurate and unde- 
pendable. The factory-load ammo pub- 
licized as available at. the Asian Games 
Village fer all shooting teams' practice 
was released for sale only two days be- 
fore the opening of the Games. All the 
shooting teams had brought along a 
good supply of factory-load ammo for 
practice as well as for competition, all 
except for the Philippine team. 

True, each RP shooter had brought 
along as much ammo as he could afford 

January 11, 19.67 



veteran of the Tokyo Olympic Games 
and Jakarta Asian Games, bagged the 
silver medal for the Philippines in the 
individual competition with a score of 
560 out of a possible 600. 

The RP centerfire pistol team, led by 
Bond, captured the bronze in the team 
event. The grueling matches lasted two 
days, and were held in the mornings, 
as were all shooting events. 

The Korean team, which was coached 
in Korea by US Army Sgt. William 
Blankenship, Jr., the world record hol- 
der and international champion of the 
ISU centerfire pistol, easily won the 
gold medal. 

The Philippine team scored 2206 
points, broken down as follows; 

Edgar Bond, Jr. — _ 560 

Antonio Arguelles Mendoza >- — 553 

Horacio Miranda 553 

Moises Gines, Jr. 540 

.flttdttH 



Nov. 25, so Espinosa, like his air rifle 
teammates, was totally without practice. 

In spite of their inexperience with the 
air rifle and after only four days* prac- 
tice in Bangkok, the RP air rifle team 
— perhaps heartened by the centerfire 
pistol team's- glowing performance — 
captured the bronze medal. This victory, 
minor as it seemed to others, renewed 
the determination of our shooters to 
bring home as many medals as they 
possibly could. 

Next on the agenda on Tuesday, Dec. 
13, was the free pistol event during the 
three hours of which 60 shots were to be 
fired. The RP team took fourth place, 
with Horacio Miranda as top scorer with 
510 points. This was the only shooting 
event in which BP marksmen disap- 
pointed their followers. 

The Philippine team did much bet- 
ter the next day, Dec. 14, in the small- 



bore rifle 3-position competition. Paced 
by Feliciano, who with his score of 1101 
points won the bronze medal in the in- 
dividual competition, the Philipptae ri- 
flemen took the silver medal in the 
team competition. The two new medak 
garnered by the rifle shooters upped the 
shooting team's medal collection to five: 
two silver, and three bronze, 

RP pistol shooters repeated the rifle- 
men s excellent showing the next day. 
Dec. 15, in the rapid fire pistol event. 
Paterno Miranda, the Philippine entry 
for individual honors, took the bronze 
medal while the team, sparked by his 
brother Horacio's Philippine^ record- 
breaking score of 577, walked away with 
the silver. 

National rapid fire pistol champion 
De Castro, unfortunately, scored an all- 
time low of 546; had he performed ac- 
cording to expectations, the RP rapid 
fire pistol team would have won the 
gold medal 

But the Philippine shooters* biggest 
day was yet to come. On Friday, Dec. 
16, in the standard rifle, 3-position com- 
petition, the Philippines won two sil- 
ver medals, Feliciano, the individual en- 
try, scored 540 to grab second honors, 
while the tefcm chalked up 2121 points 
to take the silver disc in the team com- 
petition* 

What was ironic and heartbreaking 
was that the Philippines could have 
copped the gold medal in this shooting 
event. Ang, a member of the rifle team, 
scored a record-ore nking 558 points, 2 
points higher than Nationalist China's 
Wu Tao Yuan, who won the gold med- 
al in the individual competition. 

As Feliciano had been registered as 
the Philippine entry for individual hon- 
ors in this competition, Ang's record- 
breaking score could not be considered 
for the individuals contest* If Asian 
Games regulations were less stringent, 
the RP athletic delegation would have 
come home with a third gold medal and 
another distinction. 

The team bagged their tenth and Jast 
medal the next day, Dec. 17, when Fe- 
liciano won the bronze in the individual 
competition of the smallbore rifle, prone 
position, with a score of 583, As in the 
air rifle competition, the Filipino rifle- 
men did not really expect to win any 
honors in the team competition, as the 
rifle team sent to Bangkok — Ang, Del 
Castillo, and Espinosa — are 3-position 
rifle shooters, and not prone position 
specialists. 

Feliciano, of course, is the exception, 
for in the PSA final eliminations held in 
Manila, he topped both the prone posi- 
tion contest and the 3-position small- 
bore rifle eliminations, 

Some sports fans may point out that 
the Philippine Shooting Team brought 
home no gold medals. It should be re- 
called that at least one shooter, Leo- 
poldo Ang, turned in a performance that 
rated not only a gold medal, but also 
the distinct honor of breaking an Asian 
Games record. It was just tough luck for 
the Philippines that Ang was not reg- 
istered as the Philippine entry for in- 
dividual honors in that rifle event. The 
other shooters also did exceptionally 
well, considering the measly budget al- 
located them by the PAAF and tie lit- 
tle — if any — moral support, encour- 
agement, and publicity given them by 
the PAAF and sportswriters.— # 

-IS 



■7 </ 



I'.ri 

SOME YEARS ago, a diplomat 
(J from one of the countries of the British 
Commonwealth remarked to a small 
number of Filipinos that Malaya was 
not a democracy but a bureaucracy, 
a very good bureaucracy perhaps, but 
not a democracy. The Philippines, con- 
tinued the diplomat, was the only de- 
mocracy in this part of the world. 

I was not then, nor am I now, in a 
position to pass judgment on the diplo- 
mats view of Malaya (now Malaysia), 
but I have very serious doubts about 
bis observation regarding the Philip- 
pines* 

If he was referring to the form of 
government, there would be very good 
reason to question the accuracy of his 
comparison, Although Malaysia is a con- 
stitutional monarchy and the Philippines 
a republic, both are' 'democracies. 

If the diplomat was referring to the 
style in which things are done on the 
governmental level, I must abstain from 
commenting on Malaysia, being entire- 
ly ignorant on this point; the style of 
doing things in the Philippine govetri- 
ment is frequently anarchic rather than 
democratic. 

But if the diplomat was referring to 
the mentality behind government in 
Malaysia and in the Philippine^, men- 
tality which is manifested in various 
ways, I must still abstain from com- 
ments on Malaysia, but I would say that 
we do not have a definitely democratic 
mentality, and that the diplomat's re- 
mark about the Philippines would have 
to be hedged with m many reserva- 
tions that it simply could not stand as 
it was made. 

Exactly what do I «rnean when I as- 
sert that the Filipino mentality is not 
definitely democratic? Do I mean that 
it is not democratic at all? Or do 1 
mean that it is almost, but not quite 
democratic? Let us see* 

Studies on government all too often 
suffer from a very serious defect: they 
fail to devote time and space bo a con- 
sideration of four factors which have 
a decisive influence on the success or 
failure of any government, Those four 
factors are: the ideal of government, 
the constitution and laws in which that 
ideal is embodied, the way in which 
that embodiment is applied to practice, 
and the mentality and customs of the 
people. 

Those four factors are not isolated, 
unrelated things; they hinge on one an- 
other, they are so interrelated that, un- 
less the proper relationship between 
them is maintained, successful, efficient 
government cannot be acliieved or, if al- 
ready achieved, cannot long be sustained. 
Let us begin by explaining very briefly 
what those four factors mean. 

The idea of government, or ideal of 
government if you wish, is the concept, 
the theory of the kind of government 
which the country under consideration 
is supposed to have. We have, for exam- 
ple, the ideal of a democratic republic. 
An ideal, however, is not of much use 
unless it takes concrete form. 

We would have no government at nil 
if we were to rest content with saying 
that we want a democratic republic: it 
Is necessary that a definite form be giv- 
en to that ideal, by having a constitu- 
tion and laws which determine the basic 
principles of the government, the allo- 
cation of powers to the officials of the 

14 



government, the manner in which those 
officials are to be selected, etc. 

Thus far, however, we are still in 
what we might call the realm of the 
theoretical. How are the constitution and 
the laws put into practice? Is the con- 
stitution observed? If not, is it because 
the constitution cannot be observed or 
because there is no" desire to observe 
it? Lastly, what sort of mentality do the 
people have? Does it accord with the 
constitution and the ideal of govern- 
ment? How compatible are the customs 
of the people with the ideal, its con- 
stitutional embodiment, and practice? 

As the reader must have noticed, 
there is a connection between the four 
factors. The connection between them 
is not such that one of them can be 
left out of the picture without serious 
consequences. Ultimately, they are all 
dependent on the last factor, the men- 
tality of the people and their customs. 

The ideal of government presumably 
exists in those who rule. But it must 
exist over and above all in the people. 



therefore, could at best be indifferent 
and apathetic. One does not have suc- 
cessful government based on indifference 

and apathy. 

The reduction of constitution and laws 
to practice almost brings us to the ques- 
tion of the mentality itself, for its pos- 
sibility depends on the customs of the 
people and their way of looking at 
things. 

The Federal laws against racial dis- 
crimination have been well-nigh unen- 
forceable in the Southern states: all 
sorts of strong-arm methods on the part 
of the Federal government have been 
necessary and even then have not al- 
ways been successful. In fact, it is gen- 
erally pointed out in discussions on the 
subject that a change of mentality on 
the part of the Southerners is necessary 
before the anti^scriminatkm laws can 
really bear fruit. In any country where 
the holding of public office is looked 
upon as a means of enrichment, not only 
by the officeholders but also by the 
general public, laws against that soft ol 



The starting point for achieving 

the ideal of good government 

is a change in the people s attitudes 

by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 




STUDIES OF THE GAP BETWEEN 0t 



OUR UNDEMC 



This is not a case of high-toned ideal- 
ism, it is a practical and unavoidable 
necessity* 

It is impossible for the ideal of gov- 
ernment to be anything but a mockery 
unless that ideal is held by the people. 
It is not enough that those who rule 
should be sincerely convinced of the 
ideal. If a sufficient part of the people 
do not go along with the ideal, the 
business of government becomes a very 
precarious matter* Sooner or later it is 
bound to grind to a halt. 

Furthermore, it is not enough that 
the people be committed to the ideal 
nominally; they must have more than 
a mere inkling of what the ideal is. 

H, for example, the people were to 
be vocal in their commitment to de- 
mocracy, but by democracy they under- 
stand the absence of any and all au- 
thority — a kind of condition of every 
man for himself — obviously the ideal 
of democracy will be impossible of at- 
tainment. (Let no one say that the 
example chosen is absurd. Implicitly, it 
is the idea of democracy entertained 
by many,) 

The constitutional and legal embodi- 
ment of the ideal of government will 
also be a farce if the mentality of the 
people is opposed to it; or simply in- 
different The attempt to import British 
constitutionalism into several European 
countries has been a colossal failure, ei- 
ther because it ran counter to the way 
of thinking of the people, or simply be- 
cause they could not understand it and, 




thing are a dead letter! 

The mentality of the people is, there* 
fore, in the last analysis the factor of 
overriding importance in making the 
ideal, its embodiment, and practice come 
together to make for successful, effi- 
cient government. 

Indeed, although we started our dis- 
cussion from the factor of the ideal gov- 



ernment, it is the mentality of the peo- 
ple which should provide the starting 
point. The ideal of government should 
be drawn from the what the people look 
upon as an ideal. When that is not pos- 
sible, because the people have no ideal 
of government — as in the case of sav- 
ages — or because their ideal of govern- 
ment is unacceptable — such as Imperial 
Japan of pre-World War II days — tie 
ideal of government to be set up in Hs 
place must be very carefully studied, so 
as to introduce as little friction as pos- 
sible. 

The example of Japan cited may raise 
some eyebrows and be considered the 
very denial of our contention, since the 
democratic ideal is very far indeed from 
that of Emperor worship, and popular 
sovereignty from that of the Emperor as 
being the holder of all sovereignty, 

I shall be content to point out thit 
it is possible for a country to have * 
government democratic in form and yet 
not be democratic in reality* That such 
is the case in japan is the opinion of 
a number of serious students of post-war 
Japanese government. There are power- 
ful forces at work in Japanese society 
which make the democratic ideal only 
partially operative - the strength of tr* 
ditioTi, the kind of hold which employ 
erg have over their employes, the $ 
titude of politicians toward governm^ 
and government positions, the res* 
gence of the enormous companies wift 
their unavoidable influence on gore* 
ment, the not very satisfactory eoadf- 

GRAPHIC 




DEAL OF GOVERNMENT (HEADED BY PRES. MARCOS, ABOVE) AND OUR POLITICAL PRACTICES EXPLAIN WHY OUR NATION IS A FAILURE 

CRATIC MENTALITY 



tion of political parties, etc. 

How much of a shift in the Japanese 
mentality is to be expected is of course 
debatable. The mere dying off of the 
older generations and the coming to ma- 
turity of younger generations is no .guar* 
antee, since there is a noticeable trend 
all over the world for people to be less 
and less interested in government and 
to be more and more exclusively inter- 
ested in money-making, without which 
the advances of science which make con- 
temporary life so comfortable and lux- 
urious cannot be taken advantage of. 

What is the Filipino mentality in re- 
gard to government? I do not think our 
mentality is substantially democratic, ex* 
cept insofar as every human being's 
mind and heart may be said to be de- 
mocratic, because deep down hi every 
human being there is some kind of yearn- 
ing for freedom* But in countless in- 
stances, despite our protestations of our 
democratic convictions and commitment, 
m show that the opposite is the case. 
A look back on our history wiU show 
why. 

Our pre-Spanish society was made up 
of three classes - slaves, freemen, and 
nobles. An aristocratic society, in other 
wonk It was not what the Europeans 
call an absolute monarchy - it seems 
that a. more highly developed state of 
affairs is necessary for that The long 
years under Spanish rule did nothing to 
destroy the social mentality that went 
with such a pre-Spanish society, al- 
though the legal status of slave had 

January 11, 1967 



been abolished* 

I can remember very well the pre- 
war relationship of servants to masters 
— from what 1 have read of the rela* 
tionship between slave and master m 
pre-Spanish days, I gather there was not 
much difference between the two rela- 
tionships. 

Before any of my readers feel indig- 
nant at this observation, let me point 
out that the type of slavery to which 
our minds spontaneously turn when the 
word is mentioned is the Roman and the 
American type. That kind of slavery 
seems never to have existed on our 
shored. 

Slaves were truly part of the house- 
hold, part of the family - at least so 
our older historians assured us. It was 
a very strongly paternalistic relationship. 
Obviously, that sort of relationship, al- 
though it may at times be very touch- 
ing when found in master and servant 
transforming the relationship into one of 
parent and child, is hardly conducive to 
the kind of relationship of equality which 
a democratic mentality thrives on. 

The general reliance of the Filipino 
on the wisdom and goodness of those 
above him on the political, social, and 
economic ladder, which was transferred 
from the maginoo class to the Spanish 
rulers, then to the American rulers, fi- 
nally to the Filipinos who replaced them, 
is also, to say the least, not very con- 
ducive to a truly democratic mentality 
and democratic attitudes. 

This explains in large part why so 



many of our politicians, when holding 
office, do not really feel that they can 
be called to account for any of their 
actions. It also explains why public of- 
fice and public property are so often 
treated as personal belongjngs, almost 
as something which is by right in the 
family* 

Thus, we hold on to a title long 
after the position has been relinquished. 
The manner in which we treat our pub- 
lic officials is another indication of an 
undemocratic mentality - we refer to 
them very impertinently when they are 
not around, and yet when they do make 
an appearance, we practically fall on 
our faces before them. It is not the 
dignified respect which implies self-re- 
spect, -~ 

The insufferable manners of those who 
manage to climb up the ladder of suc- 
cess, the way in which they try to lord 
ft over those under their authority or 
below their position in the community, 
show how undemocratic we really are 
in our outlook. 

Some will of course say that the ag- 
gressiveness of the underprivileged Fil- 
ipino is a proof of the spread of a truly 
democratic mentality. I challenge the al- 
legation. 

The aggressiveness of the under-priv- 
ileged Filipino is no different from that 
of his fellow countrymen, only aggra- 
vated - it is of the chip-on-the-shoulder 
variety, which again is not indicative 
of the self-assurance as to equality which 
is part and parcel of the democratic 



mind. 

Perhaps if truly serious studies were 
made of the gap between our ideal ,*of 
government and our Constitution, on the 
one hand, and our political practices 
and our mentality, on the other, it would 
become clear why our government is 
and has been a failure in many respects. 
It would then be easier to assess the 
situation in order to make whatever ad- 
justments are necessary to make our de- 
mocratic ideals a reality, instead of some- 
thing we run after yet never quite seem 
to grasp. It would be possible to bring 
our mentality fully in line with our pro- 
fessed ideals. 

It is only the development of a gen- 
uinely democratic mentality which will 
protect us from the horrible temptation 
of a society which allows for no differ- 
ences at all, no personal initiative free 
from state control, and no individual 
distinctions based on natural and ac- 
quired gifts on the one hand; and de- 
liver us from the present situation, in 
which our undemocratic mentality con- 
tinually obstructs our democratic aspira- 
tions. For aspirations there are, and the 
change in our mentality was started long 
ago, but unless we are very sensible 
about this whole business, and relent- 
lessly pursue our goal of a truly de- 
mocratic mentality based on the deep 
conviction of our God-given equality as 
human beings, with ail it implies both 
of sameness and of diversity, we shall 
not merely fail to progress - we shall 
end in tragedy — # 

15 




r 



KUWENTONG 
KUTSERO 

by NARCISO PIMENTEL, JR. 



Thoughts on carnaping 



• THE PRESIDENT is on the warpath. 
The target this time: camapers. To us car 
owners with or without drivers, this of 
course is most welcome news. At long last, 
the powers that be at Malacanang have 
awakened to the fact that there are crimes 
other than smuggling which are being 
perpetrated with ever-increasing brazen- 
ness. 

Even as I am writing this piece, my 
mind is only half with me working hard 
at this arduous business of creating non- 
sense; the other half is out where my car 
is, keeping vigil over it, worrying about 
the hub-caps, the door-locks, the windows, 
in fact, the whole car. When I finish this 
column and go down to bring this to the 
GRAPHIC will I still find my car parked 
where I left it two hours ago? 

Or will I find it gone? Will I then 
have to go looking for the policeman 
in the comer who is never there when 
things like camapings happen? And will 
he answer me with the usual blank 
stare; I don't know. I didn't see any car- 
naper, carnaping, or even ear. And so will 
I have to report the case to the corres- 
ponding precinct and then wait patiently 
for contact to be established with the 
camapers in Rizal, Bulacan, Laguna, or 
Cavite? Will I have to go crazy for days 
running down clues, hints, tips, messages, 
and notes that my car had been seen 
cruising along Rizal Avenue, that it had 
been espied parked in front of the Jai 
Alai, that it had been tailed to Tagaytay 
and then lost somewhere along the way, 
that it had been sighted in Ricol, Samar, 
Davao, and Cotabato, that it had been 
detected at the pier one day and the next 
that it had been discovered in Hongkong 
being driven by some belated Filipino 
Christmas shoppers? 

Or will I receive a ransom note together 
with my mail saying; Your car is safe. But 
it will not be safe for long unless and 
until you come across with ?10,000- 
If interested, call Precinct 7 which will 
put you in immediate contact with us- Or, 
will it be a mysterious-looking man sidling 
up to me suddenly out of the shadows and 
whispering gruffly; Don't look around 
now- And don't make a false move* or 
you're a goner. It's about your car. It's 
safe with us. We haven't touched it at all. 
But if you want it back, you'll have to 



fork over PlO,000- If interested, you can 
get in touch with us again through the 
LTC 

And will a long period of haggling and 
bargaining with the camapers ensue? Will 
I finally be able to jew them down to one 
half of their asking price? Will I get their 
final instructions on just what money de- 
nominations to get, how to wrap the ran- 
som money in an old newspaper, how to 
put it in a cardboard box, tie it with a 
string, drive with it down to Paco ceme- 
tery, and leave it in an abandoned niche 
there? After doing all this, will 1 eventually 
get my car back? Or, will I, as often hap- 
pens in this day and age, lose both the 
ransom money and my car? 

How can I know the answer to all 
these questions unless I first go down and 
find out if my car is still where I left it? 
But I am only half way through writing 




this column. I can't very well put this off 
until later, what with deadlines changed 
to earlier dates- And yet, even if I do go 
down and board my car, what can prevent 
a couple of camapers dressed m coat and 
tie and lugging a James Bond attache 
case (like those that held up Gloria Ro- 
mero's driver and took off with her car 
in front of ABS-CBN the other day) from 
holding me up at the point of a vicious- 
looking gun and driving off with my car 
to only God knows where? And how am 
I to know if that place (that only God 
knows) is where they give stolen cars 



such a face-lifting in a matter of just a 
few hours that not even the original manu- 
facturers of the car can recognize it after- 
wards even if they examine it with a high- 
powered lens? How can I tell if in a few 
days I will not be approached by a fast- 
talking second-hand car salesman offering 
me my own "face-lifted" car, complete 
with a new car plate issued by the Land 
Transportation Commission, at the tempt 
ing price of P3000? 

But granting the remote possibility that 
when I go down my car is still there 
where I left it Granting that I am able 
to drive away without being molested by 
gun-toting camapers, what can prevent 
another car from suddenly and without 
any rhyme or reason bumping into mine 
on some relatively deserted road or high- 
way without really causing any real dam- 
age to my car but with sufficient force 
to make me stop and go down to inspect 
the rear of my car in search of dents? Now 
what can prevent at that precise mo»aec:t 
the driver and passengers of the car that 
bumped into mine from turning out to be 
gun-toting camapers who suddenly poke 
their guns into my ribs and make off with 
my ear leaving me helpless and hopeless 
in the middle of the lonely road? 

I should have left the car at home. I 
should never have brought it down town. 
Cars are to be seen and admired and 
cherished, never to be used or ridden in 
* * . at least, not in this country. But where 
at home do I leave the car so it won't get 
stolen? Certainly not the garage; that's 
where many cars get stolen from, even in 
Forbes Park- It's all right when I'm home; 
at least then I can sleep next to the gar- 
age and wake up every hour on the hour 
to check on the car. But leave it in the 
garage in the care of the household help 
when I am not there? Never! 

How do I get car protection, for hea- 
vens' sake? Insurance? All right, so I in- 
sure my car, and when it gets stolen, as 
it certainly will, I get the insurance mon- 
ey. Rut I don't want the money. I want 
my car. 

Does being, a policeman help? But po- 
lice cars have been stolen- And the other 
day camapers reportedly made off with 
the car of an expert in police matters, 
graduate of the FBI and now a congress- 
man. And how true is the scuttlebutt I 
hear that one of the several cars of the 
Vice-President was stolen? 

It is about time the President declared 
war on camapers. Who knows? The next 
victim might be he himself I — # 



GRAPHIC 



Sinulat ni 

MANUEL L. QUEZON, JR. 



0 




• MAGSABI ka na ang ating 
bay an ay nasa panganib at ma- 
aaring mag-wakas, at kaagad- 
agad sasabihin ng mga iba na 
kulang ka sa pagkamakabayan. 

Tila dapat sabihin na, hindi 
man natin mahulaan kung pa- 
paano, makaliligtas din sa mga 
suliranin at panganib ang ating 
bayan at iigi rin ang lahat ba- 
lang araw. 

Nililinlang natin ang ating 
sarili kung gayon ang ating 
paniwala* 

Sa kasaysayan ng daigdig, 
nababasa natin kung gaano ka- 
rami ang mga bayan na dati- 
datiy maginhawa't makapang- 
yarihan, tia ngayo'y hindi na 
matatagpuan sa ibabaw ng lu- 
pa. 

Oktubre 19, 1966 



Nababasa natin sa Bibliya ang 
mga gawa ng kaharian ng Asir- 
ya, na sumakop sa napakara- 
ming bansa sapagka't ito.'y 
makapangyarihan. Mahigit na 
2000 taon riang nawala sa ka- 
saysayan ang Asirya, 

Isa pang halimbawa, Halos 
ang buong Europa, ang gawing 
hilaga ng Aprika at ang baha- 
gi ng Asya na tinafcawag na 
"New East" ay naging nasa 
ilalim ng pamahalaan ng Ro- 
ma* Nguni t mahigit nang isang 
Jibong taon ang nakalipas 
na wala na ang Imperio Roma- 

t)0, 

Dalawang halimbawa pa na 
may kaugnayan sa sarili nating 
kasaysayan — ang kaharian ng 
Srivijaya at ang kaharian ng 



Madjapahit, na sumakop sa 
ilang bahagi ng ating lupa sa 
lumipas na panahon, ay wala 
na iln. 

Wala tayong maipagyaya- 
bang na katangiar* sa ibang 
bayan, na maging dahilan 
upang makaasa tayo na, anu- 
man ang mangy ari at anuman 
ang ating gawin, magpapatu- 
,loy at mabubuhay din ang 
ating bansa, 

Bawat bansang ginamit na- 
ting panghalimbawa ay pa- 
wan g bumagsak dahil sa masa- 
mang palakad o sa pagsama ng 
kanilang kaugalian. Kund i 
unang humina ang mga nahi- 
rang bayan, hindi sana sila ma- 
iling nadaig ng mga nanglu- 
sob o kusang nagkahati-hati, 

3 



ONIdllld DIHdVND 

*sBjnn 

-Bin 'Soqiutq ^EsgEqBq Xb p?q 
-bui SuBXBq SunB Sub 'oSBuirq 
Suejeu uBBXBqBqEd Xe ueXeuieui 
-eui 3ueqi-^qi Su XBiBAuqE^BSf 
~3ed Su UB2ui|B3E§SuBtnd bSui 

SUE gun>[ 'E4UBS 3ui[BpBUl Eg 

lEqe[ 

3U UEUH5[EdE5l BS Sui3i3buI 3u 

EA\Biun3 bu uBXeq Sue Estq Su 

UBpjMBAVEUJ BU 5[bXi4 'SuBUIBf 

ub[i Sue ipuiq 'uEABq Suonq, 

3uB pB|UTlUm 4B ESI JBAVBq 

Sue BAvBqmuinS SuEdn ub3u 
'n[n4§BUX 4^di*p bu pi;EdB2jB3[ 
-Seui SuBjiq X Efts Bu ubXbuibui 

-BUI Su dlSI BS B[EMBUJ Sun^ 

t /poAE)[ SubXub5[-bX 

-UB^ SuiSbu ( OJiq BU pB5[B[EUI 
-tq BS UOXb §EdB3[ 'UTtUEpUIBp 

bSui Sue XE[BMiq-EM;qBi[3Bii 3ed 
-B3[ f UBundi[ bs ;dESB5[ b3ui Sub 

BSIE^B^SEd SuE[BM ^BdE3f UBq 

-BUiES Subsi Sub utp bjisisej^ 

*OUI 

SuEdB^tsSBurd O OUIB4BU 
ipuiq Xb ujuuXb[ SubXub^j 3ub 

§EdB^ BJISBU1 BU XojIU SupB 

-euj IB BUiqiq Xb uEundr[ o UBq 
-buies Subsi Buy *UBundq o UBq 
-EuiES Suun 3uesi 3uB[jq Xb ueX 
-Bq Sub bu uj4bu 4iS3ubui$j 

■b^bSesi ;EdBp bu XBSEq 

SUBJUJBU bSu! Su EM.BSBSBs3Bd 

bs uEXsq Su bausbSubSubu 
-id Sub bXis bu uBBpsuBuiBd Su 
utp uoXeS }e uEXEq SuBirqnu 

^ BU BStlBqiilBd 3uBqBUIBS Su 

urunXB( Xb 4BdB.n?iBU bu Xsq 
-numuiBd 3u uooien3bui Xb ubX 
-BiuBtUBUi bSui Sub Sarin ueX 
-Bq Su ueXeSb|B5[ 4E XBqnq 3u 
pE^Eped Su soXEB-SBd Suy 

*0B| 

Su XBunumuiBd bu soqn[ Sub 



UBUSBqtUlBd }B BXlU UBUD[pBUl 

SuBdn ubSbamue^ ' Suojsbm Su 

BAUE5{ BS ABSiqiqSBdB^EUl EU 

XBqnqdBUEq Su bXis ubSububSu 
-bSue^ *utavbub4 ;b U^41UIb3B3{ 
SuepubSeSbui 'bXsusXis 4b Sututs 

l 3EUEMl[Bd 4B ^BlBE-SEd gu pE( 

-04 'uBBJEd 4B ubjiuieSe^ Sutibs 

-I.1BS_.3UB BXtU UeSuEHBX 'OBI 
Su UB^BdBIB^ 4B 0B4 BS )EdES 

eu XBqnumuiBd Sub eXiu dBU 
-bSbui SuBdn uESuB[n?SuB3uBd 
SubXis uooiXbui Xb 0B4 Subsi Su 
ubXbSbjb3[ Sub ueui dBiiuBj^ 

*doXBq b3ui 
bs 0B4 Su jSuB^BUpu bu 4BqB[ 

BS }B *Bittlp SuBXlttE3f BS *dlS! 

SueXiuB5[ bs [cqnuBU bSui bs 
bu 0[Ei-Sun[Bj ipan^j uba^e;e5[ 
bs [ojjnnEu eu XESeq eSuj bs 
Sueutb| tputq *XBqnuanuiEd SubX 
-iu soqn[ Sub *OB4B)j3Bd SubXiu 
soqnj gu SuojusSBd Sub 4 pB[un 
-3ed ;e UBuB}|BdE3[ Sue ipun3[ 

UBnuBp Susqr SuEfEM X^OB4 
Su UEqriEXSuBdBij BSBU bu Bdnj 
Su AiBqEqr bs [e^|B3[ ;e Xb3 
-Bq bu 4eue[ 3uy "BA^n[n[Ei| Xeui 
*iqpnq Xbui 'oujfB^ Xeui 'bai 
-ip Xeui c disi Xbui X tf OE4 Suy 

"SUBUIB[ 

doXBq ipuiq X ( ob4 Suy 'b3e[be 
-Ssd bu 4BdEs 3u dBSSuE^EUirn 

BU MEqB[B5l BSui Su XeUTIUIUUI 

-Bd es UBqqiE^ 2 ut?|ua\ Xb 0E4 
3u XBunumuiBd bs (o^Suni omj[ 
-niTi3( 3uj|B Sub ( uooi Bd 4f3iujq 
bu ipuiq 4B 0B4 bSui 3u Subui 
-B] UB3nsnqE5[ 3ue Xb tsuEq 
Subsi Su utibSubu Sue 3utv\[ 

^SUBUIBX 

doXBq BS TpUTU 4^ *OB4 bs JBdBp 
-4EdEiB5f eu XBquuinuiEd 3uim 
3u uoojb3[Seui a ( oe^ e3ui Sue 

SuBdtl UBBlBd SU BMBUITlS BU 

UEB[BuBuiBd Su urjn^Sunx 'OB} 
3ub 4tdTS!SBui SuBqqrq o uioj 



f 

-iiSbui SBAinq SuBdu Subuibj ip 
X 4 04i bu 4BqB[ Su uBnqEp gay 

*ubXbuieuibui Su XBqnq 
-dBuBqBqSBd Suun SuBqj-4 ( Bqi 
Sub luiEUinp Susdn 'ueSubji 
-E3f 4jib)[es Sun>[ *Suo|uuin4 ;e 
'ubXbuibuibui bSui Su uBXBqnq 
-E3[ Sub pE[unuin SuBdn uBBpiq 
-Bured Sub UBBisd 3u dBUBuinq 
BU [OipinBU 'uooi es Bd x£}ji 

■UE3uE[IE3uE3uEd e3u! SuEltUBX 

bs 4EdBS bu XBqnq-dBUBqBqSBd 
4E dB^isisSed Sub[iub5[ bs oej 
bSui Sub UBSuBipEqEui SBMuq 
SuEdn sB4Bq SupnqnqEUi 4B uebj 

-BqBUlBd Su DB3JE[Ed EU SoXbEUI 
BS *UBEdBXEdB3| 4E UE3pUliqE4 
-E^[ Sa UE^tSEUIBUIBd ES OUIB4B4 
-BUI X,BXt BU ^EUBT Su UBUB5[Ed 

-B5[ Sub Xb utuiiXb[ Suy *ueX 

-EUIBUIBUI ESUJ Su UEqEUIES 0 

UBundq Suiin SuBst Xb u^b Sue 
*uBXEq Su 4^qt?t Su pB(n£ 

bu qjuBSiiBd Sub 
aftBu uBqoju3[-mn^3Bd Suo>[ st 
*uEXBq Sui^b Sue utp eiisis 
-eui 4^ 0[n3n3Eui Sutieeui *3ip 

-StBp Su UB3n|iqE^ BS UEEdBX 

-EdB^ Su uooiE^Srm ;iqB^ 

'UBdBstm 

-S E Uld SUI4B 3 UE UBXEXSuBd 

SuoXeS tpuiq 4jn?qns ^S;p 
-Step Suonq bs 0B4 3u BSuiuiq 

Sub UOSElB[BUI 4^SEdES 4 BdU[ 

Su AVEqBqi es 0E4 Su uEqiuiBi 

-Ei[ 3UE BJBSUldBUI O XB4BUIBUI 

SujiEEUi u *quxoq j>Tuio4B j , Xeui eu 
ESUBq SuEquEXSuEdE^EUi bSui 
Sue UBUeqEiSBUJ 3urq 4jun§u 

'[EdB^XBJ^ Su BMBU O^B[I 

"ubXb3e[e^ 

Sub epueSbui 4B pB5[B[Ed Sub 
uieuibui BU 4iqB>[ Bsunq 3ubse 
Sub SB4UEU1 3uueeui "uoqEUEd 

SUE4E ES BUlSipUEd SuE4IUIbSb5( 
e3ui 3u SuOpisSEd BS JiqEQ 




ouie)e)eui ;p Ae uiunAej 6ueAue>j 

6ue 6un)| SeMnqeui 6uueeui Ae 
ueundjj 6ues; buy 




KUWENTONG 
KUTSERO 

by NARCISO PIMENTEL, JR. 



Dial M for miracle! 



• COMPLAINTS against the telephone 
service are by now proverbial- In fact, 
they are so proverbial they have given 
broth to a spate of jokes in the community. 
One friend, for instance, the other day, 
complaining about how difficult it is to 
establish contact with anyone through 
the telephone, was saying: "It's gotten to 
the point, my friend, where I have stopped 
using the phone altogether." 

"You've had it disconnected?" I asked 
listlessly. 

"No, I still keep it as a status symbol." 
"A symbol of what status?" 
"The status quo*" 

The point of the joke eludes me up to 
now, because frankly I cannot say that 
I have stopped using the phone altogether. 
On die contrary, today I use the phone 
more times per call than I used to before. 
In fact, I have noticed that my use of the 
phone has increased in inverse proportion 
to the number of calls I make each day* 
I must admit that if I used to make 50 
calls a day before, now I make only five 
calls a day or 10 times less. Yet, to make 
those five calls 1 have to use the phone 
50 times more or 10 times five times more. 
Typically, these exemplify, more or less, 
the 10 times I use the phone to put 
through one call: 

First Time: I pick up the phone, and 
even before dialing my number I hear the 
busy signal. I wait a while, because some- 
times when you're lucky the busy signal 
just simply disappears and suddenly the 
dial tone is heard. But most of the time 
the wait is fruitless, so I put down the re- 
ceiver- 
Second Time: After dialing the first dig- 
it of the telephone number I want to call, 
I hear the busy signal. I continue dialing 
up to the last digit - : . with the same re- 
sult. So I put down the receiver. 

Third Time: Gingerly I dial the first dig- 
it of the telephone number. The dial tone 
disappears. No busy signal Good. Reas- 
sured, I dial the second digit. Still no 
signal. Wonderful. More boldly this time, 
I dial the third digit nonchalantly. Then 
it happens, Busy signal. I retreat 



Fourth Timei This time I am able to 
dial all the digits of the number. But the 
result is the same. Busy signal What can 
1 do if my party is busy? Let's wait, what 
else. 

Fifth Time: After the wait, I pick up 
the phone again, but this time I hear some- 
body dialing. Must be my party line. I re- 
treat again discreetly. r 

Sixth Time: After another wait (which 
this time is rather long to make due allow- 
ance for my long-winded party line) 1 
take up the receiver to find out that my 




party line is more long-winded than usual. 
So I hang up for an extended wait 

Seventh Time: I lift up the receiver 
softly so as not to unduly disturb my par- 
ty line. Eurekal No party line. Just the 
welcome buzzing sound of the dial tone* 
Quickly I dial my number, and then settle 
down to wait for my party as I hear the 
intermittent rings calling the other phone. 
No one answers- I wait some more, pa- 
tiently. Still no answer. I decide to check 
up. 

Eighth Time: I dial 03 (the telephone 



company's complaint department) three 
times. Three times it's busy. So I dial 05 
to complain about the complaints depart- 
ment. The girl there tells me she only at- 
tends to orders for telephone service, pay- 
ments, listing, etcetera. I dial 04 for in- 
formation on how to get 03, and the girl 
there says: "Simple. You insert your index 
finger in hole marked 0, turn it clockwise 
and let go. Then you insert your finger 
in hole marked three, turn clockwise and 
let go." I hold my temper and decide to 
go back to my number. (Note Bene: I re- 
alize this is a little bit of cheating* because 
this Eighth Time is really equivalent to 
many times; but I do hate to embarrass 
the Telephone Company.) 

Ninth Time: After dialing the full num- 
ber, there is no busy signal, there is no 
ringing, there is only a couple of crossed 
party lines conversing in very fast Chinese- 
I hang up and wait again. 

Tenth Time: I pick up the phone once 
more and to my utter amazement, a voice 
from the deep dark and mysterious recess- 
es of that black contraption says distinct- 
lyf "Hello." I answer: "Hello," and the 
following conversation ensues; 

"Whom do you want to talk to?" 

"Are you kidding? I just picked up the 
phone, never even dialed, and there you 
were on the line saying: Hello. Whom do 
you want to talk to?" 

"What a coincidence! I had done just 
that: picked up the phone without dialing, 
and I just felt someone was on the line, 
so I said: Hello." 

"Say . . - You know, your voice some- 
how sounds familiar. Are you by any 
chance Nonong?" 

"Why, yes! How did you know? And 
wait . . - Who are you? Pirn?" 

"Yes, by gosh, I've been trying to call 
you up for the last 30 minutes." 

"So have I you, man! And at long last, 
without dialing, by just picking up the 
phone at exactly the same time, mys- 
teriously, we finally got connected." 

"That's right < . - Isn't the telephone a 
wonderful invention!" 

"In fact, it is a miracle!" — # 



October 5, 1966 



"The patient man is better than the 
valiant; and he that taleth himself than 
he that taketh cities" — The Holy Bible. 

• PATIENCE is one of the virtues 
easiest to preach and one of the most 
difficult to practice. In Spanish and 
English it is preached with one word: 
"Paciencia/' "Patience," in colloquial Ta- 
galog, with two: "Kaunting pasiensia/' 
Everyone understands exactly what it 
means — or so it seems. 

We make an appeal for it under all 
sorts of conditions and for all sorts of 
reasons* The noble man and the vir- 
tuous demands it, the good man and 
the saintly pleads for it, and for the 
same reason; nobility, virtue, genuine 
goodness, and that highest point achiev- 
able by man — authentic sanctity — can- 
not exist without it The mature man 
expects patience because maturity with-, 
out patience is impossible. Patience is in 
fact a true test of character. 

Patience can, however, be a subter- 
fuge for less laudable sentiments. A 
coward may disguise his cowardice as 
patience when it is his duty to act — a 
man who fails to defend his daughter 
who is being unjustly attacked, an offi- 
cial who does not crack down on the 
misbehavior of his subordinates, an in- 
fluential citizen who fails to speak out 
against wrong, a priest who fails to rise 
in defense of religion* In these cases, 
we are dealing, not with patience, but 
with its perversion. A plea for" patience 
can also be a means for the perpetra- 
tion of injustice and oppression. It is 
the latter with which I am presently 
concerned. 

Anyone with eyes and ears and a con- 
science only needs to look about him to 
see that there is something seriously 
wrong with our society, Our principles, 
our ideals, and the legal apparatus to 
support them are fine. 

Democracy, equal opportunity for all, 
equality before the law, freedom of this, 
that, and the other. Fine, fine in theory, 
beautiful in speeches, resplendent in 
writing. But does not the reality of life 
make a mockery of all these things? 

Democracy, when a landlord may 
control the votes of all his tenants — or 
else? Equality of opportunity, when 
"pujr may place an incompetent at the 
head of the line and never even allow 
the fully qualified but backer-less indi- 
vidual a distant glimpse of the post to 
which he aspires? Equality before the 
law, when an influential politician can 
effectively block the operation of justice, 
to the chagrin of the law-enforcement 
agencies, while a poor citizen pays the 
full penalty for his crimes? 

Taking a broader view of our society, 
does not the chasm between rich and 



poor, between the educated and the 
barely literate masses operate to nullify 
whatever legal and democratic safe- 
guards our system takes such pains to 
safeguard? In a word, do not the blatant 
economic and social inequalities of our 
country tend to make our free and just 
democratic society a farce instead of a 
reality? And what, all too often, is the 
sop we throw to the unfortunate mem- 
bers of our society? A sermon on pa- 
tience* 

Well, to a large extent that is the only 
virtue that our badly situated fellow 
citizens can practice to meet such condi- 
tions — patience. 

Patience so that they will not take 
the law into their own hands and only 
make matters worse, not better. Patience, 
so that they will not be guilty of the 
same injustice of which they are the 
victims, for an injustice is never righted 
by committing another injustice, Pa- 
tience, in the exercise of self-restraint, 
so that the bounds of moral and legal 
justice may not be exceeded* True, in- 
terior patience, so that their consciences 
may remain clean, although their hands 
and bodies may be dirty, with the dirt 
of poverty and humiliation* 

But there is a broad area within which 
patience would not be patience — it 
would be apathy at best, at worst 
cowardice. That is the area of the exer- 
cise of legal and political rights. It is 
the use of the law and the ballot, the 
peaceful but forceful expression of pub- 
lic opinion, to bring about an equitable 
state of affairs, to dethrone corruption 
at the polls and support intelligence, in- 
tegrity, and dedication. 

I am not one to use the United States 
of America as the perfect model of de- 
mocracy, since it is not. There is one 
American habit, however, which we 
could imitate very profitably. It is the 
habit of writing to one's representative 
in Congress. The courts of law exist for 
the redress of legal grievances, but Con- 
gress is a resort, not just a last but often 
a first or only resort, for the remedying 
of ills. Let a measure of importance, if 
not for the country as a whole, at least 
for a section of the country, be con- 
templated, and Senators and Congress- 
men are deluged with letters from their 
constituents. 

It is not merely the United States 
Congress which is subjected to this sort 
of democratic pressure from the people 
— any and all public authorities are 
bombarded with mail as occasion may 
demand. Indeed, even private compa- 
nies and organizations are subjected to 
the same treatment. Open letters to the 
press are a very common vehicle for ex* 



pressing satisfaction or dissatisfaction 
with a situation* , 

Such a procedure serves more than 
one useful purpose: it is a safety-valve 
for n^t upWotions, it allows authon- 
£s P and private groups to feel the pub- 
lic pulse/and above 
mg on die authorities that "lbmate 
human repository of civil authority - 
the people - is keeping a sharp eye on 
goings-on and will not tolerate a cymcal 
Isregard of public opinion^ wouW 
take a calloused person indeed to dis- 
regard an avalanche of letters for or 
TgS a measure. And all this is done 
democratically, completely within the 
pale of the law, and without a trace of 
that attitude fatal to the democratic 
process: "After all, what can I do about 

it?" . 

Certainly, if the average poor and un- 
derprivileged Filipino citizen (and the 
average citizen is poor and underprivi- 
leged) were to take to the mails, as it 
were, we could look forward to a marked 
improvement in our society, an improve- 
ment which would be felt where it is 
needed most — among those who lead a 
hand-to-mouth existence, or little better. 

But the question of patience has spe- 
cial relevance for the upper crust of our 
society. The preaching of patience to the 
depressed classes comes with very poor 
grace from those who are in a position 
to do something to alleviate the lot of 
the poor and fail to do so. 

Not A Matter 
Of Contributions 

Actually, it is not merely a matter of 
giving contributions to charity. Many 
good souls do so, not only among the, 
wealthy but also among those belonging 
to the middle and even lower income 
bracket. Some do so from unworthy mo- 
tives, no doubt, but it would take a most 
unjust mind to attribute other than 
worthy motives to the immense majority 
— a genuine sympathy for the suffering 
and a desire to alleviate their lot. 

However, economic inequalities have 
grown so great that something more 
than individual help is required. Individ- 
ual help must not stop — God forbid! 
Over and above individual help, how- 
ever, a true conversion, a true change of 
heart, a new outlook is required, produc- 
tive of a concerted effort to solve our 
problems through heroic efforts if need 
be* The every-man-for-hirnself attitude, 
the child of laissez-faire economics, has 
got to go. The notion of free enterprise 
must be, not destroyed, but subordinat- 
ed to the most fundamental concept of 
society and public authority, which is 
the common good. 



It is considered a truism that, ia t 
last analysis, it is not so much the ty 
of government or economy, as the r 
who run it; not so much the laws as 
men who administer them, that r 
for a good or bad society. 

In a sense, of course, it is true: 
matter how perfect the form of govt: 
ment, no matter how perfect the I a . 
if the people in control are wicked, d 
of conscience, or not capable, the 
come will be a disaster. Society tt 
blunder through such a situation a 
survive — it often does — but at frigl 
ful cost. 

But supposing that we have a go< 
type of government (which we do) a: 
good men to run it, supposing that tk 
who largely control the economy a 
capable men, are we assured of j 
necessary good results? I seriously dou 
it - at least if we mean by good ai 
capable men those who are such sole 
according to the excessively individual 
tic model of the old free enterprise, do 
eat-dog system. 

The classical free enterprise sylte 
exists today only in countries where d 
mocracy is a farce and progress the pn 
ilege of a few rather than the birthr^ 
of all. The freest and also most pr 
gressive democracies today have a t 
rected economy in one form or ano&< 
much as they may dislike the term \ 
rected economy." Modern economy is 
complex and its various elements are 
intertwined, both within each coun' 
and in relation to the economy of i 
rest of the world, that it has been foui 
necessary to introduce a degree of pk 
ning and direction, in accordance \vi 
the particular needs of each country, 

In the Social and Christian Dein 
cratic countries of Europe, the fac ; 
obvious; less obviously, the Uitti 
States of America, with its clarion-call 
free enterprise, has found an mcreas 
amount of government vigilance ar 
regulation necessary for its econom 
Nothwithstanding Barry Gold water m 
Company, the effect has been 
strengthen, not weaken, the free eote 
prise system by protecting it from $ 
excesses which have threatened to de 
troy it in the past 

Some experiments in planned econoo' 
have not been entirely successful 
in some instances governments have g 
too far or moved too fast and had : 
move back in certain respects, but h 
and large the movement has been a so 
cess. 

It may surprise some well-mear 
hut not very well-informed Catholic 
hear that the Church, which h as 
and again condemned Communism 
had very harsh things to say about 



PATIENCE AND THE SOI 



by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr 



16 



uJ Capitalism. 
Leo XHL who exposed and con- 
iism in his Encyclical "Quod 
Muneris,** was the same Pope 
^Rerum Novarum," (in Eng- 
lish, "On the Condition of the Working 
Class") which pilloried the old style 
capitalism in no uncertain terms. Pius 
XI around half a century later wrote 
a scathing condemnation of "Atheistic 
Communism" and also brought up to 
date Leo's Encyclical on the laboring 
classes with his "Quadragesimo Anno/' 
Pope John XXIII in two Encyclicals, 
"Mater et Magistra" and "Facem in Ter- 
ris ,, again brought tip to date, not the 
principles taught by his predecessors for 
they are timeless, but their application 
to contemporary conditions. What are 
hose timeless principles? 

If I may be so bold as to put them 
[n capsule form, they are the central 
fact mat the world is meant to serve 
man so that man may serve God. Both 
materialistic Communism and materialis- 
ric old style Capitalism contradict that 
■Fact. Any social system, any governmen- 
tal system which grinds some or most 
men into the dust instead of lifting them 
up is destructive of the very order of 
nature and of things and contrary to 
:he teaching of the Church and of sound 
reason. Any system which fails to re- 
spect this true order of things, or which 
is not oriented toward it, needs to be 
changed to the degree and extent that 
mature is violated. 

The particular form and speed of 
change must of course avoid any vio- 
ation of justice, and avoid the haste 
which precludes careful study. 

Patience in making a careful study, 
yes; patience in those who must bear 
with seeming delay which is in reality 
he avoidance of ill-considered haste> yes. 
But patience as a refuge for a social 
conscience which refuses to search it- 
self and face facts and needs honestly, 
even at the cost of human misery to 
others — neverl 

A patient s careful study of our pres- 
ent social and economic system so that 
fte needs of the people, not just of a 
:egment of the population, may be met, 
s our duty in conscience. 
1 Support of reform within the frame- 
work of our democratic system, involv- 
ing some economic planning and direc- 
tion freely discussed and freely adopt- 
ed seems to me an inescapable necessi* 
ty. Let those who imagine the Com- 
munist demon to be lurking under the 
-hair of everyone who favors the elim- 
ination of extreme social and economic 
inequalities beware: some day they may 
imagine the Communist demon to be 
lurking under the Chair of St Peter*— # 



A careful 
study of 
our social 
system is 
our duty 
in conscience 




IAL ORDER 



INEQUALITIES 

Concerted effort is needed to 
combat such economic inequali- 
ties as shanties (top photo) r 
scroungers (above photo), 
wasteful parties (upper right) , 
sumptuous mansions (right). 



October 5, 1966 




CAN PRIVATE 
HOSPITALS 

ii mmrnm 

TO ADMIT 
EMERGENCY 





CASES 



It is up to Congress to pass a law requiring all hospitals to tre it, 

by M. JAVIER 



• MANILA'S private hospitals, during 
the past weeks, have been subjected to 
public scrutiny and censure due to the 
alleged refusal of some of them to ad- 
mit emergency, medico-legal cases, es- 
pecially among the indigent. Dr, Pauli- 
no Garcia, Secretary of Health, publicly 
announced his intention of going after 
private hospitals who refuse to admit 
such emergency cases. 

Can private hospitals be forced to ad- 
mit emergency cases of medico-legal na- 
ture? 

"No, the government cannot compel a 
private hospital to admit an emergency 
case/ 7 emphatically stated Dr. Eliodoro 
Congco, president of the Philippine 
Hospital Association, "Private hospitals 
are not under government subsidy and 
it would be an encroachment upon their 
rights if they were forced to admit in- 
digent, medico-legal, emergency cases*" 

Dr, Congco, a member of the Nation- 
al Health Advisory Board and the di- 
rector of a small private hospital, be- 
lieves that, at present, there is no law 
that obliges a private hospital to admit 
the type of cases in question. He re- 
called that, many years ago, there was 
a move to have the government partly 
subsidize indigent beds in Manila's pri- 
vate hospitals. As a corollary to this idea, 
a municipal ordinance was proposed 
compelling private hospitals to admit in- 
digent eases. Since the move for gov- 
ernment subsidy fizzled out, nothing was 
apparently done about the proposed 
ordinance. Dr, Congco, moreover, be- 
lieves that the Hospital Licensure Act 
does not specifically require private 
hospitals to admit emergency cases re- 
gardless of their nature. "In other 
words/* stated the Philippine Hospital 
Association president, "private hospitals 
have a choice as to what emergency 
cases to admit/' 

The Hospital Licensure Act has been 
invoked as a means of requiring private 
hospitals to treat all emergency cases 
brought to them. What is the Hospital 
Licensure Act? Also known as Republic 



Act No. 4226, it is "an act requiring 
the licensure of all hospitals in the Phil- 
ippines and authorizing the Bureau of 
Medical Services to serve as the licens- 
ing agency/' It was approved by Con- 
gress on june 19, 1965, In compliance 
with Section 15 of the Act, the Bureau 
of Medical Services of the Department 
of Health issued a set of "rules and reg- 
ulations implementing the provisions of 
R.A* No, 4226, otherwise known as the 
Hospital Licensure Act" 

Part III, Section 4, paragraph (d) of 
these rules and regulations states - 
"Separate facilities shall be maintained 
for the handling of emergency cases 
whenever possible/' In no other part of 
the rules implementing the Hospital Li- 
censure Act are emergency cases referred 
to, "The rules and regulations basically 
deal with the governing body and ad- 
ministration of a hospital, with its basic 
services (medical, nursing, dietary, etc.), 
with the required hospital facilities and 
the physical plant and its maintenance. 

If, as the Philippine Hospital Asso- 
ciation president stated, private hospi- 
tals cannot be compelled by law to ad- 
mit all types of emergency cases, the 
fault lies' in the omission of any def- 
inite ruling on the admission of emer- 
gency cases in the regulations imple- 
menting the Hospital Licensure Act, It 
is up to Congress to pass a law requir- 
ing all hospitals to treat, if not admit, 
all emergency cases regardless of their 
nature. Without this "legal obligation/' 
private hospitals have certain rights and 
privileges of choice that cannot be en- 
croached upon by the government. 

As an example of this freedom of ac- 
tion that a private hospital, not enjoy- 
ing government subsidy, is entitled to, 
Dr. Congco cited a situation he bad to 
deal with as president of the Philippine 
Hospital Association. This was a ques- 
tion of so-called "closed" hospitals. In 
medical parlance, a "closed" hospital is 
one wherein only certain selected doctors 
are allowed to treat the patients con- 
fined in iU When a well-known medical 



practitioner lodged a protest against a 
"closed" hospital in the suburbs, the 
Philippine Hospital Association was 
forced to intervene, It seems that a 
serious patient of this medical practi- 
tioner was admitted to the "closed" hos- 
pital. The attending doctor was denied 
the privilege of looking after his pa- 
tient because he was not included in the 
list of approved physicians of the hos- 




ELIODORO CONGCO 

"A choice as to what emergen- 
cy cases to treat or admit" 



pital. The Undersecretary of Health in- 
formed the Philippine Hospital Asso- 
ciation that his office could not compel 
the hospital to reverse its decision. The 
"closed" hospital, being private, had the 
right to choose the doctors who would 
be allowed to treat the patients confined 
in it. 

Dr. Congco revealed that, as far back 
as five years ago, he was instrumental 
in introducing a bill in Congress provid- 
ing for a government subsidy of a num- 
ber of beds in private hospitals for the 



use of indigent cases. He closely follow- 
ed the progress of this bill in Congress 
and he has expressed his disappoint- 
ment that up to now it has not been 
passed. He said that government-subsi- 
dized, charity beds in private hospital 
would enable them to handle all types 
of emergency cases without having t< 
suffer the inevitable financial losse 
which most of them can ill afford to 
have. He emphasized that government 
support must be given for the whole 
year round and not only when an in 
digent case is admitted. This is mcr 
sary to offset the financial burden c: 
major surgical interventions which mos 
emergency cases are bound to requir 
Since government subsidy applies onb 
to the maintenance of charity beds, the 
problem of medical fees for services 
rendered remains to be solved. This is 
not a problem for the big teaching hos- 
pitals of our medical schools. As mem- 
bers of the faculty, their consultant 
staffs are expected to render free ser- 
vice in the charity wards used for thi j 
training of the medical undergraduates. 
The skilled consultants of non-teaching 
private hospitals, according to Dr. Cong- 
co, are usually willing to charge a min- 
imum fee for services to indigent cases. 

But the important question remains — 
will the private hospitals admit any type 
of emergency case? The spokesman for 
a university hospital in a Manila sub- 
urb expressed surprise that there should 
be any difficulty about such a situa- 
tion. "We have always admitted all 
types of cases to our emergency room, 
he stated, "regardless of whether it is 
an indigent or a paying case or whether 
it is medico-legal or not." Dr. Congco, 
speaking as the director of a small pri- 
vate hospital, also answered in the af- 
firmative, "We give at least first-aid 
treatment to any emergency case brought 
to our small hospital," he replied. 
problem is that most of the time no 
vacancy is available due to our limited 
bed capacity," he added. "In that case 
we usually escort the patient to the 

GRAPHIC 




GROWTH 

by Dr. ALBERT L DMiflElSEN, University of Georgia 



between the United States and the Phil- 
ippines, Iti the Philippines 45.7 per cent 
of the population are under the age of 
14, but in the United States 30.6 per 
cent are less than 14 years old. There 
is a very significant point here. People 
who are 14 years old and less are not 
very productive. In the Philippines, 
then, 45.7 per cent of the population 
are not very productive. 

In the United States there are nearly 
two adults for every child. In the Phil- 
ippines there is only one adult for each 
child. Children are a blessing, but they 
are not unmixed blessings. 

Each adult Filipino must provide more 
education than an American if the chil- 
dren are to have an equal education. ■ 
Each adult Filipino must produce more 
food, build more houses, weave more 
cloth, etc., than an American if the chil- 
dren are to have equal facilities, 

Filipinos have increased the produc- 
tion of goods and services by about five 
per cent each year since the end of 
World War II, But the population has 
grown 3.2 per cent 'each year. . 

In conclusion, I will quote from an 
extensive study of the Philippines which 
1 recently completed* 

"A definite impression emerging from 

November 2, 1966 



this study is that Philippine economic 
.growth is a reflection of fundamental 
and apparently irrevocable forces. Short- 
run .fluctuations should be expected of 
course, but at least for the next 20 years 
there is no reason to expect a course 
much different than in the past 20. 

"Many of the Philippine problems with 
regard to increasing real per capita out- 
put emanate from 6ne of the primary 
demographic (i.e., population) variables. 
There can be no doubt that economic" 
development would be facilitated by a 
much lower birth rate. It is equally clear 
that such a decline will require several 
more decades of urbanization, industrial- 
ization, and increased education similar 
to that since about 1920. Deliberate 
birth control on* a scale similar to that 1 
in Japan since World War II appears' 
extremely unlikely for the Philippines, 
To a very large extent, increases in total 
output will continue to facilitate popu- 
lation growth, This clear choice between 
higher levels of living and large fami- 
lies is recognized by educated urban 
dwellers since the slight fertility (or 
birth rate) decline has been affected by 
this group. The choice should be made 
more explicit and to more people when- 
ever the opportunity arises** 4 — # 




by GEMMA CRUZ ARAN ETA 



Characters to collect 

# LIKE all Sunday afternoons, it was relatively quiet and 
listless. So, we decided to go out for a drive. On Buendia, we 
caught up with a turquoise 1957 sedan which was going at 
snail's pace. Had it been a weekday, it would have caused a 
horrendous traffic jam. 

"What's the matter with this fellow?" my husband won- 
dered 

"Probably thinks he is driving a hearse," I ventured- Out 
of curiosity, we overtook him to see what the matter was. 
His hood was thrown open and perched with incredible agil 
ity on the side, was another man — presumably a mechan- 
ic trying to fix something in the motor. But all the time, 

the car was doing about 20! A policeman on the sidewalk 
saw them, perked up and was about to take out his pad when 
he suddenly stopped. "Now, what law is that against?" he 
seemed to ask himself. He scratched the back of his head 

instead and looked cheated. 

* * * 

Marilyn and I went to the same school. We were also in 
the same year but she was taking another course. However, 
we, had some subjects together. She was tall and thm and 
still wore her grade school hairdo, a flurry of little curls with 
a small green ribbon on the side. Her face was always cloud- 
ed by her enormous horn-rimmed spectacles. But her ap- 
pearance was not the unique thing about her. 

Marilyn would never listen in class, She never participated 
in discussions, never took down notes nor submitted assign- 
ments, but she would miraculously pass the examinations. 
She would attetid classes religiously only to read and read her 
books and never give a thought to what was going on. At first 
we thought she was just bored (for who did not, at onetime 
or another, take surreptitious snatches at a novel when class- 
es were particularly dull?), But Marilyn would do this dur- 
ing every subject and it was not just surreptitious snatches! 
She would actually just sit there, , take out her book, read 
and pay no attention to the professor. The professors must 
have considered her insolent and must have reported her to 
the dean for she was always seen in the dean's office staring 
into space with her index finger buried in the pages of a 
dog-eared book. Still she kept on reading. Finally, the psychol- 
ogy professor, a pleasant and plump nun (a painter, polyglot, 
social worker who is herself a character to collect) was sent 
to look after her; to delve into her psyche, I suppose. The 
nun tried all sorts of techniques, from maternal lectures to 
creeping stealthily behind Marilyn's back and confiscating 
her book, Marilyn would just smile her faint, saintly smile 
of resignation, showing the tips of her enormous front teeth. 
But she always had another book for the next class, thicker 

and more dog-eared than the confiscated one, 

* # * 

Once there was a teacher in political science who, on the 
first day of class, announced that the book she was going to 
use was already obsolete but that she was going to use it 
anyway, . tJ 

The first half of her lectures was dictations; she would 
read to us from her obsolete book. The second half was 
always her commentaries on contemporary affairs not nec- 
essarily in the realm of political science. Several times, she 
would warn us about the adjectives newspapermen use in 
their stories. Adjectives, according to her, insinuate the writ- 
er's own opinions, and that makes biased reporting which 
was dangerous to our innocent minds. But her favorite topic 
was her own philosophy and way of life which she tried most 
earnestly to inculcate in us. She called it the * "Golden Mid- 
dle." It consisted of staying in the safe and sane middle and 
not being involved with the left or the right, whether ex- 
treme or not. It had nothing to do with being neutral which 
she also considered evil. Toward the end of the year, site 
suddenly announced that the Philippine revolution was real- 
ly a misnomer perpetuated by over-eager historians btie said 
our revolution should be called a rebellion for it did not suc- 
ceed, I think she was then campaigning for Diosdado Ma- 
capagal and his Unfinished Revolution,— # 



17 





Many Filipinos still believe the white' man is superior to the 'brown' man 



« THE STRESSES and strains which 
any structure can undergo and still sur- 
vive are limited. The limits may be very 
broad but they are there* 

Society is a kind of structure and, like 
other Structures, has a limited capacity 
for survival A society does not fly 
apart the way a mechanical structure 
— a machine — may fly apart if made 
to operate beyond its design limits. 

When Oswald Spengler wrote "The 
Decline of the West," he described what 
he thought was the downfall of West- 
ern society as being like the slow sink- 
ing of a ship, The ending of a society 
may also be conceived of along the 
lines of a building crumbling, or a steel 
structure gradually being corroded by 
rust However, a society can be split. 

The United States was almost per- 
manently split in two pieces, or possib- 
ly more, by the American civil war. In 
standard histories (which are today be- 
ing questioned by some historians) the 
causes blamed for the civil war are: in- 
creased Federal centralization of power 
as against States* rights, and the ques- 
tion of slavery. 

Whatever the real or ultimate reason 
may have been, the fact remains that, 
for a period of four years, the American 
national society was actually broken in 
two, the United States of America and 
the Confederate States, and the breach 
was healed through a process of con- 
quest and reincorporation* 

A hundred years after the end of the 
civil war* it was made clear, during 
the struggle for Negro rights, that the 
southern Confederate mentality has not 
been laid to rest as completely as the 
world and the Americans themselves 
thought. 

However, while the structure of 
American society was not strong enough 
at the time of the civil war to prevent 
a temporary split, today it is inconceiv- 
able that American society could again 
break apart. Its structure was too weak 
in relation to the stresses it had to un- 
dergo in 1861, it is far too strong today 
for any stress — short of aimed con- 
quest and forcible dismemberment — to 
tear it apart:* 

The United States was less than a 
hundred years old as a nation at the 
time of the civil war; more than a hun- 
dred years of existence as a people since 
then have given the necessary, and more 
than necessary, strength to the national 
structure to resist any stresses success- 
fully. 

18 



The American case has been cited — 
there are others. 

Let us consider the Austro-Hungarian 
Empire, which existed for a much long* 
er period of time than the United States 
has up to now. The Empire was divided 
up at the end of World War I into 
its component parts. 

The United States and the Confede- 
rate States might very well have grown 
together into one nation again even had 
the Confederacy won the civil war, The 
former components of the Austro-Hun- 
garian Empire have shown no tendency 
to grow back into one. Apparently, there 



ly under a politically independent .gov- 
ernment. 

To make matters worse, American and 
other foreign influences have so strong- 
ly overshadowed our independent na- 
tional life that - to me, at any rate - 
it is not limpidly clear whether or not 
the colonial mentality is advancing or 



the retail trade, which is intended to 
make the Filipino master in his own 
house. But will that automatically make 
him feel master of his own house? 1 
doubt it 

However, I do not intend to discuss 
the means of eliminating the colonial 
mentality as a whole* I intend here to 



regressing, P°int out a strange defect in the struc- 

We are conscious of being a people, - ture of our society, which is intimately 
but are we conscious of being a bound with the colonial mentality. It 



yes, 

free, independent people? Some material 
instances may lead us to doubt. 

For example, when a car stops to pay 
at the toll gate approaching Baguio, 



mmmwrnm 

RACISM 



was no process of formation of a true 
national consciousness which would sur- 
vive divisive forces. The various peoples 
constituting the Empire retained a sense 
of separate identity despite their uni- 
fication under the Emperor, 

All this may seem irrelevant to any 
discussion of the Philippine national 
structure. It is not, at least not entirely. 
Although our consciousness of being 
Filipinos is apparently quite strong, our 
consciousness of being Ilocanos or Ta- 
galogs or Bicolanos or Visayans or from 
the Muslim areas is still very much in 
the forefront of our minds. 

It was Bizal who expressed the be- 
lief that the Filipino national conscious- 
ness arose only with the execution of 
Fathers Burgos, Gomez, and Zamora in 
the 1870Y Assuming that Rixal was cor- 
rect, that means a national conscious- 
ness less than a hundred years old, of 
which only 20 have been uninterrupted- 



the rider's eye is met by a sign enu- 
merating the vehicles exempted from 
paying the toll. The vehicles belonging 
to the Armed Forces of the United 
States are listed ahead of the vehicles 
belonging to the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines. I wonder how many have 
even noticed, and of those who have, 
how many have reacted with disgust, or 
at least displeasure? 

The vestiges of the colonial mental- 
ity — if we wish to call it that — may 
be looked upon by those who give it 
any thought at all as being of minor 
importance, something that will disap- 
pear with time and of its own accord, 
as it were. In my judgment, this is a 
mistake. 

The colonial mentality constitutes a 
weakness in the structure of our national 
society which we can ill afford. 

A good deal of legislation has been 
passed, such as the nationalization of 



adds to the weakening of our society 
and thus threatens it. Each weakness 
may not of itself give cause for con- 
cern, but, taken together with others 
may erode our society and cause it to 
crumble, 

I have discussed in my Filipino ar- 
ticle, Mga Fanganib ng Bayan (In two 
parts, GRAPHIC FILIPINO, Oct, 19 
and 26), the three great dangers to 
our society — extreme economic imba- 
lance, a collapse of morals, and the loss 
of faith and principles. Ultimately — 
and, for that matter, very nnmediateiy 
— the three are interrelated, since the 
present extreme economic inequalities 
and the collapse of morals can be at- 
tributed to only one thing — the loss 
of faith and principles, Otherwise, we 
could never allow such an economic sit- 
uation or a breakdown in morals, I shall 
not discuss the matter here, except to 
point out that the three together are 
quite sufficient to end our existence as 
a stable national society. 

Our national cohesion is also weak- 
ened by a very strange manifestation 
of the colonial mentality — racism. It 
is of course not the Nazi type of racism. 
Truly colonial, it is a racism in reverse. 

When we read of racial disturbances 
in other lands, we are justly indignant; 
we are being more than a little absurd 
when we have feelings of self -righteous- 
ness as a result, It is wicked and stu- 
pid enough for one people to look down 
on another; it is more stupid for a peo- 
ple to look down on it itself; to do both 
. . . , And that is exactly what we do. 
Do we look down on others for rea- 
sons of race? As a rule, I do not think 
we explicitly argue that the Mongoloid 
and Negroid races are inferior — al- 
though I have bad the shocking experi- 
ence of hearing some Filipinos do $ 0t 
However, remarks derogatory of Ne- 
groes and Mongoloids - Chinese, Japa- 
nese, Koreans/ etc, — are so coBfrmon 
that they indicate very clearly a racist 
turn of mind. It is wicked and stuptf; 
in one way or another* it weakens man 



graphic 





I 




by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 



and mans activities. But the weakening The explanation seems to be that stich 

effect on our social structure is not so used to be the case generally While 

immediate and it is the latter which it is not necessarily so today, the 

concerns us here. thought lingers. It would not be so bad 

Our looking down on ourselves is a if it were only the thought without prac- 

dirferent matter. Do we look down on tical consequences. But such is not the 

ourselves? Let us see. case. At least, I seem to observe cer- 

From the standpoint of beauty, what tain things which indicate that such is 

do we consider a handsome man or a not the case 

beautiful woman? Filipino features and I already pointed out how it seems 

Filipino coloring - a good, healthy impossible to crash into the world of 

brown - never attract admiration among Filipino movies unless one fits in with 

.. . A .. , ^ popular prejudices regarding good 

."gnt-skmned man or woman with looks. Receptionists and other office per- 

Fibpino features will be called, respec- sonnel seem to be selected also with 

bvely simpatico or simpatica," A more than a mere glance in the direo- 

dart-sJonned person with more or less tion of our social preconceptions. 

u CaSJ f m 7< he CfdIed More ^ more 1 think I notice the 

good-IooW km,a hmg maMm. same process at work in the more ex- 

^-sfanned person with mediocre pensive restaurants, night clubs, stores, 
Z2*tlJ°°? Ca VS sian ^tures wiU etc., although the process is, naturally 
immediately be called maganda. It is less rigorous. 

still common to hear "mestizo" used as Still, it is disturbing to think that 
a synonym for good-looking "Ay, mes- possibly, someone who needed the fob 
hzong-mestizo is supposed to be a just as badly or even worse may not 
compliment. fove gotten it because of his mQi > d<jf 

Our movie-idols - excepting the co- imtely Filipino appearance. 

% i ^L i^VX™* 10 m n0t e ^ pe ^ Which brin g s me to the last obser- 

JJL l g i ft ~T e r6aUy aU vation 1 wish to make on the subject: 

SnJTs I S h ;- skmned : u . . I believe we generally expect the J less 

Leopoldo Salcedo was in his day a average-looking Filipino to be more in- 

no able exception, smce he was dark, telligent than the rest. This is a much 

out his features, particularly his high more subtle mental connection and 

nose had a strong Caucasian cast. m uch more difficult to prove, but I 

Why it a almost necessary not to iti^ it is there. If it is there - and I 

iook like ones own countrymen in or- believe it is - it is a sign that we con- 

aer to be considered good-looking by s jd er ourselves to be less intelligent as 

i . , , , , a race than lighter skinned ones. This 

Apart from the situation and examples of course reaches the heights - or the 

cited above, we abound in remarks depths - of absurdity, 
which indicate the same frame of mind, jf someone has a preference for one 

it is common enough to hear people type of features rather than another, 

say that so-and-so looks like a house- he can always plead that beauty is af- 

3 P r ma id or lavandera or driver, ter all, relative and a matter of individ- 

J ne implication is that people in those U al taste, however that taste may have 

occupations - perfectly honorable, let been formed. He has a point at least 

^ protest with vehemence and consi- and, as long as he does not allow it to 

aerable indignation - have, as a rule, influence him to the point of being un- 

f^pino coloring and features and are, fair to others because of their inherited 

therefore, according to that stupid frame appearance, it is not so bad 
01 mind, uely. 



All scientific studies have shown that 
the various races are equal in intelli- 
gence and potentialities. The United 
States being a welter of races, it seemed 
the ideal testing ground for theories of 
racial superiority and inferiority. 

During World War I, those who en- 
listed in the armed forces were given 
tests, The man who devised the tests 
concluded from the results that at last 
it had been scientifically proven that 
the so-called white race was superior. 
The same man, years later, restudied the 
question and had the scientific integrity 
to announce publicly that the tests had, 
after all, failed to prove anything be- 
cause decisive factors had not been ta- 
ken into consideration, 



Racism Becomes 
Barrier To Progress 
And National Unity 



Scientific Studies 
Disprove Theory 
Of Racial Superiority 



Wiieh brings us to a peculiar racial "~ 
economic — social observation: fea- 
tures and coloring are often connected 
m \ s °eia] and economic position and 
Possibilities. There is a clear tendency 

7 &is situation to disappear but it is 

de feitely still with us. /, , , 

w * have been accustomed to linking To link intelligence and/or ability 
■^al stations in life with the average with race and the mixture of race is an 
il ymo appearance and upper stations entirely different matter. This is a case 
Spanish or Chinese mestizo types, of plain and simple irrationality, 

November 2, 1966 



All subsequent scientific research has 
shown that the human races are equal 
in intelligence and potentialities. There 
are highly intelligent, mediocre, and 
dull persons belonging to every race and 
they are so, not because they belong 
to a particular race but because of fac- 
tors independent of race. 

The so-called intelligence tests are 
really indices of intelligence plus educa- 
tion plus a host of other factors, of 
which, very definitely, race is not one. 
There are superior and inferior indivi- 
duals, superior or inferior as to intelli- 
gence, talents, achievements, virtues 
and so on, and these are scattered 
among all races — there are no superior 
or inferior races. 

This is the firm conclusion of scien- 
tific anthropology and other sciences 
which study man. 

Our surviving tendency, therefore, to 
consider Caucasians as superior to us 
in intelligence by the mere fact of their 
being Caucasians is outrageous, Our 
tendency to be impressed by those who 
have Caucasian blood in their veins and 
to take it for granted that they are more 
intelligent than the Filipino free of such 
mixture would be funny were it not so 
disgusting, 

Fortunately, in business, government, 
the arts and sciences, and the profes- 
sions, competition has gotten so stiff that 
the alleged superiority of foreign or 
mixed blood is getting to be a negligible 



factor - no one can afford to allow 
such beliefs to get in the way of get- 
ting capable people. But it is still there 
in a good number of cases. 

The importance of the Filipino ver- 
sion of racism lies in this - it weakens 
the bond uniting Philippine society in- 
to a cohesive whole, It easily leads us 
to overlook possibilities in people Just 
because of their appearance or descent, 
It leads us to have an almost servile 
attitude toward Americans and Europe- 
ans. 

It leads us to be less self-confident 
as a people, for how can a people be 
truly self-confident when it believes that 
it is, by and large, condemned to in- 
feriority by Nature. 

How can our society reach the level 
of. social cohesion which it otherwise 
could have if the members practice or 
feel discrimination against each other? 
How can that baneful influence on our 
national life — the colonial mentality — 
vanish when we continue to indulge one 
of its strongest bases - the belief, con- 
scious or unconscious, that we are by 
nature inferior to others? 

A sense of inborn inferiority can only 
lead to a diminishing of the drive which 
we so badly need in order to attain that 
truly dynamic national life which alone 
can enable the Philippines to survive and 
progress in the midst of the difficulties 
we face, As was pointed out earlier, al- 
though the smaller individual weakness- 
es of the structure of our society may, 
taken separately, be of little importance 
and have little effect; when they are 
all taken together they favor the decay 
of our society. 

The particular case of our variety of 
racism, productive as it is of a weaken- 
ing of unity and mutual regard and es- 
teem, is certainly an added danger. 

It is time we eliminated it by edu- 
cating the minds of our people and 
changing their attitudes, not by adopt- 
ing a pugnacious or haughty spirit, 
which would only be an inverted com- 
plex and would leave that complex ba- 
sically untouched, but by making them 
- all of us — realize the truth; that 
we are all Filipinos, that as a people 
we have no inborn inferiority, that we 
have the same inborn potentialities as 
other people, that what we are and 
what we shall become depends, under 
God, on what we make of ourselves. 
Turn the glaring light of truth on ra- 
cism and show it for what it is - a 
harmful myth,— # 

19 




WHEN LOPEZ 



WAS PRES IE 11 



He tackled the problems like a man who had a phobia for fai 

by RICARDO V. SERRANO 



+ VIRTUALLY eclipsed by the suc- 
cesses of President Marcos in his state 
visits to the United States and Japan 
were the silent accomplishments of a 
mild-mannered statesman who wrestled 
with some of the toughest problems of 
the country during the 21 days that he 
acted as President* Vice-President Fer- 
nando Lopez amply demonstrated his 
qualities as a leader as he squared up 
to the nation's multifarious problems like 
a man who had high hopes and a great 
phobia foT failure. 

The first day of Vice-President Lopez 
in Malacanang started with a challenge- 
He had to hammer a compromise be- 
tween the striking employes and man- 
agement of the Development Bank of 
the Philippines, because if the dispute 
were prolonged, it would affect Pres- 
ident Marcos s state visits to the United 
States and Japan, particularly with re- 
gard to his invitation for foreign capital 
to invest in the country* The DBF is 
the only government lending institution 
in the country through which foreign 
loans are channeled to local investors. 

The bank management had brought 
the case before the Manila Court of First 
Instance, seeking a ruling on the ques- 
tion of whether the employes of the 
bank were covered by the regulations 
of the Civil Service Commission } rela- 
tive to strikes. On the other hand, the 
employes union wanted the case to be 
brought before the Court of Industrial 
Relations, arguing that the problem in- 
volved labor-management relations. 

The Vice-President summoned the 
striking employes and the management 
officials of the bank to a conference at 
the music room of the Palace. From 
then on up to three days later, 
Lopez stuck to the problem until it 
was straightened out by the forg- 
ing of a compromise between the strikers 
and bank management who jointly 
signed a return -to-work agreement 
pending judicial settlement of issues. 

For his personal interest in resolving 
the case, the Vice-President was present- 
ed with a resolution of gratitude by the 
DBF employes. 

During his first day at the Palace, the 
acting President also effected an agree- 
ment between FARGO Secretary Barto- 
lome Cabangbang and Undersecretary 
Rafael Recto to declare a moratorium to 
their feud during the President's absence, 

20 



The two officials, after a half-hour hud- 
dle at the Palace with Lopez, agreed to 
cooperate with each other in the investi- 
gation of the sensational copra overship- 
ment case that had been hampered by 
the protracted rift between them. 

The following days in Malacanang be- 
came more challenging to Vice-President 
Lopez as the heavy burden of the Pres- 
idency began to bear on his shoulders. 
The prices of rice and sugar were rising 
uncontrollably. Manila residents were 
cursing city government officials for neg- 
lecting to repair deep street ruts through- 
out the city. Car owners and drivers 
damned the government for irritating 
traffic snarls caused by excavations on 
main thoroughfares and side streets in 
the city. And all this while, graft con- 
tinued to plague the Bureau of Customs. 

On September 15, three days after he 
assumed the role of caretaker of the gov- 
ernment, Lopez ordered the mobiliza- 
tion of the entire resources of the gov- 
ernment to extirpate rice hoarding and 
bring down the price of rice within the 
easy reach of consumers. The Vice-Pres- 
ident called rice producers, millers, 
distributors, retailers, and officials of all 
government agencies concerned with the 
supply and distribution of rice to a con- 
ference in Malacanang, and ordered 
forthwith the immediate milling of all 
available supply of palay in order to 
flood the market with the staple. Lopez 
ordered the full utilization of rolling rice 
stores in cooperation and coordination 
with the RCA and local government 
agencies* . 

To prevent the channeling of rice to 
the blackmarket, the Vice-President di- 
rected police agencies to conduct close 
surveillance of rice distribution in Mani- 
la and in the provinces. 

The following day, September 16, Lo- 
pez made a hurried tour of city markets 
to personally ascertain the efficacy of 
the RCA rice distribution system, After 
concluding his tour, he expressed dis- 
appointment over the failure of this gov- 
ernment agency to deliver rice stocks on 
time to city market retailers. At the 
San Andres market, stallholders report- 
ed to the Vice-President that they had 
refused to retail BCA rice because each 
sack delivered to them in the past had 
been pilfered by as much as five gantas. 

Back in Malacanang, the Vice-Pres 
jdent was in an unusually ugly mood a< 



he fired directives to RCA Chairman 
Osmundo Mondonedo to expedite de- 
liveries of rice to city market retailers 
and to adopt precautionary measures 
to pevent pilfering of stocks of the pre- 
cious commodity. He made frequent 
consultations with rice distribution ex- 
perts and was in constant conference 
with the RCA chief, 

On Monday morning, September 19, 
the nefarious practice of blackmarket^ 
ing RCA rice was found to have been 
licked. At a breakfast conference in 
Malacanang with key government offi- 
cials, it was announced that the com- 
mercial varieties of the staple have 
dropped down in prices by as much as 
30 eentavos, RCA Chairman Mondone- 
do reported that PC soldiers now es- 
cort RCA distribution trucks, while 
members of the Manila Police Depart- 
ment guard city marts in order to pre- 
vent RCA supplies from being channeled 
to the blackmarket. 

Early the next day, the Vice-Pres- 



ident slipped out of Malacanang with 
an aide to see for himself how the gov- 
ernment's plan of saturating retail out- 
lets with low-priced RCA rice was be- 
ing implemented, In the Pasay City 
market and the Paco market in Manila, 
the Vice-President received the happy 
news direct from consumers that the 
price of commercial varieties of rice had 
also been stabilized from PI. 70 to F1.50 
per ganta. The consumers also told the 
Vice-President that there was a steady 
supply of rice in the market. 

Apparently satisfied with the way his 
campaign to stabilize the price of rice 
was progressing, he proceeded to Ma- 
lacanang for a breakfast conference 
with sugar planters, millers, and traders, 
this time, to chop down the prices of 
domestic sugar. The Vice-President had 
earlier received reports that the up- 
trend in the prices of sugar was due to 
the manipulation of unscrupulous mid- 
dlemen and traders. 

During the conference which was also 




Lopez inspects RCA rice being sold in a Manila market 



GRAPHIC 



whirlwind of abuse. Yet he stood his 
ground. In his private as well as in his 
public life, he had not been known to 
nave cowered before powerful forces; 
he had not been known to have said 
one thing and to have done another: 
he had not been known to have feared 
being alone and lonely; and he had not 
been known to have shunned defeat. The 
essential trait of a great man is moral 
courage, Don Claro possessed this trait 
to the highest degree. When, in 1957, 
at a time when the tenant of Matakan- 
yang was idolized as the most popular 
and powerful President the Philippines 
ever had and, therefore, unbeatable, 
Don Claro announced his intention to 
run against him in the presidential elec- 
tion of that year* He was not afraid to 
be laughed at. Nor to be unpopular. 
It was not his sanguine hope to win 
the presidential election; it was, rather, 
his wish to campaign on the only plat- 
form that all candidates to the presiden- 
cy have to this day shunned: Filipino 
nationalism* It would be naive to sup- 
pose that Don Claro harbored the il- 
lusion that he could topple the popular 
peripatetic President from his entrench- 
ed position* Far from it. He knew he 
would be defeated; nevertheless he had 
to face the popular man not only, as I 
have intimated, to disseminate his na- 
tionalistic ideas during the presidential 
campaigns, but also to show up the cow- 
ardice of those who thought of the 
presidency in terms of naked power, 
and to prove that there was at least 
one man in this confused Republic who 
could stand up to a Caesar, Where 
everybody cowered, he stood defiant 
and fearless, proud of the tradition of 
the Batangueno tirongs* 
Breathes there a man , * # 



TO 



Throughout this campaign, while re- 
laxing or while having bull sessions with 
his leaders, I joined in the small group 
that had garnered around him who 
listened , and agreed with his ideas. 

Being a man of distinct intellectual 
achievement, he often spoke above the 
head of the common crowd. ' It was 
necessary for him to have intermediate 
leaders who would interpret his ideas 
to the student or to the laborer. I saw 
myself as one of these intermediate 
leaders and by sheer experience, I know 
how well received his ideas are among 
the people. 

Today, students have taken up much 
of his nationalism and there are lead- 
ers advocating Recto ideas in the cam- 
puses of the UP f the Lyceum, the 
MLQ, the FEU, the UE, the Abad 
Santos Educational Institute, the Adam- 
son University, and the FEATI. Many 
of them are grouped into the organiza- 
tion known as Kabataang Makabayan* 

Young people realize their tremend- 
ous responsibility to make our country 
Filipino again. There are great odds 
against the achievement of Recto's 
goals, but the rising surge of nation- 
alism cannot be helped* 

The crusade is still Recto's* We have 
merely taken up the torch which he 
laid down when he departed — and we 
are deeply honored with the task.— # 




KUWENTONG KUTSERO 



by NAECISO PIMENTEL, JR. 



This nation can regret again 



# MY CONGRESSIONAL Reporter named Pete who 
writes news a la Time submitted a report on the state 
of the nation address of President Marcos, which is 
more a reaction than a report* I thought you'd get a 
kick reading it t so I append it here for your delecta- 
tion* 

ode 

SPEAKING before a joint session of Congress, the 
youthful-looking, nattily dressed President Ferdinand 
E, Marcos delivered his state of the nation address* 
Sweeping the crowded floor of Congress with an eagle- 
eye, which was as glittering as it was penetrating, he 
announced in grave and solemn tones: "The nation is 
in crisis!" 

You are telling me, Mr, President! 

Why, just the other day I picked up the phone to 
make an important call. My party-line was on the 
line talking endlessly to another party, "We are in 
crisis, Laura," she was saying. . -"Why? you ought to 
know why* . *What? You don't know? . . .Well, V\\ tell 
you* My husband has an ad interim appointment given 
him by Maeapagal. . . Congratulations, my eye! The 
special session of Congress closed, and my husband's 
appointment was not confirmed* * . Wait for the reg- 
ular session, you say? We don't have to. Marcos has 
already appointed another man to the same position 
as my husband's. * * And now* . * we are* . . in crisis!" 

At this point I decided to interrupt* 

"Look, lady, if you don't hang up now, I will' be 
in crisis myself!" 

And talking about crises, consider the plight of the 
president of one of the more prestigious civic organ- 
izations, whose main duty is to produce a Cabinet 
member or some important government official as 
guest speaker in their weekly luncheons* "I'm in crisis, 
man," the prexy wailed, "in lca-risis!" 

"But why?" I asked innocently. "I thought it was 
only the nation that was in crisis." 

"Well, I am, believe it or not I had my whole 
line-up of speakers for our weekly luncheons all ready 
for the year 1966. First, I was going to start with 
the bureau directors, then the undersecretaries, then 
the Cabinet secretaries themselves* But now, oh blast- 
ed luck, my line-up is all shot to pieces*" 

"Somebody shot all bureau directors and Cabinet 
members?" 

"Not shot; but shut them up* * * for one hundred 
days* And so I have no speakers, and I'm in crisis*" 

Well, if he thought he was in crisis, think of the 
Cabinet members and bureau directors themselves who 
cannot now be guest speakers for one hundred days. 
If I know my Cabinet members and bureau directors, 
shut them up for even 10 days, and, brother, they 
are in crisis! 

And what about newspapermen and newspapers? 
Are they in crisis, hoy, but are they! Now that Pres- 
ident Marcos has ordered a news black-out on all in- 
vestigations of government anomalies, irregularities, and 
other high crimes, what are newspapermen and news- 
papers going to write about? If there are no sensa- 
tional investigations to scream about in the headlines, 



who will buy newspapers at all? 

One newspaperman of my acquaintance was com- 
plaining about this quite bitterly; "There ought to be 
a law against news black-outs on government investi- 
gations* They're evil, low-down, dastardly. . . in fact, 
downright unconstitutional! * 

"I believe what they're trying to avoid is trial by 
publicity." 

"Fiddlesticksl Why, you're a lawyer. , T 
"Of sorts." 

"Never mind what sort* Isn't there a law somewhere 
which says that every man must have a public trial?*' 

"Ah, but there's a difference* Trial by publicity is 
not a public trial within the purview or tie law." 

"You re quibbling. A trial is a trial, and publicity 
is nothing unless it's public. So, if there is a differ- 
ence, it's the same difference. So* there," 

And not only newspapermen* Judges are in crisis, 
too. Since Justice Secretary Yulo cancelled their sum- 
mer vacation, now judges must work at least two 
months out of every year* Said a quipping judge: "I 
was looking forward to two glorious months of pure 
golf and bridge, with perhaps mahjong and the races 
thrown in for good measure* But now I'll have to tee 
off with a complaint every morning and hole out with 
a decision soon, or I get the grand slam-bang from 
the Justice Secretary. What a lifeP 

But the worst hit by the crisis are the day-and-night 
clubs and the cocktail lounges, now that Finance Sec- 
retary Romualdez has issued an order banning BIR 
and Customs men from frequenting these places of 
amusement* Said one inveterate habitue: "Its a crisis 
all right. The torch singers and orchestras in these 
places sing and play only one theme song which be- 
gins: Bye-bye happiness, hello loneliness, hello empti- 
ness. , ." 

One lonely hostess cried: "If this continues, we will 
all go underground/* And* she meant it literally. 

After the last applause following the state of the 
nation address had died down, I collared a congress- 
man from Bidacan and asked him: 

"X>o you agree with the President that the nation 
is in crisis?" 

He looked at me quizzically. "Which nation?" he 
inquired* 

"The Filipino nation, of course, which else?" 
"Then I agree. . . But if you mean the Ilocano na- 
tion, I disagree*" 
"Why?" 

"Because judging from the number of Ilocanos ap- 
pointed to positions in the army and the government, 
I can assure you, the Ilocano nation can be great 
again." 

"And the Filipino nation?" 

"Ah, the Filipino nation can regret again*" 

0 * # 

FRANKLY, I was nauseated by the obnoxious puns in 
the foregoing report of my Congressional Reporter 
Fete, So I returned it to him with a note scribbled 
on the margin: "Dear Fete, why don't you peter out, 
huh?" 



February 1966 



1* 




7 





The basic law of the land was written in 1935; a gre 




mm 




# "IN POLITICAL and philosophical 
theories, as well as in persons, success 
discloses faults and infirmities which 
failure might have concealed from ob- 
servation. The notion that the people 
have no need to limit their power 
over themselves, might seem axiomatic 
when popular government was a thing 
only dreamed about, or read of as hav- 
ing existed at some distant period of 
the past." These words of John Stuart 
Mill in his essay "On Liberty" may not 
be quite apposite to the theme I intend 
to develop, and his essay can hardly be 
accepted without many distinctions and 
reservations, since his main point in the 
thesis has itself broken down in prac- 
tice, but they do point out this fact: 
practice often reveals flaws which could 
not be foreseen in theory* 

This fact underlies the persistent de- 
mand for constitutional amendments, a 
demand which is generally acceptable 
to those who know of it, is favored by 
the Philippine Constitution Association, 
and has been endorsed, at least in prin- 
ciple, by the new Administration. I 
need make no apologies for desiring 
changes myself, being in such excellent 
company. While I lay claim to no inti- 
mate knowledge of constitutional law, 
or any law for that matter, I can right- 
fully venture to think about the subjects, 
like any other citizen, since we ordinary 
citizens will ultimately have to approve 
or disapprove any proposed amendments. 

An ancient Greek once said that war 
is far too important a matter to be left 
to the generals, and it would seem that 
constitutional change is far too import- 
ant to be left solely to specialists, par- 
ticularly as the Constitution is supposed 
to be - to use the high-sounding 
phrase — "the expression of the sover- 
eign will of the people." All of us should 
participate in discussion, considering 
that important changes in our govern* 
ment will be involved. 

The original Constitution provided 
for amendments in the following man- 
ner; "Article XIV. - AMENDMENTS. 
Section L The National Assembly (read 
Congress today), by a vote of three- 
fourths of all its Members, may pro- 
pose amendments to this Constitution or 
call a convention for that purpose* 
Such amendments shall be valid as part 
of this Constitution when approved by 
a majority of the votes cast at an elec- 
tion at which the amendments are sub- 



14 



mitted to the people for their ratifica- 
tion," There are, therefore, two ways 
in which constitutional amendments 
may be proposed, either by a con- 
stitutional convention expressly call- 
ed for the purpose, or by Congress it- 
self. Any amendments must be ratified 
or approved by us the people in order 
to take effect 

Since the original drafting of the 
Constitution, all amendments have been 
proposed by the legislature, never by a 
convention. The change from a unicam- 
eral to a bicameral legislature, the 
change of the President's term of of- 
fice from six years with no reelection 
to four years with one reelection, 
the parity amendment, all were the 
work of the legislature, approved of 
course by a subsequent plebiscite. How 
the first two amendments would have 
fared if they had been proposed in a 
convention rather than in the legislature 
is difficult to judge, hut I will hazard 
the guess that parity would have fared 
badly* However, even in the latter case, 
in vi**w of the relatively naive mental- 
ity of post-liberation days and the prob- 
able ease with which the Administra- 
tion then in power could have arranged 
to pack the convention, who knows? 

Partisan Considerations 

Dwelling on the subject of how 
amendments should be proposed at pres- 
ent, I think a constitutional convention 
is preferable to Congress. Congress, 
whether we like it or not, is a highly 
partisan body. Although we have (more 
or less) a two-party system, which is 
considered by many as indispensable for 
a working democracy, although every 
successive election has increasingly 
shown that the electorate cares less and 
less about electing a party and more 
and more about electing qualified indi- 
viduals and, lastly, although theoretical- 
ly elective officials are intended to con- 
sider the public interest first and fore- 
most, relegating partisan considerations 
to a secondary position, ahead only of 
personal ones, in fact and in practice 
the public interest all too often is subor- 
dinated to personal and party consider- 
ations. 

In other words, Congress is a highly 
partisan body. Many of its members are 
chosen for their personal integrity and 
abilities and are expected by the peo- 
ple to exercise their influence and cast 



their vote in Congress for the public in- 
terest, irrespective of party consider- 
ations* Performance does not often mea- 
sure up to expectations. Furthermore, 
the general trend away from party vot- 
ing has by no means eliminated the 
practice of electing a candidate merely 
because he or his party has an unusual 
hold on the constituents, apart from 
any personal qualifications- It is not un- 
known that constituents have to make 
a choice between equally or almost un- 
acceptable candidates because those for 
whom the people would like to vote 
have been eliminated by jnrra-party 
maneuvers, frequently of the most un- 
savory sort. 

The Sensible Course 

While party discipline and a certain 
consistency in an Administration pro- 
gram may at times be a rationalization 
for this unfortunate state of affairs, law- 
making and implementation of Adminis- 
tration programs are one thing, consti- 
tution making and changing are anoth- 
er. The consideration and proposal of 
amendments should be removed as far 
as possible from the more short-sighted 
goals of a short-lived Acuninfetration* 

It seems to me that the most sensible 
course of action would be to summon 
a constitutional convention. While the 
choice of members for a convention 
would not automatically eliminate un- 
worthy persons, a convention could, and 
doubtless would, include persons emi- 
nent for their knowledge, integrity, and 
selflessness who otherwise could not take 
active part in promulgating constitu- 
tional amendments. Retired politicians, 
whose health no longer permits active 
political life, lawyers who cannot or 
will not involve themselves in politics, 
educators and other highly qualified 
men and women whose ways and lives 
are far removed from partisan struggle 
— all these people could form part of 
a convention and contribute tremendous- 
ly to the wisdom of the process. To 
deprive the nation of their services in 
a matter as serious as the fundamental 
law of the land is a moral injustice, even 
if not a legal one. 

And I say this, not as an abstract 
statement, but taking into account the 
truly critical situation in which we find 
ourselves, a situation too critical and 
deeply rooted to be attributable to any 
one man, Administration, or party, To 



take an instance, the members of the 
Philconsa, the organization which has 
battled and continues to battle so brave- 
ly and strenuously for the Constitution 
and for morality in government action 

— for all of us, in other words — these 
members could take active part in the 
convention, whereas if amendments are 
to be the work of Congress, Philconsa 
could only air its views at hearings — 
and be ignored* 

The mere fact that one is chosen to 
sit in a constitutional convention which 
will establish fixed norms for all legis- ' 
lation, rather than in a partisan Cong- 
ress elected to make laws which can eas- 
ily be revoked by the next Congress, ox 
by the same d<m^es& \iv a subsequent 
session — this in itself must imbue llie 
members of a convention with a serious- 
ness and a sense of responsibility far be- 
yond that of an ordinary member of 
Congress. That a man or woman is en- 
trusted with the basic law of the land, 
and this alone, allows for far greater 
concentration jn considering constitu- 
tional problems. The perspective is by 
nature different. A lawmaker is 
chosen to face the problem of 
laws within the framework of the 
Constitution, a member of a constitu- 
tional convention is faced with the Con- 
stitution itself, a far more awesome pros- 
pect, 

I am not implying, of course, that 
we do not have men in Congress who 
are authorities on law. To name only 
a few who come to mind immediately 

— Senators Arturo Tolentino, Lorenzo 
Tanada, and Jovito Salonga. But surely 
they could be part, of an extra-congres- 
sional convention. It would seem that 
justice and the great need of the coun- 
try demand that the very best men and 
women — whether in the government or 
out of it — should have an opportunity 
to take active part, rather than restrict 
the process to those in Congress* 

I cannot deny that the calling of a 
constitutional convention involves disad- 
vantages. Possibly, considerable expense 
would be involved. If so, this is a con* 
sideration not to be lightly dismissed 
at present, in view of the shaky financ- 
: es of the government. Nevertheless, no 
matter how serious the need of economy 
at this time, economy cannot be the 
prime consideration in such a weight) 1 
matter. We cannot afford to be penny 
wise and pound foolish. 



mi 



of change has come about since / by manuel l Quezon, jry 




RECTO 
He felt otherwise 





TOLENTINO TAN ADA SALONGA 

These law experts can be counted upon in the calling of a new convention 



It may also be objected that undesir- 
able elements will not necessarily be 
eliminated from a constitutional con- 
vention. True — but the presence of 
highly desirable persons who could not 
otherwise participate cou*d amply com- 
pensate for it Where the purpose of a 
gathering is de jure and de facto far re- 
moved from parte ^ strife, the danger 
of undesirable elements is greatly mini- 
mized. Again, if it be objected that the 
manner of choosing the members of a 
convention would be determined in the 
last analysis by a party-ridden Congress, 
I would still say that the objection is 
not entirely valid because Congress 
could hardly afford an attempt to turn 
such a convention into a mockery (al- 
though past experience with Congress 
could raise doubts in some minds). Be- 
sides, the normal operation of party 
processes within Congress could not 
simply be transferred to a constitution- 
al convention, A convention does not 
normally operate on the basis of a body 
composed of a majority and a minority 
political party. Conscious of the fact 
that I have by no means exhausted all 
the objections to a convention, I shall 
pass on to the next topic, the length of 
time assigned for a convention. 

Our present Constitution was framed 
within a period of about a year. The Ty- 
dmgs-McDtiffie Law required that the 
convention meet not later than October 
1, 1934, and the new Commonwealth 
Government was inaugurated on No- 
vember 15, 1935. 1 believe that a con- 
stitutional convention should be given 
ample time for its deliberations, just how 
long to be determined by the work it 
intends to do. Depending of course on 
the extent to which individuals believe 
the Constitution should be amended, to 
that extent they will favor a greater or 
lesser length of time. While I will not 
be so bold as to say that we should 
jettison the entire Constitution in favor 
of an entirely new one, I will say this: 
the Constitution as we have it now was 
intended to be organic whole, not 
merely a patchwork of provisions unrel- 

#e^£y*S, 1966 



ated one to another. When a portion of 
the Constitution is changed, the other 
parts may well be adversely affected. 

To cite one instance; tne original 
Constitution provided for a strong Ex- 
ecutive and a unicameral Legislature, In 
a developing country a strong Executive 
was considered necessary and a unica- 
meral 'Legislature can be a powerful 
counterpoise to executive excesses, since 
the legislative power is exercised by a 
compact body. On the other hand, a sit- 
uation where the Legislature is dominat- 
ed by a party other than the Presidents 
seems less likely, a situation which can 
lead to endless bickering, horse trading, 
and even paralysis of government. The 
credit or the blame for the actions of 
a particular Administration can be easi- 
ly laid at its doorstep, This of course 
refers to the first term of the Legisla- 
ture, since originally the National As- 
sembly was to be elected every three 
years, whereas the President was to be 
in office for six years* 

Far-reaching Consequences 

The Constitution was subsequently 
amended to provide for the bicameral 
Legislature we have today, and the 
President's term was reduced to four 
years, with one reelection* I am not 
here concerned with the pros and cons 
of bicameralism versus unicameralism, 
but I wiU point out that the Legisla- 
tive seems to have been weakened^ It 
has also become more difficult to assign 
praise or blame* The last statement can 
hardly be denied, in view of the mutual 
recriminations between Liberals and Na- 
cionalistas as to who was responsible for 
the failures - there were at least some 
failures — of past Administrations. 

I have discussed the above situation at 
some length, although perhaps without 
the proper depth, only to point out that 
what may seem a limited change in the 
Constitution may have far-reaching con- 
sequences for the balance and the or- 
ganic form of the Constitution and, ulti- 
mately, on the success or failure of gov- 
ernment. (I am not here necessarily ad- 



vocating a return to unicameralism.) 

The amendment most frequently dis- 
cussed — a six-year presidential term 
with no reelection or a four-year term 
with one reelection — is another case in 
point The voting pattern almost seems 
to have made the question academic 
from the constitutional viewpoint, since 
the people have not seen fit to reelect 
a single President of the Republic. The 
ability of the people — propensity, per- 
haps — to turn one occupant after an- 
other out of Malacanang makes one 
wonder whether any constitutional lim- 
itation of presidential reelection is at all 
necessary. It could be pointed out that 
the people were not fully satisfied with 
any President and if they were ihey 
would have reelected the man. Well and 
good* But suppose after two terms the 
people are still satisfied and want the 
same man to continue, why frustrate 
their will? Would not the requirement 
of an election for the presidency at 
constitutionally determined intervals be 
a sufficient safeguard against a lifetime 
presidency contrary to the will of the 
people? 

Again, I am not trying to prove that 
reelection should or should not be lim- 
ited* I am trying to point out that 
the question requires calm and lengthy 
study. I also wish to point out in pass- 
ing that the agitation on the subject is 
largely influenced by recent party strug- 
gles and fears, and a sound decision 
could be better reached by a constitu- 
tional convention not immersed in party 
struggles, as members of Congress are 
apt to be. 

The two questions I have discussed 
are intended to point out that a consti- 
tutional convention, if called, should be 
given ample time for its deliberations, 
not hurried through its work by impos- 
ing a sharply limited time, like a special 
session of Congress, There are other 
amendments under consideration and 
discussion which will require careful 
study. Returning to the old system of 
Senatorial representation by districts is 
mentioned. So is the simultaneous hold- 



ing of elections, usually urged on the 
plea of economy. The lowering of the 
voting age to 18, on which I hope to 
write at some future time, seems to be 
favored by so many that it is a wonder 
it has not been discussed publicly, at 
least at any length, Giving the vote to 
illiterates, of which I already had occa- 
sion to write, also has wide, although 
equally silent support, as well as opposi- 
tion (although opposition seems largely 
based on the belief that it is impossible 
— in India and Mexico it is done, with 
no harm to democracy, and as the Latin 
axiom goes, *'ab esse ad posse valet con- 
sequentia" — from the existence of a 
fact you can argue to its possibility). 

The present and, to me and to many, 
unfortunate control of the Executive over 
appointments to the Judiciary would bear 
looking into and makes one reflect 
whether or not the theory of the division 
of powers between three equal and co- 
ordinate branches of government is 
working out in practice. Indeed, should 
the system of checks and balances, as at 
present established, be maintained at 
ail? While an independent Judiciary is 
absolutely essential for the safeguarding 
of the democratic process, must the 
Executive and the Legislative he set up 
one against the other, so to speak? Many 
do not think so. As I mentioned in a 
previous article, Recto is said to have 
felt otherwise. The nations of the British 
Commonwealth are not only democra- 
cies, they are unusually successful work- 
ing democracies, yet the Executive comes 
from and sits in Parliament. 

Nothing To Fear 

Our present Constitution was written 
in 1934-1935. We have had the experi- 
ence of 30 years by which to judge 
it. We have undergone changes, the 
world has undergone changes, which the 
Fathers of the Constitution could not 
have foreseen* Some old problems are 
no longer with us, others persist, some 
new ones have arisen. We are living in 
a world well-nigh alien to prewar times. 
If the Constitution is to be amended, 
would it not be sensible to bring our 
best men and women together for the 
task, allow them to take a fresh, calm, 
unhurried look at the Constitution, study 
it with all the resources with which ex- 
perience and research can provide them, 
and allow them to propose whatever 
changes are needed? 

Perhaps to allay fears of excessive 
change which subsequent experience 
might prove unwise, provision for a sec- 
ond look after 10 years might be pro- 
vided for* We ought not to be unduly 
frightened by the prospect. After all, ap- 
proval of proposed amendments is yours 
and mine to give or to withhold. In the 
midst of the chaos in which we are liv- 
ing, why should we fear a possible fresh 
start?-# 

ik 



WHAT IS A 
NATIONALIST ? 



by BUS F. OPLE 

The right to see with one s own eyes 
presents the challenge of thinking 
out the nation s position in the world 






* NATIONALISM is, above all, the 
right to see with one's own eyes* This 
was how Rizal defined it in his famous 
exchange with Father Pablo Pastells. For 
otherwise, Rizal pointed out, "we would 
be wise men in one another's house, they 
directing our actions and we theirs, and 
everything would be in confusion, unless 
for the sake of the others we renounce 
our own judgment and self-esteem . * - 
which is to offend God and to disdain 
His most precious gift* 

To see with one's own eyes is to be- 
gin the process of differentiation, indi- 
viduation, and self-determination* In this 
act is already enfolded, in latent form, 
all the grandeur of human destiny based 
on the exercise of freedom and respon- 
sibility. Without this right there can be 
no morality of freedom and human dig- 
nity- 

But the rigfit to see with one s own 
eyes means also the end of innocence, 
the loss of Paradise in intellectual as well 
as political terms, It presents a people 
with the truly momentous challenge of 
thinking out afresh the nation's position 
in the world, in relation to itself and 
to other nations, and perhaps a reorder- 
ing of the traditional national goals, 

This search for truth in independent 
terms can lead to dangerous consequen- 
ces — for certain traditional interests. 
It is in this way that nationalism arouses 
opposition and alarm — and becomes the 
basic issue in the political life of a na- 
tion. 

From the debate over the extraterri- 
toriality of the American military bases 
to that of the teaching of Rizal's books 
in public and private schools, the power 

16 



of nationalism to excite controversy is 
clear. And this example already suggests 
the reason why Filipino nationalism is 
often associated opprobriously with anti- 
Americanism and anti-clericalism, 

Nationalism as the right to see with 
one s own eyes compels us to reexamine 
the past - to look afresh at our own 
history- Such a decision may sometimes 
entail a radical change in perspectives- 
The old, colonial interpretation of his- 
tory obliged us, above all, to be grate- 
ful to the Spaniards and the Americans 
for emancipating us from savagery and 
giving us the boon of law and civiliza- 
tion. Today we see our colonial past in 
a wider and more realistic perspective, 
We may still acknowledge our debt to 
our colonizers but we do so in the con- 
text of the exploitation to which we were 
subjected. We accept the truth, with the 
rest of mankind, that colonialism, no 
matter how altruistic in appearance, m 
actual life stunts and degrades the hu- 
man personality and arrests ail mean- 
ingful progress. We realize that colonial- 
ism means the aggrandizement of the 
foreigners at the expense of the natives. 
Moreover, we discover that colonial ar- 
rangements stubbornly persist in our na- 
tional life, especially in the economic 
field 



Today's nationalist believes that these 
colonial arrangements have long outhved 
their usefulness and that therefore they 
should be changed. There is in fact near 
unanimity by now that the parity rights 
granted to the United States at the end 
of the war, in exchange for war damage 
should not be allowed to continue beyonci 
1974- There is also a developing senti- 



ment against the renegotiation of the 
Laurel-Langley agreement which expires 
in 1974 — and which will mark the end 
of a pattern of economic dependence on 
the US that began with free trade rela- 
tions in 1909, 

The nationalist believes that the pub- 
lic power, the sovereign power of the 
people, should be utilized to alter these 
arrangements as speedily as possible and 
thus broaden the areas of our indepen- 
dence. Moreover, the nationalist tends 
to regard our traditional subservience to 
the United States in foreign affairs as a 
national humiliation, He feels that na- 
tional self-respect cannot he quite at- 
tainable until we can enjoy genuine in- 
dependence in the conduct of our for- 
eign relations — to see the world, in 
the phrase of Rizal, "through the prism 
of our own judgment and self-esteem," 
The nationalist believes in a single 
national identity; hence, his rejection of 
the standard of double allegiance which 
prevails over a wide area of popular 
opinion. It is not a secret that the Filipi- 
no military mind is conditioned to think 
of the interests of America and the 
Philippines as one and inseparable. The 
practical consequences of this double 
identity are most unfair to this coun- 
try. Our intelligence agencies, for exam- 
ple, have yet to develop a sense of their 
own identity and integrity apart from 
being voluntary and dependable append- 
ages of their American counterparts* 

Such a relationship with the United 
States is immature and is often the 
source of misunderstandings and irrita- 
tion between Americans and sensitive 
Filipinos, In fairness to the Americans, 
they cannot be expected unilaterally to 
raise the level of maturity in Philippine- 
American relations. The initiative must 
come from the Filipinos themselves, 

The Americans deal with every na- 
tion according to its desserts, America 
obtained bases in Japan and Spain, but 
in both cases gave due consideration to 
the feelings and rights of the local popu- 
lations. We are still fighting for these 
rights under our military treaty with the 
US - rights long taken for granted in 
US treaties with its kindred countries in 
the Atlantic. The onus for improving our 
relations with the US may then be said 
to lie not on Americans but on the Fili- 
pinos themselves. What can America do 
if so many of us prefer to be abject and 
fawning rather than erect and self- 
respecting? It is not the Americans but 
the Filipinos who must earn their inde- 
pendence- 
Filipino Maturity 

What is at issue is not the maturity 
of Americans but that of Filipinos, Stat- 
ed differently, this is the inertia of re- 
sistance to change among Filipinos 
themselves. 

It is unfortunately only too true that 
Filipino apologists for colonialism put 
their foreign counterparts to shame in 
assiduity, ingenuity and self-righ eous- 
ness They do their best to obfuscate the 
issues of nationalism by making this syn- 
onymous with communism. Not that 
they do not sometimes come close to the 
truth. They call the nationalist a sub- 
versive" and in this they may be correct. 
The nationalist is pledged to change - 
to "subvert" - the colonial vestiges in 
the status quo; his mission, f thei e is 
any, is to remove the ancient .blocks to- 
ward greater independence, freedom _rf 
choicef and a freer and more vigorous 
development for the people. 

It will be more correct to say, how- 
ever, that the real i« , to 
comes from fhose who seek by their pur- 
blind conservatism, to hold up ^theTree 
development of the country and of its 



democracy 1 Their concept of the Repub- 
lic and that of the nationalists differ 
significantly, Hie first acknowledge a 
standard of double allegiance — to the 
United States and to the Philippines. The 
nationalists acknowledge only one coun- 
try and object of allegiance, the Philip- 
pine Republic, not a non-existing Fil- 
American republic. Anti-nationalism ^ is 
holding up the successful consolidation 
of our national independence and our 
free development based on honest be- 
liefs and genuine self-respect. It prevents 
the possibility of our true reconciliation 
and enduring friendship with America 
and the West 

Our cultural values as a people have 
been formed largely by our contact with 
the Graeco-Roman - Judaistic heritage of 
the Western world. From this source 
and from our own sensitivity we have 
presumably derived our notions of spirit- 
ual and intellectual integrity* Filipino 
nationalism is an expression of this in- 
tegrity in political terms. The Filipino 
cannot fully experience this feeling of 
integrity and of national dignity until he 
has learned to use his own eyes, judg- 
ment, and volition in ordering his own 
life and future, 

Greater Candor 

Nationalism seeks greater candor in 
our relations with other nations. And in 
the end this will be best - even for 
the friendship between the Philippines 
and America, Claro M. Recto has prob- 
ably done more for Philippine-American 
friendship than those who were apalled 
by the boldness of his candor in articu- 
lating the issues between the two na- 
tions. He has done more than any other 
to raise the level of maturity in the rela- 
tions between the two countries: an es- 
sential step toward making this friend- 



ship real and enduring. 

The Filipino nationalist has nothing 
against America as such; many of his 
cherished values flow from American 
sources, such as the American Revolu- 
tion, and the tradition of Jefferson, 
Hamilton, Lincoln, F- D, Roosevelt, and 
John F, Kennedy. The nationalist feels 
that America should export more, of this 
tradition than the opposite one sym- 
bolized by Goldwater and Nixon. This 
explains why even the most unimpres- 
sionable nationalists in Asia and Africa 
felt deeply the death of President Ken- 
nedy; implicit in this was the notion, 
right or wrong, that America could still 
rediscover its own truest traditions^ in 
the rising nationalism of Asia, Africa, 
and Latin America - had Kennedy lived. 

A perceptive English writer, Prof. 
Hugh Tinker, recently isolated and 
identified two major strains in Asian na- 
tionalism, One, he said, is the revolu- 
tionary nationalism of the Viet Cong, 
Burma, and Indonesia, and the other, the 
moderate nationalism of the rising mid- 
dle classes of the Philippines or Malay- 
sia. In terms of our own experience, the 
Hukbalahap movement represents the 
first strain, and the nationalism of Rec- 
to and Laurel the second' The contem- 
porary history of Southeast Asia shows 
that the first has always occupied the 
field in default of the second. Anti-na- 
tionalism is committed to bring about 
and hasten that default. 

Since the days of Burgos, Rizal, and 
Mabini, Filipino nationalism has identi- 
fied itself with the cause of democracy 
and the freedom oE the human mind* 
All those who can, from motive of sin- 
cere goodwill, must help it keep on this 
straight path. Rut it can and will stay 
on this path only if it is allowed suf- 
ficient freedom to attain its aims for our 
people. The alternative is suppression - 
and chaos on a Vietnamese scale,— # 



graphic 



ideas, at the acuteness with which he 
perceives and evaluates changing social 
conditions. To be inflexible in one's 
views, in one's attitudes, is fo he ig- 
norant of the dynamic nature of human 
society. But what is more important is 
that the Chief Justice's social conscious- 
ness is rooted primarily in the belief of 
the essential dignity and worth of the 
individual 

At 63, Chief Justice Conception is 
wiry and active. He spends most of his 
free time playing golf with his cronies 
and colleagues in the judiciary. Other 
than golf, his leisure is devoted mostly 
to reading, listening to music and to 
his family, particularly to his 10 grand- 
children over whom he dotes like the 
usual indulgent grandpapa. He prefers 
Tchaikovsky and Sibelius because of 
what he calls their socialistic orientation 
and their strong nationalistic spirit, 

To the Chief Justice music is a lyrical 
way of expressing one's inner feelings 
and longings* "Most oppressed peoples 
have sad and haunting music. It is the 
subconscious expression of the soul, 
which somewhat serves as a sort of balm, 
perhaps to assuage their longing for 
something which seems unattainable/' 
As examples he points to Filipino kun* 
dimans and to Negro spirituals, 

Sundays in the elder Conception's 
household in Quezon City are usually 
the occasion for a family reunion. The 
children have the run of the place, and 
the atmosphere is gay and relaxed. First 
cousins, Chief Justice and Mrs, Concep- 
tion celebrated their 40th wedding an- 
niversary recently. 

Gentleman Of Old School 

He is sincere and terribly loyal to his 
friends. His casual style and unassum- 
ing nature betray a gracious gentility 
which, no doubt, sprang from a rather 
formidable bourgeois background. Any 
apprehension one may feel at the, 
prospect of interviewing one of the fore* 
most jurists of the country is quietly 
dispelled by the easy charm and the 
kindliness of the man* Justice Concep- 
tion is a gentleman of the old school, 
which would perhaps make him stand 
out more as an anachronism against the 
brash and shallowness of the modern day 
younger executives. 

But to Chief Justice Conception, the 
law and all that it involves, is his ration 
d'etre, his one consuming passion, His 
41 years in the legal profession, whether 
in the practice of the law, in the teach- 
ing of it, or in the upholding of it as a 
judge, has instilled in the Chief Justice a 
profound respect for the law. 'The law is 
the formal expression of the people's 
will/' And the judge has to respect that 
will; a violation of the law is a desecra- 
tion of the people's will* The law has 
been instituted primarily for the welfare ■ 
of the people, to protect their basic 
rights, 

The apparently justified assertions 
that he is identified with the liberal 
block in the Supreme Court the Chief 
Justice dismisses with good humor* 
Secretly, he is delighted. "Personally, I 
think this is very flattering. But I'm 
afraid that there has been some color- 
ing on the part of the newspapers. May- 
be so, because they have based my iden- 
tification as a liberal on some of my 
decisions." 

But in a more serious vein, Chief 
Tustice Conception adds: "A judge is 
neither right nor left {in the ideological 
sense); neither is he a Nationalista nor 
a Liberal (in the party sense). His main 



concern is to adhere strictly to the law/ 1 
He bewails the fact that some people 
are not sold on the purely legal aspect 
of the law; instead, they are more in- 
clined to stress the equity of the law, 
A judge cannot allow his personal bias, 
prevailing social conditions, and other 
extraneous factors to influence his deci- 
cions. He is first of all committed to fol- 
low the Jaw, and his decisions have to 
operate withiu prescribed principles. 

On the other hand, he warns against 
the nairow reading of the law, Some 
judges refuse to see beyond the letter 
of the law. They insist on making a 
provision the law itself, not a part of 
the law. What about other provisions 
which are also part of the law? A good 
and fair judge, in the opinion of the Chief 
Justice, must not only have an impartial 
view when he decides a case but he 
must also be able to look at the law 
in its totality for him to be able to un- 
derstand its spirit One who has acquired 
a legal perspective will be able to probe 
into the "ultimate objective" for which 
the law has been conceived, 

Understanding the spirit of the law 
becomes specially significant when a 
judge is sometimes faced with a conflict 
between two rights or two wrongs. De- 
prived of fixed axioms to base his deci- 
sions on, the judge asserts his integrity 
by relying on his experience which has 
given him his legal orientation. But his 
decision must always be within the 
framework of the law, 

liberal Views 

For a man on whom the rule of law 
has become a way of life, Chief Justice 
Conception's liberal views become more 
explicit,' if not more cogent, when pro- 
jected against his stand in favor of la- 



bor - trade union, collective bargaining, 
right to picket, etc, - and against his 
militant defense of civil liberties and on 
the freedom of the press. This liberalism 
is consistent with the Chief Justice's 
philosophy that the law in the first place 
was constituted for the welfare of the 
people and for the preservation of the 
social order. But it is the people from 
which power and authority emanate. 

To the Chief Justice, the Industrial 
Peace Act and the Magna Carta of La- 
bor are not only legal guarantees against 
abuses but are also concrete indications 
of social progress within the democratic 
system. He adds that while social secur- 
ity, socialized medicine, and other prac- 
tices and institutions connected with a 
socialistic system were unknown, before, 
they are now grafted into the democrat- 
ic system. 

One of the original founders of the 
Civil Liberties Union, Chief Justice Con- 
ception is uncompromising in his advo- 
cacy of the freedom of the individual 
to have his own thoughts and beliefs, 
and in his insistence on the guarantee 
of this freedom. He likes to recall, now 
with amusement, how he and his fel- 
low CLU members have been accused 
of being "fellow travellers*' because of 
their stand on civil liberties. To him, 
what is conveniently ignored by the de- 
tractors of the Civil Liberties Union is 
the fact that the members are pledged 
to defend the Constitution, "In fact this 
is the main purpose of the Union, To 
defend the Constitution and to protect 
the rights of the individual/* 

In tie Chief Justice's view, the press 
is the most effective lever in a dem- 
ocratic society. It is a form of airing, 
an outlet, It is through the press where 
dissent, injustice, abuses, wrongs are 




WITH GRANDCHILDREN 

Eight of his children's children pose with the Chief 
Justice during AQtk wedding anniversary celebration. 



exposed. The press in this respect is 
truly the spokesman of the people, even 
if it expresses the opinion of the minori- 

As a man of law, the Chief Justice is 
against chaos and the disruption of the 
existing social order. When the people 
are repressed and not allowed to express 
their grievances the situation will pre- 
cipitate disorder, perhaps a revolution. 
The freedom of the press, and the free- 
dom of the individual to express his 
thoughts can effectively prevent dis- 
order. 

Justice Conceptions militant stand on 
civil liberties is only matched by his 
strong sense of nationalism. To him 
Filipino nationalism was at its peak dur- 
ing the early part of the 20th century. 
And this nationalistic spirit was carried 
too by Quezon and later by Recto. The 
nationalists of 1907, for example, were 
still under the influence of the propa- 
ganda movement. Theirs was a type of 
nationalism that demanded that a polit- 
ical candidate or a leader be one "que 
tiene cara y corazon Filipino." 

Evils Of Politics 

Must the Constitution be amended to 
make it more responsive to the political 
realities of the present? The Chief Jus- 
tice favors the idea that the tenure of 
the President of the Philippines should 
be fixed, without reelection. In this 
respect he even proposes that most if 
not all elective government positions be 
without reelection, if only to avoid too 
much politics. "Politics in this country 
is the cause of many evils. The politi- 
cians' first aim once they are elected is 
to insure their reelection. They are not 
interested in the people's welfare " 

But what has the Chief Justice to say 
against antiquated laws and laws which 
are colonial? In so far as the Chief Jus- 
tice is concerned, laws which seek to 
exploit, laws which are against the 
interest of the Filipinos are basically 
anti-nationalistic in content and should 
be revised. But the revision and the 
change should be guided by the prin- 
ciples contained in the Constitution. 

But the main and immediate preoccu- 
pation of Mr, Conception, as the Chief 
Justice, is to bring the courts closer to 
the people, The people have to realize 
that the courts belong to them. The 
courts do not exist only for a certain 
class or for a certain group, The courts 
are the bulwark of a democratic society; 
and the people should be made to realize 
the value of their existence. They have 
to go to the courts to seek redress: ti is 
like a cushion," Justice Conception says. 

The conservatism of the courts is 
something necessary because the func- 
tion of the courts is to institute order, 
and to preserve the social system. But 
the courts are also aware of changing 
social conditions, and Congress has 
created legal instruments to meet these 
problems - Court of Industrial Relations 
and the agrarian courts. What is import- 
ant is for the people to learn that the 
courts are there for their complaints and 
grievances. Their suits may not produce 
immediate results. "But the contest is 
for history. They have to look at their 
efforts from a larger point of view," 

Thus, to Roberto Conception, eleva- 
tion to the chief justiceship of the na- 
tion's highest court is not so much a 
tribute to his person but as a superb op- 
portunity to see that the law will not on- 
ly survive but prevail as well. For this 
the seven years that he will be Chief 
Justice are too short indeed— # 

23. 




• ALL OVER Asia, Africa, and Latin 
America today, there is a tremendous 
surge of nationalism at a time when in 
Europe, the homeland of nationalism, 
there is a marked trend in the opposite 
direction. Perhaps a partial explanation 
lies in the contrasting experiences of na- 
tionalism in those areas. 

In Asia, Africa, and Latin America, 
we view nationalism as a constructive 
force, a movement absolutely indispensa- 
ble if the developing nations are to sur- 
vive and grow in freedom, dignity, and 
self -respect. Our nationalism has already 
performed one function — the attain- 
ment of independence — but a great ma- 
ny tasks remain undone. 

On the other hand, the Europeans 
have found in the course of two World 
Wars that, unless their nationalism is 
considerably toned down, it would end 
by destroying those very nations which 
it is intended to serve* 

The European attitude toward General 
De Gaulle points up this attitude very 
clearly. While there -is widespread ad- 
miration for De Gaulle as a leader and 
statesman who saved France and rees- 
tablished her as a force to reckon with 
in international affairs, there is even 
more widespread opposition, a kind of 
impatient, irritable opposition, to his 
strong French nationalism as being a 
stumbling-block to the unification of 
Europe, which alone can save the various 
nations that comprise Europe. 

If nationalism, which for so long 
amounted to a frenzy of the European 
nations, has brought those same nations 
to the sorry pass where it threatens to 
destroy them, while nationalism has been 
such a potent force for good in other 
parts of the world, it can only be be- 
cause the term nationalism conceals both 
a constructive and a destructive force* 

As A Destructive Force 

It is destructive insofar as it is jingois- 
tic, insofar as it involves a crude belief 
in the innate superiority of one nation 
over another or over all others, insofar 
as it sets itself up against any others 
and, by implication and potentially, 
against all others. It is destructive when 
it reposes on falsehood, fiction, and ir- 
rational emotion, especially hate and 
greed; when its basic attitude is "against" 
as much as, or even more than, "for"* 

These qualities grew increasingly 
prominent in Europe as the 19th century 
drew to a close and the 20 th century 
dawned- The increasing obsession with 
national aggrandizement, for a place in 
the sun s not in conjunction with others 
but to the exclusion of others or at any 
rate to an exaggerated overshadowing of 
others, led to a paranoic self-centered- 
ness and fear of other nations, which in 
turn led to the build-up of armaments 
on a scale inconceivable in any previous 
age. 

24 



CULTURE IN 
THE NATIONALIST STRUGGLE 

(CONCLUDING ARTICLE) 



SENSE OF NAT 

by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 



The notion of a "Concert of Europe," 
instead of producing harmony, degener- 
ated into a Babel in which each partic- 
ipant tried to drown out the rest. The 
inevitable explosion came — World 
War L 

It is tragic that Europe had not learned 
its lesson. The end of tl.J War, and the 
uneasy peace that followed, merely 
served* to give a respite for the same 
old tensions to build up to an even 
greater explosion — World War II. 

European Nationalism 

From all indications, Europe has at 
last learned its lesson - that war solves 
nothing if its objective is national ven- 
geance rather than justice, and that na- 
tionalism, in its European form, is the 
breeding ground of yet more wars. Thus, 
the impatience with the anti-foreign 
type of nationalism^ thus the emphasis 
on what unites Europe rather than what 
divides it; thus the willingness to co- 
exist with communism, not out of ap- 
proval for communism but in the hope 
of avoiding another war which, due to 
tbe advance of weaponry, would end, 
not in victory or defeat but the peace of 
of common worldwide graveyard* Thus, 
a general suspicion, whether justified or 
unjustified — I believe it is the latter 
rather than the former — of De Gaulle 
and his actuations. As far as jingoistic 
nationalism is concerned, the Europeans 
"have had it," and want no more of it 

The emerging nations are only now 
able to participate as actors on the stage 
of world affairs. They see how national* 
ism built up Europe. They see the posi- 
tive, constructive aspect of nationalism 
and are perhaps less conscious of the 
disastrous effects of its perversion. 

National Dignity 

Conscious or not, the newly inde- 
pendent nations of Africa and Asia are, 
by and large, not building toward the 
old destructive nationalism of Europe. 
They are aiming at the condition of na- 
tional dignity and relative self-sufficien- 
cy long since attained by European na- 
tions and already taken for granted, like 
tbe air we breathe, a condition which 
would have been attained and which 
would have been even more widespread 
in Europe had the unfortunate aspects 
of nationalism been kept within bounds. 

To us, nationalism is a force for the 
attainment in the future of what Europe 
attained long ago. If our nationalism at 
times manifests some of the symptoms 
of old-style, European nationalism, it is 
unfortunate, but it is within our power 
to apply the remedy. The disastrous ex- 
periences of other nations should serve 
as a strong corrective and surely we are 
not so blind as to fail completely to read 
and leam the lessons of history. 

After such a lengthy warning against 



the perverted brand of nationalism, it 
will doubtless sound inconsistent for me 
to advocate cultural nationalism* 

The very term "cultural nationalism 
brings echoes of precisely the kind of 
stupid jingoism which I so strongly con- 
demn. It spontaneously brings memories 
of the Nazi claims to a superior "Aryan" 
{that is to say, German) culture, the 



perversions that we excluded from gen- 
uine nationalism. 

What then do I mean by cultural na- 
tionalism? First and foremost, it must be 
something positive, constructive, and 
realistic. It must be^ rational and logical, 
not excluding sentiment but keeping it 
firmly under control. It involves caution, 
but not cowardly fear of anything for- 




PAST 



A rustic scene done by Fernando Amorsolo 



proof of Aryan superiority and the justi- 
fication for the subjugation and even 
extermination of lesser breeds. I readily 
grant the objection to the term "cultural 
nationalism," but there is no more reason 
to reject the term because of its con- 
notations in other lands than there is for 
rejecting the term nationalism itself for 
the same reason. 

At tins point, I cannot think of a bet- 
ter term and perhaps the term will be 
less objectionable if we clarify and de- 
limit it in the same way as nationalism 
itself and exclude from its idea the same 



eign or new merely because it is foreign 
or new. 

Cultural nationalism demands an un- 
prejudiced mind, so that we may be able 
to take stock of ourselves and act ac- 
cordingly, be able to appraise foreign in- 
fluences so that the contact with foreign 
cultures may be a process of selective* 
enriching assimilation rather than in- 
discriminate acceptance or rejection, witn 
inevitable cultural disintegration or ar- 
rest. We want cultural preservation and 
growth, but not petrification or a 
of identity. The process must be an or- 



ographic 



ONJVL IDENTITY 



ganic one, as the word assimilation in- 
dicates, not one of mere external addi- 
tion , as one dumps more stones on a pile 
of stones to make the heap grow. 

We speak of preservation and growth, 
but - is there anything to be preserved 
or to grow? Is there a Philippine culture 
at alJ? Only ignorance or stupidity can 
deny it. 



places the conclusion beyond dispute. 

Just what our culture consists of, I 
am not competent to say, I can say, 
however, that it is extremely complex. 
It is that very complexity which often 
leads Occidentals to classify us either as 
Occidentals with brown skins or Orientals 
with a very superficial Western veneer. 
It is that same complexity which leads 




...AND PRESENT 

A painting, along modem lines by Cenon Rivera 



Competent students of culture have 
not, to my knowledge, denied the exis- 
tence of our culture, of "a way of life 
common to [Filipinos} based on a social 
tradition and manifesting itself in [their] 
institutions, literature, and art." {Chris- 
topher Dawson). It is not surprising that 
our fellow-countrymen who have made 
cultural investigations should realize its 
existence with relative ease, but that for- 
eign sociologists and cultural anthro- 
pologists inevitably come to the same 
L'onclusion and recognize our culture 
even better than the average Filipino 



some Asians to say that we are not Asian 
S all. although Indians, Chinese Jap- 
anese Indonesians, Nepalese Syrian^ 
5? do not deny it of each other, much 
as they differ among themselves. 

It is that same complexity which be- 
wilders us and drives us to attempt a 
totS Location with West or Eas 
the sense in which Asians sometimes 
exclude us from it), an attempt impos- 
sSe in one case, meaningless n> tbe 

0t It r i S the same complexity from which 
some try to escape by taking refuge m 



an imaginative reconstruction, more or 
less accurate as the case may he, of 
Philippine culture at the time of Magel- 
lan's arrival, setting up that culture as 
the only true Philippine culture and de- 
Filipinizmg all subsequent generations, 
including our own* 

In my opinion this attitude is unten- 
able. It separates the pre-Spanish from 
subsequent cultural developments, con- 
sidering the former as wholly indig- 
enous — they were not, in the narrow 
sense of the word - and the latter as 
spurious. The attitude gives too much 
credit to the ability of Spanish and 
American culture to supplant our pre- 
vious culture and replace it with some* 
thing entirely different; the attitude also 
gives no credit whatsoever to our ances- 
tors for any capacity to transform and 
assimilate foreign influences, giving them 
a distinctively Filipino character. 

One who holds such a view turns his 
back to the most significant and most 
remarkable — I would say most admira- 
ble — fact about our culture and our- 
selves: that complexity has not prevent- 
ed unity, nor unity led to monotonous 
uniformity. Instead of our being proud 
of our unique cultural achievement f» 
it is our achievement, not the Spaniards* 
or the Americans' — we are ashamed of 
ourselves, see only the faults and dan- 
gers of our culture and see them mag- 
nified out of all proportion. 

Pride In Our Culture 

I can think of few worse threats to a 
vigorous nationalism than a nation de- 
spondent over its culture. The Filipino 
culture is a monument to our ability 
through the centuries to master the in* 
fluences which outwardly seemed solely 
to master us — for to be transformed 
mechanically is to be mastered, but to 
modify, to transform, to assimilate, and 
to give a distinctive character is also in 
the best, non-destructive sense, to master. 

Can we continue to do so? In the past, 
we had two powerful allies, distance and 
time* The jet age has nullified distance. 
Mass media of communications and daily 
contact with foreigners at all levels of 
society have robbed us of time, time to 
transform and assimilate, time to weigh 

- for selective acceptance or rejection 

- the avalanche of influences which 
press on us and threaten to bury us. 

Only a strong cultural nationalism, a 
pride in our culture and heritage and 
the determination that we shall not be 
stampeded into change by anything for- 
eign, that whatever changes we make, 
of native or foreign origin will be 
through our own well-con sidered judg- 
ment, thr ough an organic process which 
will not shatter our culture but strength- 
en and improve it - only such a strong 
cultural nationalism can save us and 
serve as a firm anchor for our national- 
ism.— # 




Why does she 
feel at ease in 
any company 
any time of 
the month? 



Because she 
uses Tarn pax 
internal sanitary 
protection. 
It's the 
modern way, 
the nicer way, 
the "feel-fresh" 
way, the 
invisible way, 
the comfortable 
way, the better 
way! 

After all, ■ 

shouldn't 

it 

be 



the only way? 




Developed by a doctor — 
now used by millions of women 

Send in your name anil acklress with 
30<J worth off stamps to Nurse Sally, 
P. O, Box 458, Manila, fox a free trial 
package of Tampax in plain wrapper. 




We cannot surrender the light 
of reason to the forces of hysteria 
in our midst. We must look 
at every problem from the standpoint 
of our permanent national interest' 





by JOSE F. RODRIGUEZ, Staff Member 



m 



School qvdt, pmtsth. 




I 

5 



LARGEST SELLING ANKLETS 



■ 



MORE TEAN ALL OTHER 



Available everywhere in the Philippines 

Manufactured hyi 
MANILA BAY HOSIERY MILLS, INC, 



• THIS IS HARDLY the time to split 
hair, what with the Philippine Action 
Group (Philcag) about to leave for its 
overseas appointment with destiny, and, 
possibly, disaster, but an official of the 
past administration is hoping that "my 
solitary voice raised in protest in the 
wilderness" may yet bring about a mir- 
acle that will keep this nation from get- 
ting involved in an armed conflict on 
foreign soil. 

The lone protestant, Pedro G. Peralta, 
former general manager of the Philip- 
pine National Railways, recently filed 
with the Supreme Court a petition fo 
prohibition and preliminary injunction 
seeking to stop .the Administration from 
sending the so-called engineering batta- 
lion to South Vietnam. 

Explaining that he was "impelled only 
by patriotic reasons" to pursue such a 
course of action, Peralta, who enjoys a 
rather lucrative law practice in La 
Union and is reputed to be a doughty 
defender of the downtrodden and lost 
causes, said that he was, on the whole, 
optimistic of the outcome of his peti- 
tion. 

Grave Violations 
Learning that the Philcag was leav- 
ing within two months, he said, during 
a brief interview in his Manila home 
(he spends most of his time now in 
San Fernando, La Union); "I filed this 
petition last June 15, four days after 
the President signed the Vietnam aid 
bill, with the hope that favorable action 
may be taken on it by the Supreme 
Court before the military contingent 
leaves these shores. Like any petitioner 
in a law case, I am confident that the 
high court will give due course to my 
petition. By due course, I mean notify 
the diverse parties involved in the peti- 
tion and give them a chance to present 
their side. This usually takes 10 days/' 
In seeking to stop the Administration 
, from sending the Philcag to Vietnam, 
Peralta, in nis petition, emphatically 
stressed on the following grave viola- 
tions of the Constitution: 

1) The sending of the engineering 
battalion was a warlike and hostile en- 
terprise, contrary to the principles of 
the Constitution, which renounces war 
as an instrument of national policy; 

2) Republic Act 4664 (authorizing 
the increase of Philippine economic and 
technical assistance to South Vietnam) 



amounts to_ a declaration of war and, 
as Senate Bill No. 391, it was approved 
in the Senate by IS affirmative against 
eight negative votes, falling short of the 
constitutional requirement of 2/3 af- 
firmative votes of all the members of 
each chamber of the Congress (Art, VI, 
Sec. 25, Phil Constitution) . It is, there- 
fore, null and void; 

3) The "team" to South Vietnam, be- 
ing provided with "security support" 
and "shall at all times be under a Phil- 
ippine command,'* clearly reveals the 
military nature and character of the aid 




PEDRO C. PERALTA 

A voice in the wilderness? 



which kind is not expressed nor includ- 
ed in the title of the bill as passed into 
law, to wit: "AN ACT AUTHORIZING 
THE INCREASE OF PHILIPPINE 
ECONOMIC AND TECHNICAL AS- 
SISTANCE TO SOUTH VIETNAM" 
and, this being so, the sending of such 
kind of assistance is illegal and uncon- 
stitutional being violative of the constitu- 
tional provision which states that the 
subject "shall be expressed in the title 
of the bill" (Art. VI, Sec. 21 (1) Phil- 
ippine Constitution); 
4) The appropriation of P3S million 



w*qraphi° 



ideas, at the acuteness with which he 
perceives and evaluates changing social 
conditions. To be inflexible in one's 
views, in one's attitudes, is to be ig- 
norant of the dynamic nature of human 
society. But what is more important is 
that the Chief Justices social conscious- 
ness is rooted primarily in the belief of 
the essential dignity and worth of the 
individual* 

At 63, Chief Justice Conception is 
wiry and active. He spends most of his 
free time playing golf with his cronies 
and colleagues in the judiciary. Other 
than golf, his leisure is devoted mostly 
to reading, listening to music and to 
his family, particularly to his 10 grand- 
children over whom he dotes like the 
usual indulgent grandpapa, He prefers 
Tchaikovsky and Sibelius because of 
what he calls their socialistic orientation 
and their strong nationalistic spirit. 

To the Chief Justice music is a lyrical 
way of expressing one's inner feelings 
and longings* "Most oppressed peoples 
have sad and haunting .music. It is the 
subconscious expression of the soul, 
which somewhat serves as a sort of balm, 
perhaps to assuage their longing for 
something which seems unattainable/' 
As examples he points to Filipino kun~ 
dimans and to Negro spirituals, 

Sundays in the elder Conception's 
household in Quezon City are usually 
tlie occasion for a family reunion. The 
children have the run of the place, and 
the atmosphere is gay and relaxed. First 
cousins, Chief Justice and Mrs, Concep- 
tion celebrated their 40th wedding an- 
niversary recently. 

Gentleman Of Old School 

He is sincere and terribly loyal to his 
friends. His casual style and unassum- 
ing nature betray a gracious gentility 
which, no doubt, sprang from a rather 
formidable bourgeois background. Any 
apprehension one may feel at the 
prospect of interviewing one of the fore- 
most jurists of the country is quietly 
dispelled by the easy charm and the 
kindliness of the man. Justice Concep- 
tion is a gentleman of the old school, 
which would perhaps make him stand 
out more as an anachronism against the 
brash and shallowness of the modern day 
younger executives. 

But to Chief Justice Conception, the 
law and all that it involves, is his ration 
d'etre, his one consuming passion. His 
41 years in the legal profession, whether 
in the practice of the law, in the teach- 
ing of it, or in the upholding of it as a 
judge, has instilled in the Chief Justice a 
profound respect for the law. "The law is 
the formal expression of the people's 
will " And the judge has to respect that 
will; a violation of the law is a desecra- 
tion of the peoples will. The law has 
been instituted primarily for the welfare 
of the people, to protect their basic 
rights. 

The apparently justified assertions 
that he is identified with the liberal 
block in the Supreme Court the Chief 
Justice dismisses with good humor. 
Secretly, he is delighted, "Personally, I 
think this is very flattering, But I'm 
afraid that there has been some color- 
ing on the part of the newspapers. May- 
be so, because they have based my iden- 
tification as a liberal on some of my 
decisions." 

But in a more serious vein, Chief 
Justice Conception adds: mt A judge is 
neither right nor left (in the ideological 
sense) ; neither is he a Nationalists nor 
a Liberal (in the parly sense). His main 



concern is to adhere strictly to the law." 
He bewails the fact that some people 
are not sold on the purely legal aspect 
of the law; instead, they are more in- 
clined to stress the equity of the law. 
A judge cannot allow his personal bias, 
prevailing social conditions, and other 
extraneous factors to influence his deci- 
cions. He is first of all committed to fol- 
low the Jaw, and his decisions have to 
operate within prescribed principles. 

On the other hand, he warns against 
the narrow reading of the law. Some 
judges refuse to see beyond the letter 
of the law. They insist on making a' 
provision the law itself, not a part of 
the law. What about other provisions 
which are also part of the law? A good 
and fair judge, in the opinion of the Chief 
Justice, must not only have an impartial 
view when he decides a case but he 
must also be able to look at the law 
in its totality for him to be able to un- 
derstand its spirit. One who has acquired 
a legal perspective will be able to probe 
into the "ultimate objective" for which 
the law has been conceived. 

Understanding the spirit of the law 
becomes specially ' significant when a 
judge is sometimes faced with a conflict 
between two rights or two wrongs. De- 
prived of fixed axioms to base his deci- 
sions on, the judge asserts his integrity 
by relying on his experience which has 
given him his legal orientation. But his 
decision must always be within the 
framework of the law. 

liberal Views 

For a man on whom the rule of law 
has become a way of life, Chief Justice 
Conception's liberal views become more 
explicit, if not more cogent, when pro- 
jected against his stand in favor of la- 



bor t- trade union, collective bargaining, 
right to picket, eta — and against his 
militant defense of civil liberties and on 
the freedom of the press. This liberalism 
is consistent with the Chief Justice's 
philosophy that the law in the first place 
was constituted for the welfare of the 
people and for the preservation of the 
social order. But it is the people from 
which power and authority emanate. 

To the Chief Justice, the Industrial 
Peace Act and the Magna Carta of La- 
bar are not only legal guarantees against 
abuses but are also concrete indications 
of social progress within the democratic 
system. He adds that while social secur- 
ity, socialized medicine, and other prac- 
tices and institutions connected with a 
socialistic system were unknown before, 
they are now grafted into the democrat- 
ic system. 

One of the original founders of the 
Civil Liberties Union , Chief Justice Con- 
ception is uncompromising in his advo- 
cacy of the freedom of the individual 
to have his own thoughts and beliefs, 
and in his insistence on the guarantee 
of this freedom. He likes to recall, now 
with amusement, how he and his fel- 
low CLU members have been accused 
of being "fellow travellers" because of 
their stand on civil liberties. To him, 
what is conveniently ignored by the de- 
tractors of the Civil Liberties Union is 
the fact that the members are pledged 
to defend the Constitution. "In fact this 
is the main purpose of the Union, To 
defend the Constitution and to protect 
the rights of the individual" 

In the Chief Justice's view, the press 
is the most effective lever in a dem- 
ocratic society. It is a form of airing, 
an outlet. It is through the press where 
dissent, injustice, abuses, wrongs are 




WITH GRANDCHILDREN 

Eight of his children's children pose with the Chief 
Justice during iOth wedding anniversary celebration. 



exposed. The press in this respect is 
truly the spokesman of the people, even 
if it expresses the opinion of the minori- 

As a man of law, the Chief Justice is 
against chaos and the disruption of the 
existing social order. When the people 
are repressed and not allowed to express 
their grievances the situation will pre- 
cipitate disorder, perhaps a revolution. 
The freedom of the press, and the free- 
dom of the individual to express his 
thoughts can effectively prevent dis- 
order. 

Justice Conception's militant stand on 
civil liberties is only matched by his 
strong sense of nationalism. To him 
Filipino nationalism was at its peak dur- 
ing the early part of the 20th century. 
And this nationalistic spirit was carried 
too by Quezon and later by Recto. The 
nationalists of 1907, for example, were 
still under the influence of the propa- 
ganda movement. Theirs was a type of 
nationalism that demanded that a polit- 
ical candidate or a leader be one "que 
tiene cara y corazon Filipino." 

Evils Of Politics 

Must the Constitution be amended to 
make it more responsive to the political 
realities of the present? The Chief Jus- 
tice favors the idea that the tenure of 
the President of the Philippines should 
be fixed, without reelection. In this 
respect he even proposes that most if 
not all elective government positions be 
without reelection, if only to avoid too 
much politics. "Politics in this country 
is the cause of many evils. The politi- 
cians 1 first aim once they are elected is 
to insure their reelection. They are not 
interested in the people's welfare," 

But what has the Chief Justice to say 
against antiquated laws and laws which 
are colonial? In so far as the Chief Jus- 
tice is concerned, laws which seek to 
exploit, laws which are against the 
interest of the Filipinos are basically 
anti-nationalistic in content and should 
be revised. But the revision and the 
change should be guided by the prin- 
ciples contained in the Constitution, 

But the main and immediate preoccu- 
pation of Mr. Conception, as the Chief 
Justice, is to bring the courts closer to 
the people. The people have to realize 
that the courts belong to them. The 
courts do not exist only for a certain 
class or for a certain group, The courts 
are the bulwark of a democratic society; 
and the people should be made to realize 
the value of their existence. They have 
to go to the courts to seek redress: "It is 
like a cushion/' Justice Concepcion says. 

The conservatism of the courts is 
something necessary because the func- 
tion of the courts is to institute order 
and to preserve the social system. But 
the courts are also aware of changing 
social conditions, and Congress has 
created legal instruments to meet these 
problems - Court of Industrial Relations 
and the agrarian courts. What is import- 
ant is for the people to learn that the 
courts are there for their complaints and 
grievances. Their suits may not produce 
immediate results. "But the contest is 
for history. They have to look at their 
efforts from a larger point of view," 

Thus, to Roberto Concepcion, eleva- 
tion to the chief justiceship of the na- 
tion's highest court is not so much a 
tribute to his person but as a superb op- 
portunity to see that the law will not on- 
ly survive but prevail as well. For this 
the seven years that he will be Chief 
Justice are too short indeed,— # 



August S/ i&fcti 




OPENING DAY 

Makeshift registration center (bottom), crowded corridor and jittery first-graders (below, above 
right), waiting high school boys (above left), and a classroom without any lights in the Grace 
Park Elementary School at 7th Ave., Caloocan City are a few sidelights, of enrolment day.. 



HWX *j 1 101*1 Vm CO M J llll 



ome 5000 

pupils going back home: there is no roorti 
for them. 

Until a concrete solution to the peren- 
nial problem is found, classes may have 
to be held under trees, in makeshift 
schoolbuildings, in dimly lighted corri- 
dors, in filthy and stinking classrooms, 
with dilapidated tables and chairs despite 
the P631,947,112 allotted to the de- 
partment of education this fiscal year. 

— Teodoro C. Berbano 




July 27, 1966 



• SOME YEARS ago I was asked to 
define nationalism and I declined, feel- 
ing incapable of doing justice to the 
term on such short notice, I shall not 
attempt to define it now, but I will say 
that it involves basically the assertion 
and defense of identity, the identity of 
a people conscious of itself as a people. 
If my reader will grant me so much, it 
follows that official recognition of the 
independence of a nation does not of 
itself mean that the goals of nationalism 
have been fulfilled* 

In fact, nations or states have been 
created to satisfy the needs or conveni- 
ences of international power politics^ 
with the corresponding recognition ac- 
cording to international law. Those po- 
litical creations have broken apart as 
soon as circumstances permitted, be- 
cause the citizens had no consciousness 
of being a people. 

We need not go deep into history to 
find an example. 

Malaysia fell apart almost as soon as 
it was formed, with Singapore choosing 
to go its own way and the Bornean ter- 
ritories still undecided whether to re- 
main definitely within the Federation, 
This has happened because of the ab- 
sence of any feeling of national identity 
thus far which would make it possible 
for those territories to be incorporated 
fairly easily into a political unit largely 
Malay. This sense of identity is some- 
thing which, at the time of the Spanish 
conquest of the Philippines, could have 
enabled the Visayas to be as easily in- 
corporated into a political system cen- 
tered on Menado, in the Celebes, as into 
a political system centered in Manila. 
Given such a historical development, Vi- 
sayans today would be proud of being 
Indonesians instead of Filipinos. 

The international recognition of the 
sovereign status of a territory, therefore* 
does not create a national identity. The 
former presupposes the latter, and if thai 
national identity does not already exist, 
it must be created if the state is to sur- 
vive the centrifugal forces which tend 
to blow it apart. 

The identity of a people is not some- 
thing simple. Even identity of race is 
not the determining factor — at least 
not necessarily the determining factor. 
France is a perfect example. I doubt 
if there is a country in the world where 
differing, and even contradictory, politi- 
cal opinions have been carried to their 
logical extremes as in France* Yet the 
consciousness of French nationality has 
overidden all divisions. 

We commonly think of France as a 
Latin country — I shall leave the accu- 
racy of this idea to the judgment of 
those better qualified than I, but there 

18 



CULTURE 
IN THE 
NATIONALIST 
STRUGGLE 

SENSE 



is no doubt that there are very large 
non-Latin strains: Brittany is Celtic. 
Normandy is Nordic (at least there is 
a large Nordic element), part of the 
South is Basque. Nevertheless, every 
Frenchman is first and foremost a 
Frenchman, and being of an ethnic 
strain different from the majority of 
Frenchmen makes no one feel less of a 
Frenchman for it, nor do the rest con- 
sider him less of a Frenchman. 

One of the strongest elements making 
for this sense of identity, possibly the 
strongest, is the sense of community in 
French culture. In other words, cultural 
identity — not to be confused with cul- 
tural monotony or uniformity — imbibed 
in the very soul of the French people, 
is a cement which makes any thought 
of a French breakup unthinkable. Even 
if every single state in the world were 
to withdraw recognition of France, 
France would still be France. 

Concept Of Culture 

I have dwelt on the case of France 
at some length to emphasize the role 
which cultural nationalism should play 
in our nationalist snuggle, which has by 
no means been won. Speaking of "the 
Philippine soul," the outcome of Philip- 
pine culture, will sound hopelessly in- 
tellectual, or romantic to some, and jusf 
plain stupid to others, so we had bet- 
ter steer clear of such phraseology. Let 
us be satisfied with trying to answer 
two questions, by no means simple, but 
at any rate more down-to-earth; 

Is there a Filipino culture? 

What is it? 

Any answer we give will necessarily 
be challenged {at least in their own 
minds) by those whose line is the study 
of culture, since space does not permit 
anything approaching an adequate treat- 
ment of the subject But never mind. 

The modern sociological concept of 
culture is that of "a way of life common 
to a particular people and based on a 
social tradition which is embodied in its 
institutions, its literature and its art/ 1 
This view of culture is attributed to T.S* 
Elliot by Christopher Dawson (both 
among the most eminent students of 
culture in our age), and he agrees. 

Taking this definition on the strength 
of the authority of the aforementioned 
authors, and using it as a standard, can 
we say that there is such a thing as 
Philippine culture? I believe we can an- 
swer yes, 

The negative proof of this reply should 
be obvious to anyone who has travelled 
abroad or had extensive contact with 
foreign communities in our own land* 
Those Filipinos who have been to Spain 
(most have liked it) have found it def- 




OF NATIONAL 



by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 



initely foreign, "different," despite many 
similarities in our customs and attitudes. 
Those who have been to the United 
States (many have disliked it) have al- 
so found it foreign, "different," despite 
some similarities (not very many) in 
our customs and attitudes. This strange- 
ness persists, notwithstanding our con- 
tinual exposure to the "American way 
of Me" through the press, movies, and 
television and the continuing close na- 
tional relationship with the United 
States, a relationship which does riot 
exist with Spain. 

I have used Spain and the United 
States as examples, because they are the 
two countries which have had the 
strongest, because most recent and polit- 
ically dominant, influence on us. 

Lest the Filipinos feeling of strange- 
ness be dismissed as due to the white 
faces and to the contrast between Oc- 
cidental and Oriental, - let us consider 
those who are closer to us geographical- 
ly and in physical appearance, the In- 
donesians, the Malaysians (those of them 
who are Malays) and the Thais. 

The similarity in physical appearance 
and in certain social characteristics 
which seem to be common to tropical 
peoples masks the differences to a con- 
siderable extent, nevertheless the differ- 
ences are there, and no matter how the 
Filipino may like those peoples, he will 
still find their ways foreign to him. If 
the Filipino finds himself different from 
all those peoples mentioned, despite all 
sorts of similarities, it can only be be- 
cause there is a certain "hard core" of 
culture which makes him different, some- 
thing a good deal more basic and per- 
manent than a passport. 

The Filipinos consciousness of the 
different way of life of other nations 
can only be explained by the existence 
of a standard with which he can com- 
pare it, namely, his own, the Filipino 
way of life. 

The positive proof of the existence 
of a Phihppine culture shades almost 
imperceptibly into the identification and 
description of Fhmppine culture, at least 
in some of its principal outlines. 

For the positive proof, or, at any rate, 
one positive proof, we must appeal to 
our own experience. 

The family is the life-cell of the social 
organism and certainly there is a com- 
tnon pattern of family life among Filipi- 
nos. The almost universal protest against 
certain patterns of behavior among some 
of the younger generation - in their ex- 
treme manifestations, they are what is 
lumped under the general term "juvenile 
delinquency," new and unfamiliar to the 
older generation - are an unmistakable 
sign that they jar the sensibilities of the 



rest of the population because they do 
not fit in with what has come to be 
considered the normal course of famftv 
life. 

Fakikisama, whose nearest English 
equivalent is the now rather stilted* 
sounding word "comradeship'* — not 
"f ellowship" because it allows for a cer- 
tain amount of insincerity, nor "public 
relations," because it has an unmistak- 
able ring of commercialism and both de- 
grade the very concept — is so much a 
part of Philippine social tradition that 
gang-ism has stolen its credentials and 
is thus all the more difficult to expel 
from our midst. 

The word "inabait," which I hesitate 
to translate because of its complex con 
notations, but which is commonly and 
most wielicitously rendered "good;" ma- 
gaan ang dugo, which cannot be trans- 
lated at aiJ; both are universally admirer? 
qualities inseparably connected with cait 
social tradition. 

With these three instances, significant 
instances, pervading as they do our lives, 
I believe the case for the existence oi 
a Phihppine culture is sufficiently estab- 
lished. 

Now, what is Philippine culture? A 
culture ordinarily is the outcome of many 
factors, and as such is a complex thing- 
It is the product of the interplay of 
many influences — climate, geography, 
the meeting and mingling of differenl 
ethnic and racial groups, religion, the 
development of a native civilization ami 
the impact of other civilizations, etc. 

A "pure** culture almost necessarily is 
an impoverished culture. A remarkable 
case in point is the hillbillies of thr 
United States. I think we are justified 
in treating them as a cultural unit be 
cause, up to recently at any rate, ths 
lived in a world apart. The unfortunate 
situation of the hillbillies requires m 
comment 

Petrified Culture 

Egypt and China seem exceptions la 
the general rule of the necessity of er 
ternai contacts — significant con- 
tacts, that is — for the development 
a great culture, since both civUizaticr * 
appear to have been almost entirely c* 
indigenous, localized origin. But P™*|P 
the petrification and death of both civili- 
zations are the outcome of the absence 
of streams of renewal 

But the general rule holds: a rich cu- 
tore requires the concurrence of man 
factors, and presumably the potential fc: 
growth and vitality is greater the mar* 
complex the factors involved. However, 
the process of formation and develop 
ment of a culture does not take pi** 
through a mere putting together, a fl* 



graphic 



IDENTITY 



take 
simi 



• haflical juxtaposition of factors. 

The cultural process is an assimila- 
te process, an organic process similar 
ro that of nutrition, whereby a living 
body takes in external elements, of which 
some are discarded and others become 
a living part of the living body so that 
*hey cease to be external — they become 
part and parcel of the body, and in turn 
take part in the process of further as* 
ilation. 

Philippine culture has a background 
rich that potentially we have one of 
(he greatest cultures possible. What it is, 
even a thick book could hardly define 
adequately, certainly not a brief article* 
! shall limit myself to indicating some 
of the materials that have gone into 
the process of its formation, and possi- 
bly an idea of what will emerge, 

The racial composition of the Filipino 
neanle merits serious and extensive 

Presumably the original inhabitants of 
-iese islands were the Negritos, We 
should be indignant that these, our orig- 
inal Filipinos, are living an existence 
so completely on the margins of the 
mainstream of Filipino life. The fact that 
they are today relegated, as it were* to 
the status of an exotic plant that has 
-nanaged to survive should not lead to 
lae conclusion that they have not left 
definite contributions and influences on 
jut present-day life. 

Ti the touching friendliness of today's 
Negritos, to the point of their being easi- 
ly taken advantage of T was characteristic 
of them in ages past, that may well be 
the origin of the same trait, although 
somewhat reduced, in today's Filipinos. 

To describe the various pagan tribes 
— those of the Mountain Province, Pa- 
lawan, and Mindanao, — and their pos- 
sible cultural influences is not here pos- 
sible, but I imagine that many beliefs 
which affect our daily lives are due to 
them and their animistic religion, beliefs 
which we do not even suspect we owe 
to them. The very limited territorial ex- 
tension of each of those groups would 
naturally h'mit the extent of their influ- 
ence on the subsequent inhabitants, ex- 
cept where their various cultures coin- 
cided, as in the example cited. 

The various waves of Malay immigra- 
Horj are an entirely different matter. The 
Malays occupied pretty well all areas of 
;be archipelago, and their customs seem 
to be almost universal in all Malay lands. 
We may, therefore, consider the Malays 
and their culture as constituting the raw 
materials of our present Philippine cul- 
ture, the basic organism which under- 
went the cultural process of meeting, 
impact and assimilation, with its inevit- 
able modification of the original organ- 
July 27, 1966 



ism. 

ft is the original Malay population 
which has mainly undergone the influ- 
ences of the East, first of all, the stream 
of culture and civilization and race. One 
stream came from China, fairly constant 
and unchanging through the ages, the 
other from India, through Indonesia, 
modified by Indonesia in a very signifi- 
cant manner, since in Indonesia itself 
the influx of Indian culture had become 
Indonesian and yet continued to under- 
go influences that changed as India it- 
self changed, from Brahman ism, to 
Buddhism to Islam. 

A Unique People 

It was these influences, which un- 
doubtedly underwent modifications in 
the Philippines, which had already mod- 
ified the origin a] Ma lay way of life, 
which, assimilated in varying ways and 
degrees, constituted the way of life of 
these Islands, when the impact of the 
West was felt, an impact which has 
made us a people unique in the world. 

I say unique in the world, because 
we are of the East and the West, but 
not the East and not the West, we are 
of the North and the South and yet 
not the North nor the South: we are 
ourselves, Filipinos, through a beautiful 
and also unique process of assimilation 
of foreign influences to what we were 
originally. 

This process, imperfect as all human 
processes must be, has given us today's 
Philippine culture, with a considerable 
degree of stability, necessary for a pro- 
cess of development and assimilation " 
rather than disintegration, yet blessed 
with a degree of flexibility which alone 
can make further progress possible — a 
culture rich in variety without irreduci- 
ble or violently conflicting streams, so 
that we can agree to disagree, yet with 
an underlying unity which binds the 
whole fabric together, so that we are 
definitely one people, with the conscious- 
ness of a common national destiny. 

How to recognize this basic unity, in 
what it consists, and how to protect the 
necessary minimum of stability to en- 
able us to deal with the modern world 
and its influences in such a way that 
the result is healthily assimilative rather 
than disruptive and destructive, is a very 
serious problem with which we are 
faced. 

Our survival as a nation depends on 
our success in dealing with the problem. 
I honestly believe that failure will turn 
into a common phenomenon what we 
find more and more often in individual 
cases — the faceless Filipino. 
(The concluding article will appear in 
next week's issue.) 




by GEMMA CRUZ ARANETA 




Taal tales 



* AT this writing, the indecisive Taal Volcano has just emit- 
ted menacing nebulae of smoke and sporadic flashes of phos- 
phorescent fire. The sight was really more beautiful than 
frightful. The volcanologists who were said to have been 
caught unawares by the September eruption must have 
sighed heavily with relief. Since then, they have been inces- 
santly testing the lake's temperature, recording the slightest 
tick of their seismographs while predicting a more terrible 
blast But months passed and there seemed to be no real in- 
dication of another eruption ; everyone, especially newspaper- 
men, had begun to poke fun at them. Even the Taal evacuees, 
exhausted by our charity, have rowed back to the foot of the 
volcano to rehabilitate their ruined dwellings. But it had to 
take the Beatles, to whose shocking behavior the fury of the 
volcano was attributed, to prevent our volcanologists from 
losing face once again. 

Lately the Manila dailies have come out with pictures of 
a crater emitting smoke and with scientific accounts of how 
other craters and fissures are being formed, But as usual, 
we Filipinos are taking everything calmly, even indifferently, 
despite the possibility that hundreds of evacuees would not 
have enough food, clothing or shelter. 

In 1629, as we are told by Medina in his Historic de Fili- 
pinos, Taal was always coughing out flames and contaminate 
ing the wind with ashes, dust and oppressive heat. In those 
days Taal was called the ''execrable blasphemy launched by 
Satan against God." As a result, the surrounding coastal vil- 
lages were so parched that people could not cultivate their 
land. Then a certain Father Albuquerque thought of build- 
ing an altar at the foot of this bellicose volcano and ordered 
the villagers to go there in a procession, after which Mass 
was celebrated. "So successful was this," Medina relates, "that 
as yet, no more fire or smoke has been seen and that island, 
about four leg%tas in circuit, has fields and cows and the in- 
habitants of Taal sow and reap their harvests. . 

Today, the new agitation at Taal has brought about a sort 
of procession, not of devotees with blind faith, blessed can- 
dles, efficacious novenas, and saintly hymns but of pleasure- 
seekers, hungry for adventure, armed with cameras, tran- 
sistor radios, and picnic baskets. Inhabitants of the coastal 
towns have learned to turn disaster into business. Motorized 
bancas are being let for as high as P50, depending on how 
angry the volcano is at that particular moment. Times have 
changed indeed and we have become so worldly and blase! 
At the Taal Vista Lodge, a group had gathered and they 
would chorus, "O, o, o, aya-aaa-an!" everytime the crater 
would belch fresh smoke and sparks of fire; 

On 21 September 1716 and in December 1754, our fore- 
fathers witnessed the same volcano erupt. The historical ac- 
counts which have come down to us from those times are 
serious and alarmed. 

The 1716 eruption was said to have sounded "like those 
of heavy artillery. . .and the mountain seemed to be in a 
state of ignition over a space of three leagues toward Ma- 
colog Gigantic towers of boiling water and ashes were thrown 
ut> the earth shook on all sides, the waters of the lake were 
aeitated and overran its banks; this lasted for three days/' 
In December 1754, a new governor-general, Dop Pedro 
Manuel de Arandia was about to take office in Manila, lie 
must have been as provoking as a mophead from Liverpool 
for Taal volcano erupted again. This time, the eruption last- 
ed for eight days. Taal was spitting fire, huge stones, and 
ashes Four coastal villages were buried in ashes and dark- 
ness spread over Manila, Cavite, and even Panay. The lake 
was gurgling and boiling like a huge witch's cauldron, kill- 
ing t h e fish and crocodiles. It was considered most disastrous ! 

Generations from now, Taal will perhaps cause trouble 
again One wonders how our descendants will react to it. 



fq 




September 28, 19(15 



July 5, 1966 July 10, 1966 



TAAL'S LONG AND WttMT Cf 1RY 



• ASH, SAND, and red-hot rocks have formed many towns in 
the province of Batangas in the long violent history of Taal 
volcano. Since its first known eruption in 1709, the killer 
mountain lying in the middle of a placid lake has exploded 
13 times, the last three occurring within 10 months. Accord- 
ing to records kept by the commission on volcanology, the 
most violent eruptions took place in 1754 and 1911 when 
searing black ash and boiling water left a wide swath of 
destruction and made even Manila feel its relentless fury. 
Since 1911, however, the volcano had quieted down until 



September 28, 1965 when all its stored violence broke loose 
and spread death and buried towns along the lake. The vol- 
cano experts have since kept a long and silent vigil and de- 
tected, two months ago, an impending 'eruption. The people 
duly warned, evacuation began. On July 5, 1966, Taal erupted 
anew, steam and rocks spewing out of the rim of the new 
crater formed by the 1966 eruption. After two days, the 
volcano slept, only to erupt again in less than a week to form 
a second conelet. These aerial photos show the angry volcano 
in different stages of convulsion. — # 




July 14, 1966 (note first conelet) 



20 



graphic 



to live in the San Beda 
J ^rtf t inan attempt to find out 
if m can be an archbishop? 



The new cook fascinated him 
with stories of battles, guns, 
and of men who dared because 
they drank* 



Drink, girls, and guns made 
going home late a ritual 
the fast crowd of Butch Belgica 
demanded. 



They hogged the street then ganged 
up on a driver who wanted 

to pass through. A gun * 

exploded; the driver slumped dead. 




VICTIM 



• HE NEVER REALLY told anyone 
what he wanted to be* He was happy- 
go-lucky, friendly, very young* He 
didn't seem to care very much about 
studies and took his time in school At 
17, he looked 14 and was still in high 
school, but neither seemed to bother 
him* 

Most of all, he enjoyed his friends. 
If he wasn't talking to them on the 
. phone, he was visiting them. For their 
imkeL he wanted a car of his own pas- 
sionately, perhaps with the fiercest of 
* passions. At home, he begged to drive 
f the car — even if it wasn't his own yet* 
And his hints were loud that on his 
18th birthday, he'd like nothing better 
than a car of Ins own. 

But still, Joselito Zuzuarregui at 17 
was considered too young by his broth- 
e r and guardian* Antonio* "He was too 
happy-go-lucky* I wanted him to have 
more sentido. I felt very protective about 

The feeling was understandable. The 
Zuzuarreguis lost their father early in 
their lives and Tony, as the eldest, 
stepped early into the role of guardian 
for his twin brothers, Joselito and Enri- 
que, and of man of the house for his 
widowed mother* The role was made 
slightly lighter by the inheritance that 
I the elder Zuzuarregui had left to his 
heirs and which fell on Tony to ad- 
minister, 

Henry, the other- twin, was mature 
for his age and. sailed through school 
smoothly* Graduated this schoolyear, 
Tony had promised him and his mother 
a trip abroad — anywhere they pleased 
— and Joselito was to go with them, 
as soon as his grades were released. 

Joselito had trouble with school even 
from the beginning, simply because it 
didn't grip his interest* And so Tdny 
hovered over him as the boy struggled 
through nursery school at Nena Gareia's. 
through grade school at Letran, and 
through part of high school at the Ba- 
guio Military Institute* 

In 1964, Tony thought that Joselito 
might take an interest in schooling 



abroad and so early summer, took the 
boy with him to San Francisco, Califor- 
nia* "I enrolled him at the San Fran- 
cisco Academy* He learned to find his 
way to the school and knew in a day 
what bus to take* Some of my friends 
in San Francisco said they would love 
to have him stay with them. And so I 
left him at the school, although I gave 
him a plane ticket for home in case he 
decided to come home instead. When I 
was ready to leave in a week — and 
after only three days schooling at tfie 
Academy - Joselito told me he wanted 
to go home with me*** 
Back home, Joselito enrolled at the 




JOSELITO ZUZUARKEGU1 



THE VICTIM 

He was too friendly, happy-go-lucky, and gen- 
erous and school did not quite grip his interest 



Lyceum and there made many friends, 
the best of whom was Ernesto Enage 
who described Joselito as '*happy and 

rt He was so generous with them," said 
Tony* "Sometimes my mother would 
complain that Tony lost his shirt again* 
He went out of the house with a new 
shirt and came hack with an old one* 
Once he had new shoes and came home 
with old slippers* His friends obviously 
take a liking to his things* And he literal- 
ly took his shirt off his back for them " 

At home, he was a quiet boy, who 
didn't talk much, didn't like reading or 
watching tv. "Most of all, he liked to 
sleep," chuckles Tony. "In fact, I called 
him Manok because of the way he slept: 
straight on his back, but with his head 
tilted to a side*" 

was close to his mother and ran 
with his wants to her - most of all he 
went to her about the car, Tony was 



strict with it; he had to be home by 
nine in the evening if he had the ear; 
but his mother interceded when he 
didn't keep curfew* Joselito also begged 
his mother for a car of his own and it 
was she who talked Tony into giving the 
boy a '65 Dodge Dart last January. 

The softness on Tony's part was 
promoted by a special fondness for the 
hoy. T thought he had a streak of bad 
luclc He lost his father when he was 
only four* He lost a finger when he was 
seven* He was always sickly. He was 
slow in school." 

Protective as Tony was about his 
brother, he had no forethought of actual 
violence failing on the boy. "Of course, 
1 gave him ample warnings* I told him 
that a boy. a girl, and a beautiful car 
are provoking* Seen on the road at night, 
it is a temptation for other boys to come 
up to it with a dare to a race* That's 
why, 1 told him, he couldn't take the 



car out very often*" 

Once in Baguio thougji, when Jose- 
lito was a cadet at the BMI, he had a 
brush with violence* On a Saturday 
night leave to go to the movies, Josebto 
and his companion, another cadet, were 
set to by some boys and threatened with 
knives- Joselito escaped, but his com- 
panion was stabbed, It was time, Tony 
decided, to take his biotbet axil of the 
BMI. 

Of Butch Belgica and his brother, 
Tony had never heard — though Butch's 
father knew Joselito and twice had oc- 
casion to take the boy home, after Jose- 
lito had taken supper with the Belgicas* 

Tony was to hear of Butch Belgica 
only when it was too late — "after the 
< last time I saw Joselito at home/' That 
was Sunday, May 1st when the Zuzuar- 
reguis were ail home and were together 
for lunch. That night when Tony came 
home at 10 p.rn.* he noticed that Jose- 
lito's car was not in yet and so early 
the next day, the Monday holiday* he 
was looking for his younger brother 
give him a scolding* 

"He's asleep," said Henry the twin, 
"Let your scolding go for now*** 

So Tony left the house to go to the 
stables at the San Lasaro race tracks 
where he kept his horses* At home — 
Henry and his mother had to 1r * liim 
later on, Joselito woke up, looking brisk 
and energetic. And what was more, he 
did something unusual; he washed his 
car* 

Tired from the task, Joselito took s 
shower and put on fresh clothes and 
told his mother that he was going to 
visit Ernesto Enage at the Fhilamlife 
compound. Parked in front of the Enage 
home, Joselito sat on the trunk of his 
ear, merrily swinging his legs as he and 
his friends talked. 

In the twilight, they saw Butch Bel- 
gica and his friends stop their ear. 
Butch went down to have a few words 
with Joselito* In the twilight, friends 
saw a scuffle between the two. Batch's 
gun went off* Joselito slumped to the 
ground,— # 



June 22, W66 v 




by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 



« THE OFFICE of the President J 
the Republic looms so large in the pop- 
ular imagination, as does, to a lesser ex- 
tent, Congress, that the other branch of 
our government, the Judiciary, theoret- 
ically separate and theoretically equal, 
gets scant attention* 

We think of individual judges and 
individual cases of course, and possibly 
grumble about them; but of the judicia- 
ry as an institution and as an arm of 
government we think precious little and 
care even less. We speak blithely of a 
government of laws, not of men, as if 
the laws administered themselves, Little 
do we realize that laws can be made 
operative only by men and that the last 
bulwark of justice, that one and only re- 
fuge of civilized man and the peaceful 
citizen, is the Judiciary* 

If we realized, as we should deeply 
realize, that the Bill of Rights, the em- 
bodiment of the freedom so dear to our 
hearts is a worthless scrap of ineffectual 
oratory without a strong judiciary to give 
it substance and muscle, we would be 
fiercely determined to defend and 
strengthen the judiciary, give it credit 
for what, under terrible obstacles, it is 
able to accomplish, and blame the other 
branches of government, not the judicia- 
ry, for a situation under which the ju- 
diciary is unable to develop to the full 
its potentialities for service to the na- 
tion- 
Guarantee Of Independence 

It has been accepted as a basic pre- 
mise of our form of government that 
there should be three separate and co- 
equal branches of government, the exec 7 
utive, the legislative, and the judicial, 
That the three branches are always list- 
ed in that order is not a mere accident 
"~of verbal rhythm or anything of the 
sort, The order of listing reflects clearly 
the mentality and the fact regarding the 
descending importance of the three 
branches of government. While we af- 
firm the principle of equality, we at 
the same time unconsciously deny it. 

That the three branches of govern- 
ment should be relatively separate — I 
say relatively separate, because an ab- 
solute separation would mean three dif- 
ferent heads of the same political body 
- is one of the theories of popular gov- 
ernment worked out through experience. 
The equality of the three branches is a 
corollary of the same theory of separa- 
tion of powers, and in practice is pos- 
sibly even more difficult of attainment* 
That the ideal of equality should be 
approached as closely as practicable is 
of the greatest importance, especially in 
our political society as it exists in its 




COURT IN SESSION 

The Bill of Rights is a worthless document without a strong judiciary 



A revision in the position 
and functions of the 
judiciary would give truer 
and greater meaning to the 
checks and balances theory 



concrete reality, conditioned by our 
education (or lack of it), our tempera- 
ment, our foibles (to use a charitable 
word for our politics), and the absence 
of a long-standing tradition of judicial 
power. 

If one considers the matter, one can- 
not escape the conclusion that the Judi- 
ciary is to a certain and potentially dan- 
gerous extent subject to the Executive 
and the Legislative* It has one guaran- 
tee of independence - for what that 
guarantee is worth — tenure of office. 
That guarantee is considerable in the 
lower courts, almost absolute in the 
higher courts and the Supreme Court 
and quite absolute, if h e so wishes, in 
the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
(barring, of course, the highly unlikely 
commission of a crime which ends ten- 
ure.) But apart from tenure, what do we 
have? 

The judiciary is entirely dependent on 
the President and Congress for its per- 
sonnel The President appoints and the 



(congressional) Commission on Ap- 
pointments confirms, rejects, or bypasses 
the appointees to positions in the judi- 
ciary. The Secretary of Justice (head ot 
the department of justice and extension 
of the personality of the President) has 
in his hands the choice of men and 
women to be fiscals and judges, and de- 
cides and recommends who should be 
appointed, promoted, demoted, etc* etc* 
Political influence and — let us be 
blunt — skullduggery attempt to play 
with varying degrees of success, their 
full, disreputable role. How many men 
and women are advanced to and in the 
judiciary due to merit, regardless of per- 
sonal and political considerations; how 
many due to such consideration ac- 
companied by merit; and how many be- 
cause of such considerations, in the ab- 
sence of merit or even in the presence 
of positive demerit - only the suffering 
members of the judiciary know. 

That our judiciary has managed to 
maintain such high standards under 
such conditions is not a sign of the de- 
sirability or propriety of the system but 
of God's undeserved mercy and no one 
has a right to count on a sustained mir- 
acle. The respect felt by the public for 
the judiciary in general and the Supreme 
Court in particular speaks volumes for 
their learning and integrity. It would 
be simple common sense to establish a 
system favorable rather than menacing 
to such standards. 

Hie study of the law involves a de- 



gree of devotion, consecration really, 
which is not exceeded in any other lay 
profession. It involves more, much more, 
than a mechanical memorizing of prin- 
ciples and statutes and an equally me- 
chanical application of those principles 
and statutes to cases. 

Study Of Law 

As Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes 
once said: 'The business of a law 
school is not sufficiently described when 
you merely say that it is to teach law 
or to make lawyers. It is to teach law 
in the grand manner, and to make great 
lawyers." 

Learning the law and applying it by 
rote very obviously is not here en- 
visioned/ Now, what after all are the 
members of the judiciary but lawyers 
called upon to exercise judgment auth- 
oritatively, what a judge but a man call- 
ed upon to be man of judgment in a 
Court of law? 

And how can a man be a man of 
judgment in a court of law unless his 
learning and his devotion to the law 
are such that he has imbibed so much 
of it both in its spirit and its letter that 
the law has become the every air he 
breathes? How is our present system 
suited to the formation and preservation 
of a judiciary made up of such men ana 
women? 

If there is one part of government 
that should be free of all imputations of 
politics, it is the judiciary. Nevertheless, 

graphic 



judges and fiscals are appointed by the 
Resident, probabl v the most highly polit- 
ical man in any democracy - he could 
hardly attain to the Presidency if he 
Were not. Right off, therefore, there is 
a presumption that political considera- 
tions can play a partJn his choices for 
the judiciary. I do not say that political 
considerations necessarily are involved 
but they can be, and even if this were 
to happen on very rare occasions - 
which is probably the case - those rare 
occasions just might deprive the judi- 
ciary of a highly deserving man or wom- 
an or, conversely, afflict it with a highly 
undeserving one. 

Furthermore, any President, faced 
with his manifold duties, of which se- 
lecting the personnel of the Judiciary is 
only one, is physically incapable of giv- 
ing the matter the attention it deserves. 
He naturally and inevitably must rely 
in most cases on his Secretary of Justice. 
Although purely political appointees to 
the post of Secretary of Justice are al- 
most unknown in this country — in that 
respect we have perhaps been more 
fortunate than other countries — we have 
at present no guarantee that such a tra- 
dition will be continued. If politics 
should continue to degenerate as most 
people expect, there is no reason to sup- 
pose that at some future date the tra- 
dition will not be disregarded — an un 
scrupulous politician is a poor respecter 
of tradition, or of anything else for that 
matter, except the harsh realities of polit- 
ical opportunism. 

In the event of a purely political 
Secretary of Justice being appointed, the 
consequences to the administration of 
justice in this country are easy to imag- 
ine, seeing the sort of people who 
would obtain appointments and rise in 
the judiciary. But even without such a 
calamitous eventuality, it is undeniable 
that the fortunes of judges and fiscals 
have at times depended on the political 
color Malacanang saw or imagined in 
them. 



The trek back to their Alma Mater is a combined intellectual' sentimental journey 

by FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 



• STUDENTS OF the UP College of 
Law one day turned their heads for a 
second glance at a straggly group of 
people going up the staircase of Mal- 
colm Hall. Among them one could pick 
out the dignified figure of a well-known 
judge and trailing him, a millionaire 
businessman whose name is a by-word 
in industrial circles and stock markets. 
Was there a convocation somewhere on 
the campus or were they calling on Dean 
Vicente Abad Santos? Accustomed to 
the sight of dignitaries and government 
functionaries visiting their school, the 
students cut short their speculations to 
rush to their classes. 

Had they been persistent enough to 
follow the distinguished guests, they 
would have been surprised to discover 
that these men were, like them, enrolled 
in school — with one difference. This 
group of judges, lawyers, businessmen, 
and accountants, were well-established 
in their professions. Adjusting their 
crowded calendars, they had looked for- 
ward to this opportunity of "clearing 
the mental cobwebs" that had accumu- 
lated through the years and of updating 
themselves on recent developments in 
their respective fields at the UP Law 
Center. 

Prime Beneficiaries 



ber of days instead of staggering them 
to suit the convenience of the Manila 
practitioners. Law alumni, in particular, 
take pains to make the long trek back 
to their Alma Mater on a combined in- 
tellectual-sentimental journey. 



principles of their specialized fields of 
law, those who sign up for a course 
look forward to a discussion in depth, 
an analysis of problematical areas and 
authoritative answers to their practical 
questions. In addition, the publication of 



Members of the bench, humble enough the proceedings assures the participants 
to admit they can still learn a thing or of the preservation of all matters taken 

up including their individual contribu- 
tions to the discussions, 



Political Favor 

That the members of the judiciary 
should in any sense be dependent upon 
political favor for their advancement is 
outrageous. It is, unfortunately, a fact, 
not always, perhaps not often, but it is 
a fact. For a judge to be reassigned to 
a more convenient location, or promoted 
to a higher court, for an assistant fiscal 
to be promoted to fiscal or a fiscal to 
be made a judge, or for that matter for 
a lawyer to enter the Judiciary at all 
may require currying the favor of some- 
one who controls votes, be he a profes- 
sional politician or otherwise influential 
with particular groups. 

The necessity of approval of an ap- 
pointment by the Commission on Ap- 
pointments is a corrective to the afore- 
mentioned danger. It can equally in- 
crease the danger, since appointments 
in the judiciary, like all other appoint- 
ments subject to confirmation by that 
body, can be turned into a political foot- 
ball, especially when the President is 
at odds with congress. The process 
would have to be more subtle — it would 
be no less real. \ 

I have by no means exhausted the 
disadvantages of our present system 
(e. g., I have not discussed prolonged 
vacancies in courts), I have merely 
sought to indicate them - some of them. 
There is, I believe, a way in which these 
disadvantages and others left unmen- 
tioned could be eliminated or at leapt 
drastically reduced. It would be to bring 
the present system more in line with 
the theory of the judiciary as a separate 
and equal branch of the government. 
Here I really and / To page 41 

June ,?3 r J,96ft 



Judges and practising lawyers now 
consider themselves singularly fortunate 
in being the prime beneficiaries of this 
new institution which has been set up 
on the UP campus under the director- 
ship of Prof. Crisolito Pascual. Created 
by Congress in June 15, 1964 within the 
framework of the UP College of Law, 
the Law Center seeks to expand the 
role of the College from being merely 
a training ground for future lawyers to 
a dynamic agency which will contribute 
directly to the improvement of the ad- 
ministration of justice. 

Prior to the formal organization of the 
Law Center, the College of Law, 
through its Continuing Legal Education 
and Research Unit, conducted a three- 
day institute on the Revised Rules of 
Court, the main lecturer being the chair- 
man of the committee which undertook 
the revision of these procedural rules. 
So well-received was it by members of 
the bench and the bar that the Center, 
once officially established, drew up a 
schedule of institutes in different fields 
of law in response to the clamor for 
similar programs. 

Made the subject of annual offerings 
were the twin areas of labor-manage- 
ment relations law and tax law in view 
of their rapid development and increas- 
ing importance. Thus far, two annual 
institutes have been held in each of 
these fields. Recently, approximately 
200 persons attended the pioneer Insti- 
tute on Corporate Practice and Secur- 
ities. Spurred by the enthusiastic re- 
sponse, the UP Law Center has com- 
mitted itself to offering this course on 
a continuing basis. Already in the blue- 
print stage is an Institute on Fair La- 
bor Standards and Welfare Legislation. 

Most of these programs are held on 
a straight three-day basis to afford those 
in the provinces an opportunity to at- 
tend. 

Precisely to accommodate these out- 
of-towners, the Law Center has stuck 
to its practice of scheduling these pro- 
grams continuously for a certain num- 



two from others, sit side by side with 
practitioners who plead in their "salas." 
One can sympathize with a confused 
participant who kept on addressing the 
chair as "Your Honor." At judicial con- 
ferences, however, such as the one on 
The Application and Graduation of Pe- 
nalties, everyone except the moderator 
was either a judge or a fiscal. Not in- 
frequently, a lecturer, regarded as one of 
the legal luminaries in his field, is em- 
barrassed to spot a judge in the audi- 
ence. One ranking government official, 
finding himself in such a situation, sin- 
gled out the judicial officer, saying, "You 
should be on this platform instead of 
me." 

Desirous of benefiting as great a 
number as possible, the UP Law Cen- 
ter has not confined its participants 
solely to members of the bench and bar 
or to UP alumni. Everyone interested 
enough to attend is welcome. An anony- 
mous member, fearful lest he be dis- 
qualified from attending, urged, "Keep 
up your policy of opening the Institute 
to everyone." 

As the Law Center gains experience 
and expands its facilities, its potential 
for broadening its operations especially 
under its Division of Continuing Legal 
Education, is immensely magnified. As 
,of today, one institute in a particular 
field of law is held every quarter. What- 
ever be the subject-matter, the lectures 
and discussions at these gatherings focus 
primarily on recent legal and adminis- 
trative developments or rulings in these 
areas and controversial issues. Well- 
grounded on the basic concepts and 



Where officials of judicial and ad- 
ministrative agencies take to the plat- 
form, the practitioners, hoping to catch 
the unwary speakers off-guard, spring 
questions relating to their cases pend- 
ing before the governmental body con- 
cerned. As expected, the lecturers re- 
fuse to comment on sub judice matters. 
Others, uncertain of past courses of ac- 
tion taken, seek a reassuring official nod 
to set their minds at rest or to provide 
a basis for hiked fees. Many unabashed- 
ly admit attending for free expert legal 
advice. 

Results 



IT'S 

SCHOOL 

TIME 

AGAIN 

FOR 
JUDGES 

AND 
LAWYERS 



Some derive unexpected results from 
these meetings. "This was the closest I 
got to a beauty queen," confessed one. 
He was referring to his seatmate, a for- 
mer carnival queen, who happens to be 
a lawyer and a landed proprietor be- 
sides. Incidentally, the beauteous lady 
sat through a lecture delivered by a 
former classmate who is now presiding 
judge in one of our courts. 

There was a group of men and wom- 
en who, after having attended one of 
the Institutes, returned to the Law Cen- 
ter and informed the director that they 
were now setting up their own seminar 
on the same subject for triple the fees 
they had themselves paid. 

Those not as business-minded find in 
these sessions an opportunity to culti- 
vate professional ties and develop con- 
tacts. Others grasp the rare chance of 
cornering an otherwise inaccessible gov- 
ernment official or plying an * abogado 
de campanilla" with searching ques- 
tions. 

A top official of a government cor- 
poration in a past administration show- 
ed undue eagerness in propounding 
questions. Once on the floor, he kept up 
a stream of questions addressed to the 
speaker, who was an authority in his 
field. Before taking his seat, trie inter- 
rogator explained that he wanted to be 
sure of his ground before appearing as 
an expert on this same subject at a tv 
show the following week. 

Judging from comments of partici- 
pants, formal evaluations conducted and 
snatches of conversations overheard, this 
program of continuing legal education 
is fiUing a iong-felt need of lawyers, 
judges, and professionals for a refresher- 
type of a course where one can be as- 
sured of quality instruction r.r 1 an op- 
portunity for an inrerchan£w. of opinions 
with colleagues, all a I a norr'r 1 cost. 
To the inevitable c:op of political ap- 
pointees named to the bench who are 
long on influence but short on experi- 
ence, the Law Centers program of con- 
tinuing legal education comes as a veri- 
table "life saver"; here, he can pr jfit 
from the life-long practice of veteran 
lawyers. Undoubtedly, this phase of the 
Law Centers operation is opening up 
new vistas to the members of the legal 
circle and concomitandy establishing 
higher standards for the profession.— # 



MBS® 111] 



fiction 



HHi 



<► THE BOY stood, hands in pockets, 
in the center of Flaza Martires and slow- 
ly and sullenly pivoted on his right heel, 
the rums filimg his field of vision. The 

ihoolhouse, with its front walls blown 
uwh, struck the boy's puzzled and hurt 
g;ize with riotously disarranged desks; 
,l.e bluish blackboards still bore, un- 

ased, the criss-crossed alien alphabets. 
Lhe Municipio's rent roof was a crazy 
i wist of galvanized iron sheets; the thick, 
- emingly impregnable walls were 
:^rred deeply, the iron -bones of its 
J imework stuck out, bent and rusting, 
\ id through the charred trunks of che 

acias circuit scribing the plaza f the 
b f y s focus took in the isolated tower of 
re church where the bronze bell hung 

tomjess and mute; the enemy had 
necked the ascending ilights of stairs 
;«j tlie tower. 

The boy stopped his revolution on his 

?! and stood stock-still; listening it 

imeci to some ancient agony. A shrill 

ce made him turn. It was Ponce. 

'Paco," Ponce said, gasping the words, 
l i have been looking for you every- 

ere." 

?once was Paco's age, both of them 
foi rteen, but he was slightly shorter, his 
head reaching just a little over Paeo's 
ear. He iooked sick and hungry. He was 
son of the town s painter. He limped, 

.ggmg his left foot behind him. Dur- 
ing the evacuation he slid down a slip- 

y slope in the mountains and broke 
his leg. 

4, Where did you go?" 

u l was here all the time," Paco said. 

"What have you been doing?" 

'Nothing." . 

''Nothing?" 

"Weil, I looked around me," Paco ges- 
tured vaguely, "At all these/* 
"These?" 
" The ruins" 

"Oh," Ponce said, puzzled. He squat- 
i <m the ground and drew a circle with 



his forefinger. 

"Let's play marbles/ 1 be said* 

He fished out of his pockets a handful 
of marbles. The glass globes of various 
colors flashed in the sun. He laid them 
on the ground and arranged them m the 
middle of the circle. He stood up, polish- 
ing a marble he had saved from the pile 
on the ground. It was the bluest marble 
of the group. He closed one eye and 
through the unclosed eye he guided tbe 
fall of the marble. The marbles in the 
circle scattered in diverse directions. 

M Only three out," Ponce said dejected- 
ly as he surveyed the scattered marbles. 
After rearranging them, he stood up and 
offered the blue marble to Paco. ' Here, 
it's your turn," 

"What?" Paco said, staring at his 
friend almost without recognition. 

"Its your turn/* Ponce repeated, 

"Oh," Paco sighed, as though in relief 
after a moment of crisis, ^Yes/ 1 he said 
and took the marble* He held it between 
his thumb and pointing finger. The mar- 
ble felt smooth and clean. He took aim, 
let fail, and the colors scattered. Only 
one black marble remained in the circle. 
It lay alone, like a hole in the ground, 
in the center of the circle, 

*'All out but one!" Ponce exclaimed. 
"You always win," he said, both in ad- 
miration and envy of his friend. He 
stooped down and picked up the mar- 
bles, Paco watched Ponce pick the scat- 
tered colors; orange, led green, white, 
blue, and black. Ponce then rearranged 
them in the center of die circle. 

€t You first this time " he said, offering 
the blue marble to Paco. 

"No more," Paco said, turning away, 

"Okay," Ponce said, gathering the 
marbles and pouring them into his pock- 
ets. With his lame foot he obliterated 
the circle in the dust* "What do we ptay 
now?" he asked. "Hide and Seek may- 
be?" 

"No more," Paco said, closing his eyes 
and shaking his head. Ponce waited, hop- 
ing for a change of mind. When Paco 
opened his eyes, he was smiling. 

"Let's go somewhere/* he said, 

"Where?" 

"Just froibw me," he said mysterious- 
ly. Then he broke into a run across the 
plaza. 

"Wait!" Ponce cried out, and pursued 
his In end with a limping gallop. 

At the end of Paco's flight was the 
iron gate to the cemetery in the out- 
skirts of the town. Paco waited for 
Ponce, 

"It's the cemetery!" Ponce said, pant- 
ing. 

"Yes" Paco said, smiling, "Lets go 
in/" 

"Noooi" Ponce wailed. 




"All right," Paco said, TH go in 
alone." He pushed the iron gate and 
stepped inside, 

"Don't," Ponce said. Darkness was 
dropping from the mountains, Paco dis- 
appeared among the wingless angel 
statues and chipped crosses. Some of the 
angels were headless. 

Ponce waited in the gathering dark- 
ness for his friend to return from the 
dominion of the dead. It seemed an 
eternity before he came back, his hands 
behind his back, a smile on his face. 

"You stayed in there too long," wailed 
Ponce, 

"I have something for you," Paco said, 
"What is it?" 

"Oh, you don't want it/* 
"Let me see it," Ponce insisted, 
"Ail right," Paco said, Here it is, rt 
Into the eager, waiting hands of Ponce 
suddenly materialized a skull. Ponce 
stared at the hairless, eyeless, fleshless 
thing in his hands, let out a scream, 
dropped the skull, and fled for home. 
Paco laughed like the devil. 

Ponce's shocked and ghastly white 
lace impaled in his mind, Paco walked 
home, taking a long route. Darkness was 
an ally, keeping secret the devilish smile 
on his face. He walked home slowly. 
The schoolhouse was totally silent. Can- 
dles burned dimly inside the church. Old 
women were chanting ancient prayers. 
The town was about to retire: windows 
were closing and mothers were shout- 
ing for their children to come home. 

His father was waiting for him at 
the doorway. 

"Paco," he said, and tbe boy knew his 
father was furious at him. What was it? 
As he came closer, he saw the whip 
sticking out from behind his fathers 
back, 

"Good evening," the boy said^ His 
father withdrew into the sala. 

"Lie down/ 1 his father commanded. 
What was it? He dropped to the floor 
obediently. Ponce, he thought. 

"Ponce," he said drily. 

"Yes/* his father said. The whip 
slashed across his buttocks. He winced 



Among the ruins where ' 
he walked, skull and 
samurai haunted him 

by JOSE I FLORES, Jr. 

and bit into his tips. But he was smil- 
ing and kept diirilang of Ponce's shocked 
face. After the punishment his father 
told him to eat his supper. 

"Ponce was hysterica!/' his father said 
as he ate, "If you do it again III cut 
your fingers his father warned, Paco 
nodded his head. He saw the old im- 
passive face, the scar cutting across tbe 
nose, Paco shifted his gaze to die watt 
and stared at the samurai sword his 
father had hung there, evidence of an 
enemy officer shot down like a dog along 
the railroad tracks. 

His mother came into the room, bear- 
ing fruits, She was a thin, shriveled 
woman, contrasting sharply with his 
father s bulky figure. She siientiy offered 
him the fruits and withdrew quickly back 
to the kitchen. 

When he was alone in his room she 
came in and took his hand. She was 
trembling. She pressed his hand on her 
mouth. He wanted to pull nis nana away 
but decided to let her kiss it when he 
felt her tears warmly dropping on it. 

"You do not even cry anymore," she 
said sadly before she finally stood up 
and left him alone. He blew the light 
out in the room and Jay m the dark, 
smiling at Ponce's shocked and terrified 
face. 

Skull and samurai haunted him in ihn 
next days that followed. He kept away 
from Ponce, eluding Ponces gestures to 
renew friendship. Paco walked among 
the ruins, aimlessly wandering among 
the twisted steel, the fallen beams, the 
gouged walls, the crevices and cleavages 
of the bombed-out buildings of the muni- 
cipio, the schoolhouse, and the church. 

Ponce lingered in the background, 
watching from a distance, hoping for 
that wave of the hand that would mean 



24 



graphic 





0 THE BOY stood, hands in pockets,* 
in the center of Plaza Martires and slow- 
ly and sullenly pivoted on his right heel, 
the rums filling his field of vision. The 
schoolhouse, with its front walls blown 
down, struck the boy's puzzled and hurt 
gaze with riotously disarranged desks; 
the bluish blackboards still bore, un- 
erased, the criss-crossed alien alphabets. 
The Municipio's rent roof was a crazy 
twist of galvanized iron sheets; the thick, 
seemingly impregnable walls were 
scarred deeply, the iron-bones of its 
framework stuck out, bent and rusting. 
And through the charred trunks of the 
acacias circumscribing the plaza, the 
boy's focus took in the isolated tower of 
the church where the bronze bell hung 
motionless and mute; the enemy had 
wrecked the ascending flights of stairs 
to the tower. 

The boy stopped his revolution on his 
heel and stood stock-still, listening it 
seemed to some ancient agony. A shrill 
voice made him turn. It was Ponce. 

"Paco," Ponce suid, gasping the words. 
*T have been looking for you every- 
where." 

Ponce was Paco's age, both of them 
fourteen, but he was slightly shorter, his 
head reaching just a little over Paco's 
ear. He iooked sick and hungry. He was 
the son of the town's painter. He limped, 
dragging his left foot behind him. Dur- 
ing the evacuation he slid down a slip- 
pery slope in the mountains and broke 
his leg. 

"Where did you go?" 

"I was here all the time/' Paco said. 

"What have you been doing?" 

"Nothing." 

"Nothing?" 

"Well, I looked around me," Paco ges- 
tured vaguely. "At all these." 
"These?" 
"The rums." 

"Oh," Ponce said, puzzled. He squat- 
ted on the giound and drew a circle with 



his forefinger. 

"Let's play marbles," he said. 

He fished out of his pockets a handful 
of marbles. The glass globes of various 
colors flashed in the sun. He laid them 
on the ground and arranged them in the 
middle of the circle. He stood up, polish- 
ing a marble he had saved from the pile 
on the ground. It was the bluest marble 
of the group. He closed one eye and 
through the unclosed eye he guided the 
fall of the marble. The marbles in the 
circle scattered in diverse directions. 

"Only three out," Ponce said dejected- 
ly as he surveyed the scattered marbles. 
After rearranging them, he stood up and 
offered the blue marble to Paco. "Here, 
it's your turn." 

"What?" Paco said, staring at his 
friend almost without recognition. 

"It's your turn," Ponce repeated. 

"Oh," Paco sighed, as though in relief 
after a moment of crisis. "Yes," he said 
and took the marble. He held it between 
his thumb and pointing finger. The mar- 
ble felt smooth and clean. He took aim, 
let fall, and the colors scattered. Only 
one black marble remained in the circle. 
It lay alone, like a hole in the ground, 
in the center of the circle. 

"All out but one!" Ponce exclaimed. 
"You always win," he said, both in ad- 
miration and envy of his friend. Pie 
stooped down and picked up the mar- 
bles. Paco watched Ponce pick the scat- 
tered colors: orange, red gieen, white, 
blue, and black. Ponce then rearranged 
them in the center of the circle. 

"You first this time," he said, offering 
the blue marble to Paco. 

"No more," Paco said, turning away. 

"Okay," Ponce said, gathering the 
marbles and pouring them into his pock- 
ets. With his lame foot he obliterated 
the circle in the dust. "What do we play 
now?" he asked. "Hide and Seek may- 
be?" 

"No more," Paco said, closing his eyes 
and shaking his head. Ponce waited, hop- 
ing for a change of mind. When Paco 
opened his eyes, he was smiling. 

"Let's go somewhere," he said. 

"Where?" 

"fust follow me," he said mysterious- 
ly. Then he broke into a run across the 
plaza. 

"Wait!" Ponce cried out, and pursued 
his friend with a limping gallop. 

At die end of Paco's flight was the 
iron gate to the ccmetciy in the out- 
skirls of the town. Paco waited for 
Ponce. 

"It's the cemetery!" Ponce said, pant- 
ing. 

"Yes," Paco said, smiling. "Let s go 




69 



"All right," Paco said, "111 go in 
alone." He pushed the iron gate and 
stepped inside. 

"Don't," Ponce said. Darkness was 
dropping from the mountains. Paco dis- 
appeared among the wingless angel 
statues and chipped crosses. Some of the 
angels were headless. 

Ponce waited in the gathering dark- 
ness for his friend to return "from the 
dominion of the dead. It seemed an 
eternity before he came back, his hands 
behind his back, a smile on his face. 

"You stayed in there too long," wailed 
Ponce. 

"I have something for you," Paco said. 
"What is it?" 

"Oh, you don't want it." 

"Let me see it," Ponce insisted. 

"All right," Paco said. "Here it is.* 
Into the eager, waiting hands of Ponce 
suddenly materialized a skull. Ponce 
stared at the hairless, eyeless, fleshless 
thing in his hands, let out a scream, 
dropped the skull, and fled for home. 
Paco laughed like the devil. 

Ponce's shocked and ghastly white 
face impaled in his mind, Paco walked 
home, taking a long route. Darkness was 
an ally, keeping secret the devilish smile 
on his face. He walked home slowly. 
The schoolhouse was totally silent. Can- 
dles burned dimly inside the church. Old 
women were chanting ancient prayers. 
The town was about to retire: windows 
were closing and mothers were shout- 
ing for their children to come home. 

His father was waiting for hini at 
the doorway. 

"Paco," he said, and the boy knew his 
father was furious at him. What was it? 
As he came closer, he saw the whip 
sticking out from behind his father's 
back. 

"Good evening," the boy said. His 
father withdrew into the sala. 

"Lie down," his father commanded. 
What was it? He dropped to the floor 
obediently. Ponce, he thought. 

Tonce," he said drily. 

'Tes," his father said. The whip 
slashed across his buttocks. He winced 



Among the ruins where 
he walked, skull and 
samurai haunted him 

by JOSE T. JFLORES, Jr. 

- ^ii*r^V . ;-.jr - 

and bit into his h{R. But he was smil- 
ing and kept thinking of Ponce's shocked 
face. After the punishment his father 

told him to eat his supper. ^feBtefti 

"Ponce was, hysterical," his father sai 
as he ate. "If you do it again 111 o 
your fingers,"* his father warned. Paco 
nodded his head. He saw the old in 
passive face, the scar cutting across tfe_ 
nose. Paco shifted his gaze to the wall 
and stared at the samurai sword his 
father had hung there, evidence of an 
enemy officer shot down like a dog along 
the railroad tracks. 

His mother came into the room, bear- 
ing fruits. She was a tliin, shriveled 
woman, contrasting sharply with hi* 
father s bulky figure. She silently offered 
him the fruits and withdrew quickly back 
to the kitchen. 

When he was alone in his room she 
came in and took his hand. She was 
trembling. She pressed his hand on her 
mouth. He wanted to pull nis nana away 
but decided to let her kiss it when he 
felt her tears warmly dropping on it. 

"You do not even cry anymore," she 
said sadly before she finally stood up 
and left him alone. He blew the light 
out in the room and lay in the dark 
smiling at Ponce's shocked and terrified 
face. 

Skull and samurai haunted him in the 
next days that followed. He kept away 
from Ponce, eluding Ponce s gestures to 
renew friendship. Paco walked among 
the ruins, aimlessly wandering among 
the twisted steel, the fallen beams, the 
gouged wails, the crevices and cleavages 
of the bombed-out buildings of the munt- 
cixno, the schoolhouse, and the churcn. 

Ponce lingered in the background, 
watching from a distance, hopmg tor 
that wave of the band that would mean 



in. 



~NoooP Ponce wailed. 



graphic 



judges and fiscals ;re appointed by the 
President, probably the most highly polit- 
ical man in any democracy - he could 
hardly attain to the Presidency if he 
were not. Right off, therefore, there is 
a presumption that political considera- 
tions can play a part, in his choices for 
the judiciary. I do not say that political 
considerations necessarily are involved 
but they can be, and even if this were 
to happen on very rare occasions — 
which is probably the case — those rare 
occasions just might deprive the judi- 
ciary of a nighlv deserving man or wom- 
an or, conversely, afflict it with a highly 
undeserving one. 

Furthermore, any President, faced 
with his manifold duties, of which se- 
lecting the personnel of the Judiciary is 
only one, is physically incapable of giv- 
ing the matter the attention it deserves. 
He naturally and inevitably must rely 
in most cases on his Secretary of Justice. 
Although purely political appointees to 
the post of Secretary of Justice are al- 
most unknown in this country — in that 
respect we have perhaps been more 
fortunate than other countries — we have 
at present no guarantee that such a tra- 
dition will be continued. If politics 
should continue to degenerate as most 
people expect, there is no reason to sup- 
pose that at some future date the tra- 
dition will not be disregarded — an un- 
scrupulous politician is a poor respecter 
of tradition, or of anything else for that 
matter, except the harsh realities of polit- 
ical opportunism. 

In the event of a purely political 
Secretary of Justice being appointed, the 
consequences to the administration of 
justice in this country are easy to imag- 
ine, seeing the sort of people who 
would obtain appointments and rise in 
the judiciary. But even without such a 
calamitous eventuality, it is undeniable 
that the fortunes of judges and fiscals 
have at times depended on the political 
color Malacanang saw or imagined in 
them. 

Political Favor 

That the members of the judiciary 
should in any sense be dependent upon 
political favor for their advancement is 
outrageous. It is, unfortunately, a fact, 
not always, perhaps not often, but it is 
a fact. For a judge to be reassigned to 
a more convenient location, or promoted 
to a higher court, for an assistant fiscal 
to be promoted to fiscal or a fiscal to 
be made a judge, or for that matter for 
a lawyer to enter the Judiciary at all 
may require currying the favor of some- 
one who controls votes, be he a profes- 
sional politician or otherwise influential 
with particular groups. 

The necessity of approval of an ap- 
pointment by the Commission on Ap- 
pointments is a corrective to the afore- 
mentioned danger. It can equally in- 
crease the danger, since appointments 
in the judiciary, like all other appoint- 
ments subject to confirmation by that 
body, can be turned into a political foot- 
ball, especially when the President is 
at odds with congress. The process 
would have to be more subtle — it would 
be no less real. 

I have by no means exhausted the 
disadvantages of our present system 
(e. g., I have not discussed prolonged 
vacancies in courts), I have merely 
sought to indicate them — some of them. 
There is, I believe, a way in which these 
disadvantages and others left unmen- 
tioned could be eliminated or at least 
drastically reduced. It would be to bring 
the present system more in line with 
the theory of the judiciary as a separate 
and equal branch of the government. 
Here I really and / To page 41 



9 * 

The trek back to their Alma Mater is a combined intellectual- sentimental journey 



by FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 



• STUDENTS OF the UP College of 
Law one day turned their heads for a 
second glance at a straggly group of 
people going up the staircase of Mal- 
colm Hall. Among them one could pick 
out the dignified figure of a well-known 
judge and trailing him, a millionaire 
businessman whose name is a by-word 
in industrial circles and stock markets. 
Was there a convocation somewhere on 
the campus or were they calling on Dean 
Vicente Abad Santos? Accustomed to 
the sight of dignitaries and government 
functionaries visiting their school, the 
students cut short their speculations to 
rush to their classes. 

Had they been persistent enough to 
follow the distinguished guests, they 
would have been surprised to discover 
that these men were, like them, enrolled 
in school — with one difference. This 
group of judges, lawyers, businessmen, 
and accountants, were well-established 
in their professions. Adjusting their 
crowded calendars, they had looked for- 
ward to this opportunity of "clearing 
the mental cobwebs" that had accumu- 
lated through the years and of updating 
themselves on recent developments in 
their respective fields at the UP Law 
Center. 

Prime Beneficiaries 

Judges and practising lawyers now 
consider themselves singularly fortunate 
in being the prime beneficiaries of this 
new institution which has been set up 
on the UP campus under the director- 
ship of Prof. Crisolito Pascual. Created 
by Congress in June 15, 1964 within the 
framework of the UP College of Law, 
the Law Center seeks to expand the 
role of the College from being merely 
a training ground for future lawyers to 
a dynamic agency which will contribute 
directly to the improvement of the ad- 
ministration of justice. 

Prior to the formal organization of the 
Law Center, the College of Law, 
through its Continuing Legal Education 
and Research Unit, conducted a three- 
day institute on the Revised Rules of 
Court, the main lecturer being the chair- 
man of the committee which undertook 
the revision of these procedural rules. 
So well-received was it by members of 
the bench and the bar that the Center, 
once officially established, drew up a 
schedule of institutes in different fields 
of law in response to the clamor for 
similar programs. 

Made the subject of annual offerings 
were the twin areas of labor-manage- 
ment relations law and tax law in view 
of their rapid development and increas- 
ing importance. Thus far, two annual 
institutes have been held in each of 
these fields. Recently, approximately 
200 persons attended the pioneer Insti- 
tute on Corporate Practice and Secur- 
ities. Spurred by the enthusiastic re- 
sponse, the UP Law Center has com- 
mitted itself to offering this course on 
a continuing basis. Already in the blue- 
print stage is an Institute on Fair La- 
bor Standards and Welfare Legislation. 

Most of these programs are held on 
a straight three-day basis to afford those 
in the provinces an opportunity to at- 
tend. 

Precisely to accommodate these out- 
of-towners, the Law Center has stuck 
to its practice of scheduling these pro- 
grams continuously for a certain num- 



ber of days instead of staggering them 
to suit the convenience of the Manila 
practitioners. Law alumni, in particular, 
take pains to make the long trek back 
to their Alma Mater on a combined in- 
tellectual-sentimental journey. 

Members of the bench, humble enough 
to admit they can still learn a thing or 
two from others, sit side by side with 
practitioners who plead in their "salas." 
One can sympathize with a confused 
participant who kept on addressing the 
chair as 'Tour Honor/' At judicial con- 
ferences, however, such as the one on 
The Application and Graduation of Pe- 
nalties, everyone except the moderator 
was either a judge or a fiscal. Not in- 
frequently, a lecturer, regarded as one of 
the legal luminaries in his field, is em- 
barrassed to spot a judge in the audi- 
ence. One ranking government official, 
finding himself in such a situation, sin- 
gled out the judicial officer, saying, "You 
should be on this platform instead of 
me. 

Desirous of benefiting as great a 
number as possible, the UP Law Cen- 
ter has not confined its participants 
solely to members of the bench and bar 
or to UP alumni. Everyone interested 
enough to attend is welcome. An anony- 
mous member, fearful lest he be dis- 
qualified from attending, urged, "Keep 
up your policy of opening the Institute 
to everyone." 

As the Law Center gains experience 
and expands its facilities, its potential 
for broadening its operations especially 
under its Division of Continuing Legal 
Education, is immensely magnified. As 
% of today, one institute in a particular 
field of law is held every quarter. What- 
ever be the subject-matter, the lectures 
and discussions at these gatherings focus 
primarily on recent legal and adminis- 
trative developments or rulings in these 
areas and controversial issues. Well- 
grounded on the basic concepts and 



principles of their specialized fields oi 
law, those who sign up for a course 
look forward to a discussion in depth 
an analysis of problematical areas anc 
authoritative answers to their practical 
questions. In addition, the publication of 
the proceedings assures the participants 
of the preservation of all matters taken 
up including their individual contribu 
tions to the discussions. 

Where officials of judicial and ad- 
ministrative agencies take to the plat- 
form, the practitioners, hoping to catch 
the unwary speakers off-guard, spring 
questions relating to their cases pend- 
ing before the governmental body con- 
cerned. As expected, the lecturers re- 
fuse to comment on sub judice matters. 
Others, uncertain of past courses of ac- 
tion taken, seek a reassuring official nod 
to set their minds at rest or to provide 
a basis for hiked fees. Many unabashed- 
ly admit attending for free expert legal 
advice. 

Results 



IT'S 

SCHOOL 

TIME 

AGAIN 
FOR 

JUDGES 
AND 

LAWYERS 



Some derive unexpected results from 
these meetings. "This was the closest I 
got to a beauty queen," confessed one. 
He was referring to his seatmate, a for- 
mer carnival queen, who happens to be 
a lawyer and a landed proprietor be- 
sides. Incidentally, the beauteous lady 
sat through a lecture delivered by a 
former classmate who is now presiding 
judge in one of our courts. 

There was a group of men and wom- 
en who, after having attended one of 
the Institutes, returned to the Law Cen- 
ter and informed the director that they 
were now setting up their own seminar 
on the same subject for triple the fees 
they had themselves paid. 

Those not as business-minded find in 
these sessions an opportunity to culti- 
vate professional ties and develop con- 
tacts. Others grasp the rare chance of 
cornering an otherwise inaccessible gov- 
ernment official or plying an "abogado 
de campanile" with searching ques- 
tions. 

A top official of a government cor- 
poration in a past administration show- 
ed undue eagerness in propounding 
questions. Once on the floor, he kept up 
a stream of questions addressed to the 
speaker, who was an authority in his 
field. Before taking his seat, the inter- 
rogator explained that he wanted to be 
sure of his ground before appearing as 
an expert on this same subject at a tv 
show the following week. 

Judging from comments of partici- 
pants, formal evaluations conducted and 
snatches of conversations overheard, this 
program of continuing legal education 
is filhng a long-felt need of lawyers, 
judges, and professionals for a refresher- 
type of a course where one can be as- 
sured of quality instruction and an op- 
portunity for an interchange of opinions 
with colleagues, all at a nominal cost. 
To the inevitable crop of political ap- 

!)ointees named to the bench who are 
ong on influence but short on experi- 
ence, the Law Centers program of con- 
tinuing legal education comes as a veri- 
table "life saver"; here, he can profit 
from the life-long practice of veteran 
lawyers. Undoubtedly, this phase of the 
Law Centers operation is opening up 
new vistas to the members of the legal 
circle and concomitantly establish! 
higher standards for the professio 



FR£ED( 



SSTfREEDOM'S... 

jj^jni page 23 / truly must apologize 
the members of the judiciary and 
rig legal profession for treading on un- 
jgjo^n territory - I do not apologize to 
those politicians and to any others who 
have exerted a baneful influence on our 
judiciary. 

First of all, it would seem logical 
that the Department of Justice, a depart- 
ment under the Chief Executive and 
^nerefore under a branch of the govern- 
ment separate from the judiciary, should 
be restricted to the functions of the legal 



extreme cases should the Court have to 
sit in banc. Or, the cases appealable to 
the Supreme Court should be drastically 
reduced. As this could result in an in- 
crease of work for the Court of Ap- 
peals and certain special courts, the 
creation of additional courts might be 
necessary, as well as further limitation 

of cases appealable to courts below the 

Supreme Court. 

More Judges, Fiscals 

Since in rather important cases people 
are reluctant to leave their fate in the 
hands of one man — the judge — and 



( epartment of any corporation. It should thus far the jury system is by and large 

dvise the government on points of law considered inadvisable in this country, 

jk1 be the government's lawyers, pos- the solution might be to have the in- 

<ybty also provide the indigent with free creased number of unappealable cases defined circumstances. Congress, that is, 



judges sitting in banc. 

This would in turn require an in- 
crease in the number of judges. The 
general expansion of the whole court 
system would unavoidably involve an in- 
crease in the number of fiscals. This 
would of course help to implement the 
right of every man to a fair and speedy 
trial. It would also draw, due to the 
greater number of posts available, more 
law graduates from politics to the 
courts, not a bad prospect by any means. 

In all this, what would remain for 
the executive and the legislative? To 
the executive, legal action against mem- 
bers of the judiciary if the judiciary 
failed to take the initiative itself, but 
only in well-defined cases and in well- 



leeal aid. It should not sit in judgment 
on the acts of the members of the judi- 
ciary nor scrutinize them, except perhaps 
when the government finds it necessary 
$ take criminal action against some 
member or other. 

The judiciary itself should be freed 
from its galling practical subordination 
to both the executive and the legislative 
branches of government. The recruit- 
ment and advancement of those who 
shall serve in the courts of law should 
be placed squarely and solely in the 
hands of the Supreme Court or some 
body under its control. 

Who, better than those who have 
spent a lifetime in the service of the law, 
can determine who is and who is not 
qualified to belong to the judiciary or 
be promoted in it? The Supreme Court 
itself should be filled according to a 
clear-cut system based on experience, 
ability, and merit. 

Internal Autonomy 

Congress could pass a law laying 
down certain qualifications for members 
of the judiciary and their promotion, but 
such a law should be sufficiently flexi- 
ble not to encumber the independent 
operations of the judiciary as a body se- 
lecting its own personnel. Such a law 
should be made a part of the Consti- 
tution, so that it may not be subject to 
the whims and fancies of successive 
Congresses. 

And such a law should maintain in- 
tact the right of the judiciary to a degree 
d( internal autonomy similar to the rights 
of the two Houses of Congress to estab- 
ish their own internal rules and proce- 
dures. The Bar Association possibly 
;;hould enjoy an official advisory capac- 
ty with regard to the judiciary and the 
Supreme Court, the highest embodiment 
of judicial power, but such an advisory 
power should be very carefully studied 
and of course could in nowise include 
interference in the operation of the 
courts as courts. 

The creation of a more truly indepen- 
dent judiciary, independent not only as 
; o its legal decisions but also as to the 
appointment, promotion, and discipline 
of its members, would of course bring 
x host of problems. 

For one thing, the judiciary, as dis- 
tinct from the department of justice, 
would have to be expanded tremen- 
dously, since many of the administrative 
functions of the Department would pass 
to it, with the need for the correspond- 
jig personnel. 

The task of selecting and promoting 
the members of the judiciary would over- 
burden the Supreme Court even more 
than at present. To cope with this dif- 
ficulty, either of two steps, possibly both, 
would be necessary. The number of 
Supreme Court justices would have to 
he ixicTeased so that it could sit in more 
than two divisions and only in certain 



— unappealable that is to the Supreme 
Court of Appeals — heard by several 



the Commission on Appointments, 
should retain the power to reject ap- 



pointments and promotion in the 
judiciary, but only for the lack of the 
qualifications specified by the law 
previously suggested. 

Such a revision in the position and 
functions of the judiciary in our govern- 
mental system would, I believe, bring 
our government more in line with the 
theory of separate and equal branches 
of government. 

It would give greater and truer mean- 
ing to the theory of checks and balances. 

It would unfortunately entail a con- 
siderable increase in expenses for the 
judiciary (with a corresponding decrease, 
however, in the budget of the depart- 
ment of justice). An increase in expend- 
iture would be admittedly unpopular 
at a time of national poverty, but is 
such an increase too high a price for 
the safeguarding of justice?— # 



TunA DO 



41 




i MALANG'S 
MENAGERIE 




— ^graphic 




# PRESIDENT Marcos has ex- 
tended the speech ban until the ad- 
journment of the current session 
of Congress on May 19. — News 
item 

Gentle hint to our solons. 

* # * 

Even a very much surprised so- 
lon cannot say, "It made me speech- 
less/' 

* * * 

What, no half-day? 

Unfair to government employes, 

who do only half-work. 

* * * 

Nawasa must make a storm in 
order to meet immediately its nor- 
mal total delivery of 170 million 
gallons of water a day in the met- 
ropolitan area. — News item 

If the Nawasa cannot make a 

storm, any brainstorm will do, 

m • ■* * 

To the government employes who 
are glum about the President's 
no-half-day edict, here's a piece of 
advice : 

Fry now t play later. 




Nawasa Board Chairman More- 
no Saturday night accused Direc- 
tor Jose Llanes of blocking emer- 
gency measures of the agency in- 
tended to solve the water crisis, 
* — News item 

If the quarrel escalates to a duel, 
we suggest water pistols at six 
paces. Then the two would not be 
able to harm each other as their 
water pistols would not have any 
ammunition. 

* * * 

President Marcos has appointed 
a woman as acting administrator 
of the National Cottage Industries 
Development Authority. 

If you want to know why a wom- 
an must head a cottage industries 
entity, the answer is simple: Our 
principal cottage industry involves 
some kind of labor which only 

women can perform. 

* * * 

FAKE DRIVERS' LICENSES 
INCREASING — Headline 

Licenses or drivers? 

* * # 

The National Science Develop- 
ment Board has supported the es- 
tablishment of an incinerator to 
dispose of Manila's garbage, 

Manila's garbage is really a 
burning question. 



Teacher : Spell sea:. 
Newspaper-reading pupil : C-I-S. 

* * # 

When he stepped off the plane, 
ex-President Macapagal asked 
what happened to the $30 million 
borrowed by the Nawasa from the 
World Bank, 

What's sad about it is that the 
money did not even go down the 
drain, 

* * s 
Congressman Caram is accused 

of witch-hunting in colleges and 
universities. 

Which is witch? 

* * * 

Columnist's comment on the 
sloppy plumbing work at the Lu- 
neta toilets: "In the place, every 
pipe leaks/' 

Everybody too, 

* * * 

PEKING PAPERS CENSORED 
— Headline 

No fair peeking, 

* $ a 

House hawks passed the Viet- 
nam Bill 46 to 6, 

That confirms our suspicion that 
hawk and the eagle are of the same 
feather, 

* * * 

Two members of a road-build- 
ing team and a six-year-old boy 
were ambushed in a forested area 
in Nueva Ecija and then behead- 
ed. 

The only advice we can offer in 
tight situations like this ambush 

is not to lose your head, 

* * * 

Barbara Ann, married for 16 
years to movie actor Steve Brodie, 
was awarded a divorce after she 
told the superior court that her 
husband would go out to mail a 
letter and not return for six or 
seven hours. 

If Barbara wants to be posted 
on where her hubby was doing 
during those seven hours, we of- 
fer this educated guess; he was 

playing post office, 

* * • 

The Forest Products Research 
Institute (UP) in Laguna is offer- 
ing a course on wood identifica- 
tion, 

That would be useful in distin- 
guishing political timber from 

wooden politicians, 

* * * 

Russia's Luna 10, which she sent 
orbiting around the moon, is the 
first artificial satellite of the 
moon, 

Russia can really make satellites 

for satellites. 

* * * 

If you are a young man, or even 
not so young, traveling is so 
broadening, 

Pretty broads abroad. 



During tourist season, 
looks greener abroad, 
Grass widows too, — # 



grass 



H I NOMOTO 

I 

© 



MAGING MAKABAGO, , , 

Kanttin an* maslxihawin* pagtataka 
at maaasanan* *nl sa pamamagitan he* 
"HINOMOTC1" Tractors at Power 
Tillers. Isang tiaiiba at makabag*>ng 
uri ma* maldnaryang pangaakang hinti- 
zh npang tugunin ang mjra ealiranin 
at d*ing ng mga Filipinong magsaaaka, 

Sumutat o maklpagkita sa am in 
upaxiff kayo ay am in* ma'paglingknran. 



NA N GANG AI LANG AN NG 
TAGAPAMAHACI SA LALAWICAN 



Exclusive distributors 



O 

^FEISCB 

MACHINERY DIVISION 




Miniature 4 -Wheel 
Tractor MB Diesel 
Model 9-11 H.P, 



(FAB EAST INDUSTRIAL SUPPLY & TO.. INC.) 
Su-titi Del Monte Ave,, Q.C. TeL No. 
P. Q. Box 251, MANILA 



On n't Do Ualf A Mini 
bum uc huh nitiuii: 

Lot Me SHOW Haw I Can Moke You o REAL HE MAN 
from Head fa Too— in Just 15 Minutes a Day S 



Take a good honest look at yourself! Are 
you proud of your body or are you satisfied 
to go through life being just "half the man" 
you could be? 

NO MATTEft how ashamed of your present 
physical condition yon may be — how old or 
young yon are — you have the DORMANT 
muscle power in your God-given body to he a 
real HE-MAN, Believe me, I know because I 
was once a 97-pound HALF-ALIVE Weak- 
ling, People laughed at my build P # VI 
was ashamed to strip for sports . . . shy 
of girls . . afraid of competition. 

Then I discovered the secret that changed 
me into "The World's Most Perfectly De- 
veloped Man." The secret I have shared 
with thousands of fellows to turn them 
into marvelous physical specimens — 
REAL HE-MEN from head to toe! 

My Secret Builds Muscles FASTI 

My Secret is "Dynamic Tension/' It's 
the NATURAL easy method you can 
practice right in the privacy of your own 
room — JUST IB MINUTES EACH 
DAY — while your scrawny chest and 
shoulder muscles swell so big they almost 
split your coat seams, , , you get sledge 
hammer fists, a battering ram punch, . . 
ridges of solid stomach muscle, . . mighty 
legs that never tire! 

L C. S, (Atlas Div,), D»pt.<M4.412 FCI Bldg„ 
4\6 n a r: mar mas St., Sta. Cruz. Manila. " 
P, O. Box 447. Tel. 3-24-74 



Holder of the title 
"The world"* 
Most Perfectly De- 
veloped Man." 



F|*pp I give every pupil These Five Outline 
Course* that Tell You ihe Secret of 
I IlLL Jiu Jrttu, Karare, Boxing,, Wrestling, 
Bolnri<in9, and Performing Feafi of Strength 




M aster Thnte 
20 Wrtitllhl 

Hclds Gd to rated 
by the beat 
wrestlers In the 
country 



BttQme a Sel* 
enllfie Boxer 

with these sim- 
ple rules end 
euentUis that 
mafcfl you a 
dangerous an- 
taeoolst 






Learn the Art 
or Self- Defense; 

15 Masterful Jlu 
JlUu* Karate 
holds enable 
you to overcome 
anv at ticker 



Astonish Yaur 
Frlendt With 
Ftiti ft f 
Strcnotri like 
bending i 6* 
foot - long steel 
bar 



How To Oft 
Handstand! 

eren on one 
hand for a lone 
time, for build- 
ing muscles and 
for perfuming 
on the beach or 
Dt any gathering 




VALUABLE TWPNY 
GIVEN AWAY 

Be the envy of 
friends! Win 
this strikingly 
handsome "At- 
laa Champions" 
trophs, over 
tfc ft high ! ah 
pupils eligible 



No theory.' No gadgets or contraptions 
When you develop your strength through 
"Dynamic Tension" you can Laugh at 
artificial muscle makers. You aimply 
uao the SLEEPING muscle-power in your 
own body almost unconsciously every 
minute of the day -r walking bending 
over, even while sitting! — watch it in- 
crease, and multiply until you're covered 
. with a brand-new suit of beautiful SO- 
LID MUSCLE. You're a REAL HE- 
MAN! 



1% 



%\ 



FREE 32-PAGE ILLUSTRATED BOOK 

Send now for my famous book showing how "Dynamic- Tension" can 
make you a new man* 32 pages packed with actual photographs, val- 
uable advice, answers to vital questions. A real prize for any fellow 
wishing a 'better build* Rush coupon below with P.20 worth of stamps. 

L C. 3, (Atlas Div,), DeptX-U, P. O. Box 447, Manila 

412 FCI Bid*., 410 Datmarinss, Sta. Cmr, Manila; Tel. 3-24-74 

Send me e copy of Mr, Atlas' fa'moas book on Dynamic-Tension and other information. 
No obligation on my part, f enclose F.20 worth of atamps. 

Name * ^ I - «. Ate 

Addrca s . , .» .»«,..v M .#«.^ — ^.mhi,^ - 



GRAPHIC 

APRIL 20, 1966 



THE 





• THE PAST elections which were 
conducted disgracefully found the youth 
relatively inactive. Compared to the ex- 
tremely vocal and pugnacious activities 
of elderly groups so energetically en- 
gaged in namecailing, mudslinging, and 
other more strictly political activities, 
the youth were practically silent 

With the exception of the ill-starred 
PPP effort, in which some young people 
seem to have worked with something 
approaching fanaticism, one had the im- 
pression that the youth were not particu- 
larly interested. The youth were not 
politically involved, whether in their 
majority or in the likeliest segment, the 
articulate university population. It is 
hard to avoid the suspicion that dislike 
for the cheap politicking outweighed 
whatever enthusiasm the youth might 
have developed for particular candidates 
and dampened the fires of commitment 
Not. of course, that the youth did not 
vote. 

The present composition of our popu- 
lation, with its heavy preponderance of 
young people, would have made a Dig 
total vote impossible if the young voters 
had stayed home. But between trudging 
to the polls and waxing enthusiastic, 
there is a world of difference; between 
being propelled to the voting booth by 
the compulsion of conscience and going 
out to the highways and byways to pro- 
claim one's political faith there yawns 
a gulf. The deliberate attempt to involve 
our young people, failed miserably, Any 
politician who hoped to use the youth 
as a mere tool of victory was disap- 
pointed. Those of us who, from higher 
motives, hoped to see the youth active 
— one way or the other, but active — 
were equally disappointed. 

Strangely enough, the Vietnam Aid 
Bill has been a blessing in disguise for 
the latter group. It proved that young 
people have interests higher than James 
Bond movies and Beatle styles. Those of 
us anxious to hear the voice of youth, 
have now heard it loud and clear. The 
voice is not a unanimous one where 
views on the Aid itself are concerned* 
But the voice is there, it has been raised, 
and when a voice is raised, whatever It 
may say, one tiling is clear — that voioe 
means to be heard and it means to be 
heard because it is convinced of its right 
to be heard. At last! ... * 

Youth's Lack Of Influence 

Any human society inevitably has de- 
fects as well as redeeming graces, and 
our society is no exception. But ours not 
only has aefects, it is positively plagued 
with them. Among the most serious, I 
count the lack of influence of the youth 
on public affairs. It is doubtless con- 
venient for some people, but it is un- 
just, it is impolitic, and it is stupid. That 
it is not illegal is no defense, for a thing 
may be legal and yet immoral 

10 



"La bella esperanza de la Patua rma,*' 
"the fair hope of my native land." Hi 
zal*s description ol the youth has been 
used so often that it has been turned 
into a cliche. It is the fate of great men 
to fashion lapidary phrases which are 
then seized upon for tawdry oratory un- 
til the words lose their power to provoke 
thought and inspire action. "The fair 
hope of my native land," is of the num- 
ber of such phrases. 

If we tiiink of RizaTs words at all 
^and no one bothers to read the whole 
poem for its true meaning) , what do we 
have in the back of our mind? If I do 
not misjudge the average mentality of 
people my age (40) and over - and I 
believe 1 do not — Rizal's words conjure 
a vision ot the future only. After all, a 
hope is for something yet to come. What ., 
one already has, one. does not hope for. 
The idea is that the youth are the hope 
of the country because in the future, 
when iheij shall have lost their youth 
and attained our mature years, they shall 
assume the burdens which we shall by 
then be unwilling or rather unable to 
carry. 

They are to be held in reserve, to as- 
sume an entirely subordinate role until 
the weight of years and the course of 
nature has incapacitated us to play the 
exclusive role that we now play, Then 
they are to step into our shoes, having 
been shaped by our wisdom [it it is 
that), formed to our taste, including our 
prejudices, our shortcomings and the 
mentality ot a setting generation, 

This process has been followed time 
and again in history, and followed suc- 
cessfully. The same protests we voice 
against the youth, who are not as people 
used to be, were raised. 

There is record of -an Egyptian com- 
plaint thousands of years old, that the 
youth were not as they tised to be. Nev 
ertheless the process was followed suc- 
cessfully. The result? The petrified civ^ 
ilization of Egypt. The admiration that 
this ancient civilization excites is unde- 
niably well deserved. But after it 
reached its early flowering, it suffered 
from an essential defect — it ceased to 
giow, it no longer developed, it no 
longer changed. In a word, while it 
seemed to live on, it lost all dynamism 
— it was dead. It took only the Greek 
and Roman invasions to perform the 
burial service, and the burial was not 
particularly honorable. All this, because 
the means had been found to pour each 
succeeding generation into the age-old 
mold. 

The well-being of society was equated 
with the interdiction of any shadow oi 
change. It was always the ways of the 
ancients that constituted the pattern (or 
all future ages. Fast things were admired 
not as remarkable achievements in their 
time, to serve as a springboard for great- 
er achievements in the present, which in 



turn would seive as stepping stones for 
even greater achievements in the future* 
The past was erected into an absolute 
standard and both present and future 
had worth only insofar as they were the 
reflection of the past. 

Let it be borne in mind that the stabil- 
ity of Egyptian life did not involve 4 
tew basic principles, allowing for pro- 
gressive change outside of them. Life 
was determined down to the last de- 
tails of manners, and all prescriptions 
were considered equally important or 
at least equally immutable, The con- 
tinuity of life through the ages had a 
certain undeniable beauty, but this con- 
tinuity was not that of a growing tree 
but that of a pyramid, as stony and as 
dead. 

Historical developments proved too 
strong for any petrified society to devel- 
op in Europe. The spread of Christianity 
made the development of a petrified so- 
ciety impossible. By limiting immutable 
principles to the substance of the Chris- 
tian religion, it made dynamic develop- 
ment in other tields not only possible; 
it made it normal, desirable, and praise- 
worthy. 

Role Of Christianity 

By proclaiming certain principles alone 
immutable, Christianity made coherent 
development possible, since such devel- 
opment is impossible without a stable 
center around which it can revolve. Com- 
plete, total change without a point oi 
rest results not in progress but in chaos, 
The lack of basic convictions leads not 
to dynamism but to its breakdown, since 
total uncertainty leads to mental confu- 
sion and confusion is not an atmosphere 
conducive to progress. When a society 
does not know its why and wherefore, 
nor its goal and why those goals are 
ultimately desirable, it slows down and 
finally stops working for those goals. 
These questions can be answered only 
by basic convictions and these Christian- 
ity provided and provides. 

One of the most dynamic civilizations 
the world has ever seen is the Islamic, 
which at one time extended from India 
and Central Asia through Africa and up 
to Spain. It, too, was based on central 
principles. The service to Allah (Islam 
implies the surrender or obedience to 
Cod), involved not a surrender to na- 
ture but its dynamic subjugation and 
conquest through the different branches 
of knowledge, the arts, and polities. 

For a progressive civilization, two ex- 
tremes are, therefore, to be avoided - 
h total immobility of life and knowledge 
in all its aspects leading to mummifica- 
tion, on the one hand; and a total drift 
without firm foundations leading to 
chaos and ultimate stagnation, on the 
oilier. One extreme as well as the other 
can lead to one and only one end - 




the loss oi dynamism and progress, the 
inability to move ahead and overcome 
difficulties. In a word, death* 
Where da we as a nation stand? 
Our society is different from the old 
Christian and Islamic cultures. Cardinal 
Santos himself said on one occasion thai 
ours is a pluralistic society. Ours is a 
secular rather than a religious State 
(which is not to say that it is atheistic 
or anti-religious — our Constitution be- 
gins thus: The Filipino people, implor- 
ing the aid of Divine Providence). Our 
religious beliefs {supremely important 
as they are) do not coincide. But at 
least our convictions about basic dem- 
ocratic tenets do, even if our reasons for 
those convictions differ. Of the rights of 
the individual, his obligations to his fel- 
lowmen, the State as the servant rather 
than the master of the citizens, free 
choice of those who shall govern by 
those who will be governed, in accord- 
ance with laws and not with caprice 
etc. We thus have what we might cal ! 
a hard core of civic beliefs around which 
our social and political life revolves anc' 
can progress. But there is a difficult) 

just as in the particular matter o' 
the Filipino mentality, which is almo^ 
hopelessly at odds with itself, our soeiet; 
is at odds with itself. Despite ou 
democratic convictions, our attitude W 



Rizal's la Bella esperanza de la 
Patria mia has become merely a 
vision of the future. He meant 





by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 




ward life and toward change has a 

strong flavor of archaism. 'Tradition/ 
it has been said, "is the democracy of 
the dead,* 1 Well and good. It would be 
foolish to stifle the voice of the past. 
We are only being sensible when we 
listen, to learn "whatever it may have to 
teach us. I believe that is a great deal. 
Tradition, after all* is the product of 
experience, and \ refuse to believe that 
our forefathers were too stupid to learn 
anything worthwhile from experience. 
But it is even more foolish to stifle the 
voice of the present, and what one might 
call the unadulterated voice of the pres- 
ent is the voice of the youth* for the 
elderly are in a sense already the past. 

I said it is unjust that the youth should 
have no influence on public affairs. It 
ts unjust because our youth are part 01 
society, with a stake in it like the rest 
of us. 

If the casting of a vote fulfills the ie- 
quirements of participation in public af 
fairs, then our youth, at least most 01 
them, are enjoying their rights. But 
participation in the life of a democratic 
society entails a good deal more than 
the simple act of voting, I conceive of a 
democratic society as having a democrat- 
ic life, and there is a good deal more 
to that life than just casting one's vote. 
There should be an interplay of forces, 

April 20, 1966 



of groups, of minds, of activities and 
interests, members of the same group 
acting upon each other and different 
groups interacting among themselves, so 
that the total life of society is the dy- 
namic outgrowth of the life of its mem- 
bers. 

A Democratic Society 

Under such a system, it is not merely 
the government which is democratic, the 
entire social activity in its different as- 
pects is democratic* I readily grant that 
such an idea is an ideal not fully at- 
tainable* but it can be approximated, and 
to the degree that it is approximated, 
to that degree we have a democratic 
society, 

When we deny the youth a hearing 
and not the mere possibility but the 
reality of exerting influence on society, 
we attenuate the truly democratic char- 
acter of our society to a dangerous de- 
gree, because we exclude from the inter- 
play of forces a considerable segment of 
the population. With the youth pretty 
well excluded from influence, the busi- 
ness of governing is no longer the exten- 
sion of the life of the entire society, it 
is the extension of the life of a part of 
society. The result is a distortion of 
representative government, since the ac- 
tion of government will not be repre- 



sentative of the entire society, in fact 
it will not be representative of what 
may well be its majority. 

1 said that the youth have a stake in 
society like the rest of us. That is not 
quite accurate. They have a gt eater 
stake. What is done today will affect the 
elderly little; at any rate it will not af- 
reet tnem long, for the excellent reason 
that they will not be around long to be 
affected by it. Our young people will 
be around for a long time and whatever 
is decided and accomplished now, for 
good or ill, shall inevitably affect them 
for a long time to come, Those who have 
reached a certain age, with anxiety or 
reliet as the case may be, can say with 
Louis XV u ajter me, the Deluge." The 
youth may find themselves in the posi- 
tion of his successor Louis XVI who 
lost his head, 

It is only fair and fust - that all the 
generations which are able to participate 
actively in the life of our society should 
do so. As a matter of fact, we are cheat- 
ing ourselves if we do not allow and in- 
deed encourage it. Statistically speaking, 
the tremendous number of young people, 
say from 18 to 30, must include many 
who could and would help push this 
country ahead, if given a chance. Of 
course, in spite of obstacles, some young 
people may manage to assert themselves 



and attain importance despite the ar- 
tificial obstacles we put in their way, 
just as a few Negroes managed to rise 
in American life despite the well-nigh 
insurmountable barrier of race prejudice. 

In a country where politics and gov- 
ernment play a predominant role in 
nearly every field, the role of youth in 
the political field is of special signif- 
icance. And here, the situation is any- 
thing but encouraging. Some fairly 
young men have been appointed to 
prominent positions, but as far as polit- 
ical parties are concerned, the influence 
of young people is practically nil. This 
is one of the factors which make pos- 
sible the continuation of the kind of 
partisanship which is ruining the coun- 
The style of politics now in vogue 
can go on simply because so many of 
those in undisputed control want it to 
continue, The reader is familiar with the 
saying that you can't teach an old dog 
new tricks. 

The old politicians have grown old 
in the techniques of political manage- 
ment current today. Whatever may be 
said in favor of such techniques - if 
anything can be said in favor of such 
techniques — few will deny that they 
have led to appalling results in many 
ways. 

Perpetuating Power 

The closed circle of political cronies 
is conducive to whitewashing whenever 
something improper or downright im- 
moral is discovered. The "equity of the 
incumbent' 1 theory for instance is an 
absurdity traceable at least in part to 
political cronyism. It is a way to per- 
petuate the old politicians in power by 
shutting out other aspirants to the party 
nomination and usually to election, since 
few are able to win an election without 
party support. How anyone can estab- 
lish any sort of equity in a position (that 
is, a kind of a right to it) to be freely 
given or denied by the electorate is a 
mystery. To claim that the incumbent 
has a right, ahead of others in the party, 
to the nomination, but not to the elec- 
tive post itself, does not justify the theo- 
ry. It artificially limits the party's choice 
of candidates and ultimately the people's 
choice. In the last analysis, insofar as it 
is within the party's power, we would 
be burdened with the same individual 
term after term, regardless of our dis- 
satisfaction with his public service, un- 
til he steps aside voluntarily out of the 
"goodness" of his heart. 
. What almost amounts to commuting 
between political parties, as well as the 
frequent independent Liberal and Na 
cionalista candidates running against the 
official candidates, may be partly attrib- 
utable to the "equity of the incumbent" 
principle. The relative permanence of an 
elective official may have its advantages, 
but it also carries / To page 20 



11 




El Mestizo's on -to- Vietnam 
speech hits two birds (dove and 
hawk) with one stone 




MANNY'S FINEST 




by LORENZO J. CRUZ 



# NOT A FEW who saw and heard 
Rep. Emmanuel Pelaez deliver his spon- 
sorship speech on the Vietnam aid meas- 
ure last week said they were impress- 
ed by his arguments and style of de- 
livery* Comments ranged from "brilliant* 
to "the best argument for the measure 
so far.*' 

One "dove" in the Lower House was 
even reported to have approached Mr. 
Pelaez in the midst of the applause and, 
congratulating him* remarked: "You al- 
most convinced me into voting for the 
bill" 

Forget that only the night before the 
congressman from Misamis Oriental was 
leading a move to have a vote on the bill 
deferred. Forget that the political situa- 
tion in Saigon was explosive, The point 
is, among Mr* Pelaez's many turnabouts, 
it was — so far — his best. As one 
morning newspaper described it, it was 
his shining hour. 

For one who has changed party af- 
filiations about half a dozen times, and 
survived it politically, it is perhaps easy 
to defend even an indefensible position, 
in this case the American war in Viet- 
nam, 

With a serious mien, Mr. Pelaez read 
through his 21-page speech calmly but 
forcefully. People in the galleries and 
on the floor itself listened attentively to 
what he had to say- 
Mr. Pelaez argued his case master- 



fully, one must admit, bolstering his po- 
sition wifch the authority of a former 
foreign secretary, and quoting even from 
the Recto Reader! ' 

For all his seeming logic, however, 
Pelaez overlooked one basic fact: There 
is something more to the Vietnam war 
than the democracy-is-good, com- 
munism-is-bad argument of the Caram 
variety. 

Only those who would deny a people 
their right to aspire for genuine inde- 
pendence would deny that the Vietnam 
war is as much a fight against foreign 
domination now as it was when the 
French tried to return to Indochina. 

Lost Revolution 

That the Western nations failed to see 
it, while the communists - seeing this 
_ t 0 ok advantage of the situation is dis- 
cussed lengthily by Robert Shaplen, 
famed American correspondent and au- 
thor, in his book The Lost Revolution, 
He says, for instance, that "a revolu- 
tionary condition existed in Indochina 
all along, one that should have been 
regarded from the start by the Western 
nations for what it was, a truly Asian 
revolution representing the legitimate 
hopes of people throughout the region 
to be free of any domination, either that 
of their former colonial masters, of old 
or new native tyrants or satraps, or that 
of the communists.'* 



12 



Now the Vietnamese are casualties in 
a war escalated by the United States 
simply because the latter failed to grasp 
the true meaning of the revolution 
against tyrants and satraps like Ngo 
Dinh Diem. 

Taking this into consideration, the ar- 
guments of Mr, Pelaejk^yould, to borrow 
a plirase currently usee! "%f the Vietnam 
context, fall like dominoes, 

But putting it aside, one can still 
examine many of the arguments ad- 
vanced by Mr. Pelaez. 

For instance, Mr. Pelaez cites ''con- 
stants" in our foreign policy. We have 
opted for collective security, he tells us, 
and now we must do our part. The US 
is fighting for democracy in Vietnam 
and it is to the interest of our national 
security to do what we have always 
done; that is, to act on the basis of 
collective security, as we did in Korea. 
In other words, we must also join the 
Vietnam fray because we are commit- 
ted under our security arrangements. 

Useless Talk 

Rut no one has ever proved, and in- 
deed Sen, Lorenzo Tanada denies, that 
we are obliged - under the present cir- 
cumstances - to send troops to Viet- 
nam under Seato or under the mutual 
defense treaty with the United States, 

Mr. Pelaez wanted to know from crit- 
ics of the Vietnam bill: '*What is vow 

^graphic 




□ □□ 



THE PRESTIGE 
OF UNIVERSITY EDUCATION 
IN SOUTHERN MINDANAO! 




* Rising with the progress of Mindanao and its people is the 
8 -storeys Research Tower Building of the University of Minda- 
nao in Davao City. This building houses the IBM Data Process- 
ing Center, the Closed -Circuit Educational Television Center, 
and Radio Station DXMM, one of the eleven Mindanao stations 
owned by the University of Mindanao for both educational and 
commercial broadcasting activities. 



The UNIVERSITY OF MINDANAO 

Formerly "THE MINDANAO COLLEGES" 
DAVAO CITY, PHILIPPINES 

Member, Philippine Association 
of Colleges and Universities 




"Fa* Clodt Country ami Family" 



July 13, 1966 



Man is blessed with more and more free time 
and cursed even more with the problem of what to do with it 
by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 



THE LEISURE PROBLEM 





26 



# THE ADVANCES made in science 
and technology have not been an un- 
mixed blessing; they have created prob- 
lems as well as solved them. One is 
peculiar to our time* For the first time 
in history, leisure is becoming increas- 
ingly a common possession of men. As 
the standard of living rises, as machines 
take the burden of work off men's 
shoulders and the progress of automa- 
tion shifts the job of supervising 
machines over to other machines, leav- 
ing human beings with an absolute min- 
imum of work to be done, man is 
blessed with more and more free time 
and cursed more and more with the 
problem of what to do with it. 

Due to our slow scientific develop- 
ment, we are not conscious of the prob- 
lem in this country, nor will a large seg- 
ment of the population be faced with it 
for many years to come. Nevertheless 
it is best to be aware of it well in ad- 
vance since the method of coping with 
it cannot be developed overnight and 
may well take as long to work out its de- 
tails as time required to bring us the 
leisure problem. 

In economically advanced countries, 
particularly in the United States of 
America, wages have been rising stead- 
ily even as working hours per week and 
per year are being shortened periodically. 
The inventions of science and technolo- 
gy, the wonders of yesterday, the prized 
possession of a privileged few, are taken 
for granted and have become the com- 
mon possession of all but the very poor* 
Yesterday's luxuries are todays necessi- 
ties. Where the two-car garage used to be 
a mark of opulence, all it indicates today 
is that the family cannot be called poor 
by American or European standards, 
and if unmarried children lived with 
their parents as long as they do here, a 
four-car garage would be a necessity* 
Television is, of course, so very common 
now that not to have one has almost 
turned Into a status symbol, a proof that 
the owner of the house is too intellectual 
to bother with anything so pedestrian — 
to be television-less may well be the af- 
fectation of an ' intellectual or artistic 
snob. There just might be a connection 
between the increase in activity aimed at 
social upliftment of the "poor", and an 
uneasy feeling over having so many 
facilities for relaxation and pleasure and 
the senselessness or tediousness of us- 
ing one's free time for more and even 
more of the same. In other words, "all 
work and no play makes Jack a dull boy" 
but no work and all play makes life itself 
dull. Time begins to hang heavy on peo- 
ple's hands and they do not know what 
to do with it 

In the fairly distant past such a situ- 
ation was already known to the very 
wealthy. The ruling classes had no need 
to work for a living, so they ruled, on the 
whole I think, weti, taking into account 
what was expected of them m those 
times, and making / To page 28 



THE LEISURE PROBLEM continued 



Most Filipinos are still able to 

relax and enjoy a quiet evening alone 





From page 26 / due allowance for trie 
paternalistic flavor of government which 
we today would find unacceptable but 
may have been unavoidable at a time 
when education was not widespread. 
What time was left over from the activ- 
ity of governing was devoted to the 
chase and similar genteel sports, or to 
cultivating the mind or ones artistic pro- 
pensities. Even courtship took time, since 
it was accompanied with a good deal of 
protocol and ceremony which we would 
find rather quaint and extremely amus- 
ing. 

Entertainment and pleasure involving 
as it usually did some intellectual or phys- 
ical effort on the part of the pleasure- 
seeker, was largely home-made and there- 
fore set its own limits on what the lei- 
sure class could want or use. Even go- 
ing on vacation was not a wholly effort- 
less affair, due" to the primitive means 
of transportation. Conversation was ac- 
tually considered an art, and like all art 
required concentration and expertise to 
be duly exercised! 

Today s leisure class comprises more 
and more the entire population. Today's 
leisure class works, but it certainly has 
leisure in abundance. The bourgeois idea 
°f a prosperous middle class and the 
Marxist idea of the working class, theo- 
retically contradictory, are in practice 
ending up by being the same thing- As 
toe base of middle class life grows 
broader in capitalist countries and the 
dtrioas improve in communist coun- 
ties, the bourgeois mentality is actually 
; ^v:rded and actually despised by the 
bourgeoisie, while the proletarian life ap- 
prtjaclfi^ that of the bourgeoisie ever 
roore closely, This trend cannot p but 
knng about a change away from what 
used to be considered the proletarian 
tnentdlty toward something else which 
15 neither proletarian nor bourgeois. 

Who really has the last word, who 
ca « claim the victory is, I think, irrel- 
ev w»t, since the ultimate gainer is hu> 
■amity - this mutual approach and ac- 
pcmsuodation may be the means devised 
°v Providence to save mankind from 
nmhjai annihilation. Whether this third 
*ype of mentality will in itself, apart 



from its side effect of preventing war, 
constitute a benefit for mankind in the 
long run, will depend on just what that 
mentality will be. At this point, we can 
only try to nudge it in what we consider 
the proper direction, then wait and see. 

But, returning to the leisure time of 
today's prosperous people . . , , their en- 
tertainment is more and more of a passive 
variety. It is served up to them on a 
silver or, perhaps more appropriately, 
plastic platter — they need make no ef- 
forts beyond driving to the movies or 
switching on the television set or the 
stereo. 

Digest Mentality 

Walking, (a pastime of yesterday's 
leisure class) more than two of three 
hundred yards is not done* If one goes- 
on vacation, one does not mount a horse 
or climb into a rattling, swaying carriage 
to arrive hot and dusty or frozen and 
muddy, hut in either case tired; one 
steps into a plane or air : conditioned 
train or ship, or drives out in a car on 
a superhighway, where the hardships are 
confined to a possible traffic-jam, hard 
on the nerves rather than the body. The 
ease with which entertainment is had, 
the swiftness with which people travel, 
leaves people with more time on their 
hands than they can use. What Pitirim 
M. Sorokin in his book "The Crisis Of 
Our Age" described as our contempora- 
ry sensate culture has just about reached 
its final stage - all pleasures and all 
goals" are for the satisfaction of the 
senses, and that sort of thing palls very 
duickly. One may tire of thinking, one 
does not get bored with it - pleasures 
of the senses can both tire and ,bore. 
And, in fact, people seldom do any se- 
rious, deep thinking; they are satisfied 
to let others do it for them and have it 
served to them in convenient, easy-to- 
Sgest morsels, hence the popularity o 
dogans, one minute meditates and a 1 
sorfs of condensations of boob and J> 
eests" of other magazines. The senses, 
their satisfaction, the se ns atronal ~ 
Lt is the mad quest; of the day, and 
hose of us who still remember our 
Kldays will recall that sensation east- 




ly reaches saturation, as the phenome- 
non of sensory fatigue shows - we stop 
feeling and stop enjoying it, 

Why Worry? 

To increase the leisure time of peo- 
ple even more, although a good thing in 
itself, will harm them, actually infect 
them with an unsatisfiable restlessness, 
unless the idea of pleasures undergoes 
a radical change, as including pleasures 
of the mind, and the notion of leisure 
is changed, from that of time for the 
mad pursuit of the will- o* -the- wisp of 
sensate pleasure to that of time to be 
used for something pleasant but also 
useful, although different and providing 
a change from one's workaday activities, 

I explained early in this article why 
the problem of excess free time should 
be considered by Filipinos now, although 
the conditions making it possible lie in 
the indefinite future. It must sound 
Strange, even ironic, to the average work- 
ing Filipino that we should start worry- 
ing now about the problem of how a 
worker should use' spare time - he is 



content enough to be able to relax in a 
chair or drop off to sleep after an ex- 
hausting long day's work, if indeed he 
is able to do that instead of doing some 
other extra work to supplement his in- 
adequate salary. He would be quite sat- 
isfied with a peaceful Sunday at home 
or visiting friends and relatives, if in- 
deed he does not have to work on Sun- 
day also in order to eat on Sunday, or 
do the chores which exhaustion after 
work did not allow him to do during 
the week. 

But there is an excellent reason for 
studying the problem of leisure now. 
Most Filipinos are not yet as sensation- 
mad as the people of other countries. 
They can still' enjoy a quiet evening at 
home with the family, or peaceful con- 
versation with friends, or even just sit- 
ting or lying in Silence and relaxation, 
enjoying the very silence and absence of 
activity. There is still time, through all 
the means available to society, particu- 
larly education, through the schools, the 
mass media of communications, the pul- 
pit, the home — to make them, aware, 
or to keep them aware of those pleasures, 
* those forms of leisure, which are not 
solely of the senses. They can still learn, 
as their education progresses — if they 
get the kind of education to which they 
are entitled — that the highest and most 
lasting pleasures are those of the mind 
and the spirit, and good art is also of 
these; and that leisure time can be put 
to better uses than the mad, and ulti- 
mately unsatisfiable pursuit of voluptu- 
ousness, and that for those better uses 
of leisure time, no amount of leisure time 
wilt ever be excessive. But if we fail to 
take the necessary steps now, when the 
time of greater leisure is at hand it will 
not bring enrichment to the lives of our 
people - they will merely step from the 
treadmuTof work to the treadmill of the 
insatiable, restless, mentally dulling pur- 
suit of hedonistic pleasures, The first 
treadmill at least results in something 
; worthwhile - the sustenance of life and 
the production of results, The second can 
only lead, sooner or later, to a despair- 
filled and pathetic sense of futility and 
emptiness.-# 

graphic 





BGaW aOWG SOF1T TOO£ 




MP) 




FAMILY SOAP 

Now ! 

TANCHO FAMILY SOAP 
LIQUIFIED T1QUE BEAUTY LINE SOLID TIQUE with vitamins A & Q2 for 

healthier hair and skin. 




1M6 

m Family 



mmm 




Internationally-accepted Tancho 
products are medicated with T-7, a 
photosensitizing dye which promotes 
the health of your hair . . . keeps your 
scalp clean and dandruff- free. No 
problem with soaping either, because 
Tancho washes off easily with just 
one soaping. 

Start clicking. Use modern medicated 
Tancho! 



MEDICATED 



July 13, 1966 



27 





ES OVER A MEETING TO DISCUSS PLANS FOR THE RURAL CONGRESS 



ALLEN € s 



JOSE F. RODRIGUEZ 
Staff Member 



its forces in an all-out drive to help 
the rural folk improve their living stan- 
dards. The first big step to be taken 
by the Philippine Catholic Hierarchy in 
this direction is the holding of a Na- 
tional Congress for Rural Development 
from February 5 to 11. 

The forthcoming Congress intends to 
accomplish the following objectives; 
1) create a greater general interest in 
the country on the problem of the land 
and of the seas, and of the people re- 
lying on them for their living; 2) study 



more closely and with greater care the 
situation of rural workers — to find out 
concrete lines of action the Church may 
take, based on a solid understanding of 
the existing structures of society; 3) for- 
mnlate a plan of action which the 
Church can implement without usurping 
or encroaching upon the legitimate func- 
tions of government and private agen- 
cies; and 4) indicate more clearly the 
areas of cooperation with other groups 
also aiming for social and economic de- 
velopment. 




AND THE HOMELESS 



The National Congress for Rural De- 
velopment in the Philippines wiO be 
sponsored by the Philippine Catholic 
Hierarchy, An executive committee and 
a secretariat within the executive com* 
mittee are in charge of organizing the 
Congress. His Eminence, Rufino J, Car- 
dinal Santos, is overall chairman of the 
executive committee, while Bishop Lino 
R. Gonzaga and ex-Ambassador Oscar 
Ledesma are first vice-chairman and sec- 
ond vice-chairman respectively. The 
other members of the committee are: 
Bishop Mariano G. Gaviola, Don Vicen- 
te Araneta, Msgr. Justine- C. Ortiz, Rev. 
Francisco Sender), CICM, Rev. William 
Masterson, SJ.„ Rev* Cornelius Breed, 
MHM, Arty. Jeremias Montemayor, Atty. 
Ramon Jimenez, Mr, Alfonso J, Aguir- 
re, Atty. Marcos Herras, and Francisco 
Tantoco. 

Around 400 local farmers and fisher- 
men as well as delegates from several 
Asian countries have been invited to at- 
tend the Congress, which will hold ses- 
sions in Fangasinan; Los Banos, Laguna; 
and Cagayan de Oro City. Three Italian 
-prelates — Msgrs. Luigi G. Ligretti, Pie- 
tro Pavanj and Giovanni D'Ascenzi — 
will represent Pope Paul VI at the Con- 
gress, which will have for its theme, 
"Man and the Land in the Philippines 
in the Light of Vatican II/* 

Many will wonder what is meant by 
"in the Light of Vatican II* 

It simply means that the Congress 
was inspired by the wonderful synthesis 
presented in the decrees of the Second 
Vatican Council which, among many 
other things, concerned itself with the 
launching of ideas, firmly rooted in a 
deep faith in Christ, and which could 
lead to' a mom dedicated and active par- 
ticipation of Christians in the formula- 
tion and application of solutions to the 
many problems that beset the rural and 
agricultural population of the world. 

It was His Holiness, Pope Paul VI, 
who specifically suggested that such a 
Congress be held in the Philippines so 
this nation may more conscientiously 
serve Christ in the midst of non-Chris- 
tian and predominantly rural Asia, 

The statistical predominance of 
Christians in this country makes it an 
ideal springboard for the launching of 
ideas designed to improve the lot of the 
rural workers. Eighty-three per cent of 
the entire Philippine population are bap- 
tized Roman Catholics — demonstrating 
clearly that the problems of the agri- 
cultural sector are predominantly prob- 
lems of Catholics. 

It's high time the Catholic Church in 
the Philippines shed off its feeling of 
superiority and smugness and takes up 
the challenge of doing something about 
the living conditions of all Filipinos, 
particularly those existing in the rural 
areas. The course of action to be under- 
taken in this direction should shift from 
individualized endeavors to group or col- 
lective effort. The problems are so great 
that the cooperation of all, priests as 
weU as laymen, is needed. 

All efforts of Philippine Catholics in 
the forthcoming rural Congress should, 
therefore, be geared toward the clearing 
up of the syncretic materials to be found 
in the minds of most people such that 
religion itself becomes a motive force 
behind man's day-to-d? y efforts at social 
and economic uplift- # 




I. c. s. 

TRAINS PEOPLE 



INTERNATIONAL CORRES- 
PONDENCE SCHOOLS, with 
more than 7 million students in 
75 years of world-wide activity 
in the field of correspondence 
education, offer 253 stondord 
courses and hundreds more that 
can be set up to meet one's needs. 

To you who find it impossible 
to go to college, or wish to update 
your technical knowledge and 
skills in order to meet the chal- 
lenges posed by new and changing 
employment requirements in busi- 
ness and industry. ICS extends 
an invitation to avail of its tes^i 
services. 

Mark an "X" before the course 
which interests you and mail this 
od to us. Information will be 
rushed to you. 
) Accounting 
) Advertising 
) Air Conditioning 
) Architecture 
) Automobile 
) Business Administration 
) Computer Programming 
) Chem. Engineering 
} Civil Engineering 
) Elect* Engineering 
) Mech, Engineering 
) Commercial 
) Commercial Art 
) Drafting 
) Dressmaking 
) Industrial Engineering 
) High School 
) English 
) Journalism 
) Mathematics 
) Paper & Pulp Making 
> Radio, TV & Electrenks 
) Salesmanship 
) Refrigeration 
i Textiles 
) Shop Practice 
) OTHERS 



ICS. 

Dept s-iis 412 FC I BIdg. 
416 Dasmarinos, Sta. Cruz 
P O Box 447, Manila 
Tel. No, 3-24-74 



Mome 



Address 



U7 




FOR some reason or other, since the 
French Revolution of 1789 set up as the 
battlecry of democracy the three words 
■'Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity," it is 
mainly thef second word that has re- 
ceived attention. Those who live in a 
democratic country take it for granted 
that they already enjoy liberty; fraternity 
is not even thought of, although, as a 
prominent philosopher has pointed out, 
it is the spirit of democracy. There re- 
mains equality, desired, pursued, yet 
never attained because never understood, 
This being January, and therefore the 
anniversary of the first appearance in 
1835 of the first part of Alexis de Toe- 
quevtiles work on "Democracy In 
America " allow me to start this discus- 
sion of equality with two quotations 
from him, indicating the effects of a 
wrong idea of equality. 

The first one is; "One should not dis- 
guise the fact that democratic institu- 
tions develop to a very high degree the 
sentiment of envy in the human heart. 
It is not at all because they offer every- 
one the means of becoming equal to the 
rest, but because those means unceasing- 
ly fail those who use them. Democratic 
institutions awaken and flatter the pas- 
sion for equality without ever being able 
to satisfy it completely. That complete 
equality slips from the hands of the 
people" at the moment when they think 
to grasp it, and flies, in the words of 
Pascal, with an eternal flights the people 
warm to the pursuit of that good all the 
more precious in that it is so near due to 
being known, yet so far due to never 
being tasted . , . , Whatever surpasses 
the people for whatever reason at onjee 
* seems an obstacle to their desires, and 
| there is no form of superiority however 
legitimate whose sight does not tire their 
. eyes'' 

Our second quotation is equally de- 
20 



pressing: "Poverty as well as misfortune 
are the two best guarantees of equality 
known to men. 1 " 

Democracy being as it is so obsessed 
with the notion of equality, the envious 
quality of democracy has not changed in 
our day, at least certainly not in our 
country. Witness the reference to the 
process of democratization as a process 
of leveling, i.e., bringing down to a com- 
mon level; witness further the frequent 
reference to higher income taxes as a 
system of ^soaking the rich/ 1 

Democracy being de facto so obsessed 
with the notion of equality, and the no- 
tion being, again de facto, so destructive 
of individual advancement since absolute 
equality is attainable only on the lowest, 
most unhappy level, it will do us good 
to think of equality and what we should 
mean and intend by it, lest our efforts 
be directed only to an equality of pov- 
erty, misery* ignorance, and vulgarity. 

The word "equality" has, unless I am 
mistaken* a mathematical origin. Ulti- 
mately* of course, it means identity, 
sameness. When we say that one quan- 
tity equals another, we mean that one 
quantity is the same as another or is 
identical to another. But while we can 
speak of one quantity " being the same 
as another* we cannot speak of one 
thing being the same as another* least 
of all of one person being the same 
as another. 

One can speak of one abstraction be- 
ing the same as another, not of one con- 
crete reality as being the same as an- 
other. Thus, we can speak of one liter 
of gasoline being the same as another: 
the notion, and the theoretical quantity 
of one liter is the same as another liter, 
in the world of reality, any physicist 
will admit that any given liter of gas- 
oline is a little bit more or a little bit 
less than another one* be the difference 



infinitesimal. 

This equality, then, exists in the mind. 
Once it is found in the world outside 
the mind* it is no longer perfect equali- 
ty* sameness, identity. This is in the 
case of inanimate objects which are so 
very much under our control, malleable* 
measurable, changeable at our will. 
What happens when we come to the 
world of human beings, since that is the 
world we are dealing with when we 
speak of equality in a democracy? 

Human beings are such complex 
creatures — that is what makes them so 
interesting — that we get into serious 
trouble when we begin to speak of 
equality, because all too ofteb in the 
back of our minds what we really have 
is the mathematical notion of equality. 

This confusion is not helped one bit 
by the contemporary worship of science, 
which is in the* last analysis the applica- 
tion of mathematics to the external 
world. Worse, what we worship is not 
so much science as its misrepresentation 
as given out by the popularizers of sci- 
ence, for science has long since realized 
that the external world admits of no 
exactitudes, a fact that Plato realized 
two millennia and a half ago. 

Even worse, when we seek to apply 
mathematical equality to human beings* 
we forget that the world of mathematics 
admits of proportional equality, what is 
sometimes called geometrical equality as 
opposed to arithmetical equality, for at 
least proportional or geometrical equali- 
ty can be applied to human beings, 
whereas arithmetical equality cannot. 

One can only be equal to one, two to 
two* and three to three 1 , whereas every 
equilateral triangle, is equal to every 
other equilateral triangle* regardless of 
size, and five is to 10 as six is to 12, 
although five is less than six and 10 is 
less than 12, 



Equality then is a very confusing word 
when we want to apply it to human be- 
ings. That is because, as we remarked, 
human beings are such complex crea- 
tures. Perhaps it would help clear up 
the confusion if we were to remember 
that we may be using Vhe word in the 
sense of "same," meaning arithmetical 
equality, when we really should he using 
it in the sense of "alike." It will above 
all help avoid confusion if we remem- 
ber what we are dealing with. 

When we speak of human equality, 
we can be referring to any number ol 
things. In the first place* we should 
mean that people are equal by reason 
of their human nature. That is, they are 
equal in that they are equally human 
beings. This is one case in which one 
can hardly speak of more or less. Either 
one is a human being or one is not, 
Either one belongs to that race of crea- 
tures which we call men or one does not. 
What constitutes a human being is pres- 
ent in each human being* in concrete 
form* The basic dignity found in a hu- 
man being is found in every human 
being, in a particular, concrete form, 
Thus every person, whether he or 
she lays claim to it or not, enjoys the 
rights of a human being. 

However, as we pointed out, human 
nature is found in human beings in con- 
crete form, not in universal form* Here 
the trouble and confusion begin. Human 
beings exist* not as simple human be- 
ings, but as Juan, Pedro* Jose 3 Maria. 
Ana* etc. In other words, human nature 
does not walk around on the streets, it 
is Juan and Maria who, possessing hu- 
man nature, go around on the streets, 
And Juan and Maria, being creatures of 
the world, differ from human beings, 
all things except their humanity* Here 
equality ends* 

At any stage of development, human 

GRAPHIC 




r life 
| nature endows us 
equally, and at any 
stage of development 
tiuman beings "differ 
from each other 




Educational achievements of 
men differ very widely* 

beings differ from each other. From the 
moment when a human ovum is fertilized 
and thus starts its career as a human 
being, one individual differs from every 
other And all through its development 
it differs from other humans until it dies. 
How does a man differ from other men 
aU through life? 

First of all, men are endowed with 
differing physical characteristics. Before 
the age of the exact sciences, people al- 
ready were aware that no two human 
beings are exactly alike physically, al- 
though they may have thought that idea* 
tical twins were an exception* Various 
scientific discoveries have shown that 
people really do differ physically. Fin- 
gerprints, once the only accepted form 
of identification because they were dif- 
ferent in every individual, are now be- 

January 25, 1967 




Economic and social backgrounds play a tremendous role 



ing addad to or replaced by other phys- 
ical characteristics such as voice, etc., 
which differ within scientifically measur- 
able limits, and which stamp each man 
and woman as distinguishable from the 
rest. 

Nature itself makes one human being 
different from another. There has been 
talk recently about the possible future 
ability of scientists to control heredity. 
Although there does not seem to have 
been talk as yet of scientists being able 
to make one human being exactly like 
another, and I doubt if scientists would 
be interested in doing such a thing, I 
suppose the theoretical possibility will 
exist, insofar as physical and psycholo- 
gical characteristics are concerned* Iden- 
tical twins cause a feeling of curiosity 
and pleasure — I wonder if human be- 
ings deliberately alike in everything 
physical would not rather cause a chill? 

We have pointed out that people dif- 
fer from other people physically. They 
look different, and are. But they differ 
even more in their intelligence and their 
minds. The various tests worked out to 
measure intelligence and aptitudes are 
universally admitted to give only ap- 
proximations. This does not speak against 
the value of the tests. It only means 
that we are trying to use a standard of 
some sort to give us as accurate an idea 
as possible of areas where measurements 
of an exact kind are simply out of the 
question. 

I do not know whether there is any 
claim made that human beings are born 
equally intelligent potentially and devel- 
op differently due to differing environ- 
ments and experiences. If such a claim 
has been made, I do not know how it 
would be proved- In any case, by the 
time any exercise of intelligence is pos- 
sible, we already find an infinite grada- 
tion of levels of intelligence. And as a 



person s intelligence is affected by en- 
vironment and experience differently, so 
his next experience may elicit a different 
land of response from his next experience 
or from the next change in his environ- 
ment What I am trying to point out is 
that what is inside of us, our intelligence, 
our physical abilities, our looks, etc, dif- 
fer all the way through life* No equality 
there. Neither nature nor life endows us 
equally. 

Even more important, life does not 
endow us equally. The ancient philos- 
ophers used to say that the human mind 
is like a clean tablet on which nothing 
has been written, referring this state- 
ment to the moment of birth. Just how 
literally true this is may very well be 
debated, but if we take the word mind 
to mean the entire intellectual and psy- 
chological make-up of man, modem psy- 
chology is pretty well agreed 

According to the latter, the writing on 
the clean tablet starts from the very be- 
ginning, and the ones "'who do most of 
the writing, at any rate the most im- 
portant writing, are the parents, Parents, 
being human beings themselves, differ 
widely, and the result is that the in- 
fluences wielded on children are infinite 
in their variety, with also infinite results. 
The influence of the members of the 
family, apart from the parents them- 
selves, is also tremendous. The general 
social, economic, and educational back- 
grounds play their tremendous role, and 
these also vary unceasingly. Those who 
undergo all these multifarious influences 
cannot help but be unequal. 

Last hut not least, we shall mention 
the inequality of achievement of individ- 
uals. We can use the word achieve- 
ment in the sense of something great 
that has been done, and in this sense 
some people have no achievements, Not 
evervone has made a name for himself 



in some particular field. But in the wider 
sense of doing things, getting things done, 
even on an externally small and in signif- 
icant scale, people do have achievements 
and those achievements differ very 
widely. One is an academic success, a 
social failure, and possibly an economic 
nonentity. Another may be an academic 
failure, a social success, and an economic 
mediocrity. Again, all along the line, in- 
equality. 

Under such conditions of human life, 
the kind of equality that is all too often 
unconsciously desired, a leveling of all, 
an artificial keeping of all at the same 
level, would be the rankest injustice pos- 
sible, It is by the nature of things im- 
possible to bring all up to the same high 
level Thus the only way to achieve 
equality is on the level of the least com- 
mon denominator. The refusal to admit 
superiority in some and inferiority in oth- 
ers would very likely be diminished if 
we were to use another terminology and 
merely say that some are more able than 
others, some have had better sense than 
others in using the possibilities presented 
to them. 

We would be more sensible about the 
whole matter if we would realize that 
there is neither credit nor blame attached 
to what we start with, that is, that we 
are neither to take credit nor to be 
blamed for what we start with, whether 
it be much or little, What we do with 
ourselves and what we help others to 
accomplish it are what really count. In 
the concrete, what should this mean? 

We pointed out at the very beginning 
that we all have basic human rights, 
since we all have human nature. This 
means unavoidably that we all have the 
right to human existence. No one has 
the right to deny anyone a truly human 
life* More than that, we have to provide 
for those who are unable to provide for 
themselves. Whatever the situation, a 
human being should never he in a con- 
dition of living like a brute animal. So 
much for all human beings, as a matter 
of strict necessity due to their human 
nature. 

But beyond that, the equality for 
which we should all struggle is equality 
of opportunity and equality before the 
law. This is the only kind of equality 
which is a truly human equality* It is 
the kind of equality which, far from pull- 
ing down, pushes people upward toward 
the truly human goal of fulfillment. 

Equal opportunity and equal protec- 
tion from the laws can alone make it 
possible for human beings to be truly 
equal in the only way in which they can 
be, which is in the sense that they will 
be able to develop their potentialities 
and develop their personalities to the 
fullest extent possible, so that they can 
truly say that human nature as found 
in those particular human beings has 
been developed to its maximum. 

As long as society does not make this 
possible, or at the very least strive in 
this direction with all its might, some- 
thing is seriously amiss. 

The envy which de Tocqueville point- 
ed out as a* danger and a menace 1 to the 
democratic society, the degrading desire 
to drag people down instead of climbing 
upward, will be a tremendous temptation 
for the less fortunate, even though not 
quite unfortunate, as long as people can 
honestly say that they are held back by 
factors not of their own doing,-# 

21 



# HOW will the war end? Will Hanoi 
and the Viet Cdng surrender eventually 
to the Americans? Will American forces 
invade North Vietnam, as French forces 
did 20 years ago? 

It is difficult, perhaps impossible, for 
anyone to foretell how the Vietnam War 
will end. The Americans tell the world 
that they are winning the war, but from 
my observations in North Vietnam, the 
Vietnamese are certain that they are ac- 
tually winning the war. And they cited 
several factors. 

1 ) Uuring the nine-year war with the 
French, the Vietnamese fought on en- 
tirely different grounds. To begin with, 
the French had already established foot- 
hold on the land. They had their own 
puppets inside North Vietnam, Having 
been in control of Vietnam for 80 years, 
they exercised power over the feudal 
nobility, the Cao Dai sect. The Amer- 
icans, in contrast, have never been in- 
side Nurth Vietnam and therefore have 
never developed puppets whom they can 
now depend on. 

2) When the Vietminh were fighting 
the French, the former were cut off en- 
tirely from communist countries. From 



CONCLUDING ARTICLE 




I] 



It- 



President Ho Chi Minh of the DRV with the Vice-Chairman of the South Vietwm National Libera- 
tion Front meeting in Hanoi with Vietnamese soldiers during Independence celebratwn, Sept. 2, 1965. 



Inside North Vietnam by antonio s. araneta, k 

iWVi Iff MHfMW Cwfighu 19Mj ^ GRAPHIC Fnblirt.liw. Inc. 



FREEDOM BEGINS AT 

Author believes that United States must withdraw its troops from S. Vietnam 




1945 to 1950 China was in the grip of 
a civil war, It was only from 1950 on- 
wards that the rear of the Vietminh 
forces was secured, the communists hav- 
ing by then gained control over the Chi- 
nese mainland. But even then supplies 
to Vietnam were limited, because the 
Ciunese themselves had inadequate sup- 
plies, having just been engaged in the 
Korean War, Now, supplies to Vietnam 
suffer no major obstruction. Even if rail- 
road lines are cut off, supplies can still 
be slipped in by other means. 

3) The Vietnamese communists have 
been figjhting continuously for 25 years 
since Japan invaded Indo-China in 1941, 
While there was an interval of "peace' in 
North Vietnam from 1954 to 1964, in 
South Vietnam the struggle never 
stopped, notwithstanding the Geneva 
Agreement, "We are used to war. Wo 
work and do not think about the war, 
I write my articles peacefully even while 
missiles are being shot over Hanoi, We 
have been living with war for 25 years,** 
said one journalist, 

4) But whereas the Vietnamese were 
engaged in war in a 'free enterprise' so- 
ciety from 1941 to 1954, the war which 
they have been carrying on since is un- 
der an entirely different setup. They 
are now a socialist society, This has sev- 
eral advantages, In "free enterprise** 
South Vietnam, there is runaway infla- 
tion as the natural effect of war on a 
capitalistic society; in North Vietnam, a 
gocialist society, there is no such infla- 
tion. Prices can be controlled. In fact, 

22 



prices have been lowered to help the 
people. People do not start hoarding 
goods in panic nor lose faith in the cur- 
rency, as we did in the Philippines dur- 
ing the last war. 

5) In North Vietnam every married 
soldier or the soldier who has to support 
a family is assured that if he dies or is 
injured, his dependents can continue to 
live decently, because the state continual* 
ly provides for everyone. They are as- 
sured of welfare benefits, unlike in a 
capitalist society where the dependents 
must feud for themselves* Take the case 
of the Philippines, Have our veterans or 
war widows and orphans been adequate- 
ly helped by the government? 

6) But perhaps the most important 
reason for their determined struggle is 
one explained by Nguyen Minh Vy, the 
director general of the General Infor- 
mation Board in Hanoi. "It is regrettable 
that you are not a peasant," he re- 
marked in a tone which I thought at 
first sounded a bit sarcastic, "You will 
never understand how we peasants suf- 
fered under the old colonial rule. You 
will never understand why Vietnamese, 
majority of whom are of peasant stock, 
will fight indefinitely to preserve what 
we have now gained. Our enemies can 
destroy all they want but we are de- 
termined never again to let ourselves 
be placed under the yoke of a foreign 
master. 

"Consider this situation: The majority 
of us Vietnamese - over 90 per cent - 
never owned land, When the French 



were expelled, the land was given not 
to a few wealthy Vietnamese but to the 
peasants because aCommunist economy 
was immediately installed unlike in other 
colonies which gained independence, 
such as India and Pakistan, where the 
fruits of independence went to the 
wealthy classes. But in North Vietnam 
all of us have enjoyed the benefits of 
owning our own land. Never before 
have our people enjoyed this unique 
blessing. Now, the Americans who are 
imperialists like the French want to take 
away all these - the land, our inde- 
pendence. Do you know what effect this 
has on a peasant?" 

Ngo Dien, the chief of the Press and 
Information Department of the Foreign 
Ministry who arranged my interview 
with Premier Pham Van Dong and Pres- 
ident Ho Chi Minh, remarked; "The US 
is condemned by the whole world, and 
no self-respecting nation wants to act as 
a mediator for the US. The US must 
therefore call on its puppets, like Mar- 
cos, to act as mediators. But the US 
made a wrong choice in selecting Mar- 
cos as a mediator. The Manila Sum- 
mit, in which Marcos played the main 
puppet role, clearly shows that the 
Americans want to escalate the war. It 
is an escalation in deception. They want 
to escalate the war because they are 
desperately losing in Vietnam. It has 
been two years since they began their 
daily bombings, but the Americans have 
not been able to stop us. We now know 
we can take them. 



"The war can easily be stopped by 
them. All the Americans need do is to 
follow strictly the Geneva Agreements. 
That means that there must be no for- 
eign troops in Vietnam, That is one of 
tiie provisions of the Geneva Agreement. 
Our country does not have any military 
alliance with the Communist countries, 
though we have relations with about 30 
countries. In fact we are the only Com- 
munist country in Asia that has not 
forged a military alliance with other 
Communist countries. We have refrained 
from doing so because we respect the 
Geneva Agreement. But the Americans 
have violated it. In May 1961, Ngo Dinh 
Diem entered into a military alliance 
with the US; Vice-President Johnson 
signed the agreement with him in Sai- 
gon, 

If the Americans want to negotiate, 
they should do so with the National 
Liberation Front of South Vietnam be- 
cause they represent that portion of 
Vietnam. And the people of South Viet- 
nam, like those of North Vietnam, will 
never accept the division of our coun- 
try, Once South Vietnam gains indepen- 
dence from the Americans, the NLF will 
negotiate with us for the eventual re- 
unification, 

"More troops in S. Vietnam will not 
change the situation a bit. The Amer- 
icans have reached a saturation pcint 
with respect to their troops. They have 
already lost over 60,000 men. 

And if they invade North Vietnam, they 
(Turn to page 24) 

GRAPHIC 




KUWENTONG 
KUTSERO 

by NARCISO PIMENTEL, JK. 



The few Years resolutions of FMs cabinet members 



• FOR A WHILE there was panic in Ma- 
lacafiang. At the rate the resignations came 
pouring in, there would be no one left to 
man the government's battle stations, ex- 
cept the Big Chief himself. It had all start- 
ed when the President, in one of those 
moments of truth (which incidentally are 
becoming increasingly frequent) confessed 
in the presence of his Cabinet and the 
heads of government corporations that he 
was not quite satisfied with the way things 
were going and that he wanted to reor- 
ganize the government for greater and 
more economic efficiency. 

Touched to the quick, RCA General 
Manager Osmundo Mondonedo tendered 
his resignation for the second time this 
year and so did the General Manager o! 
the Namarco, Jovenal Ahnendras. That 
started the ball of resignations rolling* 
Soon it spread to the Cabinet when the 
Vice-President and concurrent Secretary 
of Agriculture Fernando Lopez offered to 
resign his post as Agriculture Secretary. 
At this point panic struck* What if this 
snowball of resignations grew to an ava- 
lanche? 

No, no, no, the President hastened to 
explain, it was never his intention at this 
stage to revamp his Cabinet* The reorgani- 
zation he was talking about the other day 
referred only to government corporations, 
and even then, not to all of them. So, as it 
turned out, the President's target consisted 
of only a few cogs in the government ma- 
chinery which needed a little oiling per- 
haps or some repair, or maybe complete 
replacement. To get to the bottom of this 
whole binge I sent my favorite trouble- 
shooter to every government office and he 
turned in this report: 

1 There is nothing in the present set-up 
that a good New Year's resolution 
wouldn't mend. I have gone through every 
nook and cranny of every government of- 
fice with a psychological geiger counter, 
and that's the conclusion I have come to. 
Whatever knocks or rattles one hears are 
quite natural and to be expected since ad- 
ministrations, like automobiles, depreciate 
quite rapidly and one year is not as short 
as one may ordinarily think, Some rust is 



bound to develop somewhere; some dust is 
bound to accumulate somewhere, and all 
that is needed is a New Year's resolution 
to sweep away the dust and nib away the 
rust to get this government going great 
again. So, I've gone around the different 
government offices dropping a hint here 
and there for an appropriate New Year's 
resolution, and I must say that I've found 
the officials I've talked to quite receptive 




mw years 

RESOLUTION 




and cooperative. Here are their New Year's 
resolutions: 

VICE-PRESIDENT LOPEZ: I resolve 
when the President leaves the country 
again on one of his state visits, not to per- 
form his job so well that even the 
GRAPHIC notices it, because it makes the 
President think that the GRAPHIC is sub- 
versive. 

SECRETARY OF COMMERCE: I re- 
solve not to be out of the country when 
the question of allowances comes up again 
for discussion and condemnation* so that 



I may be in a position to defend myself 
personally against any accusation, denun- 
ciation, or even insinuation. 

SECRETARY OF PUBLIC WORKS: I 
resolve not to keep on harping on how I 
finished the Guadalupe bridge before the 
Christmas deadline fixed by me • . * until 
I am nominated to the Senate slate of the 
Nacionalista party, in which event I resolve 
to keep on harping throughout my elec- 
tion campaign on how I finished the Gua- 
dalupe bridge before my own Christmas 
deadline. 

SECRETARY OF FINANCE: I resolve 
to keep an ever watchful eye on my Un- 
dersecretary Pouce -Entile who has resolved 
to do his job as Commissioner of Customs 
so well that he will be made also concur- 
rently Undersecretary of Justice when Un- 
dersecretary of Justice Teehankee is made 
Secretary of Justice if and when Secretary 
of Justice Yulo is made Ambassador to the 
Vatican* 

SECRETARY OF JUSTICE: I resolve 
not to go running to President Marcos with 
every problem I have lest he develop a 
phobia against seeing me in his office and 
he start telling everybody around him: 
"My gosh, what's the matter with him? 
Why does he have to consult with me on 
every problem?" as if any Cabinet Sec- 
retary can make any decision without first 
consulting him* 

RCA GENERAL MANAGER: I resolve 
not to mind criticism from the press and 
not to engage in polemics with newspaper 
columnists over my actuations or those of 
my office, in order to conserve my health 
and have time and energy left to attend 
to my duties. 

NAMARCO GENERAL MANAGER; I 
resolve not to collect the extraordinary al~ 
lowances approved by my Board of Direc- 
tors, in order not to incur the ire of the 
President 

Believe it or not President Marcos whis- 
pered into my ear that he himself has a 
private New Year's resolution to read 
Kuwentong Kutsero with a sense of humor 
and take it with a grain of salt — # 



Jantary 4, 1967 







EDUCATION AND 

Past societies have lived and died. Can ours 



uu&J u\ that ca * lli-iataoni, 

oaa truift ?*- & - Sjfc, 
v <Lud_ *. : n Vrt til 1 

like a dream I. m& T *i- vii* 
two possible exceptions, ! r c ■ ' > 
civilization has not involved the e.:, 
?he j eople who created it or lived in its 
aids:. The contemporary Cambodian is 

a ame man whose ancestors con- 
caved arid built the Khmer cities of 
older time, of which Angkor is only the 
beit known example. Todays Egyptian 
faiJah is the direct descendant of the 
ancient Egyptians who created one of 
the worlds earliest and most enduring 

i ations, whose monuments have 
with:ood the ages. The Indians of Mex- 
ico, Central America, Peru, Bolivia, and 
Colombia are not newly imported races 
which, centuries ago, built the Maltec, 
Maya> Aztec, Inca, and other civiliza- 
tions. The civilizations survive only in 
books, museums, decaying monuments, 
and the imagination of man — the peo- 
ple live in the same world as ourselves. 
It is therefore possible for a civilization 
to disappear without its people ceasing 
to exist. Or at least, so it was in the 
past. Whether such is still the case to 
day is a matter of opinion. Let me ex- 
plain. 

The civilizations we mentioned were 
basically self-contained; they were limit- 
ed to a fairly well-defined area, the peo- 
ple effected by them were severely lim- 
ited, when compared with the rest of 
the human population, and although 
there has always been a certain amount 
of mutual influence between civiliza- 
tions, each was in a relative sense a 
world in itself. It is thus not surpris- 
ing that one could disappear without 
the others being dragged down with it. 
Today we have developed a kind of 
world civilization. In the past, when 
Western historians wrote of "Civiliza- 
tion," they meant Western civilization, 



though the rest did not count. They 
\ould start the history of civilization 
vith that of Greece, with perhaps 
a brief reference to Egypt and pos- 
sibly tnt otfier Middle Eastern coun- 
tries, as a kind of unavoidable nuisance* 
Today, the world has become one be- 
cause of the truly interlocking relations 
of the countries of the world Civiliza- 
tion has therefore become the common 
property of all mankind. Just what our 
world civilization means is not easy to 
define, Although in a very true sense, 
Western civilization has become the pre- 
valent type of civilization, it is not so 
in an exclusive sense. The surviving non- 
Western civilizations are gaining ever 

Imparting, Sustaining 
And Furthering Civilization 

greater cognizance in the West, at the 
same time that Western civilization is 
being absorbed to an ever greater ex- 
tent by its non-Western counterparts. 
There is a progressive mutual recogni- 
tion and appreciation which the mutual 
distrust arising from international pol- 
itics can do nothing to arrest, Although 
we cannot yet speak of a fully integrat- 
ed world civilization — and in the sense 
of an entirely uniform and homogeneous 
world I rather hope it never happens; 
it would be so tedious — we do have 
it in embryonic form. The achievements 
of the various civilizations are available 
to the entire world and are now the pos- 
session of the whole world. Something 
approaching the destruction of the hu- 
man race would today seem necessary 
for civilization, for our civilization, to 
disappear, since in a way it is spread 
wherever the human race exists, As 
long as educated men and women in 
iufficieht numbers exist in any part of 
the world, civilization will go on, im- 



mune from external destruction, Were 
it to be wiped out in the greater part 
of the world, those who had garnered 
its fruits and survived would retain it 
and be able to extend it anew* This is 
one viewpoint, held, it would seem, by 
Arnold Toynbee and others, There is 
the opposite viewpoint: that there is as 
yet no world civilization even in an in- 
cipient stage; that the various civiliza- 
tions are still self-contained units and 
could separately be wiped out, so that, 
at least in theory, one by one they could 
disappear, leaving scarcely a ripple on 
the surface of history. If we accept the 
first theory, which seems the more plau- 
sible of the two, and if we accept the 
possibility of a world conflagration de- 
structive of enormous segments of the 
human race — and, sad to say, this is 
no remote possibility — then a new mor- 
al obligation has arisen for each coun- 
try, a kind of obligation which did not 
exist quite in its present form: the obli- 
gation of so enriching its people with 
civilization, making them partakers of 
civilization to such an extent that they 
would be able to spread it anew over 
the face of the earth should it be des- 
troyed elsewhere, This* which I call a 
new moral obligation, does not mean 
that there was no obligation in the past 
for each country to turn out civilized 
men and women, as highly civilized as 
possible, regardless of what went on in 
other countries — that obligation has al- 
ways existed Hoes mean that the old 
obligation has been added to immeas- 
urably. 

The means of imparting, sustaining, 
and furthering civilization can be re- 
duced to one word: education — edu- 
cation in all its forms and in all its 
aspects. I do not refer to schools only 
— everything that reaches man, has con- 
tact with him, can educate him or push 
him backwards, make him or keep him 
civilized, or make or keep him a bar- 
barian or a savage — home and exter- 



nal environment, mass media, the mil- 
lion and one things with which man 
comes into daily contact. It is a hardy 
plant indeed that I can resist external 
forces strongly hostile to its life and 
growth; it is a weak plant indeed that 
will not thrive when everything favors 
its growth, 

I said thai education is not sj m] 
mous with schools. Schools are, however, 
a primary factor in education, We can- 
not discuss in one article all the fac- 
tors which enter into the process of ed- 
ucation — I would like to diseu:? the 
role of schools. What is the roL oi 
schools in the educational process, and 
how are our schools fulfilling their role? 
We pointed out that education must pro- 
duce civilized men and women. Are our 
schools turning out civilized mei^ and 
women, at least to the degree that a 
school should? 

The role of schools in the educational 
process is a tremendously important me. 
This is of course a redundant statement 
in the view of those who identify edu* 
cation and going to school, those who 
think that education is entirely a mat- 
ter of passing on facts, facts, and more 
facts, in an organized school — what 
is at times called a formal education. 
But even for those of us who believe 
that schooling is one patt» not the tcliole, 
of education, it should be crystal-clear 
that schooling is of the greatest impor- 
tance. Schooling and working are the 
two activities, relatively continuous, fn 
which a man spends the greater p-±r* 
of his waking hours. Work may go on 
for a longer period of a man's hie 3 but 
under reasonable economic conditions, 
work does not start until after choot* 
ing, it is not specifically aimed at the 
education of the person, and, again un- 
der reasonable economic conditions, 
work does not enter into a mai's l*fe 
at its most formative period, wheret 
studies do. In terms of waking hours, 
therefore, it is inevitable that those 



14 



GRAPHIC 




July 20, 19GG 



• SOME months ago I had occasion to 
participate in a symposium on the theme 
''Mandate for Greatness," In the course 
of the general attempt to pin-point the 
meaning of greatness, one of our lady 
writers, in my opinion second to none, 
asked when this nation had been great. 
She herself expressed the view that the 
Filipino people were truly great at the 
time of the Philippine Revolution and 
the qualities which made them great 
were courage, self-sacrifice, and patriot- 
ism. In my opinion she made a telling 
point. 

She made me realize clearly, and I 
hope she also made the others present 
realize, that the greatness of a people 
does not consist in having a full belly 
and full pockets but a full mind and a 
full heart/ It is the intellectual and moral 
qualities of a people, not the size of their 
dollar reserves, that entitles them to 
be called great. This is a very 
important truth, so important that 
it can never be sufficiently stressed. It 
can be affirmed without hesitation that 
in the minds of the overwhelming majors 
ity of Filipinos today, ail this talk about 
greatness conjures visions of the United 
States of America as the model, the ideal 
to be pursued. 

Unfortunately, those visions exclude 




the growing religious, intellectual, moral, 
and artistic importance of the United 
States; they include only the material 
aspect of the American picture — eco- 
nomic prosperity and tecnnological pro- 
ficiency* 



Not By Bread Alone 



Economic prosperity presents itself i 
us as greatness. It is the same tempta- 
tion offered to Christ in the desert: "If 
Thou be the Son of Cod, command 
these stones to turn into loaves of bread," 
And there is still only one answer to 
that particular temptation: "Not by bread 
alone does man live, but by every word 
that comes from the mouth of the living 
Cod/* Christ in His great hunger after 
His prolonged fast showed His Divinity 
more clearly by His grasp of the hier- 
archy of values than by performing a 
miracle there and then — there would 
be times and places for miracles later 



presents itself to 



- *x**x cot«o truth? Csn 

on. Can we gr**y u«> ™-"- l [ UUi : c 
we bring ourselves to the realization o 
the true scale of values, of the spintual 
over the economic, of the moral over the 
pragmatic, of that of which we can be 
proud over that of which we can boast, 
intrinsic worth over exhibitionism tor 
public, especially foreign, consumptioni' 
On how we answer in practice depends 
whether we shall rise to true greatness, 
or be content to develop into a barn- 
yard of well-fed animals, the majority 
clean, fat sheep. 

In my opinion, two factors are work- 
ing powerfully against our greatness as a 
nation, one negative, the other positive. 
The negative factor is the thoughtless, 
injudicious jettisoning of tradition, the 
other the attempt at wholesale adoption 
of the unsavory aspects of American life* 
It is only by stopping these two ever-ac- 
celerating movements and replacing 
them with a more intelligent process can 
we become anything worth becoming. 
Let us take a closer look at what we 
have to stop. And first the disintegration 
of tradition. 

Tradition And Change 

To uphold tradition may seem incon- 
sistent in one who has so often advocated 
change as I have. But I have never ad- 
vocated the indiscriminate elimination of 
tradition. I have never suggested wiping 
the blackboard clean and starting with a 
clean slate. It is something which in the 
very nature of things cannot be done and 
those who have attempted it, despite 
whatever good intentions they may have 
had, have usually succeeded in eliminat- 
ing much good and invariably left the 
worst* 

The men who made the French Rev- 
olution with its motto of liberty, equality, 
fraternity, the men who in their pathetic 
belief in die omnipotence of Reason to 
set all things right, thought they could 
start a whole new world, so entirely new 
that even the names of the months of 
the year were changed — what did they 
accomplish? Many good things, no doubt, 
and much of this good has survived. But 
they also set up the Committee of Pub- 
lic Safety, a kind of Gestapo which led 
to the Reign of Terror in which innocent 
men and women were put to death on 
mere suspicion — the very antithesis of 
liberty. It did not take long for Napo- 
leon to appear on the scene and those 
who hoped to eliminate monarchy and 
privilege by removing the king were 
soon applauding the coronation of an 
Emperor and his creation of a new aris- 
tocracy, the Bonapartist. And fraternity, 
the brotherhood of all men? France was 
soon overunning Europe and establish- 
ing a political and military hegemony 
over Europe, However, the genuine tradi- 
tion of France — its culture, its refine- 
ment, its tolerance, its sense of mission 
not to enslave but to elevate and to com- 
municate — what we might call the soul 
of France — remained and incorporated 
and assimilated what was of genuine 
value in the Revolution, as well as some 
less fortunate aspects of the Revolution, 



for "0 human process is perfect. 

To obliterate" tradition, men, is impos- 
sible and to attempt it only brings need- 
less suffering. Even if it were possible it 
could only retard, not accelerate, the 
process of achieving greatness. Tradition 
is a kind of collective memory and per- 
sonality of a people, guiding their be- 
havior and activity. To destroy tradition 
wholesale, if that were possible, would 
be the equivalent of a total loss of mem- 
ory — amnesia. No one issues from an 
attack of amnesia a great man, Ordinari- 
ly there can he no question of his rising 
to greatness until he has built up a whole 
new body of knowledge, experiences, 
and accomplishments, a new identity 
from which to start his drive toward 
greatness. 

To destroy Philippine tradition would 
be to destroy the identity of the Filipino 
people. It would be a kind of spiritual 
and moral genocide* To destroy in a 
people the ^knowledge of what it has 
been and is, the heights to which it has 
risen and tlie depths to which it can 
sink, how it has thought and felt in the 
past and how it thinks and feels now - 
and why — its goals and the efforts to- 
ward those goals, its successes and its 
failures, is to destroy all possibility of 
introspection and self -evaluation, and by 
that very fact to rule out any prospect 
of improvement. We must be especially 
on our guard in this matter as a people 
because we have not been a people very 
long. 

It is all very well to consider Lapu- 
Lapu a national hero for being the first 
to resist foreign invasion, but I seriously 
doubt if he looked upon himself as the 
defender of the nation, since there was 
no Filipino nation as yet. Filipino na- 
tionality, our consciousness of ourselves 
as a single people, with a unity tran- 
scending regional — in reality tribal — 
divisions, is a product of, at most, the 
last 200 years - but a day in the life of 
a nation. Indeed, with regionalism still 
rampant, one may well wonder if the 
process of national unification is quite 
complete. 

Filipino Trait 

Young though we may he as a people 
and consequently young though our 
traditions may be insofar as they are 
national, we do have certain traits which 
have been common to the various tribes 
throughout the archipelago since it was 
settled centuries ago* These traits con- 
stituted separate parallel traditions which 
have now become the basis and the sub- 
stance of the common national tradition 
which exists today, Among these traits 
are good manners, sensitiveness with its 
corollary of fear of offending others, a 
warm and generous hospitality, courage, 
bravery in combat and other <Jang erS J & 
remarkable capacity to endure hardship, 
an easy wit, intelligence and quickness 
to learn, a proper respect for learning, 
individual helpfulness as distinguished 
from efficient group action (a pioduct 
of more highly organized societies), a 
true appreciation of friendship, a gen- 



THREAT TO 

by MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 



82 



, * M * v graphic 



era! attachment to intangible values 
rather than to the purely materialistic, 
an eye for beauty rather than voluptu- 
ousness and the ideal of romantic love 
rather than mere sex, a strong feeling of 
pity and sympathy for the underdog and 
a strong sense of what is equitable more 
than, and as going beyond, mere justice 
- the list is almost interminable. 

It is impossible to define the Filipino 
spirit - what Germans call "Geist — 
but if I were to make the attempt, I 
would say it is characterized by the 
spiritual and moral rather than the mate- 
rial, the intangible rather than the mea- 
surable, the fine rather than the rud<\ 
the kind rather than the harsh, the soft 
rather than the hard. As a people, we 
love life rather than fight it and' are 
contented by what we have attained 
rather than driven relentlessly by what 
we hope to attain. Surely fine traits, open 
to abuse and liberally mixed with abuse 
as all good things are, yet basically 
sound, are the core of our tradition, our 
"way of life" It is easy enough to talk 
of overthrowing tradition or changing it, 
but when we do, we had better be quite 
sure of what we are doing. The ingredi 
ents that have gone into making the Fit* 
fpino character are gold, mixed with 
dross it is true, but we must take care 
that, in discarding the dross we do not 
throw out the gold along with it. Our 
ways of doing things are both the out- 
come and the cause of our national char- 
acter — they reinforce each other. In the 
process of reform toward progress, we 
had better not sell past generations of 
Filipinos short. 

And that is exactly what we are in 
the process of doing by adopting the 
seamier American goals and ways whole- 
sale. The "wise guy" is replacing the 
wit, the toughie the brave man, and the 
boor the gentleman. One of the clearest 
symptoms of our attempt to turn into 
synthetic Americans is the Filipino cow- 
boy movie* "Bad men" in the American 
Western tradition have never ridden 
around this country on horseback, fight- 
ing law-abiding citizens also riding 
around on horseback* Life in the saddle 
bay never been an aspect of Filipino 
life, Yet such movies are not only made, 
they apparently receive a warm lecep- 
tion. 

Another symptom worth noting is the 
strong trend toward business as apart 
from the professions. Making due allow- 
ance for economic necessities and the 
high cost of living, we cannot avoid the 



We are tossing out our 
coffee and replacing it 
with the dregs of Ameri- 
can 'civilization' 



impression that there is a marked drift 
in the direction of commercialism. There 
cannot but result, and there already 
exists, a certain disregard, and even con* 
tempt, for the professions and the arts, 
for being less lucrative. I can recall not 
very long ago a certain special respect 
accorded to doctors, to which their voca- 
tion fully entitled them. This still sur- 
vives among the poorer classes but is 
disappearing among the wealthier classes 
who, after all, set the pattern which ul- 
timately determines the "tone" of Phil- 
ippine society. There is also undoubtedly 
a tendency for people to look upon med- 
icine as a business — a way to make large 
amounts of money — rather than a voca- 
tion of service to human life. Such a 




public attitude toward the medical pro- 
fession debases the profession in the eyes 
of the people and by a subtle process 
ran debase those who practice the pro- 
fession themselves. 

The attitude toward art is also under- 
going an unfortunate process. A few be- 
gan to show the public what treasures 
of art are to be round in old Filipino 
pieces — santo$, antique furniture, etc. 
In the twinkling of an eye, the posses* 
sion of these antiques turned into a ''sta- 
tus symbol" ( an American term) , so that 
even those who did not really care the 
least bit about such things felt obliged 
to possess them, The obsession with 
status symbols — "keeping up with the 
Joneses — has taken the country by 
storm, and it is a distinctively American 
trait. What we see in Hollywood mov- 
ies, their crudeness, their cheapness, 
their vulgarity, the stress on the abnor- 
mal over the normal and the grotesque 
over the proper — these are setting the 
pattern for our minds and hearts. A cer^ 
tain "hardness'* of the individual is turn- 
ing into an ideal to be pursued, It need 
hardly be pointed out that a "soft" in- 
dividual, that is, a morally weak individ- 
ual, is not any more desirable, but gen- 
tleness and courtesy are not to be con- 
fused with softness, nor is sentimentality 
— our great men and women of the past, 
who embodied our ideals and traditions 



in their highest form, were anything but 
"hard/* Yet they were the people who 
led the Philippine Revolution and the 
subsequent political struggle for eman* 
cipation from American rule. 

Gentleness and bravery, sentimentah- 
ty and a grasp of realities are by no 
means incompatible. Taken together, 
their combination with either hardness 
or softness is impossible, whereas hard- 
ness and softness all too often go to- 
gether in the same individual — one is 
soft toward oneself and hard on others. 

Good Family Idea 

The shift toward a highly commer- 
cial, materialistic spirit is so universal 
that many fail to see it. I shall cite two 
instances from my own experience which 
illustrate the general trend. There was a 
lady who objected strenuously to her 
son's entering a seminary, not because 
she did not want to lose him, not be- 
cause she was anti-religious or anti-cler- 
ical, not because she thought he could 
render better service in some other line, 
or because she wanted him to marry and 
raise a family. No. She had the bad 
manners — another new trend — to tell 
me, a seminarian at the time, that her 
son was stupid to enter the seminary be 
cause he had a job with a good salary 
watting for him. Another lady was an- 
noyed with her son because he decided 
to study history instead of business. 

The shift is also noticeable in con- 
nection with the term "good family," In 
(he past, the term good family meant a 
family whose members were noted for 
their good behavior, education, and 
prominence in the community because of 
those qualities* A certain degree of fi- 
nancial prosperity was naturally involved 
since education would have been almost 
impossible without it, but definitely il 
was not the money that singled out the 
family. It was common to hear that 
such a family was not very rich, but a 
good family nevertheless; and a family 
of vulgar, ill-behaved individuals could 
never have been considered a good fam- 
ily, no matter how wealthy. 

At present, the surest pass into the 
highest circles is a fat pocketbook, re- 
gardless of how it is acquired, and all 
the vulgarity and bad behavior will not 
close any doors. In other words, we are 
turning away from the concept of honor- 
ing people for their qualities and are 
now honoring them for their possessions* 
We are turning from the veneration of 
persons to the worship of wealth, This 
is exactly the attitude which virtually 
decorated financial robber barons in the 
United States and turns certain licentious 
movie stars, adorned with all the gla- 
mour which Hollywood money can give, 
into international idols, while the com- 
mon prostitute, who may originally have 
been forced into the "profession"* against 
her will and mistakenly thinks that there 
is no way out, is looked upon with de- 
rision and contempt, instead of being the 
object of pity and the kind of assistance 
which would help her reestablish herself 
as a decent member of society. 



More and more> the only dividing line 
which society recognizes between the 
two is money and worldly success, which 
causes one to be accepted and praised 
and the other to be rejected and con- * 
demned. If that is not a perversion of 
values, I do not know what is, for one 
is every hit as much of a tramp as the 
other. 

Special Relations 

The had manners, the vulgarity, the 
rank commercialism, the worship of 
wealth, the ruthlessness, the materialism 
and consequent loss of spiritual values, 
the loss of the capacity to enjoy simple 
innocent pleasures, the tendency to rate 
personal worth in terms of money — 
what a turning away from the true Phil- 
ippine tradition! To what can we as- 
cribe it but the eager acceptance of the 
worst aspect of what only one nation 
has been able to bring us, because only 
one nation has had the power and the 
influence to do so. Ours is a special re- 
lationship indeed! We are dumping our 
past, our true selves, onto the garbage 
heap and taking, not the best that Amer- 
ica has to offer us ~ for there is much 
good there, and much also in common 
with our best traditions — but the worst, 
which destroys what we have of good 
and reinforces what we have of evil. 
We are not skimming the cream off the 
top of American life, to improve the 




flavor of our coffee; — we are tossing 
out our coffee and replacing it with the 
dregs of American "civilization," of 
which so many Americans have express- 
ed their shame and disgust. 

Canon Bernard Iddings Bell, an Amer- 
ican, used the phrase "to rescue Amer- 
ica from Americans", and counselled re- 
turn to the older American values and 
attitudes which built America, as the 
only way out. We need to rescue the 
Philippines from the same threat, and 
the only means are the same, a return to 
whatever is sound in our tradition and 
its proper growth and development. 
None of this is incompatible with prog- 
ress on all levels — quite the contrary. 
Otherwise, let us forget all this talk of 
greatness, let us at least he honest 
enough to confess that our goal is not a 
great people with great men and women 
but a stockyard of sheep, fat, healthy, 
contented, thoughtless — and worth- 
less.— # 



TRADITION 



July 20, 1966 



33 



STUDENTS' LITERARY CONTEST 

Sponsored by Weekly GRAPHIC and RADO watch 
COLLEGIATE WINNER 

ANTONIO E. HERNANDEZ, Adamson University 

A Jew in history 



# PABDON me friend, for interrupting 
your afternoon coffee but there is some* 
thing brewing in my mind that must 
simply come out. Do you see that man 
over there, some two tables away? The 
one leaning over the railing, staring 
down at the river. Yes, the one with the 
black umbrella, Well, you cannot see 
his face from here but there is something 
in his eyes, in the way he looks down at 
the river that suggests a deep weariness, 
a resigoation, a desire to destroy him- 
self, in fact 

Dont ask me why I knew this, I have 
seen thousands, yes, thousands of others 
like him in the middle of bridges, at the 
edges of cliffs, in windows of high build- 
ings, and by closely observing them I 
have become sort of an expert on human 
morbidity, Now this particular man is 
not going to jump, at least not this af- 
ternoon. He stares at the river with sad, 
burning eyes, his mind heavy with the 
thought of suicide. But he has not ac- 
cumulated enough courage yet. He is 
just turning the thought over in his 
mind, just as each of us had, at one 
time or another thought of reaching out 
for an object that is not ours, hut never 
really serious about it. This man is 
dreaming of the cool waves swallowing 
him — the dark, comfortable oblivion 
slowly closing in to blot out the last 
persistent, nagging trace of the misery 
that so HQs up his life. 

But that is all he will do today: stare 
and dream, dream and stare. Yet tomor- 
row he will pass this river again, and the 
day after tomorrow, and the day after 
that. And one day, the choice will have 
become unbearable and he will just 
heave a casual sigh, and then step for- 



ward to an empty solution. But by then, 
he will choose to be alone, not in this 
riverside cafe and not with his black 
umbrella. 

I see you are amused, my friend, and 
I do not question your reasons for be- 
ing so, Still, I am in the mood to amuse 
you further. Do you know that I myself 
have tried to commit suicide no less than 
50 times these last two thousand years? 
Oh, look! Our morbid friend is walking 
away. He is young, yet look how pain- 
ful his steps are. I have a mind to ap- 
proach him a little while ago and 
whisper to his ears: If Thou be the Son 
of God, cast Thyself down into that 
murky depths. As a bad joke, But there 
is something like pity within. me. 

What, my friend? Oh, about my com- 
mitting suicide. You know, you will not 
understand a word I will tell you unless 
I introduce myself to you, which is not 
an easy thing to do, Nfy name is Samuel 
and I am that controversial Jew who in- 
sulted Jesus on His way to Calvary, and 
who was condemned to roam the earth 
forever. Please, please don't display the 
least sign that anything is so irregular. 
All these two thousand years I have been 
introducing myself to people and 1 am 
tired of explaining further my identity 
after the preliminary introductions, If 
you believe me, good, but if not, then 
please keep it to yourself and you will 
do both of us a great deal of favor. 

Now, going back to our subject, I 
really did try committing suicide during 
my first five hundred years or so, but of 
course God would not permit it, at 
though there were times when I succeed- 
ed in drowning myself or something like 
that whenever God was busy creating 



some far-off universe. But sooner or 
later He would fish me out, shake me 
to dryness, and He would then breathe 
the life back to me and off I go, satis- 
fied at least with the little rest I had. 

And all those years, I have always 
believed that I was running away from my 
guilt, But then, I came to ask the 
question: why was God so harsh in pun- 
ishing me for a few words I had uttered 
in an unguarded moment when He was 
so generous in curing the blindness of 
Longhine, who opened a wound at the 
side of His Son? Of course, I am not 
insisting that just because hurting Christ 
bodily deserved that much, then merely 
insulting Him deserves more. It is just 
that, in the light of that discovery, my 
guilt decreased in magnitude, in my 
mind at least. It was then that I began 
introducing myself to people without 
fear. 

But strangely, I did not stop seeking 
death. It was also then that I discover- 
ed that I was trying to escape not my 
guilt, but life, I simply have too much 
of it Oh, how often do I laugh at peo- 
ple who mourn the shortness of their 
lifetime. 

You have a contemporary philosopher 
who proposes that the source of aQ of 
man's shortcomings is mortality, which* 
he says, induces a sense of urgency in 
the confused individual. Let man be im- 
mortal, he contends, and earth becomes 
a paradise. How naive I There is no more 
suitable punishment than immortality 
for one who has offended the Son of 
God, 

No, don't misunderstand me, I have 
nothing whatsoever against life. It is 
just that it is not for us, life was not 



created for the ape, nor for man but for 
the super creatures of the future, We 
still don't have the right level of intel- 
lect to enjoy life; our shortcoming is not 
social but biological. Utopia will be 
reached not through revolution but 
through evolution, We are like children 
who are given a wonderful, enlighten- 
ing book, but a book that was given 
too early for us to understand. So for 
the moment, crimes must be committed, 
wars must be fought, and poverty must 
be endured because we still have nor 
understood the book. 

Perhaps you are wondering what con- 
nection this matter has with me, This 
march of evolution, I mean. Just think 
of it, I will be and I must be around till 
Judgment Day, and that is a long, long 
way off. Meanwhile, generations will 
uome and go, hundreds of them, in fact, 
and the whole face of the earth will 
change. And when the super creatures 
come, I will have become an obsolete 
creature, a living remnant of a prehis- 
toric age, they will say. I will be lock- 
ed up in a cage and they will stare at 
me endlessly, Unthinkable. 

Yes, yes, I know. But don't pity me, 
please, Time is a persistently corrosive 
enemy and it has worn me out, but I 
am intact. Funny, isn't it? That is the 
point of the whole thing. I must be 
corroded but I must remain intact until 
the very end, Perhaps I am already be- 
yond vanity, but still I am proud of the 
fact that I, not God alone, am also 
responsible for my being intact. Every 
human creature these last two thousand 
years had been my contemporary, you 
know, and I derive strength, strangely, 
from knowing their weaknesses. Yes, it 
sounds cruel and selfish. Bight at this 
moment I derive power from the knowl- 
edge that I have access to an infinite 
number of possibilities compared to you. 
I have made it into a fantastic battle of 
attitudes because I know that is the only 
way I can live with myself, 

Don't ask me, my friend. An unjustly 
severe punishment makes an effective 
lesson in justice. Now, if you don't mind 
I must be off. I suspect that your at- 
tentiveness is not sincere but merely a 
concession to one who, you think, is 
crazy. But anyway, try to recall the face 
of that man with the black umbrella. It 
might be within your power to save him. 
Goodbye and thanks for your time,— # 



✓ — Poetry — — - 
The evening girl 

by ROMEO P. VIRTUSIO 

"... a candle burned on the table, 
a candle burned " 

— Pasternak 




3 



wrap me, o crescendoing sUk of the mourning night, 
caress this bloated face in your billow dinning, 
let my dancing unpUlared feet stick your grieving lust 
and let me go whole and leaping in your weary journeying. 

nightly, i return to this spot of my mother's crimes, 
and the hordes mangle the flesh she and i richly venomed 
knowing not, o not, that the stayful kiss leaves the brine 
that exacerbates the walled in fury of loin-soul exited* 

we whirl, and roU, both filling the unyielding plot 
of our bones with the brief wind of our throb-sighs, 



but they're never enough: each night longer moments plod - 
out to where by day i fashion my dread device. 

at midnight, i scream the ringing zenith of my pain, 

i loll out my tongue, ravishing their hours with gutter joy, 

and i am soon tired: they unsate yet complain 

that the cheap-scented mouth must early ask the fatal toll 

i can't sing to morning : we have become estranged, 
and i home vest. with nothing and softly shiv'ring, 
an exhausted weeping queen, all my hours again strained 
to all the quiet terrors of caressing panting evening. 



^"graphic 



is outside the context of the history of 
salvation, The presence of the Church 
In the State University should therefore 
be an incarnational presence in the 
sense that the Church should take flesh 
within the framework of the objectives 
and disciplines of the State University 
as such by taking an apostolic form re- 
levant to the State University milieu. 
And the State University milieu is 
neither a Catholic university nor a hos- 
pital nor a parish milieu. It is a State 
University milieu with its own social 
and academic peculiarities. If the Church 
is to incarnate herself therefore in the 
State University milieu, the dynamics 
of her apostolate there has to take a 
form definitely peculiar to the State 
University context, and operationally 
different from the dynamics we familiar* 
ly employ, say, in a Catholic school or 
in a parish. 

Religious Processions, 
Flag-waving Rallies 
Are Not Enough 

Clerical paternalism, for example, 
^which characterizes the pastor-parishion- 
er relationship in our parishes today 
will not be tolerated even for one mo- 
ment in a secular academic community 
any more than dogmatic pedantry which 
characterizes much of our Catholic ped- 
agogy today will attract the intelligent 
believer. Even the church-groups and 
or gani zations in th e State University 
cannot insist on running their activities 
along the tribal and strictly missionary 
lines, say, of the Confraternity of the 
Miraculous Medal or the Legion of Ma- 
ry which may all produce relevant re- 
sults in a parish but not in a State Uni- 
versity the peculiar vocation of whose 
Catholic constituents is not missionary 
but intellectual apostolate, 

The Church cannot bring over to thi? 
secular university her crusade-mentality 
by making herself heard merely through 
religious processions and flag-waving ral- 
lies, and making herself noticed merely 
through pins, uniforms, and stickers, 
The secular thinker is no longer im- 
pressed by these crowd- gimmicks* What 
he is looking for in the Church are the 
People who can individually prove that 
they are God's People by convincingly 
^bearing witness to the validity of their 
Christian vocation through their intel- 
lectual excellence. The secular thinker 
in the State University is quick to notice 
the slightest evidence of intellectual 
mediocrity in the Church, He has no pa- 
tience with so-called Catholic intellec- 
tuals whose only claim to intellectual 
activity is belligerent defense of the 
Church and her churchmen. He is am- 
used by the nervous hostility of the 
Hierarchy toward those Catholics whose 
concept of loyalty to the Church in- 
volves not only a defensive militancy 
but also a creatively critical evaluation 
of both the good and the evils in the 
Shurch. The secular thinker today is 
eonvinced that there is no such thing 
as an intelligent Catholic because al- 
most all the truly scholarly Catholics 
he knows and respects (artists, writers, 
professors, statesmen, student leaders, 
etc.) are being branded as. subversives, 
or at least mediocre Catholics, by their 
own churchmen. 

It is about time therefore that our 
churchmen woke up to the fact that 
much of what the secular thinker thinks 
about the Church today is indefensibly 
true. The Church in the secular uni- 
versity therefore must change that feu- 
dal image which has remained with her 



since the days of the Inquisition. Those 
were the days when the Church was a 
ghetto-Church, a Church of Popes, bish- 
ops, and priests, a Church in which 
those who were not Popes, bishops, and 
priests were merely a flock of voiceless 
and subservient sheep* The Church to- 
day is a Church of many intelligent be- 
lievers many of whom, let us admit, are 
even more intelligent than their church- 
men. Churchmen today therefore cannot 
insist anymore that just because they 
are churchmen of an infallible Church, 
therefore, they should have the last 
word on everything from how to love, 



court, and marry to how to win votes 
and influence rich people* The Church 
begins to look funny when her church- 
men pretend to know all the answers. 
That is why Vatican Council II had to 
re-declare the biblical truth that the 
churchmen alone are not the Church, but 
they together with the rest of the Peo- 
ple of God. 

In a critical community like the sec- 
ular university, the Church must there- 
fore be the very first one to take notice 
of the medievalisms and irrelevancies in 
her own structure today, and she must 
be able to face them fearlessly and 



humbly in a spirit of contrition ar** 
amendment. She must be able to enter 
into a creative dialogue with the secu- 
lar world by sharing in the many secu- 
lar dimensions of truth to which she can 
add her own spiritual dimensions toward 
the experience of one single reality. Ac- 
tually this is nothing eke but a more 
contemporary application of the Great 
Commandment. For charity is nothing 
else but a sincere attempt to enter into 
the mind and heart of another, and rev- 
erencing what the other thinks and 
loves by finding in him a valid reason 
to live together one common life*— # 




Who's got the lion's share? 




the best- selling motorcycle in the Philippines 
and all over the world ! 



WIDEST CHOICE OF HONDA MODELS -90 TO 450 CC FROM 



MARIWASA 



HAVE HONDA 
HAVE PUN 




4-streke engine for pradtien, 
versatility, durability. 



HAVE HONDA 
HAVE PROFITS 



Economical, low maintenance costs 
parts trio* service always available, 





The nicest lions roar on a Honda 



MARIWASA distributors, inc 



76? Aurora Boulevard, Quezon City 



Tel, 7-72-19 * 7-60 ©0 



WITH DEALERS THROUGHOUT THE PHILIPPINES 




September 28, 1966 



19 



TB kills 22,000 Filipinos every year. You can be among them next yea; 
intli^igji^gain^h 



i- 



Sinulat ni MANUEL L QUEZON, Jr. 



Huwag tayong umasa na uunlad at titibay ang ating demokrasiya kapac 






AUTHOR ACCEPTS 




h 



m WHEN THE article, Language: A People's Soul 
(in two parts, GRAPHIC, Aug. 24 and 31), by 
Manuel L. Quezon, Jr., was published, littJe did 
GRAPHIC realize that it was setting off a rash oS 
letter-writing from readers interested in the pro* 
pagation of our national language. 
In that article, Mr, Quezon said: 
'Those who write and, in general, those who 
belong to intellectual circles would be doing a 
great service to the people if they were to start 
using Pilipino, even at the cost of some effort 
Unless they believe in establishing a kind of in- 
tellectual foreign-oriented elite from which the generality of the popula- 
tion are to be excluded, they must logically use more and more both to 
reach those who already know it well and to help spread it among 
those who do not." 

Letters came pouring in from readers all over the country* Some 
wanted Mr, Quezon himself to translate into Pilipino his writings in 
English which had appeared in GRAPHIC. Others chided him for 
suggesting a worthwhile proposal but failing to follow it. Miss Elsa M. 
Luis of Paniqui, Tarlac, wrote; 

"He (Mr* Quezon) writes and, I believe, he belongs to intellectual 
circles; therefore, he should have begun (practising what he was 



MLQ, Jr. 



# ANG LAKAD ng pagiisip ng ating 
mga nuiuno, noong bago pa dumating 
ang mga dayuhang puti sa ating lu- 
pa, ay di karakarakang matitiyak sa 
ating panahon. 

Ang dahilan nito'y, sa ilahm ng iba't 
ibang watawat na sumakop sa a tin, may 
mga pagbabago ng ugali na di maiiwa- 
san, Kung minsan ang pagbabagohg 
iyan ay naging sa ating kapakanan at 
kung minsan naman ay naging sa kapa- 
hamakan natin. 

Isang paraan upang mabatid natin ang 
isip ng ating mga ninuno, pagkalipas 
ng halos limang daang taon, ay ang pag- 
aaral ng kahulugan at pinanggalingan 
ng mga salita ng ating > wika. 

Gamitin natin ang isang halimbawa 
sa wikang Latin, Sa kasalukuyan, ang 
sahtang "Senador" ay walang ibang 
'•ahulugan It^di ang isang kinata- 

an ng 1 kabilang sa ba- 



hagi ng Kongreso na rinatawag na Se- 
nado. Subalft ang salitang Senado ay 
binango sa salitang Latin na "Senatus," 
ang pagpupulong ng mga "senex," ang 
mga matatanda, na may karapatang gu- 
mawa ng mga batas para sa bayang Ro- 
mano sa mga unang panahon. 

Samakatuwid, sa mungkahi ng mga 
dating Romano, ang may karapatang 
magsabi kung ano ang dapat gawin o 
sundin ng bayang Romano ay ang mga 
matatanda na kjnikilala at iginagalang 
ng madlang Romano* 

Pagaralan natin ang mga salita na 
ginagamit natin sa mga nagpapalakad 
ng bayan, sapagka't diyan natin maki- 
kita na dapat nating ipagmalaki ang 
ugali at ang budhi ng ating mga ni- 
nuno. 

Ang may kapangyarihan sa bayan ay 
sinasabing may katungkulan. Ano ang 
kahulugan ng salitang yaon? 



Ang salitang katungkulan ay hango 
sa salitang tungkuhn, ang karapatdapat 
gawin ng may pinananagutan. 

Samakatuwid, ang nasa katungkulan 
ay isang tao na may tungkuling dapat 
tuparin sa paglilingkod sa kaniyang na- 
sasakop, 

Diyan natin mauunawaan na, ayon sa 
ating mga ninuno, ang kapangyarihan 
ay Fundi napapasakamay ng isang tao 
u P an S gamitin niya at samantalahin niya 
sa sariling kapakanan, kjWdi sa kapaka- 
nan ng kaniyang mga nasasakop. 

Gayon din ang salitang karapatan, 
Ang karapatan ay ang dapat, maging 
dapat gawin o iwasan ng maykarapatan, 
maging ang dapat kilanlin sa may ka- 
rapatan. J 

Samakatuwid, ayon sa isip ng ating 
mga ninuno, may mga dapat igalanj 
sa bawat isa, at sa paggawa naman nf 
bawat isay nauukol nalcanjyang kilan- 



hn kung hanggang saan siya maaring 
umabot sa kaniyang pagkilos at pagga- 
wa. Ang labis doon ay hindi na karapa- 
tan, sapagka't hindi na dapat. 

Kapag hinalungkat natin ito, mau- 
unawaan natin na, ayon sa ating 
mga ninuno, ang karapatan ng bawa T 
isa ay hindi kalayaang gumawa ng fa 
hit na ano, maging mabuti, maging mt* 
sama. Ang kalayaan ay ayon sa kar* 
patan lamang nauukol na gamitin, » 
karapatdapat, Ang paghigit doon ay 
paglabag na sa tunay na kalayaan, 
pagka't makasisira sa karapatan ng tt^ 

Noong lusubin ng mga Amerikano ang 
ating bayan upang yurakan ang atfcg 
pagsasariling pambansa na unti-untiy 
nababawi na natin sa mga Kastila, ang 
pagdadahilan na kinasangkapan ng mga 
Amerikano ay upang gawin daw tayong 
mga Kristiano (yamang matagal nang 
Kristiano ang karamihan ng mga Pm~ 



/-h nut 



bawa't isa'y walang ini-intindi kundi ang sariling pa kin a bang lamang 



Hi 




A CHALLENGE 



preaching) with his article, Granting — because it is the fact — that 
GRAPHIC uses English as its medium of communication, he could 
have asked a special favor that he may use Filipino* If GRAPHIC 
would refuse, there are Filipino magazines to turn to." 

In answer to those of the first category of readers, Mr, Quezon ex- 
pressed regrets he could not accommodate their suggestion. "Ang inyong 
nais na isalin ko sa Filipino ang aking xnga sinulat sa Ingles ay hindi 
ko pangangahasang gawin, sapagkat ang pagsasalin ay isa sa pinaka- 
manirap na gawin ng isang rnanuuulat, at ipinagtatapat ko na hindi ko 
kaya" he wrote* 

Instead, taking a cue from readers of the same persuasion as Miss 
Luis, Mr. Quezon sought "special favor* from GRAPHIC and sent in 
the accompanying article as his answer to readers of the category. 
GRAPHIC, which (as you may have noticed) started last week running 
its editorials both in Filipino and in English, was only too willing to 
oblige. 

Of this article, Mr. Quezon has this to say: 

"Here is an attempt at writing an article in Pilipino, Any criticism 
you have regarding the style or shallowness of treatment of the subject 
matter is fully justified. My purely Western-language education is per- 
haps an extenuating circumstance* I can only plead that I am trying to 
practise what I preach. My friends will testify that my conversational 
Filipino is fluent and unmixed, although I write it clumsily,'— # 




pino), upang layoV maging sibilisado, 
(para bagang hinm pa tayo sibilisado 
ng panahong yaon), at tuturuan daw ni- 
la tayo ng demokrasiya, 

Dapat nating ikahiya, mga kababa- 
yan, na hanggang ngayon ay mayroon 
pa tayong mga kalahi na tinatanggap at 
inuulit ang mga natuxang maling panga- 
iigatuwh-an. Inuulit nik at itinutura nila 
sa iba, bilang mga loro na hindi miisip 
ang kanilang sinasabi. 

Huwag na lamang natin silaug kaiini- 
pan o kagalitan. Ayon sa pagkakawang- 
gawa sa kapuwa, na tungkulin nating 
lahat sa harap ng Fanginoon at ng ating 
kapuwa tao, isipin na lamang natin tia 
hanggang doon na lamang ang abot ng 
kaaSang isip - bindi nagbubuhat sa ka- 
samaan o sa pagkukulang sa karangalan 
ag ating bay an at lahi. 

Subatf t ang boong katotohanan ay 
maling-mali sila. Ang pamahalaan na 

September 28, 1966 



itinatag ng ating mga bayani, ang sa- 
ligang batas na ipinatalastas sa Malolos, 
ay ayon sa demokrasiya, ayon sa mga 
simulam at patakaran ng demokrasiya, na 
hinango sa iba't ibang aral ng mga taga- 
pagtanggol ng kalayaan, sa mga aral 
ng Pananampalataya na nagtuturo na 
lahat tayo ay magkakapatid sapagkat 
anak tayong lahat ng Maykapal, at 
ayon din sa isip at simulain ng ating 
mga ninuno, na kumikilala na ang tao 
ay nasa kapangyarihan upang tunrn- 
pad sa mga tungkulin sa kaniyang nasa- 
sakop at ang mga nasasakop naman ay 
malayang gumawa ng ayon sa kaniyang 
karapatan, sa "dapat" niyang isagawa 
tungkol sa nasa katungkulan at sa ibang 
mga kapuwa, 

Ano pang batayan ng demokrasiya ang 
maituturo sa atin ng mga Americano? 

Subalft isinasagawa kaya ngayon ang 
mga napakagandang simulaing yaon? 



Masakit kilanlin, subali't ang katotoha- 
nan ay napakaraming nasa katungkulan 
na nakaliHmot: ang layunin ng katung- 
kulan ay ang pagtupad sa tungkulin sa 
bayan, hindi ang pananatili sa kapang- 
yarihan upang magpayaman a upang 
pagsikapan ang sariling kapakanan, ka- 
hit na mapahamak ang kapuwang ma- 
mamayan, o lalong mapalubog sa hirap. 

Sa kabilang panig naman, nililimot 
din ng marammg mamamayan na ang 
kanilang karapatan ay tungkulin din, 
ang paggamit ng kanilang kalayaan sa 
nararapat lamang, hindi sa ibang bagay, 
sapagkat ang paggamit ng kalayaan sa 
ibang bagay ay hindi tunay na kalaya- 
an kundi ang pagsira at paglabag sa 
tunay na kalayaan na siyang isang pina- 
kamahalagang biyaya ng Fanginoon sa 
tao. 

Nauukol na pagkuru-kuruan ng ba- 
wa't isa, maging ang nasa katungkulan, 



maging ang pangkaraniwang mamama- 
yan, kung ano ang kaniyang ginagawa, 
kung paano ang kaniyang paggamit ng 
kaniyang kalayaan sa kaniyang pamumu- 
hay. 

Huwag nating akalain na bubuti ang 
tayo ng bayan, huwag tayong umasa na 
uunlad at titibay ang ating demokrasiya, 
kapag bawa't isa'y walang ini-intindi 
kundi ang sariling kapaldnabangan la- 
mang, kung hindi iisipin ng bawa't isa, 
at isasagawa, ang pagtupad sa sariling 
tungkulin, ang paglilingkod sa bayan ng 
nasa katungkulan, at ang paggamit ng 
mamamayan ng kaniyang kalayaan at ka- 
rapatan sa ikabubuti ng kapuwa, maging 
mataas at marangal, maging aba at duk- 
ha. 

Ang ating demokrasiya ay mabubu- 
hay lamang kapag palaging iniisip ng 
lahat ang kahulugan ng salitang <¥ ka- 
tungkulan" at "karapatan."— # 





mmmm 



\ mm 

my i 




• « V • 



■ ift I 



by EFREN P. MOLINA 

Butuan City 



BUTUAN PUBLIC HOSPITAL 

The imposing front notwitfistanding, this neglected building is due to collapse 



• THE BUTUAN public hospital is a 
picture of official neglect. In 1963, a 
team of government building inspectors 
declared the hospital unsafe for further 
use and recommended its immediate 
demolition. Up to now, nothing has been 
done about it. 

It appears strong from outside but 
widespread ^anay" infestation caused 
many parts of the building to sag, Re- 
pair work, which will entail no less than 
**30,000, is considered futile and uneco- 
nomical, considering the extent of de- 
terioration of the building. 

According to Dr. Salvador B. Legas- 



pi, hospital chief, the cost of repair will 
be more than 50 per cent of the amount 
needed to construct a new building. 
There will be a chain of repairs unless 
a new building is constructed, he said. 

Aggravating the deplorable condition 
of the building is the lack of good sewer- 
age and a raging controversy over own- 
ership of the hospital site among the 
heirs of the donors. The city government 
of Butuan, too, has not been remitting 
its share for the maintenance of the hos- 
pital. 

The hospital originally had a I5-bed 
capacity but it was enlarged to 75 due 



to the influx of patients coming from as 
far as Leyte del Sur, Leyte del Norte, 
Surigao del Sur, Surigao del Norte, Mi- 
samis Oriental, and upper Agusan towns. 
During the 1963 floods which lasted for 
55 days, the hospital was half-sub- 
merged under water and the patients 
from the ground floor had to be trans- 
ferred to the second floor. Presently, 
some hospital patients are housed in the 
P45,000-Butuan hospital dispensary do- 
nated by ex-Governor Democrito O. 
Plaza to lessen the load of the main 
building. 

Apparently touched by the sad state 



of the hospital, Agusan Governor Con- 
suelo V. Calo recently made strong re- 
presentations with the secretary of health 
through Dr. Vicente Gahol, regional 
health director, to expedite the im- 
mediate release of F385,000 earmarked 
for the construction of a new hospital 
building, The amount is appropriated 
under various sources. 

How soon can the people of Agusan 
have a new hospital building? Indeed, 
the secretary of health must do some- 
thing before the deteriorating building 
will collapse.— # 



MIGUEL MALVAR 



• ON September 27 the whole nation 
commemorated the 101st birth anniver- 
sary of Miguel Malvar, often referred 
to as the last Filipino general to sur- 
render to the Americans during the Fil- 
ipino-American War. 

Much has been said of Malvar's gal- 
lantry in the battlefield, but he himself 
never dreamed of becoming a soldier, 
much less a general. After his studies, 
he engaged Tumself in farming and 
poultry raising in their farm in Santo 
Tomas, Batangas. An industrious farmer, 
he worked from sunup to sundown, 
resting only at high noon for his lunch 
which his pretty and equally industrious 
wife, Paula Maloles, prepared for him. 

His remarkable industry and persever- 
ance led Dr, Jose Rizals eldest sister, 
Saturnina, to invest P1000 in a business 
and let him manage it for her. As she 
had expected, the business grew tre- 
mendously during the first few months, 
His business acumen became the talk 
of the neighboring communities. 

When he had saved enough money, 
he bought a piece of land at the foot of 
Mt MaMing. There he embarked on a 
new business venture — raising native 
oranges, It was at this stage of his life 
when the patriot in him dominated his 
desire to continue in business. He soon 
joined up with Andres Bonifacio in the 
war against Spain. 

With the help of only a handful of 
local patriots, he raided the Spanish 
barracks in Talisay, Batangas. This in- 



22 



by ISIDRO C GREG0RI0 

Aliaga, Nueva Ecija 



cident naturally angered the Spanish 
authorities who immediately demanded 
his head. He was forced to abandon his 
farm and hide in the wilderness of Mt. 
Maldling* 

After offering his services to General 
Aguinaldo in 1897, Malvar gathered his 
relatives and friends and organized his 
own army and made himself its com- 




GENERAL MALVAR 

Gentleman soldier and farmer 



mander. The 7U-man strong group 
was equipped with a few shotguns, re- 
volvers, and bolos. 

Unable to get him, the Spaniards ar- 
rested his father, Don Ambrocio Maloles, 
instead and tortured him at their quar- 
ters at the base of Mt. Makiling. 

Greatly infuriated, Malvar stormed the 
Spanish quarters, and rescued his father 
after routing the enemy. 

Then came the "Pact of Biak-na-Ba- 
to,' in which the revolutionary leader, 
Aguinaldo and 41 of his men left Biak- 
na-Bato for their voluntary exile in Hong- 
kong. Malvar was among those who 
went into exile. But when Aguinaldo re- 
turned to the Philippines to join the 
American Asiatic Squadron under Com- 
modore George Dewey, General Malvar 
and other Filipino patriots were left 
behind, 

Somehow, General Malvar succeeded 
in returning to the Philippines at the 
time when General Aguinaldo was ur- 
ging his own people to help America in 
hgntmg Spain. In recognition of his 
courage and ability, Aguinaldo appoint- 
ed him brigadier-general of the Filipino 
forces in Tayabas (now Quezon) Ba- 
tangas, and Laguna. His fine showing 
led to his promotion to the rank of 
commanding general of the revolution- 
ary forces in 1899. Then when Aiminal- 

Marcn ii, 1901, Malvar became the 
eommander-m-chief of the whofe ™f 
pmo amy. On July 3l , 1901, he i ssu «d 



a stirring manifesto to the Filipino peo- 
ple. ^Forward, without ever turning 
back! All wars for independence have 
been obliged to suffer terrible tests!" 

As the struggle continued, the Fili- 
pino officers fell one by one, until only 
Malvar remained in the field. Confront- 
ed by a modern army, while his groaned 
under a sad lack of arms and provisions 
Malvar realized the hopelessness of the 
struggle. He surrendered to General 
George Bell, the commander of the 
American troops in Laguna, Tayabas, 
and Batangas, in Lipa on April 16, 1902. 

Following his surrender, he issued a 
proclamation which said that "the war 
carried on against the authority of the 
United States by the Filipino people has 
ended." H e enjoyed all the Filipino 
soldiers w to stop from now on, all hostile 
operations and, with their arms, sur- 
render to the nearest military authori- 
ties. * 

Civil government was established in 
Bata ^ s on July 4, 1902. General Bell 
asked General Malvar to act as governor 
of the province, but the latter chose to 
go back to his farm, 

Gen. Malvar died on October 13, 1911, 
at the age of 46 in Sta. Mesa, Manila. 
Present at his burial in his hometown, 
of Santo Tomas, were high ranking gov- 
ernment officials. Representing Gover* 
nor-General William Cameron Forbes 
was General George Bell, the American 
officer to whom he had presented him- 
self.-/ 



GRAPHIC 



pfiOBUS fMCtflSQS 
j\J\oyeS ^punb on Us isetfbsciCS 




MYpOOJ6WPft(JS SXgUMT 

iTvrs 2axon has 3 
retre&r at the l&st 

0n(j much cc&x 1 ^ 
. %^ gent I ^ pe^ u 35/ok 

of /tfs £h?l\. 





ftbrcfeb. AVbJbS pfoce^ lite; Cpt^gv^c- 
, uvrff fly a^^t-t^sl^K^rf- 




ffa&tfcfy ; St n c^sn we ai Su cA 
i^iDj^ ^e^ita^i^ fey fine/, f loob 
^H4)0f /atey Sp&cieS h& t? e& v\ 
-found mTM^ 
Tkls ^OLOn has been 

of fh& pa>K^ 




Tte QfiATUS DB6ATUS 

i/e*^) Itfub wBr c^h 

fife POlMTOFORPSR,- — fyovo&b 

if pounbs f6r hoo\tes utiurs ^ 

Wfijfe its e&iinj hafafo are^Khcwn,;^ 
(6 has -a rem&r/^bfe W)u ranee 

been Ob3en?e& <&fr -fai* 



7K# ^©ufe/fek 

c^c^ta*/ parfrfef, nfcbon 
cutting o^remcWe^ 

(jf not T6 be co^fu^ 

very -fine 6hb?ffiH^ 
fey fla5h bulbSr 





, 16 



STATE OF AFFAIRS 

by ADRIAN E. CRISTOBAL 




The Philippine Press 



• A BLISTERING attack on the Philippine Press by Jose 
Ma, Sison was followed recently by Rudy Trinidad of UP 
campus in a letter to the publisher of the Manila Times. 
Trinidad called a large percentage of newspapermen "nothing 
but gossips, blackmailers, racketeers, tools of vested interests, 
free-loaders, malicious intriguers, and professional distor- 
tionists of news for commercial purposes/' 

"While they plunder on their victims at will for a black- 
mail price," Reader Trinidad continues, "they are protected 
by the law. Many of them are all-knowing brats, arrogant, 
and uncouth belonging to the 'cream' of Filipino (men and 
women) columnists, newsmen, commentators, and editors. 
Everybody who meets up with this group gets a cold running 
through his spine for fear, and becomes cautious in the pres- 
ence of these 'untouchables/ A lucrative enterprise will have 
to maintain its 'untouchables' to survive as profit is evil to 
these people if they can't share in it. This is the picture of 
the majority in the media business as seen by a silent by- 
stander/' 

I have heard these complaints, although not in the colorful 
language that Reader Trinidad has employed. I have heard 
them from businessmen, politicians, and friends — and the 
'fear of newspapermen' is something that I have encountered 
personally now and then. 

The inevitable conclusion is that the Philippine Press has 
become too powerful, and power corrupts the newspaperman 
as much as any other man. 

But Reader Trinidad has missed an another point: why 
the Tolentinos, the Tanadas, the (Vicente) Peraltas, the Ma- 
nahans, the Manglapuses, to name a few, do not quake before 
newspapermen so described by him and have not been vie* 
timized in any way. 

As a general rule, politicians and businessmen who are 
most intimately "lovey-dovey" with certain newspapermen 
are also those who do not merit the encomiums and protec- 
tion they get. A few newspapermen of withering integrity 
have, to tell the sad truth, succumbed to them after an up- 
hill fight for the barest economic security. 

The hazards of the game are too various to enumerate. 
To the newspaperman of integrity, there is the threat to life 
and limb. To others, there is the cultivation of tastes and ap- 
petites fostered by association with the high and the mighty. 
All these are, of course, explanations, not justifications, but 
in the blurred moral system that we have now, one easily 
gets confused with the other, 

A corrupt society, in other words, cannot expect to have 
a thoroughly uncorrupted press. 

But, on balance, Reader Trinidad, as well as others who 
think as he does, still short-changes the Philippine Press, 
For the Philippine Press nevertheless enjoys a considerable 
amount of freedom, which can only be maintained if an im- 
portant segment of it remains uncorrupted. He cannot deny 
that despite the managed news and distorted perspectives, 
the Rig News get printed just fhe same, malefactors get ex- 
posed, and the electorate, of which Reader Trinidad is one, 
get the diverse opinions and important issues they need for 
making their final judgment 

For all its ills, the Philippine Press helps him — in a way 
that he cannot imagine — to exercise his freedom in a dem- 
ocratic society. 



^A ^MENTAiiY APPROACH TO Ar 

In conclusion, author, 
a political scholar, 
suggests a return to 




• IT IS TOO glibly assumed that a 
single six year term President will be a 
better Chief Executive than one with a 
four-year term qualified for reelection* 

Let us suppose it is so. But let us 
not overlook the possibility of a good 
man who is elected and then makes one 
honest mistake after another, bungles the 
whole business of government without 
once being guilty of selfish ambition on 
partisanship. This would be a beautiful 
case of hell being paved with good in- 
tentions, that is, the hell of our nation- 
al life would be paved with the Pres- 
ident's good intentions — it would still 
be hell 

This is bad enough over a period of 
four years, it would be worse over a 
period of six. The proposed amendment, 
let all and sundry realize, involves -a 
greater risk, if the advantages cited 
should fail to be realized in any given 
case. 

I think we should consider the pres- 
idential term of office from the perspec- 
tive of a very broad principle. A repre- 
sentative democracy should, as mucE as 
possible, govern in accordance with the 
sentiment of the people and be repre- 
sentative of the people insofar as this 
is practicable. 

It is in the light of this principle and 
the problem of how to make the govern- 
ment more democratic that we should 
consider the President's term of office. I 
believe one way to implement this gen* 
eral principle would be to return to our 
original pre-amendment Constitution, 
but with really basic modifications. At 
the risk of sounding paradoxical or self- 
contradictory, I shall proceed. 

Originally, we were to have a Pres- 
ident elected for a single term of six 
years, and a single chamber legislature, 
he National Assembly, whose members', 
were to have a term of three years. Thus* 
the composition of the Second National 
Assembly would have reflected approval 
or disapproval of the first three years 
of the Administration. At any rate, such 
would be the case today, when we have 
two major parties more or less equal in 
power. 

Of course (again studying the un- 
amended Constitution as it would operate 
today), the defeat of Administration 
candidates and the triumph of the Oppr> 



HI 



sitiou, indicating popular repudiation c! 
the Administration, could be ignored by 
the President, whose term would nm 
another tbree years. These possibilities 
would then arise — either the President 
and the National Assembly would be 
deadlocked, or the President would have 
to win the National Assembly over, or 
the President would be content to go 
along with the National Assembly, an 
unlikely prospect. Only in the last, very 
uuEkeiy event would government ie£leti 
popular sentiment. Naturally, if the Sec- 
ond National Assembly's composta 
showed popular support for the Admin- 
istration in its first three years and 
therefore an endorsement for the next 
three, the government would reflect pop 
uiar sentiment and there would be no 
problem in that line, 

I beiieve we could make the govern- 
ment more responsive to the electorate 
and also solve the problem of tie Pres- 
idents term of office by returning to 
the original framework of the Constitu- 
tion and overhauling it in accordance 
with the needs of popular governmeD* 
and our particular characteristics as a 
people. The overhauling would be in 
accordance with the demand of tie Sen- 
ate President and others that a truly 
national Constitution be produced. 

Suggestions 

Suggestions seem to be in order - 1 
shall make mine. 

My basic outline would be as follows: 

1) A return to unicameral system, ttot 
is, a legislature composed of a s*o# 
chamber, not a Senate and a House © 
Representatives. 

2) A six-year term for the member* 
of the legislature like today's senate 

3) One-half of the legislature to bj 
elected every three years (as onfi-&^ 
of today's Senate are elected every P° 
years) 

4) A six-year term for the Preside 

5) The Presidents term to end auto- 
matically if his Administration is i*P u ' 
diated after the first three years by I* 5 " 
ing its majority in the legislature* 

6) Election of a new President by 
new majority, to serve the reflia^ 
three years. 

7) Direct popular election of the n* ¥ 
President every six years. 



INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE 



by MANUEL L. QUEZON, Jr. 




The return to a unicameral legislature 
would make possible the assigning of 
credit or blame within the law-making 
body; that is, the majority could not 
point the accusing finger at another law- 
making body, as is' possible today — it 
would have to face responsibility square- 
ly and face the electorate squarely, on 
the basis of that responsibility. 

Furthermore, and perhaps most im- 
portant, a better balance of power would 
be achieved between the President and 
the legislature, not by weakening the 
President but by strengthening the legis- 
lature. The legislature is stronger in re- 
gards to the President when its power is 
concentrated in one Ifbuse instead of be- 
ing divided between two Houses. Also, 
experience has shown that the present 
form of the Senate allows for deadlocks 
too often, and gives to the man holding a 
deciding vote, an amount of power never 
intended in single members of Congress. 

A Drain Of Talent 

There is yet another consideration in 
favor of a single House* Because the 
Senate is considered the more important 
House, inasmuch as its individual mem- 
bers are more powerful than a congress- 
man, there is a natural tendency for any 
congressman who gains prominence to 
try to "graduate" to the Senate. Thus, 
there is a drain of talent from the House 
of Representatives to the Senate. This 
would not be so bad if it did not often 
result in an able ^congressman running 
for the Senate and losing — thus depriv- 
ing the country of his services unless he 
is appointed as a "lame duck.** 

The classical argument for an Upper 
House to act as a House of review of 
the acts of the Lower House is not de- 
cisive, because those who now exercise 
their leadership and moderation in the 
Senate would do so in the Lower House. 
As a matter of fact, it would be very 
difficult to prove that legislation passed 
by a unicameral legislature is poorer in 
quality than that passed by a bicameral 
legislature. 

The six-year term for the legislators 
svould be necessary so that some degree 
of coordination could be achieved with 
the presidential term. It would, of course, 
be possible to follow the original three- 
year term system but the individual 



legislator would he faced with campaign- 
ing too frequently. As in the case of a 
six-year President, he would be able to 
con centrate on lawmaking more com- 
pletely if campaigning were not so close 
at hand ail the time. 

The replacement of one-half of the 
legislature would make it more repre- 
sentative of public opinion, because it 
would more closely represent changes 
in public opinion. If the legislature w.ere 
to prove unsatisfactory to the public, the 
electorate would take control from the 
majority by electing opposition candi- 
dates. If, however, the voters were satis- 
fied, they would elect candidates belong- 
ing to the majority, thus keeping the 
majority in power* In other words, every 
three years the composition of the legis- 
lature could be brought into line with 



Under this system, the 
President chosen by 
legislature should 
serve only three years . . . 



the political tendency of the country. 

The six-year term for the President 
would be advisable because long-range 
administration programs such as this 
country and all underdeveloped countries 
need cannot be completed in four years. 
It is not only personal ambition that can 
cause a four-year President to prepare 
for reelection at an early date; he may 
well feel it his duty to continue guiding 
his Administration's program to its com- 
pletion or at least to near completion, 
which is not possible in four years but 
is entirely possible in six. Even if reelec- 
tion after a six-year term were permit* 
ted, the President could still concentrate 
for a longer period of time on strictly 
presidential duties. 

The trouble with a six-year presiden- 
tial term is that, if his Administration 
should prove a failure - and failure be- 
trays itself within one, two, or three 



years, the country would have to con- 
tinue suffering until the term of office 
ends. That is the reason for removing 
the President after ihree years if he 
loses the majority in the legislature. An 
Administration really stands or falls, de- 
pending on the legislation for which it 
is responsible* 

If the President loses his majority in 
the legislature, it would show that his 
program of government to which the 
legislature gave existence through laws 
was judged a failure by the people. 

I do not mean that all his programs 
in economics, education, national defense, 
etc. should have been completed in three 
years. I pointed out above that major 
programs cannot be completed in a 
short time. The failure would consist 
in the non-completion of projects which 
could and should have been completed 
in a short time but were not, and in the 
failure of long-range projects to have ad- 
vanced as far as they could reasonably 
be expected to advance* The major proj- 
ects are precisely die ones in which the 
population are most capable of judging. 

To take an example, a program to 
bring wages and prices into balance may 
take time, but if the situation has not 
improved perceptibly in three years, 
even a relatively ignorant voter can tell 
— his life has not grown less hard. 

Thus, if the Administration is judged 
a failure by the voters, and control of 
the legislature passed to the Opposition, 
the President would also automatically 
cease holding office and the new majori- 
ty in the legislature would elect a new 
President who would help carry out the 
new mandate. It would be impractical 
for the people to elect the new Pres- 
ident because that would involve hold- 
ing a national election right after another 
general election. To allow the President 
to continue would lead to difficulties in- 
herent in the original Constitution, as 
indicated above. 

The President chosen by legislature 
should, however, serve only three years 
at which time the people would again 
elect a President by direct vote* This 
would preserve the basic principle prac- 
tice of electing the President by direct 
vote. The danger of a President being 
elected who would be on the opposite 
side from the new majority in the legis- 



lature would be slight, since again one- 
half of the legislature would be elected, 
reflecting satisfaction or dissatisfaction 
with the previous Administration. The 
satisfaction or dissatisfaction would also 
be reflected in the election of the Pres- 
ident. 

This does not happen now, because of 
the bicameral and presidency- centered 
system we have. In the proposed system, 
greater importance would shift to the 
unicameral legislature, our government 
would be legislature rather than presi- 
dency-centered, It would he colored 
less by personality than Administration 
programs so the choice of a President 
would be decided on the basis of the 
choice of program for the legislature. 
This would also seem a movement in 
the direction of greater democracy, since 
there would be greater power in the 
hands of the legislature rather than in 
the hands of one man, the President, 
without adopting the Parliamentary con- 
centration of all power in the legislature, 
which here could easily lead to legisla- 
tive excesses* 

A Continuing Mandate 

I do not say the system I propose is 
fool-proof — no human system is* Nor do 
I mink I would be seriously considered, 
as it involves too great a departure from 
existing practice here and anywhere. But 
it would practically eliminate the dan- 
ger of an electioneering President since 
his continuation in office after three 
years would depend not on his cam- 
paigning but on his Administration's ob- 
taining a continuing mandate in the legis- 
lature, which could only be done by 
means of a satisfactory program carried 
out successfully* 

A bar to more than six years would 
be a matter of opinion since reelection 
of the President would still depend, al- 
though not so absolutely, on a satisfac- 
tory Administration, If the Administra- 
tion is satisfactory, why not another 
term? 

The determining factor for or against 
a ban on reelection should then be 
whether or not the intra-party squabbles 
for the nomination would be harmful to 
our political life, as being (possibly) 
conducive to pre-election intrigues be- 
tween President and legislature.— # 

17 






INSIDE RUSSIA 

Above: Gemma Cruz Araneta inspects a Filipiniana material 
in a Russian museum. Below: Antonio §. Araneta, Jr. ex- 
changes views with Dr. B, Gafuron, director of Oriental 
Studies Institute (opposite Araneta) t and Dr. Lewinson 
(partly covered), a Russian specialist in Philippine affairs. 
Right: The Red Square and the Saint Basil cathedral 





The Philippines in Ru 




by Dr. A. GUBER 
nd Dr. G. LEWINSON 



• THE EARLIEST mention of the 
Philippines found in Russian diplomatic 
documents relates to the very first years 
of the reign of Catherine II and refers 
to the Anglo-Spanish dispute on the so- 
called "Manila debt". According to the 
Paris Peace Treaty of 1763, Britain un- 
dertook to return the Philippines, which 
she had occupied during the Seven 
Years 1 War, to tiie Spanish Crown. Soon 
the British Government demanded of 
Spain that she pay two million piastres 
on account of the promissory note given 
by the Archbishop of Manila as indem- 
nity to the commander of the British 
troops in the Philippines, Colonel Dra- 
per, but die Royal Court of Madrid re- 
jected this claim and on its own part 
insisted on the return of a Spanish ves- 
sel seized by the British in the port of 



Manila. 

The dispatches ol the Russian repre- 
sentatives in London, Madrid, and the 
Hague from 1763 to 1766 reveal all peri- 
peteias in the Anglo-Spanish dispute that 
came to their knowledge through per- 
sonal conversations with the ministers 
and diplomats of both countries and the 
study of documents that passed through 
their hands. We learn much irom these 
dispatches regarding the sufferings that 
befell the inhabitants of the Philippines 
as a result of the struggle between the 
two colonial Powers; the pillage and out- 
rages committed by the British forces 
in Manila, the suppression by the Brit- 
ish of the "rebellion of the inhabitants 
of the Manila Islands/' the attempts of 
the Spanish colonial authorities headed 
by the Archbishop to pay off the con- 



querors through additional taxation of 
the Philippine population. Worthy of 
note is a document appended to a dis- 
patch from the Russian Ambassador to 
London (published at that time but still 
a great rarity): a letter from Colonel 
Draper to Lord Halifax outlining the 
circumstances of Manila's capture and 
the negotiations of the British with the 
Archbishop of Manila. 

Another part of the 18th century doc- 
uments describes the conflict between 
Spain and Holland in connection with 
the establishment of the Philippine Roy- 
al Company in 1785, 

Two reports (1767 and 1770) by the 
Russian Ambassador to Madrid, Stake- 
berg, provoke curiosity; in the first, he 
writes in detail of the existing plans to 
establish the Philippine Company and 

-graphic 



