
HIS EXCELLENCY PRESIDENT MANUEL A. ROXAS 

— UPON WHOSE SHOULDERS FALL TODAY THE WEIGHTY PRO- 
BLEMS OF GUIDING THE NATION TO THE PATH OF ULTIMATE 
SECURITY, PEACE, GENERAL WELFARE AND PROSPERITY. 

3 



PROGRAM 



I 

REMARKS by the Master .of Ceremonies, Hon. JOSE FIGUERAS, Adviser of the 
NATIONAL COMMISSION OF LABOR AND PEASANTS 

1. Labor March by the Band. 

2. Speech by Mr. AURELIO INTERNAS, Acting Chairman of the NATIONAL 
COMMISSION OF LABOR AND FEASANTS. 

3. Song — " SA K ABU KIR AN" — by Miss NATY MUSOZ. 

4. Speech by Mrs. BEATRIZ P. RONQUILLO, President of the WOMEN'S 
INTERNATIONAL LEAGUE. 

=>. Speech by Hon. PEDRO MAGSALIN, Secretary of Labor. 

6. Vocal Solo — "BALITAO" — By Miss DELY MAGPAYO. 

7. Message of His Excellency, President MANUEL A. ROXAS. 

8. Presentation of Gift to Senate President JOSE AVELINO — by Col. ARTE- 
MIO NABOR, (FLAS). Acting Executive Secretary of the NATIONAL 
COMMISSION OF LABOR AND PEASANT, accompanied' by Atty. BAL- 
TAZAR VILLANUEVA, Acting Chairman of the NATIONAL LABOR 
UNION (NLU) Mr. HUGO RETAGA, President of the NATIONAL 
WORKER'S BROTHERHOOD, Mr. VICENTE CABRERA— President 
Committee 3. LOFT, Air. MAXIMO ESTRELLA — Secretary UOEF, 
Mt. NICOLAS CRUZ — Treasurer UOEF and Mr. RODOLFO CAS- 
TRO — Gen. Delegate UOEF. ~ ' 

9. Vocal Solo — "KUNDIMAN". 

10. Introduction of the Guest of Honor — by Mr. PEDRO FERNANDEZ, Gen- 
eral President of the UNION DE OB R EROS ESTIV ADORES DE FIL1- 
PINAS (UOEF). 

11. Address by the Guest of Honor: The Honorable JOSE AVELINO, President 
of the Senate. 

II 



DANCE 



MESSAGE 

The social mission of every progressive democratic government is not merely to 
serve as a mediator between capital and labor but to seek a just balance and equality 
by actively helping the weaker side. That has alzcays been a fundamental objective 
of this administration, which is the natural heir and executor of the great Quexonian 
tradition of social justice. 

From the very start, our President has sponsored and enforced such measures fls 
the 70-30 division of the crop for the benefit of the peasants and the limitations o?* 
rentals and prices for the benefit of the workers. Through skillful- and 
far-sighted diplomacy he has also secured the distribution of millions upon millions 
of pesos to aid the masses in recovering from the ravages of war. 

Some false friends of labor would lead the country to chaos bv defying the law. 
We on the other hand believe that if a laic is bad or unfair, it should be changed^ not 
broken. You can be certain that the Liberal Party will always work, within the laic, 
to help labor. Nothing will stop or can stop its pro-labor policy. 

As a former Secretary of Labor before the rear and as a friend of labor through- 
out my public career, I can assure you of my own steadfast sympathy and active help. 
I am on your side. 

JOSE AVELINO 
President of the Senate. 



MESSAGE 

One of the gravest evils in modern society is the economic inequity that exists 
beticeen the fortunate few ivho possess excessive icealth and the proletarian millions 
zcho are virtually destitute. Both industrial and agricultural zcorkers need bettr?- 
Dving conditions. Amhle sufficiency is the crvina need of the icorking classes. To 
this end f Capital and Government can and should combine efforts to enable the work- 
ingman to acquire by skill and thrift a moderate ownership. 

In this respect, the government has taken the initiative in readjusting ozenership 
with a viae to the common welfare and the uplift of the masses. It has concluded 
negotiations for the purchase of landed estates for distribution and resale at cost to 
propertyless tenants. I invite Capital to follozc this exampl" set by the government. 
The sooner oicner is readjusted bv either Government or Capital so as to meet the 
demands of the common good the earlier will zee prevent abuses that may eventually 
lead to the destruction of Capital itself. % % 

On the other hand, the industrial and the agricultural worker must bear in mmd 
that there also exist responsibilities and duties concomitant to his class in society. 1 o 
lose sight of this fact will lead to chaos and confusion. The worker has duties* to 
perform and responsibilities to shoulder which constitute his share in the relations be- 
tween Capital and Labor. 

I perfectly agree icith Labor that the present-day scale of wages is altogether not 
in keebino with the high cost of living. But I cannot over-emphasize the need f < 
consider the condition of any particular business and of its ozvner when settling the 
scale of wages. It is unjust to demand wages so high that the employer can not 
grant them without ruin to his business. It is not only unjust but in the long run, 
it will prove more harmful than beneficial to the laborer who, after all, will prosper 
only in proportion to the condition of his employer's business. 

These are days that call for closer cooperation betzceen Labor, (capital, and Gov- 
ernment mv friends. These are days that caU for sacrifice for the common good' 
We are marchina along th" road to rehabilitation and reconstruction of our ruinrd 
economv and industry. We cannot afford to let unrestrained emotions halt the 
national progress I urge both Capital and Labor to cooperate more and to avoid 
Uttina individual benefit supersede the benefit of the community. 
Manila, Sept. 20, 1947. EVGENIO PEREZ 

Manila, Sept. 25, 1917 



MESSAGE 

in acln "Onlt" '° Zt^ ™ at } onal . Commission of Labor and Peasants again 
L hi recall t he hofie n exdted hefore h _ J 

even ^IrJtf *** the r " nditi " ns "f our post-war life, demanding 

andunU d 9mCy ^ ™ l ™ tion - Labor itself realizes its need for a strong 
ona ' unified movement. By division Labor not only denies itself the strength that 
unity gives; in fighting each other rival labor factions dissipate their scattered strength 
rank, , /7 '' U " ° P lU l " iereSt fa a ""'■ fir ' 1 lab " r movement. The split in the 
til in th 4%t IS rrX nSt T thrCat '° indu * tri <>l Peace. We have seen evidences of 
Tare, nivell L ' C ° "H"" U -" ited States - We >'™ e °* ™" history, com- 

laZr , r "Tt^ POtntedh i " s "-"'-'^e. of harmful dissensions within the 

Tmanv nZ t , Z * ^l-" mch landing exclusive bargaining, leads 

to J - ^Jk stoppage that hinders the flow of production and essential services. 

health ■ aZn, < v a " m r fied mov ^ ment "'"t labor can attain to a sane and 
U ?l f v 5 d - reCt T' h cnn hel P establ "» ™ll-defined standards in em- 
IrcdZll m$te i, ° f ^ V " r - iety arhi "V f rom *»' Afferent and often un- 

Latr TT P ," rS " ed l,V different Unions - l * a ™" can be found whereby 
Labor st>e(d authoptanvely for all within its ranks, we may expect that contract 
negotiations w-ll be conducted on a higher level, with greater mutual respect and trust 
from each side of the tabh. thereby Promoting equilibrium in labor-management re- 
lation* and assuring equitable distribution of the profits of industry. 
nrmJ t u f N(lt ' onal Commission 0 f Labor and Peasants on the 

tumH ° f / tS /f L blrth "!" t0 * x i>™° the hope that its efforts may help towards the 
fulfillment of the need for a unified labor movement in the Philippines. 

s„ M , 1C in .„ PEDRO MACS J LIN 
September 1.-). 1047 p , T , 
oecretary of Labor 



MECHANIZE YOUR FARMS FOR GREATER PRODUCTION 

TRACTORS 

DISC PF OWS _ f rom four disc to five disc 
DISC H ARROWS 

ELECTRIC GENERATORS for Farms 
WATER PUMPS 



arc aH available now in stock and ready for sale in CASH OR INSTALLMENT 

Our Instalment Sales Plan is as follows: 

25% down payment, the balance pavable 

in 3 years in 3 equal annual payments ' ' ' 

at 4% interest. ' : 

Plus 5% sales tax 

: W ? ar % read y to serve you at all times. For further particulars call at or 
inquire from the 

AGRICULTURAL MACHINERY AND EQUIPMENT CORPORATION 

220 Tanduay, Manila 
"Make Agriculture Pay — Do It the AM EC Way" 



THE NATIONAL COMMISSION OF LABOR AND PEASANTS 



(A BRIEF HISTORICAL SKETCH) 



For several years prior to 1939, labor lead- 
ers in the Philippines had the common desire to 
have their respective labor unions grouped toge- 
ther under one national organization, with a 
view to presenting a united front in their effort 
to secure concessions for their members in the 
employ of commercial and industrial etablish- 
mcnts in the Islands. Accordingly, several at- 
tempts were made at consolidating all existing 
labor unions under one federation after another, 
but for reasons that need not be enumerated 
here, all such efforts failed. 

Some time in May, 1939, however, the late 
President Manuel L. Quezon appointed former 
Senator Jose Avelino as Secretary of Labor. At 
long last labor leaders throughout the country 



felt that one of their kind was deemed fit by the 
President of the Commonwealth to occupy a 
cabinet post. Secretary Avelino, they know, 
was at one time president of a labor union in 
Samar; they were positive that, having been a 
labor leader himself, the new cabinet man would 
be instrumental in bringing about the realiza- 
tion of the program of the administration re- 
specting Social Justice. 

The expectation of organized labor in this 
country was immediately rewarded. On the very 
day that he assumed his duties in the Depart- 
ment of Labor, Secretary Avelino sent an in- 
vitation to all prominent labor leaders for a con- 
ference in his office, which was promptly ac- 
cepted. At that time, the existing labor unions 




Late Pres. Quezon is shown above cutting" ribbon signalling" the opening* of the Farmers' 
ana Labor Jubilee under the auspices of the National Commission of Labor and Peasants last 
1939. Also shown in the picture are Senate Pres. Avelino then Sec. of Labor and Chairman 
ex-Officio of the NCLP and Hon. Jose Fignieras, adviser of the NCLP. - 



7 



were already for the most part unified into 
three formidable labor groups. The so-called 
conservative unions were affiliated with the 
Congreso Obrero — National Federation of 
Labor (conservative wing) group headed by the 
late Segundo Ramos; while the progressive or- 
ganizations were grouped under the Collective 
Labor Movement (CLM) headed by Jose M. 
Nava. The third group, otherwise known as 
the liberal group, consisted of unions affiliated 
with the National Federation of Labor (pro- 
gressive wing) _ Confederated Workers Al- 
liance (CWA) combination under the leader- 
ship of Angel Marin and Artemio Nabor. 

The conference thus called was held two or 
three days afterwards. Explaining his purpose 
in calling the meeting of labor leaders, the new 
Secretary of Labor made it clear that labor unity 
must be maintained, if the labor movement in 
the Philippines must achieve its objectives, Con- 
vinced of his sincerity, the representatives of the 
three labor groups above-mentioned agreed to 
form the National Commission of Labor as a 
supreme national entity of labor organizations, 
wherein each group would be represented by ten 
members. In another conference that took place 
shortly thereafter, the Commission adopted a 
charter, and elected Secretary of Labor Avelino 
its Chairman ex-oficio, with Artemio Nabor as 
Executive Secretary of said Commission. 

Representing the conservative group in the 
newly organized labor commission were Se- 
gundo Ramos (deceased), Aurelio Intertas, Ma- 
riano Ubaldo, Pedro Fernandez, Floro Buen- 
consejo, Simeon S. Ringor, Eugenio Arrogante, 
Nicolas Cruz, and two others. The liberal gro lp 
was represented by Angel Marin, Artemio Na- 
bor, Jose I. Baluyot, Gregorio Pineda (deceas- 
ed), Jacinto Salazar, Felix Verces (deceas- 
ed), Jelicisimo Lauzon, Filomeno Prudon, Jose 
Kobles Jr. and Pedro J. Velazco; while the 
progressive group had for its representatives Tose 
M. Nava, Antonio D. Paguia, Luis Taruc, Gui- 
Ilermo Capadocia, Isabelo Tejada (deceased) 
Manuel Joven. Pedro C. Castro. Ildefonso K. 
Komev, Jose Ilagan and Dionisio Gifbj (des 
ceased). 

On the 5th of the following month, the 
National Commission of Labor was pompously 
inaugurated. In the morning of that dav a huge 
abor rallv took place at the Manila Grand Opera 
House, with the then First Ladv of the Land, 
Dona Aurora A. Quezon, unfurling the flag 
of the Commission. In the afternoon, a labor 
vmirv parade and demonstration took nJace. 
Starting from the Manila Grand Opera House, 



the paraders marched towards the Luneta. As the 
guest of honor of the occasion, the late President 
Quezon addressed a crowd of close to a quartcr 
of a million working people of Manila and near- 
by provinces. It was the largest labor gather- 
ing in the Philippines ever to be held to that 
date. 

For the first time in our history, labor unity 
was achieved, Secretary of Labor Avelino, 
accomplished a chief objective. The late Pre- 
sident Quezon was elated at the thought that 
a favorite dream of his had became a reality it- 
self. The working masses throughout the Phil- 
ippines then rejoiced. 

About the middle of July of 1939, a National 
Commission of Peasants was likewise organized 
as a sister organization to the National Com- 
mission of Labor; again, with the Secretary of 
Labor as Chairman ex-oficio. The late Juan 
Feleo was chosen Executive Secretary of the 
new commission, with Jacinto Manahan (de- 
ceased), Mateo del Castillo, Jesus M. Nava, 
Fernando E. Samaniego, Tomas T. Tirona, Ar- 
temio Caballes, Arcadio Roxas, Teodulo Cruz, 
Casto Alejandrino, Felixberto Yumul (deceas- 
ed), Florentino Tecson, Manuel Palacios, Va- 
lenzuela and other leading peasant leaders among 
its members. The peasants' commission was 
inaugurated in Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija about 
the month of August of the same year. I n 
identical ways, organized peasantrv was thus un- 
ified. 

With both labor and peasant unity achieved, 
the Social Justice policy of the late President 
Ouezon's administration had the full support of 
^nranized labor and peasantry in the Philippines. 
A progressive era in management-labor relations 
was given a good start. We were then 
headed towards industrial peace. 

ring the latter part of 1940, however, Se- 
cretary of Labor Avelino was relieved of his 
duties in the Department of Labor and appoint- 
ed Secrefarv of Public Works and Communica- 
tions. Fortunately enough, he was succeeded by 
a new Secretary of Labor, the Honorable Leon 
Guinto, who turned out to be aqually friendly 
to labor, but then he felt that it was time for 
the Secretarv of Labor to withdraw from the 
chairmanship of the two commissions. Conse- 
quently Aurelio Intertas and Felicisimo Lauzon 
were designated Chairman and Vice-Chairman 
respectively of both the National Commission of 
Labor and National Commission of Peasants, 
with Artemio Nabor continuing as the Execu- 
tive Secretary of both commissions. 

Up to the start of World War II in the Phil- 



3 




Senate Pres. Avelino, then Sec. of Labor, is shown ahove receiving - the historical Earn- 
pilan gift from Moro lahor delegation headed by labor leader Jose M. Nava, Supreme Head 
of the powerful Federation Obrera de Pilipinas. 



ippines, the two commissions were engaged in 
various activities to promote the material, social 
and moral well -being of its members, as well 
as of unorganized labor and peasantry in the 
Islands. Representatives of both the commis- 
sions of labor and peasants made trips to indus- 
trial centers and rural communities to make a 
survey of working and living conditions then 
obtaining in many localities; and thereafter, re- 
commended the passage of legislation that would 
ameliorate the lot of the working masses. Un- 
der the management of the then Inspector Gen- 
eral of Labor Jose Figueras, a Farmer-Labor 
Jubliee was held in Manila to celebrate the first 



anniversary; of labor unity in this country. With 
the activities of labor and peasant organizations 
efficiently coordinated and correlated, workers 
and peasants easily obtained liberal concessions 
from their employers or their landlords. 

At the outbreak of the war, the two com- 
missions saw to it that all labor and peasant 
organizations in the Philippines were converted 
into labor battalions, farmers' battalions and 
bolo battalions, which functioned under the 
Civilian Emergency Administration until the oc- 
cupation of the Islands by the Japanese Im- 
perial Forces, when said organization S went un- 
derground and became guerrilla units. 



FOR DYEING ALL KINDS OF CLOTHES 
INSIST OX 
"AZUL ULTRAMARINO" 

DY BUNCIO AND COMPANY INC. 

IMPORTERS & EXPORTERS 
Manufacturers Representatives 
Head Office: Branches 
609 Lavezares St. Cebu — San Francisco, Calif. 

Manila, P. I. U. S. A. 

CABLE ADDRESSES: "DY BUNCIO" 
ALL STANDARD CODES 



MESSAGE TO PHILIPPINE LABOR 

By V. MADRIGAL 



My greetings to you on this memorable oc- 
casion are not a vain expression of feelings. They 
spring from the bottom of my heart. It is my 
candid belief that in peace and in war the so 
called laboring class does constitute the in- 
haustible reservoir of productive and creative 
energies from which the nation draws her re- 
vitalizing forces. Over your shoulders mainly 
lies the expeditious and prompt rehabilitation 
of our devastated cities and towns, on your 
willingness and determination to do your share 
shall a great deal depend the progress, welfare 
and lasting happiness of our people. 

Having come from the ranks and file of the 
humble and lowly; having been one of you, I 
am in a singular position to know your feelings; 
hence, I cannot but feel the most profound 
sympathy for the yearnings of your hearts. The 
days of heartless and soulless exploitation of 
man by man are over, the merciless cruci- 
fixion of human values on the cross of 
gold or silver has no place in the world 
of today. The socio-economic factors, "ca- 
pital and labor," should be treated as the 
instrumentalities of man for his perfect- 
ion, for his happiness, for the realiza- 
tion of his mission in this world ; the 
means to an end, not the end itself. Man 
should remain the master of both. The tendency 
to confuse the instrumentality with the princi- 
pal, the means with the end, is responsible for 
the many evils that have visited mankind ; it ha- 
frigthfully and fatefully divided the peoples of 
the earth; it has sown the seeds of pre- 
judice, of antagonism, nay of hatred amongst 
those who, with a better understanding of their 
rights and of their sublime mission, should at all 
times feel closelv united by the bonds of Chris- 
tian brotherhood. 




Mr. V. MADRIGAL 



There is and there should always be an un- 
mistakable boundary line between the BEAST, 
the unfeeling brute, and the MAN, the most 
beautiful expression of God's wisdom and pow- 
er. In a social and economic structure wherein 
certain groups of society are condemned to a life 
unworthy of man's original birth as the king of 
all creatures, wherein he is denied those bless- 
ings and prerogatives that distinguish him from 
the lower creatures there certainly must be a 
fundamental fault or mistake either in its basic 
organization or in its operation. 

I believe in the right of every man to equal 
opportunity in the enjoyment of the goods of the 
earth. I shall strive to make of the control of 
the means of production by any man or groups 
of men a medium for the realization of such 
ideal, rather than a mere opportunity for gain 
or wealth accumulation. 



10 



THE U.OE.F...ITS TRAVAILS AND STRUGGLES 



In the history of the labor movement in the 
Philippines, the year of 1917 stands out as the 
starting epoch of militant trade unionism in this 
country. That year marked the birth of organ- 
ized labor — the dawn of the working man's 
new awareness and a deep consciousness of its 
inherent rights and prerogatives under the actual 
set-up of a democratic regime. 

The Union de Obreros Estivadores de Fili- 
pinas may be said to have been given birth dur- 



herents giving it added vigor and personality. 
As a consequence of the initial strike its mem- 
bers staged, a better wage scale was approved 
by 'their employers wherein ordinary laborers 
who used to received PI. 25 a day were alreadv 
paid P2.00 while those capatases receiving P4.00 
a day received P3.00, an increase of about 20 
per cent of their original wages. 

Thus for the first time in labor's history in 
our countrv our working masses had literally ex- 




Mrs. Aurora Quezon is shown abov* recMrr'.nor from Mr. FSflro Fernandez, G-en. Sec, and 
Mr. Aurelio Intertas, Gen. Vice Pres. of the UOEF, the contribdtion of the stevedores to Hthe 
National Philippine Red Cross in last year's fund drive in the amount of i>10,20O.O0. 



ing that year of 1917. On August 15th of that 
year, a small labor group under the able leader- 
ship of Mariano Ubaldo, Engracio Bernardo, 
Gregorio Herrera, Rafael Nueva and Alberto 
Reyes had succeeded in carrying out their de- 
mands for increased w T ages and for the recogni- 
tion by their employers of their labor agrupation 
as a representative body which was eventually 
named the Union de Obreros Estivadores de Fi- 
lipinos (UOEF). 

A headquarters of the union was officially 
inaugurated when the organizers opened a mo- 
dest office on Muelle de Binondo. Having won 
their initial victory over capital when they 
struck for the first time against their employers, 
the newly organized stevedores' union became 
more inspired and encouraged when it was re- 
inforced with many new symphatizers and ad- 



perienced a new lease in life in its valiant strug- 
gles for survival and they have become finally 
aware of a dawking era of emancipation from 
peonage and servility under a capitalist system of 
industrial monopoly. 

Undoubtedly the dramatic world agitation 
going on among the working elements in other 
countries had inspired local labor leaders to as- 
sert their own people's legitimate role in the 
scheme of Philippine political and economic life. 
The surging Russian masses had revolted against 
their Tzar and against their aristocracy about 
that year and succeeded to overthrow the Em- 
peror's absolute regime. Labor elements in 
America and Europe had about that time also 
launched a concerted drive to wrest essential 
prerogatives from their masters and employers 
and in demanding for increased wages, better 



11 



living conditions and shorter working hours. 
Hence, it was not surprising that such world 
agitation and reaction had also inspired local 
labor elements to work for their own uplift and 
w cllbeing. 

The founders and organizers of the UOEF 
have positively become very much alive to 
the trends of trade unionism sweeping 
over the democratic countries of the world. 
Thus, they also decided to expand and unite 
themselves together with other labor groups in 
the country under one potent leader- 



the result of which was the recognition 
of the union as the only labor bargaining 
body by the employers and the granting 
of most of the demands contained in the 
petition of the strikers which precipitated the 
walkout. Undoubtedly this was another signal 
victory for the local working man. 

On June 20, 1927, the Committee No. 2 un- 
der the presidency of Fruto S. Coching was or- 
ganized. The longshoremen working on the 
docks and piers of Manila organized also an- 
other group which they named "Bisig Ng Pan- 



Central Committee, U.O.E.F. 



MARIANO A. UBALDO 

AURELIO S. INTERTAS 

PEDRO FERNANDEZ 

NICOLAS CRUZ 

JUAN1TO R. CIPRES 

VICENTE CABRERA 

RODOLFO CASTRO 



BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

MARIANO A. UBALDO 
AURELIO S. INTERTAS 
PEDRO FERNANDEZ ' 
NICOLAS CRUZ 
JUANITO R. CIPRES 



General President 

.. Gen. Vice-President 

... Gen. Secretary 

Gen. Treasurer 

Gen. Asst. Treasurer 

Gen. Auditor 

Gen. Delegate 



VICENTE CABRERA 
JUSTINO BALANO 
JESUS P. BALAIS 
PABLO RUIZ 
JOHNY MONTGOMERY 



RODOLFO CASTRO 



=3 



ship. First to be fused and merged with 
the original organization was the "Panay Ba- 
gong Lakas" group which was renamed Com- 
mitee No. 1 of the UOEF. This fusion marked 
the first step in Philippine labor's drive for 
unification and solidarity. 

Then in Mav of 1927, due to oppresive 
abuses committed by capatases employed by their 
employers, the Simmie and Grill (now the Lu- 
zon Stevedoring Co. ) , a group of stevedores 
called "Traffic" working under the same com- 
pany finally decided to declare a strike asking 
for increased wages and better treatment and the 
elimination of abusive capatases from the com- 
pany's employ. The leaders of this new walkout 
were Pedro Fernandez, Rodolfo Castro, Amado 
Baluyot (deceased) Emilio Aquino, Pablo Pe- 
lavo and several others. The strike lasted for 
15 days when the employers finally sought to 
hold a conference with the labor leaders, 



Mian" which later was renamed Committee No. 
4 affiliated with the UOEF under the presi- 
dency of Silvcrio Ventura and Jesus Salazar. I n 
1938 another group of workers in the port of 
Manila called "May Pagkakaisa" was also or- 
ganized, and this is the present Committee No. 
3 of the seamen's organization under the presi- 
dency of Justino Balano. 

When war broke out in 1941, practically all 
the leaders and members of the UOEF wore in- 
ducted into the labor battallions organized by 
the government. Upon the occupation of Ma- 
nila bv the Japanese a great number of the labor 
battallion legions had united themselves as <\ 
guerrilla unit and had sent their fighting outfit 
to the mountains to conduct resistance activities 
against the enemy. Others remained in the city 
for the purpose of serving as intelligence opera- 
tives and contact units with the forces in the 
mountains. Most decidedly the labor batallions 



12 



Picture above shows the guests and officials of the TJOEP at a banquet on the occasion 
of the unfolding" of the flag- of the union given at the S electa, with the Pirst Lady of the 
Land, Mrs. ivoAits, as maarma. 

G-en. Sec. Pedro Fernandez is shown at the mike delivering" a speech. Others in the, 
photo are from left to riglvto; Vicente Cabrera, Nicolas Cruz., ex-Chief Javalera, Maar'inno 
"Ubaldo, Mrs. Boxas, Mrs. Jose Figrueras, Mrs. Fecson, and others. 



guerilla outfit had served the allied cause credit- 
ably by effectively harrassing the enemy, des- 
troying enemy lines of communications and am- 
bushing Jap patrols upon every opportunity du- 
ring the hectic days of the occupation. 

When the American forces of liberation of Gen. 
MacArthur took back Manila from the hands 
of the Japanese after a bitter house-to-house and 
street-by-street fighting, the U. S. Army had 
occupied the piers of the city and started its re- 
construction while at the same time utilizing 
these for the U. S. navy's use and as depot for 
supplies of the U. S. forces. Hence a call for 
workers was sounded and forthwith, with varied 
activities and projects at the wharves waiting for 
personnel, practically most of the pre-war water- 
front workers and stevedores volunteered to 
work under the charge of the U. S. Army, 
It had even become necessary for the army to 
take in additional laborers from the provinces 
to undertake the voluminous and seemingly end- 
less work on the piers of Manila. War was 
then practically going on. Then everything 
seemed going on smoothly. Rut when the sur- 
render of the enemy was later announced the 
Army authorities began laying off workers, at 
the same time cutting down on their wages and 
rations. , 

Hence the locrl labor group began to feel the 
threatening un^mnlovment for a great number 
of them and of the impending dislocation of their 
economic security. Thus again labor sought 



council among themselves and with the leaders 
of the UOEF having* reorganized themselves 
into a militant organization with sufficient force 
enough, they had decided to call a strike against 
the Army which was employing them. This 
strike was regarded as the biggest walkout ever 
staged in this country by local unions, involving 
from 80 per cent to 90 per cent of the dock 
workers population. 

The stevedoring union held tight together in 
demanding from the Commanding General of 
the U. S. Army for increased wages, and assur- 
ances of permanent employment, particularly at 
that time when commodity prices and the stand- 
ard of living in the city was soaring sky high 
and housing had become a most serious and cost- 
ly affair for the city people. 

The petition of the striking stevedores were 
evidently given full consideration by the Com 
manding General. For after two weeks of nego- 
tiation the Army authorities acceded to the de- 
mands of the strikers, giving 50 per cent increase 
in their wages, both skilled and unskilled labor. 
Thus, post-war labor again won a signal 
triumph for being able to secure favorable con- 
cessions from their employers, making effective 
use of strike as an inherent right and preroga- 
tive. 

One significant repercussion as the outcome 
of that strike staged by the local stevedores 
(Continued on page 24) 

13 



FERNANDO LOPEZ 

FRIEND OF THE MASSES 



There rre rare instances where we find peo- 
I . the upper strata of society— millkm- 

, and ■ aristocrats— identifying themselves- 
Uosdy and wholeheartedly with the down- 
trodden" masses, with the unfortunate and for- 
rotten [egipn^, and have endeared themselves in 
the -hearts of these underprivileged. It cannot 
e dcnicd th at here in our country the caste sysr 
tern or society still persists governing the rela- 
tions among our different classes of people. 

I)own in the southern metropolis that is Ilo- 
»o City a youthful business executive and fin- 
ancial tycoon belonging to the fabulously rich 
Lopez family by the name of Fernando Lopez 
has become too well known as iriemi of the poor 
and the laboring masses. His fame as such cham- 
pion of the poor and underprivileged has literal- 
ly reached the four corners of the archipelago 
so that President Manuel Roxas, the leader of 
our people who is continually in search of trust- 
ed leaders and public officials to assist him in 
the national endeavor of reconstruction and re- 
habilitation of our prostrate country has real- 
ized in this youthful leader a great possiblity for 
leadership and so had asked him to become one 
of the official standard bearers of the Liberal 
Party for senators. 

Don Fernando Lopez had been serving for 
nearly two vears already as Mavor of Iloilo 
C it\\ in which position he had endeared himself 
to the masses and to the different elements of 
the community not in the city alone but thruout 
the province itself. His record as chief execu- 
tive of that citv is eloquent proof of his deep 
concern and abidine faith in the common man, 
He had devoted himself to their welfare and 
Uplift, sacrificing his energy, his wealth and his 
talents for their wellbeing. Every well-inform- 
ed Ilongo in the famed "Queen City of the 
'South" can attest to the fact that during near- 
lv two vears that Nan ding Lopez had been 
mayor of that city he had practically not 
received any financial compensation for his servi- 
ces because all money he was supposed to receive 
were either given as direct help to indigents and 
needy people daily begging for monetary assist- 
ance from him or were contributed to charity 
and other civic enterprises of the community. 

The only consolation Mayor Lopez, the poo- 
pie's candidate now for senator, received for his 




Mr. FERNANDO LOPEZ 

services to the poor is their undying love and 
devotion and steadfast loyalty. This fact Mayor 
Lopez enshrine deeply in his heart. And even 
his once political critics and bitter enemies can 
attest to this benevolence and deep-rooted un- 
derstanding of his for the miseries and needs 
of the downtrodden people whom others in his 
,place would regard as scums of the earth. 

As candidate for senator, Mayor Lopez is ex- 
pected to win a great majority of votes. Judged 
by his qualifications and honesty, Mayor Lopez 
deserves the vote of the nation as senator. He 
is an able lawyer, a successful business executive, 
a respected newspaper publisher, an expert agri- 
culturist being owners of sugar haciendas, pio- 
neer transportation magnate and a renowned 
philanthropist. 

He was born on April 13, 1904 in Jaro, Ilo- 
ilo, son of former governor Benito Lopez of 
that province. Together with his brother, Don 
Eugenio, he studied at the San Juan de Letran 
and later fnished law at the University of San- 
to Tomas, finishing it in 1925. That same year 
he passed the bar. 

Upon his return from an extensive travel 
(Continued on page 23) 



14 



PRIMITIVO LOVINA -MAN OF THE PEOPLE 



Primitivo Lovina, former Chairman of the 
Board of Governors, brought the RFC close to 
the people through a progressive policy and at- 
titude. He is now candidate for senator, and 
when elected, the people can feel assured that he 
will take the initiative in all legislations that 
will promote the general welfare of the people 
and speed up rehabilitation of the national eco- 
no r »">\-. 

The record of the RFC speaks well for the 
able administration of Primitivo Lovina of the 
said financial institution. Up to July 31, 1947, 
the RFC has granted loans to 99 industrial 
cstabishments, 821 farmers, 1,257 homebuilders, 
and^ 1 1 government loans for self-liquidating 
projects. The financing of these projects by the 
RFC has gained significance because of their 
social and economic implications. The loans 
thus granted have created jobs which afforded 
gainful occupations for no less than 50,000 
laborers. Considering that a wage earner has an 
average of four dependents, this means a liveli- 
hood to about 250,000 individuals; and there is 
no question that these 250,000 individuals are 
imbued with some feelings of social security, 
which is conducive to peace and contentment. 
As the RFC broadens its activities, these bene- 
fits will become more widespread and far-reach- 
ing. 

Candidate Lovina is a. recognized leader in 
the world of finance and we need him in the halls 
of congress to help shape our financial policies 
and legislation, of which we arc badly in need. 
The government must take seriously the finan- 
cial aspect of our national life, because the suc- 
cess of the Republic is entirely dependent on the 
financial success of the government enterprise 
and admistration. It is obvious that the govern- 
ment cannot carrv on its program of construc- 
tion and - rehabilitation, and relief without 
money. But it does not mean heavy taxation. 
It only means wise financial policies and good 
pieces of legislation to carry on government en- 
terprises and sources of revenues and to help the 
people produce and make a living. Once the gen- 
eral public is productive and employed, govern- 
ment financing will not be a problem. 

Sound government finance means sound citi- 
zenry finance. For the government is nothing 
more but the agency of the people. If the princi- 
pal is bankcrupt, so is the agent. But in this 
particular instance, the agent can help in making 
the principal financially sound, because of the 
authority the agent carries in the mandate of the 
people through the ballot. 

It is for this reason that a man like Primitivo 
Lovina will be useful in the senate of the Phil- 




Mr. PRIMITIVO LOVINA 

ippines. 

Lovina, besides being a recognized leader in 
the world of finance is also a friend of labor, as 
he worked his way up. He has not separated 
himself apart from the people. 

He hails from Rizal City, and the political 
idol of his province. Already he is gaining po- 
pularity altho this is the first time that he .las 
entered politics actively. 

Success is not measured by the money we can 
accumulate but by the friends we make. If we 
consider this as a measure of one's success, then 
candidate Lovine can also be considered a suc- 
cessful man. It is true he is a success from the 
money side but the man Lovina does not 
look upon it as the last measure of his life. 
Incidentally, he makes money, but he is devoted 
likewise to the service of his people. 

The support that the labor elements is ex- 
tending to Lovina, is not because of his money 
but because of his interest in the welfare of 
labor, for money cannot buy everything, more 
particularly the interest and welfare of the peo- 
ple. 

Let us give Primitivo Lovina a chance to 
serve the people, and more particularly the in- 
terest of labor. With his influence and financial 
backing he can best serve our interest than a 
senator who is likely be tempted to sell his con- 
viction because he is in want. 

Life is a give and take process. Let us give 
Lovina our support and he will give us his sup- 
port. 



15 



LIBERAL PARTY 

Official Candidates 



for Senators 

P. LOVINA V MADRIGAL 

G. PECSON F. LOPEZ 

E. TIRONA L. TAN AD A 

P. A. DAVID C. TAN 



-OQO- 



foi Members of the City Council 
(Manila) 

A* Santamaria E. Balagtas 

S- Agustin J. Phodaca 



toas S. Marino 

A. Bautista G. Garcia 

L S^mh m J. Vilkwml 



16 



A DESERVED PROMOTION 



The elevation of DELFIN BUENCAMINO 
to the chairmanship of the board of governors 
of the RFC is a tribute to the character of the 
man as well as a deserved promotion on the part 
of the employee, who has devoted the best of 
his life to public service. 

The government can retain good and honest 
men in the government service by elevating to 
positions of responsibility those who have shown 
faithfulness and efficiency in the performance 
of their duties. 

Time and again, this question of merit has 
been brought to the public but seldom, if ever, 
has it been attended to for the obvious reason of 
politics. But if the government, and the admi- 
nistration in particular desires to retain men ot 
tested ability and honesty to stay in the public 
service, then it is about time for the administra- 
tion to appoint to public office men who de- 
serve them and not because they have been faith- 
ful political followers. 

The case of the present chairman of the RFC 
is in point, for Mr. DELFIN BUENCA- 
MINO has been in the government service for 
many years and he is considered one of the best 
in his line. 

Together with candidate Primitivo Lovina, 
they organized the RFC until today it is one of 
the government institutions instrumental in the 
reconstruction and rehabilitation of the country. 
Now that Mr. Lovina has resigned, the full re- 
sponsibility of serving the countrv through the 
RFC falls on the shoulder of Mr. Delfin Buen- 
camino who rose from the ranks to his present 
position. 

Mr. Buencamino is not only wellknown in 
the financial world but also in all other walks of 
life wherein he can contribute his share in the 
growth and development of the country. 

Mr. Buencamino was first connected with the 
Philippine National Bank, and it was there that 
his ability for administration and planning was 
first demonstrated. For it said that you cannot 
hide brilliance just as the sun cannot be hidden 
even by a thick cloud. 

The RFC is doing in no small measure the 
great task of giving life to our people in the field 
of finance, and such efforts can only be accom- 
plished if its management is placed in the hands 
of able men. The President is aware of this, 
and that is why in the absence of candidate Pri- 
mitivo Lovina, Mr. Delfin Buencamino was ap- 




Mr. delfin buencamino 

Acting Chairman R. F. C. 



pointed in his place. 

The RFC has contributed in a large measure 
to the solution of the unemployment problem 
during the first seven months of its existence. 
Every phase of financing undertaken by the 
RFC, whether in the form of industrial loan, 
agricultural loan, home-building loan or loan 
to a local government, contributed directly or in- 
directly to the welfare of the laborers and their 
dependents. 

The direction of this giant enterprise is now 
in the hands of Mr. Delfin Buencamino. But 
by himself, he will not succeed. His success will 
be dependent upon public cooperation. Let us 
give him a hand and he will do his part. 

Public cooperation can be best shown by not 
belittling the task of the RFC, for it is to be 
admitted that being administered by men, it has 
its own shortcomings. And for that matter all 
undertakings run by men have defects. But the 
defects can be remedied if the public will do its 
part. > 

It is therefore requested that public coopera- 
tion be extended to the RFC. Any complaints 
can be directed to the Chairman, Mr. Delfin 
Buencamino, and we are sure he is just too 
ready to remedy and attend to any complaint 
from the general public. 

The RFC is for the people, let therefore the 
people do its part in its success. 



17 



heetings to all 
Delegates of the 

NATIONAL COMMISSION 
of LABOR and PEASANTS 



NATIONAL RICE AND 
CORN CORPORATION 



MANILA, PHILIPPINES 



THE NVP AND PUBLIC SERVICE 



By Brig. Gen. JUSTO CABO CHAN 



The National Volunteers of the 
Philippines is one oi the establish- 
ed institutions in the country pri- 
marily dedicated to public service. 

its organization in 1932 and 
ov..,bcMuent incorporation under the 

kVS of the Philippines, it has 
sndered inestimable service to the 
government and to the people, 
both in time of peace and in time 
of war. Civic-military in its nature, 
it has lived up to its patriotic ideals 
Uid purposes as embodied in its 
constitution. 

It will be noted that the domin- 
ant characteristic of the organiza- 
tion that attracts the best elements 
in the country is the fact that each 
member is sworn to support and 
defend the Constitution of the Re- 
public. Thus, in the past, when 
the Sakdal uprising took place in 
nearby provinces, the members 
were mobilized and placed on alert 
duty 24 hours a day, guarding 
bridges, power plants, communica- 
tion centers, and other strategic 
places. At all times whenever fires, 
earthquakes, inundations or other 
calamities occurred, the members 
were always present to give a help- 
ing hand. 

When the Pacific War suddenly 
broke out in 1941, all available 
units of the organization were mo- 
Tzed for instant service. Simul- 
taneously, negotiations were made 
with the Military authorites for the 
acceptance of at least one Division 
of our men. Although the plan did. 
not materialize due to lack of time 
and the withdrawal of the United 
States Armed Forces to Bataan 
and Corregidor, the members went ahead and 
served the government in different capacities, 
even without compensation. General Timoteo Cer- 
teza and the writer placed at the command of then 
Chief of Police Antonio C. Torres 600 strong for 
service as auxiliary police in Manila and suburbs 
at the height of the enemy bombings. Through- 
out the enemy occupation, thousands upon thou- 
sands of our members served faithfully and ef- 
fectively in the underground resistance work. 




In this postwar period, the National Volunteers 
organization, true to its tradition of rendering 
public service whenever and whereever needed, 
has pledged itself and all the resources at its com- 
mand to an all-out aid and effective suonoft to 
the government especially in the establishment 
and maintenance of peace" and order. W*i nave a 
standing voluntary offer of 10,000 trained men to 
the Secretary of National Defense for the purpose. 



Brig. Gen. JUSTO CABO CHAN 

Deputy National Commander 

The Volunteers participate in every way they can 
in the big task of clearing the way to national 
recovery. 

The National Volunteers of the Philippines, 
since the inception of its public career, has never 
asked for hell) from the government or from other 
entities. Moreover, when the members serve the 
public they do so voluntarily and without thought 
of money compensation or other considerations. 
There is a spirit of camarederie among the mem- 
bers and they help each other mutually in time 
of need. With their civic and military training, 
they become good citizens in time of peace and 
dependable soldiers in time of war. The cardinal 
virtues in which the members are indoctrinated 
are Honor, Patriotism, Loyalty and devotion to 
Duty. Upon the Volunteers, with all dignity 
and their standard of public service, he indeed 
the future strength and greatness of our Re- 
public. 



19 



Greetings to all Delegates 
of the National Commission 
of Labor & Peasants 

SHIPPING COMMISSION 

Chairman- Judge Rafael Corpuz 
Members: 

is Alfredo de Leon 

Capt. Enrique Razon 
Felipe Cuaderno 
Vicente Manalo 



35 



33 



Judge Vicente de la Cruz 



General Manager 



PLARIDEL SURETY & 
INSURANCE COMPANY 

P,Iar Rld *- 109 Pl a/ , sta. Cruz. 
Manila 

BOND* 

customs, Judicial, Contract Gua- 
r Wee, Internal Revenue, Fire- 
•ntns ^ Ammunition, Arrastre 
Miscellaneous 

I NSU R AN CE p j ' ..... 

* r^r^ e ^ Personal Accident 

MORTGAGE LOANS 

ANSELMo S. HILARIO 

I resident 

DEOGRACIAS C. MATIAS 
' "'- /rrs - & Gen. Mgr. 

ROMEO A. SANTOS 
Treasurer & Mgr. I ns . Def>L 

H. R DIMAGIBA 

Secretary o Asst. G e ?i. Mgr. 



COMPLIMENTS OF 

JULIANO & CO. 

COTABATO, COTABATO 
SHIP OPERATORS 

M/S "ZAMBOANGA-J" 
MIS "C0TABAT0-I" 



Alternating every Thursday For Cebu, Du- 
maguete, Zamboanga, Cotabato. 

ORIENTAL SHIPPING AGENCY 



VICENTE LAO 
Oivner 6f Gen. Manager 



327 Elcano St. 



Binondo 



Manila 



20 



GREETINGS TO THE PUBLIC: 
We are happy to announce that 



FIRE INSURANCE 
PERSONAL ACCIDENT 
SURETY BONDS 



We are now open for business — 

FIDELITY BONDS 

FIREARMS' BONDS 
JUDICIAL BONDS 




Judge ANTONIO QUIRINO 
Pres. & Gen. Manager 

C. P. CALANOC 
Asst. Manager 



Dr. ALELI R. GUZMAN-QUIRINO 
Secreta ry-Treasu rer 

GUILLERMO ESCALANTE 
Manager, Insurance Dept. 



Philippine Bank of Commerce Bldg. 
3rd. Floor, 121-123 Escolta, Manila 



Patronize Your 
Home Products 

TRY OUR — 

* NACOCO SOAP — Favorite of Housewives For Laundry Purposes 

* NACOCO TOYO — Palatable and Rich in Protein Contents. 

* NACOCO SANTAN — Delicious and Sanitary 

■ • . AVAILABLE AT OUR STORE 



E 



220 TANDUAY. MANILA 



21 



LIST OF LABOR ORGANIZATION 



9 

10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 

18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 

36. 
37. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
4.3. 
44. 
45. 

46. 

47. 
48. 



REGISTERED 
CITY OF 

Mine and Labor Union of the Phil 
Philippine Federation of Marine and Labor 
Contractor 

pj)!{- Communications Workers Union 
£, • r™™"'- America Labor Union, Inc. 
• hihppine Workers' Sailors Union 
Lmted Labor Union 

bnion de Maquinistas, Fogoneros v Ayu- 
dantes 

Courier Employees' Union 
L'nion de Empleados de Trenes 
Employees' Workers Union 
Natural Workers Brotherhood 
aamahang L. B. Co 
United Employees Welfare Ass'n. 
federation del Trabajo de Filipinas 
international Marine and Labor Union 
La Estrella del Norte Employees Ass'n. 
^aisahan nang mga Manggagawa sa Metro- 
politan Water District 
Coast Pacific Seaman Union 
^I.p.no Working Men 
£ubl,c Utilities Employees Ass'n. 
Irade Ser vice Union 
National Labor Union . 
Alanila Trading Labor Association 

Employees' S° yeeS and Lab ° r Ass '"- 

Fihl" g T ^ agsasakasa Filipinas 
; ,P1 "° '-abor Union 

Kzzonl^Tl LaU " dry Workers ' Union 
' b ong lagkakaisa (B T C \ 

SS e de°D Lab t r °^"-tion 

Ph ilippines Workers Union of the 

Manlh C 0 ° rkerS Nation 
Filipino M!!!t rUCtl '° n T Work ers Union 
Union de 7^ c,ans Union 

Liber *l UnioTrrr 8 de Filipinas 

H 5 *^^**" Union 
Intrrnational 1? Wloyees Ass'n, 
Union harvester Co. Workers 

Phil. Stewards r„ i 

Philippines ' ° ks and Messboy cf the 
Liberal Labor Union 

Kaisahan ng Marino nf A* 

no at Manggagawa sa 



UNDER C. A. 213 
MANILA 



ees 



49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53, 

54. 

55, 
56, 
57. 

58. 

50, 
60. 
61, 
6?, 
63, 
64, 
65. 
66. 



1. 

?; 

iS. 
/I. 

s. 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 

12. 

1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 

1. 

2. 

3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 



Daungan sa Filipinas 

Samarinos Labor and Construction Ass'n. 
Philippine Refining Workers Union 
Central Vegetable Oil Workers Union 
Shell Craft Buttons Workers Union 
Kapisanan ng mga Manggagawa sa Indus- 
trial ng Tabako sa Filipinas 
Pangbansang Kapatiran ng mga Panadero 
at Dulcero 

Aristocrat Waiters Association 
Bataan Motor Workers' Union — CLO 
United Motor Workers' UnionPCLO 
Rattan Arts and Decorations Workers' 
Union 

Elizalde Employees Association 
Robles' Transportation Workers Union 
Elizalde Motor Workers Union 
Phil. Stevedores and Laborers Union 
Phil. Mfg. Co. Employees Mutual Ass'n. 
Hume Pine and A-bestos Workers Union 
United Emplovess Welfare Association 
Philfarmco & Ramiro Rapid Transportation 
Workers Union— CLO 

CITY OF ILOILO 
Consolidated Labor Union 
Federation Obrera de Filipinas 
Panay Labor Union 
Philippine Laborers & Farmers Ass'n. 
Union de Marinos de Iloilo 
Seafarers' Union 
Republican Allied Federation 
Katilimbang Sang Inanafc Sang Pangabud- 
lav sa Filipinas 
Tigbatas Association 
Philippine Labor Union of the Vets. 
Democratic Peasants Union 
Labor Union of the Veterans 

CEBU CITY 
Liberal Labor L^nion 

United Cebu Autobus & Transit Employees 
Association 

Cebu Stevedores Association 

Ancr Katubusan sa mga Namumuo 

OTHER CITIES 
Southern Luzon Employees Ass'n. 
Allied Workers Association of the Philip- 
pines 

Cebu Branch (U. O. E. F.) 

Republic Labor Union 

Davao I iVht Employees Association 

Allied Workers' Ass'n. af the Philipp{ nes 

Bacolod-Murcia Central Chapter 

United Mine Workers' of the Phil. 



22 



FERNANDO LOPEZ- FRIEND OF THE MASSES 



{Continued from page 14) 

abroad after his graduation, he and his broker 
engaged themselves in the newspaper punching 
business and later in transportation business. 
They opened up the Iloilo Transportation Com- 
pany and later bought the Panay Autobus Com- 
pany, one of the biggest transportation firms »n 
the Philippines. Then they organized the 
INAEC in 1933 and operated this until the 
outbreak of the war. After liberation they again 
resumed their business and organized the FEA- 
TI, serving as pioneer air transport firm in the 
country which later was purchased by the Phil- 
wDinc Air Lines controlled by the government. 
They are still stockholders of this air transport 
firm. 

All hh employees are insured at the expense 
of the enterprise. 

In his travels around the world he gained 
broad views and sound economic ideas. He in- 
troduced reforms during his administration as 
Mayor of the Citv of Iloilo. When goods were 
sold at black market price in many parts of the 
Philippines, Mr. Lopez succeeded in reducing 
to the minimum the prices of commodities in the 
City of Iloilo. 

Knowing personally the subversive elements 
in Iloilo after the Liberation, he was able to 
maintain peace and order at the time when 
chaotic conditions existed in the other parts of 
the world. 

To minimize crimes commited bv minors, and 
to solve the problem of delinquency during the 
most troublesome period of our history, Mr. 
Lopez created the "BOYS TOWN" where 
children were taught the civilized ways of life. 

To help the government and the people to 
spread popular education he stablished last July; 
at his own expense, the Iloilo City Colleges! one 
of the most progressive institutions of learning 
in the country. With * n enrrollnierit of 3500 
students at the start, Mr. Lopez earns the dis- 
tinction of being the organizer of the biggest 
private Colleges in the Philippines during the 
first year of its existance. 



Mr. Lopez is truly, a very generous man, 
sympathetic and understanding to the needs of 
tne people. While reluctant to engage m poli- 
tics, yet he could not resist the call of public 
service because the people are convinced that he 
could truly render immense good to the country, 
lie is cognizant of the needs of our country and 
because of these it is to be expected that he 
could accomplish much in helping the govcrn- 
~- nt achieve the solutions for the vast pro- 
blems of reconstruction and rehabilitation of 
our war- ravaged country. 



WE J RE FOR 




JOSE R. EDIS 

Lawyer-fVriter-N eivspaperman 
for 

CITY COT 'NCI LOR 
(MANILA) 
"From houseboy, ordinary laborer, street 
vendor, teacher, agent, government em- 
ployee, ete., to lawyer" is brief summary 
of Any. GDIS' life. 

TO GIVE HIM A CHANGE IS TO 
MAKE OUR DEMOCRACY REAL 



23 



THE U.O.E.F.— ITS TRAVAILS AND STRUGGLES 



{Continued from page 13) 



XSvS th3t k f L ° CUSSed atte '»>on ohte 

keen interest JmT 1 i • labor ^ups took 
their rep ein a v ' h K l0Cal u 1 iom bv SRIldl ^ 
their fjght 2 ns 6 t0 h u dp l0Crl Unite ■'" 
capitalist Th ao7r° nable aml Strin ^ 
Organizations) and the SfTTa ° f • InduSt " aI 
ration of Labor? * f (American Fede- 

which cvas J5 *« Manila harbor 
Presidency T&£%2?""°- 5 coder the 
imposed of w^a ; S omnil ttee No 6 
f -tand at sto rfc^?^ * the ^er- 
gamzed under the Was also or - 

Under the ' ° f J° h ™y Mont- 
-other branch un on PS?** ° f Lu '' S Sef,a 
^n'zed and this ' Ba tang as was also or- 
mittee No. 7 S^tly named Com- 
mas named Committee V ° T f^ 0R in Cebl1 
dc '^ of E . Arrogante ""^ the P ,esi - 

, Ma «'la under f l e DrP Iaimches (Io <*i"" <"' 
H. Committee ^^"V* Adriano Y " 
P 7»Ke under the p re Z CaStaf,as - Q™« 



a- 
on 
a- 



ea • Committee NV ,7 • ncv of J" a ' 
NtpV^-oVr'A, 8 ^ M - Slipways 
Se»,.„7 " Atimonan <H kantar a. Committee 
Ap 5° r 0 ^, a' a ° r l ' e? -n. Province under 
££\ Ca fyan under ST* 1 ^ No. 13 in 
modi ^in^ 1 ^ Hontiveros. 

called W^ 68 ****** L d the rise of com- 
of the ? * e u "ion t h e f 0 . of a strike was 
Pared with received h u g year ™ view 

threatened ^ ivi »S sta^ , the lab "rers 

the g ov^ e ; u>, n «g -j v r Urge 

companies w 1 . an d Var i %Us 7 10 J Company, 

eventuality 0 f ^ voIv ed ) but ? r st * aT ™hip 

neck in the Jj? ^ vZ^ ' he 

program of Z T'Z 

i_ • • r ^vernmpM, ^Habit tat on 

shipping firms, thc all heU§ Qf ^ 

government representatives n g eom Pany and 
sions to deliberate on the de ° n man ^ occa " 
ers. The petition was subn^te \ k°* the labor " 

ecl by Pedro Fer- 



nandez in behalf of the central committee of thc 
UOEF. Finally they acceded to the demands 
of the Union. 

As a result of this the laborers practically 
got a raise in wages up to 200 per cent of their 
former earnings, and 150 per cent extra com- 
pensation for overtime work beyond tUr% S-h^^r 
daily labor. Capataces earning P3.25 a day 
were thereafter paid P9.18; those workers re- 
ceiving P2.75 got a raise of P7.56 a day; those 
earning P2.25 received P6.61 and so on. Thus 
under the newf wage allocations, it could be 
stated that a new deal in social justice was given 
to the sons of toil and hard work. 

But it had not been all agitation and striving 
for better wages that the UOEF union had 
espoused. This organization also assisted grv-- 
ernment agencies in such ways as to promote th? 
people's welfare and their wellbein^. For th^se 
ends, in the appeal of the Red Cross last year 
for funds in order to carry out its extensive 
charity and public welfare activities, the UOEF 
was able to contribute fM 0,200.00 raised froni 
among its members. This union also contri- 
buted PI, 800.00 to local disabled war veterans 
drive for funds; P800.00 to help war widows 
and orphans and contributed another PI, 000. 00 
for the Bov Scouts' fund dnV. 

During the recent Anti-Tuberculosis fund 
drive, the union members were able to purchase 
700 ticket costing P2 each or a total of 
400.00. The Union is also a regular patron of 
the YLAC a charitable social organization 
among society debutantes in the city by contri- 
buting P500.00 yearly to its funds. 

The historic struggles of that pioneer group of 
labor's champions for recognition have been am- 
S rewarded, and today the orgamza ion they 
founded during that crucial year of 1917 has 
tounciec lous influence in our present 

uTl^bcczusc ovt of a handfnl of men 
StS the ordinal ^ Jt had ,rown 
into a vast labor union comprising upwards of 
80,000 members. 

In collaboration with other mibtant and vigt- 
Inn labor organizations in different parts of the 
mm trv it is the fond expectation of the local 
IZ^Zion to be able to contnbute in a 
arg e measure to the elevation of the plight of 
our workers and employees to reach a level as to 
become an essential and useful class tn our demo- 
cratic set-up of society. 



24 



October is the Starting 

Month of Sto. Rosario and it 
is the beginning of Fiestas — 
Surely you will need a pair 
of new shoes — for yourself 
and family — Try 

National Footwear Shoes 

PUREZA, ST A. MESA MANILA 



v \3?^ Co- 



0* 



MO 



