UINO 

MANAGEMENT 

Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




People Empowerment 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




People Empowerment 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 
Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 

Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 
Writers/Researchers 

Minerva Generalao (lend writer) 

Susan Solo 

Gloria Georgina Jota 

Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Dennis Concepcion 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo Yonzon III 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 
Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 



Executive Director 

Maria Montelibano - RTVM 
Fr. Rene Mangahas 
Dante Buscayno 
Fatima Buscayno 
Prof. Carol Hernandez 
Prof. Segundo Romero 
Norberto Gonzales 
Deputy Diretor Ida Vargas - RTVM 
Ching Montinola 
Henrietta de Villa 
Amor Castillo 
John Meneses 
Adelaida Lagria 
Raul Limbo 



Eugene Refuerzo 
Enrique Mangalindan Jr. 
Giomarti Gamayo 
Susan Castanos 
Jimmy Oidem 
Emmanuel Abello 
Presidential Broadcast Staff 

-RTVM 
PMS - Sectoral Liaison Office 
Department of Agriculture - 

National Agricultural 

and Fishery Council 
Technology and Livelihood 

Resource Center 



Land Bank of the Philippines 

DTI - Bureau of Small 
and Medium Business 
Development 

Cooperative Development 
Authority 

Kaunlaran ng Manggagawang 
Pilipino, Inc. 

U.P. College of Public Adminis- 
tration 

Parish Pastoral Council for 
Responsible Voting 



Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

NEDA Secretariat- APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "People Empowerment", takes a look at the various NGO in- 
terventions the Aquino administration caused to happen - not only because these 



were strategic and of practical value at the time, but more so since active partici- 
pation of people's organizations in nation-building is a basic tenet of the Aquino 
management of the presidency. 



This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency , is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
those not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
hearts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"From the hundreds of thousands at Ninoy's 
wake, through millions on his funeral, to 
democracy's triumph last February [1986], we 
were one . . . 

We were people's power. We were Filipinos 
without distinction to divide our resolve. 

Now the country is back in our hands. The 
revolution of freedom is over. . . 

People power can put our economy back on its 
feet, put food on our tables, shirts on our backs, 
roof over our heads, and pride in our hearts". 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Labor Day 
May I, 1986 



Introduction 



AT THE COJUANGCO building in Makati, Jose "Peping" Cojuangco Jr. was 
summoned by his elder sister, Corazon C. Aquino. It was a day after the parliament, 
the Batasang Pambansa, had declared Ferdinand Marcos the victor in the 1986 
snap elections. To pragmatic politicians, this declaration meant "tapos na ang 
boksing" - the game was over. The dictator, who for years had the country in the 
palm of his hands, must have his way. 

As a long-time politician, Peping had an automatic and jaded reaction to the 
machinations of Marcos and to that of the doings of his rubber-stamp Batasan. As to 
the latest pronouncement, he had resigned himself to the idea that perhaps Marcos 
had won again and would now continue to reign unperturbed. But what most poli- 
ticians had failed to realize was that Corazon C. Aquino had this innate and instinc- 
tive ability to sense what the people want and what the people feel. 

Peping closed the door behind him and asked his sister what she had in mind. 
She who had pondered and mulled over the events of the past few days had a terse 
command. In all probability, Corazon Aquino said it only in one line, for in a matter 
of minutes Peping came out of the room stunned with disbelief and surrender, ac- 
cording to witnesses. He said: "Acheng insists on calling on the people to rally at the 
Luneta". To Corazon Aquino, there was no turning back. She wanted to heed the 
voice of the people. 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



People power was not born at EDSA. The seed was germinated a long time ago 
when a single shot that fell a man at the tarmac lit fires of protest in people's hearts. 
It had to take the man's widow to bring it all out. 

In a few days, various citizens' organizations gathered at the Mondragon build- 
ing to launch a protest movement. To everyone's amazement, except Corazon 
Aquino, millions came to Luneta eager to be led by this quiet and self-effacing widow. 
To them, she simply said, "These are my suggestions. They are now in your hands". 

And how the people responded. Crony businesses and products were boy- 
cotted: banks had runs, beer sales plummeted, newspaper circulations shrank. Soon 
enough, the regime was reeling in astonishment and in pain. The people realized 
that they had the power that fateful day in Luneta. 

The rest, as the cliche goes, is now history. 

The people capped their protest by going to EDSA chanting Cory's name, 
eventually carrying her to the presidency. And for the next six years, President 
Aquino would tap and hone and enhance this people power until it came into its 
own. 



The 

NGO 
Phenomenon 



SOON AFTER EDSA, People Power had no choice but to metamorphose. 
For one, the people's collective will was no longer directed against a dicta- 
torial government. The task was not to rise in protest but to work for peace. To 
build and not to dismantle. There was so much to be done. And had to be done as 



one. 



With her faith solid in her people, President Aquino never wavered in her vi- 
sion of a nation standing on its own. But she realized that all sectors, including the 
private sector, must have an active hand. She made it a policy to involve the 
NGOs in the planning and the decisions made by government instrumentalities, 
from the barangay level way up to the national level. For the next six years, 
NGOs would bloom throughout the country. 

The Chief Executive made sure that there was a conducive environment for 
NGOs to proliferate and grow. The Constitution of 1 987 was explicit in this. Execu- 
tive Orders, laws, and subsequent programs of action reinforced the tenet of People 
Power. 



The 1987 Constitution mandates the state "to encourage non-governmental, 
community-based or sectoral organizations that promote the welfare of the na- 
tion". 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The Constitution also guarantees "the right of the people and their organiza- 
tions to effective and reasonable participation at all levels of social, political and 
economic decision-making". 

The DaLrk Days Gone 

During the administration of President Marcos, the government was hostile 
towards the NGOs. The feeling was mutual. The NGOs were also generally hostile 
towards the government. 

This was understandable given the largely feudal character of the Marcos re- 
gime and the democratic tradition of NGOs. The hostility reached a point where 
government was considered the enemy because it worked against the interests of 
the people whom it was supposedly committed to serve. Many NGOs could not 
even imagine working with the government. 

Marcos had sought to control all levers of power and all the resources of gov- 
ernment. He viewed organizations that worked among the poor with extreme sus- 
picion. 

But after EDSA, the NGOs became the government's steadfast and reliable 
allies. They were given their due respect. 

Vicky Garchitorena, an active NGO leader and advocate, shares her insights 
during the June 18, 1992 Parangal ng mga NGOs para kay Cory: "Immediately 
after EDSA, there was a flowering of the NGO movement. 

First, because (President Aquino) gave us democratic space 

Second, (her) ascendancy to the presidency on the wave of people power in- 
spired us to use the same methods of organizing concerned citizens, no longer to 
topple a dictatorship but to banish hunger, and illiteracy, and malnutrition and 
other social ills. Many of the NGO leaders today were in the protest movement 
against the dictatorship. It was a natural evolution that we moved from the socio- 
political to the socio-economic as the needs of our country and our people changed". 



People Empowerment 



7 



Since EDSA, new and activated NGOs served as the government's alternative 
delivery mechanisms, facilitators for project funding and assistance, credit con- 
duits, and project implementors. 

People's organizations like farmers associations and cooperatives, labor un- 
ions and workers cooperatives, association of agrarian reform beneficiaries, organi- 
zations of upland farmers, fisherfolk, urban poor, women, youth and students were 
formed to address specific sectoral issues. 

As a result, hundreds of organized small farmers and fishermen were trans- 
formed from mere producers to entrepreneurs. The number of cooperatives grew 
from 3,424 in 1986 to 15,649 by March 1992. In Bulacan alone, Governor Roberto 
Pagdanganan reported in June 1991 that active cooperatives rose from 52 in 1987 
to 400 in 1 991 , with increased assets climbing from P24 million to P460 million. 

Reaffirmation Of People's Power 

In October 1989, in a press interview with Bob Drogin, President Aquino said, 
"Under my administration, we have given greater importance to nongovernmental 
organizations. In fact, in the regional development councils, I have given 25 percent 
representation to nongovernmental organizations which had not been given before". 

As members of the regional development councils and based on Executive 
Order 308 issued by President Aquino in November 1987, NGOs were urged to 
participate in the "formulation of long-term medium and annual socio-economic 
development plans", and"medium-term and annual public investments programs" 
at the regional and subregional levels. 

The NGOs participated in appraising and prioritizing the region's socioeco- 
nomic programs. They also helped coordinate the implementation of programs 
and projects in the regions which involved several government agencies. 

As if to emphasize the importance of NGOs in the development planning proc- 
esses, the need for NGO participation was again institutionalized and enshrined in 
the new Local Government Code of 1 991 . Hailed as a landmark in people empow- 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



erment, the code mandates local government units to "promote the establishment 
and operation of people's organizations, NGOs, and the private sector in the pur- 
suit of local autonomy". 

The Code stipulates that NGO representatives be present not only in the local 
development council but also in other special bodies like the prequalification, bids, 
and awards committee; the local school board; and the local health board. 

The Code is also explicit in directly involving NGOs in many key areas of de- 
velopment. The local Code, further, institutionalizes and enhances the so-called 
modes of partnerships which have been forged at the multilevel. 

According to Vicky Garchitorena, those in the "NGO world are extremely ex- 
cited about this law. This is a landmark legislation that no other president would 
have supported since it diminishes central control and devolves power to the local 
governments. 

Only a president who truly and sincerely wished to see the emergence of an 
empowered citizenry and the development and strengthening of the countryside 
would have pushed for such a law this law indeed institutionalizes people power". 

The Lifestreams 

Indeed, President Aquino not only made govenment-NGO partnership a way 
° f S over nance. She made it a way of life. She helped made people power flow into 
three large lifestreams in the Philippine body politic: 1) socioeconomic develop- 
ment partnerships vital to reduce poverty; 2) disaster management partnerships, 
essential for sustaining support for the calamity-stricken; and 3) political devel- 
opment partnerships, critical for enhancing and preserving democratic instituions. 

On hindsight, writing for an editorial for Trait d' Union, Geneve Tiers-Monde in 
June 1992, President Aquino said, "I truly believe that it is through nongovernmental 
organizations (NGOs) that we can empower the people. The NGOs are the 
lifestreams of people power. 



People Empowerment 



9 



When NGOs and people M s organizations initiate programs and projects on their 
own, for the uplift of communities and seek little or no help from government then 
the lifestreams must be surging forth with a new patriotic consciousness with the 
citizenry,finding in themselves the capacity to shape the landscape of their destiny. 

Indeed, in the Philippines, NGO development had become synonymous with 
the institutionalization of people power. 

When a government forges partnerships with them to involve them in policy 
planning and decision-making, and, in the implementation and evaluation of pro- 
grams and projects, development flows more freely into the lifestreams of the na- 
tion, transforming people's lives". 



NGOs for 
Socioeconomic 

Development 



AFTER THE FLIGHT of the dictator, President Aquino had to prepare and 
lead the Filipino in a larger war - the war against poverty. With 60 percent of the 
populace living under the poverty threshold, the urgent task at hand was to free the 
people from the bondage of want. 

The President and her Cabinet simultaneously launched livelihood programs 
aimed primarily to benefit the people in the countrysides. And as a matter of policy, 
the government was to link up with NGOs to facilitate the delivery of the basic 
services in any given area. 

As early as June 1986, the executive made a clear statement to pursue a "peo- 
ple-powered development". 

It said: "The private sector shall not only serve as the initiator but also as the 
prime mover of development. Specifically, the business sector, NGOs, and private 
voluntary agencies shall take the lead in undertaking and sustaining programs and 
projects aimed at improving the socio-economic situations". 

Expanding Through Dialogue 

The courses of action taken by the Aquino administration was not designed 
within the confines of the Palace. The President and her Cabinet were guided by the 



People Empowerment 



11 



thoughts and the needs of the people. The President was relentless and tireless in 
meeting with the common tao as she travelled the breadth and width of the archi- 
pelago. 

During her visit to Davao City on May 23, 1 986, the President said: "Consulta- 
tion is necessary because no one can know better than the people directly affected - 
what their problems are and how these should be solved. This is especially true 
when the main burden of the solutions must be bourne by them". 

As during the uncertain periods in 1 986 when the President rallied the Filipinos 
to boycott crony businesses and products, the Chief Executive was always sure of 
one thing - the infinite capacity of the Filipino to rise above adversities and to meet 
challenges. 

To enlarge the scope of people's participation in the planning and execution of 
livelihood projects in their places, the President required local and regional devel- 
opment councils to include NGOs as members. Rural folks also found light, voice, 
and importance as organized groups which the President encouraged to bloom. 



Organizing For Livelihood Opportunities 

Barely a month after the EDSA Revolution, the government began organizing 
the citizens into People's Economic Councils (PECs), community-based groups com- 
posed of entrepreneurs, farmers, professionals, fishermen, teachers, housewives, 
market vendors, and the youth. The objective of PECs was to plan and spur eco- 
nomic growth and opportunities in their respective towns. Functioning as clearing 
houses, they were to harness resources in their locality and to utilize proper govern- 
ment agencies for their activities. 

The exponent in government of the PECs was the Department of Trade and 
Industry which established the first PEC in San Fernando, Pampanga in March 1986. 



Since then, till early 1991, 1,700 other PECs have been established throughout 
the country, initiating livelihood programs, conducting training programs on skills 



— The Aquino Management of the Presidency 

and management, facilitating technology transfer, and rendering services in health, 
education, and social concerns. They were also involved in infrastructure projects 
such as farm-to-market roads, bridges, dams, and even bus terminals. Sometimes, 
just by monitoring works-in-progress and, sometimes, by getting involved in actual 
construction. ° 

The People's Economic Councils have improved the lot of many communities 
m the country. 

In Agusan del Sur, an economic council brought a town from a hopeless, mori- 
bund existence. 

In 1985, the people of the once bustling Magallanes town despaired over the 
closure of the Sta. Ines Plywood Factory - the town's largest employer. The com- 
pany was the community's lifeblood, and its closure reduced the town's economic 
activities by at least 50 percent. As a result, the people's fall back position, the Sta. 
nes Cooperative, exhausted its reserves. The town's rural bank could not help. It, 
too, was m the brink of collapse due to the absence of economic activity. 

But the people of Sta. Ines was a hardy lot. They thought of embarking on 
income-generating projects through their cooperative. They sought fund assistance 
from the Ministry of Trade and Industry and some Canadian organizations operat- 
ing m the province. Unfortunately, their requests were turned down for "lack of 
equity". 

"Walang naitulong ang gobyerno sa amin noon (before EDSA) (Government 
has never helped us before)", said a leader of the cooperative. Then came President 
Aquino. 

On March 30, 1987, a People's Economic Council was formed in Magallanes. 
It facilitated valuable financing assistance to the Sta. Ines Credit Cooperative and 
other livelihood undertakings in the area. The town sprang back to life. 



The council negotiated loans from DTI for the Sta. Ines Credit Cooperative. In 
1988, the loan extended was PI 50,000.00. In 1989, it became P500,000.00. In 



People Empowerment 13 

1990, the amount was further increased to PI .2 million. The funds came from 
DTI's Tulong sa Tao-Self Employment and Livelihood Assistance (TST-SELA) pro- 
grams. 

The funds were used to conduct skills training in garments, meat and fish 
processing, small business management and leadership training. By early 1990, 
some PI .4 million have been loaned out to 198 small micro-enterprises borrowers. 

The PEC in Magallanes also spearheaded the development and production of 
small fishpond farms. It facilitated a P299,500.00 loan from the Landbank of the 
Philippines for small cultivators of prawn and bangus. 

More blessings followed. As the national economy picked up under President 
Aquino, the Sta. Ines Plywood Factory was reopened. This created 1,000 jobs and 
increased the buying power of the residents. By then, the people of Magallanes 
knew that they could not afford to overlook their cooperative. 

In what a study termed as a "highly participative" manner, the townfolk pur- 
sued to improve their knowledge in cooperatives. They conducted seminars and 
training programs to enhance access to funds, improve project management, up- 
grade skills, establish credit consciousness, and increase awareness in cooperativism, 
consumerism, and community development. 

The impact made by the People's Economic Council in Magallanes had been 
replicated more than 10 times over in other rural communities. Some outstanding 
PEC projects were the basket production village in Kalookan City; handicrafts in- 
dustry development in Nabas, Aklan; bagsakan project in Aritao, Nueva Vizcaya; 
electrification project in Victorias, Negros Occidental; Yuta Uli sa Tawo project in 
Mabuhay, Zamboanga del Sur; People's earth-filled dams in Gattaran, Cagayan; 
and construction of foot bridges in Pata, Sulu. 

Victoria Garchitorena, national chairperson of the People's Economic Council, 
says: "This is the true economic revolution of today. In the furthest municipalities 
of the land, there are Filipinos who, quietly and without fanfare, are changing the 
society they live in by acting as catalysts for economic growth, as one voice in the 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



articulation of the community's concerns, and a local ombudsman to ensure the 
faithful delivery of services". 

And without fanfare, too, President Aquino directed government agencies and 
financial institutions to come to the aid of the small farmers and fishermen. 



Counsel For The Farmers' Councils 

One such directive was contained in Executive Order No. 116 which author- 
ized the Department of Agriculture to organize farmers, fisherfolk, rural bankers, 
traders, and other individuals engaged in agriculture to constitute themselves into 
Agriculture and Fishery Councils or AFCs. Like the PECs, these groups served as 
fora for livelihood ideas. 

The AFCs also coordinated the Livelihood Enhancement for Agriculture Devel- 
opment (LEAD) program of the Department of Agriculture. The LEAD program 
was designed to encourage farmer entrepreneurship by providing capital and tech- 
nological support to rural folks who wished to control their produce from planting 
to marketing. 

Local councils were given the responsibility of receiving, evaluating, and en- 
dorsing project proposals from their kababayans for possible LEAD funding. Fund- 
ing were either in the form of loans from banks or in grants usually from a foreign 
NGO. Any project proposal to proceed needed imprimatur from an AFC. 

In cases wherein the needed funding was PI 50,000.00 or below, the council 
also served as the approving authority. Projects which cost more were sent to a 
higher body, the National Agricultural and Fishery Council. 

Since its launching, LEAD had set on stream over 3,489 livelihood and support 
service projects. 

The process of decision-making was one way in which empowerment, through 
the Department of Agriculture, was carried through. Like PECs, the AFCs became 
genuine grassroots endeavor. 



People Empowerment 



15 



President Aquino emphasized the active participation of NGOs in program 
management. She advocated an end to the traditional top-down approach in de- 
velopment. Time and again, she said: 'The role of the NGOs must not be limited to 
being beneficiaries of projects alone. They must be initiators and implementors of 
the development process". 

The NGOs were also given other roles in facilitating assistance to end benefici- 
aries. In concrete terms, they were urged to help farmers and fishermen do feasibil- 
ity studies when they made their proposals from funding. This was what was called 
as the "handholding" process, where the elder, the kuya, took care of the younger 
ones, the bunsos in their growth. The NGOs were asked to guide and assist the 
smaller or new groups in project identification. 

The NGOs also served as alternate delivery mechanisms, not only as facilitators 
for project funding and assistance but also as credit conduits, project monitors, and 
most of all, as organizers of people's organizations. 

This unprecedented emphasis on the active role of the NGOs produced spec- 
tacular results. But as in anything new, it had its concomitant awkward, but never- 
theless happy adjustment periods. As what happened in Bataan. 



Old Problems, New Roles 

For years, water for irrigation was the main problem of the rice farmers in 
Pilar, Bataan. Their main source of water was the old Magsaysay dam which, aside 
from groaning with age, had been damaged by strong typhoons. Farmers had to 
continually stack sacks of sand on the dam wall to prevent it from collapsing alto- 
gether. 

The Tabon ng Bayan, a farmers 7 group led by Rolando "Mang Lando" Sanchez, 
appealed to their political leaders and to government agencies concerned to reha- 
bilitate the dam. The National Irrigation Administration did technical plans for its 
rehabilitation, but the farmers would not agree to any of them. 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The NIA proposed that the dam be first emptied before it could be patched up. 
The timetable was four years. To the farmers, that was unthinkable. 

The farmers preferred that the rehabilitation be done at the quickest time pos- 
sible. Furthermore, they opposed the idea of emptying the dam. It would mean lost 
harvests. It would mean loss of millions of pesos. It would mean hungry families. 

The farmers reached over to their chestful of wisdom and experience and pro- 
posed, instead, to build diversion canals to maximize the use of water. 

The NIA could not agree because it would have entailed higher rehabilitation 
cost and a longer timetable. Besides, the canals had to pass a private land. That 
meant problems in right-of-way. 

There was an impasse. During the visit of President Aquino in Bataan on Au- 
gust 12, 1989, she learned of the problem and promptly instructed concerned par- 
ties to sit down and resolve the deadlock. 

On August 31 , 1 989, people from the Office of the President, NIA officials, and 
local officials went to Pilar, Bataan, in two waves - one in the early morning, and one 
near noontime. 

The first wave was the Radio-Television Malacanang (RTVM) crew headed by 
its executive director, Maria Montelibano. They were tasked to document the con- 
dition of the dam and the discussion between the farmers and the officials. Based on 
a previous arrangement, the preliminary meeting was to be at 6 o-clock in the 
morning. 

Used to a very punctual President Aquino, the RTVM crew left Manila at two 
o'clock in the morning to be on time. They were at the dam site minutes before the 
appointed time. But there was no Mang Lando. There was nobody from the farm- 
ers group. 

Montelibano, who is energy personified, and her crew waited for 30 minutes. 
One hour. Two hours. At eight o'clock a.m., Mang Lando came, almost stunned. 



People Empowerment 



17 



With embarassment, he said that he did not really expect people from the Office of 
the President to come. 

Many times in the past, Lando confessed, the farmers were lucky if govern- 
ment officials and workers who promised to come would show up on time. Most of 
the time, he said, they simply did not show up. 

The second wave of officials came on time, too. They patiently sat down with 
Mang Lando and his group until they were able to come up with a solution. Fore- 
most consideration was to prevent the loss of any cropping season. 

They decided to build canals, with the farmers tasked to get the permission of 
the owners of affected adjacent property. The farmers, too, provided labor. They 
were consulted on the final project design. And they were actively involved in the 
buying of cement and other construction materials. 

By June 1991, or in less than two years, the dam's rehabilitation was com- 
pleted. Soon enough, the farmers' harvest doubled. The farmers' faith in their own 
capacity, and trust in government were renewed. 

Mang Lando sums it up: "Ngayon lang namin nadarama na kaming maliliit ay 
pinakinggan at pinahalagahan". (For the first time in our lives, we are finally 
heard and given importance)". 

Unwavering Trust In The People 

The heart of the President exuded it all: Trust is an important element m 
people empowerment. President Aquino's trust and faith in the Filipino people put 
an end to ceremonial collaboration, token consultation, and dole-out mentality in 
extending government funds and resources to the people. 

The President trusted the Filipino to use his better judgement. She trusted him 
in determining his own future. And she trusted him with huge funds. On the basis 
of trust, the bond grew. 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



President Aquino entrusted PI .2 billion worth of assistance from her Presi- 
dent's Social Fund to 344 NGO partners. The Department of Agriculture's liveli- 
hood program released P416.59 million pesos for various micro-projects in the ru- 
ral areas. 

Tulong sa Tao of DTI released a total of PI 76.7 million to 272 conduit NGOs to 
finance micro-livelihood projects. 

In addition, the Landbank of the Philippines from 1 986 to 1 991 , extended loans 
amounting to P4.87 billion to over 6,360 farmers cooperatives benefiting almost 
half a million members. The remarkable development about this huge loans is that 
they were being paid - defying the socioeconomic pundits who have said that small 
farmers and fishermen were "non-bankable". 

During the June 1, 1990 regional dialogue on poverty alleviation, President 
Aquino explained what she meant by people's total war against poverty. She said: 
"In the ultimate analysis, it is our people themselves who must provide the all- 
important resource to win the war against poverty. 

Deliberately, I veered away from the image of government as an almighty 
institution designed to be the people's redeemer, a relationship which relegated our 
people to the role of passive expectators in an opera called national development. 

I opted, instead, for the concept of strong partnership between people and 
government, where government provides the encouragement and initial resources 
which the peoplem in turn, harness, multiply and use to improve their individual 
and collective lives". 

At one time, the President stressed: "I try to empower the people more so that 
they themselves will build their self-reliance, initially getting government assistance 
but at a certain point, hopefully being able to do it on their own". 

In addition to DTI's Tulong sa Tao Program, DA's LEAD projects, and 
Landbank's Push for Cooperatives development, the government's direct assistance 
to the rural folk included the Department of Agrarian Reform's Agro-Industrial 



People Empowerment 



19 



Development Area program, the Technology Livelihood Resource Center's Support 
for Foundations and Integrated People's Cooperative System, and the Social Secu- 
rity System's Members Assistance for the Development of Entrepreneurship. 

There were also the Community Forestry Program for the livelihood of upland 
farmers and the Community Mortgage Program for socialized housing. President 
Aquino initiated the President's Social Fund (PSF) to assist livelihood programs and 
many more. 

These programs required the people to organize into groups to be able to avail 
themselves of government assistance. The bias was for people power solutions. 
They discouraged individualistic approach and instead focused on forging alliances 
and in the pooling of resources. These eventually formed the backbone of the Kabisig 
movement. 

Dawning Of Cooperatives 

Under the leadership of President Aquino, cooperatives in the country grew in 
number and importance. This was no accident. There were conscious, deliberate, 
and concerted efforts to develop a strong and extensive cooperatives system. 

President Aquino said in February 1 990: "I see cooperativism as a democratic 
response. Cooperatives provide our people - even the poor in the countyrside - with 
an experience in participatory decision-making. 

Cooperatives have therefore become a vehicle for grassroots democracy; peo- 
ple sharing in the responsibility and accountability". 

President Aquino's desire to support cooperativism made no false claim to 
originality. The first Philippine cooperative was, in fact, founded by Dr. Jose Rizal 
at the turn of the century when he was in exile in Dapitan. Based on a German 
model, the cooperative that Rizal established sought to improve the livelihood ca- 
pability of the town's people. 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Since 1915, various laws had been enacted, creating rural financing structures, 
promoting and regulating cooperatives and providing support systems for their 
growth. But the considerable gains of cooperativism's formative years were wiped 
out by the imposition of martial law. In many instances, cooperatives were equated 
with subversive groups. The Visayan Integrated Cooperatives, or VICTO, one of 
the biggest federation of coops in Cebu, had to drop the word cooperative from its 
name during martial law just to avoid undue harassments. 

But Corazon Aquino was a different president. She had no fear, much less, 
fear of people organizing into groups. In the Constitution of 1987, the growth of 
cooperatives was to serve as an instrument of social justice and economic develop- 
ment. 

On March 1 0, 1 990, the President signed the Cooperative *Act which put more 
bones and muscles into cooperatives in the Philippines. The act also led to the birth 
of a thousand and one cooperatives. In 1991, 8,932 cooperatives registered with the 
Cooperative Development Authority an almost 500 percent increase over the 
number of coops in 1990. In 1985, only 226 coops were registered with CD A. 

Celebrating Cooperatives 

In Talongadian, Iloilo City, the spirit of cooperation among the youth made 
possible the economic and physical transformation of the area. 

Organized by young men Cesar Sumague and Ismael Umadhay in 1987, the 
Talongadian Multi-purpose Cooperative, Inc. had at the start 33 members and 
assets worth P34,379. At the end of 1990, it had close to half a million for farmer 
members. 

President Aquino paid tribute to the youth of Talongadian during the launch- 
ing of the national partnership for cooperative development on February 5, 1990 
She said: "I was particularly touched by the story of a cooperative in Talongadian 
a sitio in the outskirts of Iloilo City. 

The place was an isolated monument to poverty. Not even a dirt road con 
nected it to the main thoroughfare. Its residents were complacent, apparently re 




President Aquino presides over an informal meeting with farmers 
and fishermen from Southern Luzon during a visit to the Liceo de San 
Pablo, in San Pablo, Laguna on August 8, 1991. With the President 
are: (clockwise) Celso Daniorco, vice president of the SPCMBY Coop- 
erative; Marino Escaris, president of Dayap Credit Cooperatives and 
Development, Inc.; Press Secretary Tomas Gomez III; Roger Magyaya, 
president of the Katipunan ng mga Samahang Magsasaka; Manolo 
Suntuangco, president of the Federation of Laguna Farmers Marketing 
Cooperative, Inc.; Nelia Fortuna, president of the Pitogo Coconut 
Farmers Federation; Agriculture Secretary Senen Bacani; Laguna 
Governor Felicisimo San Luis; Antonio Austria, president of the 
Alyansa ng mga Samahan sa Timog Katagalugan Para sa Kaunlaran; 
Paz Yuson, president of the Alaminos Barangay Multi-purpose Coop- 
erative, Inc.; and Agrarian Reform Undersecretary Renato Padilla. 



Precedingpage. 

The President waves to the people during 
the launching of Kabisig at the EDSA Shrine. 




President Aquino admires the hand-woven birthday gift 
presented to her by peasant leaders during a visit to Naga 
City on January 21, 1992. Holding up the handwoven cotton 
tapestry are Florendo Gregorio (left) and Flaviano 
Encenares, vice-chairman and chairman respectively of the 
Tunay na Alyansa ng mga Samahan sa Kabikulan. The 
tapestry was hand-made by Fe Ibarlen of the Buhi Rural 
Women Multi-Purpose Cooperative. 



NEVER A LITTLE. Above, President Aquino poses with Demetria Munda, a Filipina 
domestic helper based in Singapore who donated P7,000 out of her savings for the 
victims of Mt. Pinatubo. Also in photo are Bong Munda (left) and Leo Munda (right) 
who accompanied their sister to Malacanang. The Mundas are from Sta. Lucia, San 
Fernando, Pampanga. 

Below, President Corazon C. Aquino receives a P300.00 donation from Arlu Gomez, 
a 6th grader of Xavier School, out of his first salary as a junior newscaster of Channel 
9's Newswatch for the "Bigay Puso Pasko '86" project. 




I 




The President was the guest of honor during the awarding 
ceremonies for outstanding Pampanguenos organized by the 
"Bangun Pampanga Movement" on March 19, 1992. The 
group was organized in response to the crisis in Pampanga 
wrought by the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. 



President Aquino admires the "Earth Flag" 
presented to her on June 27, 1991 by Sister Luz 
Emmanuel Soriano (far right) on behalf of the non- 
governmental organizations (NGOs) - environmen- 
talists during the celebration of the Philippine 
Environment Month at PICC. The President urged 
the citizenry to help preserve the ecological 
balance in the country. Also in photo is Environ- 
ment and Natural Resources Secretary 
Fulgencio Factoran Jr. 




President Aquino admires a hand-woven rug depicting 
Mt. Pinatubo at the Negros Canadian Center in Bacolod 
on November 22, 1991. The Center is a result of the 
Canadian government's C$1 1 million grant to the prov- 
ince and its non-governmental groups' livelihood 
programs. With Mrs. Aquino are Gov. Bitay Lacson, 
Canadian Ambassador Andre Simard, Eduardo Locsin 
of the Negros Rehabilitation and Development Fund 
and Vice Gov. Rafael Coscolluela. 



President Aquino is greeted by enthusiastic 
Davaoenos on February 20, 1992 during her 
visit in their city to inaugurate a Housing 
Project and distribute livelihood funds to 
several non-governmental cooperatives. 



President Aquino is welcomed by members of the International Volunteers group upon her arrival at 
the Main Conference Room in Malacanang during the celebration of International Volunteers Day on 
November 28, 1991. The President lauded local and foreign volunteers for their "heroic" assistance to 
Filipinos, especially during natural calamities. With the President is Virginia Davide, director of the 
Philippine National Volunteer Service Coordinating Agency. 

President Aquino views the provincial network of the Daughters of Charity (DC) congregation during 
her visit to the St. Peregrine Development Center in Paranaque on the occasion of its foundress' 400th 
birthday on August 12, 1991. At present, the congregation has established 23 schools all over the 
country with a total of 41 , 1 64 students. With the President are some members of the DC congregation 
led by Assistant Sister Visitatrix Margarita Duran (second from left). The President earlier announced 
the release of some P1.35 million to finance charitable projects of the congregation. 




TO THE PEOPLE. The regional consultation held in Bacolod 
City on October 16, 1986 was well attended by a crowd of 
Negrenses who caught their first glimpse of President 
Aquino in her first official visit to their region. 



People Empowerment 



21 



signed to their meager earnings, and poor quality of life. That was until one day, a 
group of out-of-school youth decided to set up a cooperative. 

I am moreover particularly pleased with the leadership opportunity the coop- 
erative gave to the young people of Talongadian. They used to stand idly by. Now 
they lead in bringing progress to their community. To top it all, these youngsters 
now undertake credit transactions with one of our major government lending insti- 
tutions. Today, they have more money. But more important than that, they have 
regained their dignity and their rightful place as our comrades-in-arms in the na- 
tional war against poverty. In their homefront, they are already victors". 

The cooperative embarked on corn, mungbean, and swine production. It built 
a small warehouse and a coop store. 

Today, a 350-meter long barangay road winds fown from the municipal road 
of Sta. Barbara to the far end of Talongadian. Twenty six families in the sitio joined 
hands the knbisig way and built the road themselves in 14 days. 

Ismael Umadhay recalls: "Since time immemorial, wala iyang road na iyan. 
But when we organized, that was one of the first things we did". 

The short road literally placed Talongadian on the map. It made possible the 
visit of local elected leaders who, for years, hardly knew that the sitio existed. 

There were many such projects all over the country which, like pieces of a 
jigsaw puzzle, do not mean much separately. But when fitted together, they depict 
the increasing dynamism of the rural economy. 

In Bulacan, five poultry cooperatives banded together to improve their opera- 
tions and profitability. The result was synergy. Their federation had since been 
called the Agro-Food Processing Development Corporation. 

It brought together 8,000 backyard poultry raisers who belong to the Agro- 
Filipino Inc.; Bulacan Livestock and Poultry Raisers Association, Inc.; Bulacan Grow- 
ers' Cooperative; Katipunang Yarnan ng Samahan ng mga Tangkilikang Magsasaka 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



sa Bulakan; and Pandi Livestock and Poultry Marketing/Pandi Poultry Breeding 
Farm, Inc. 

It all seemed a pipe dream when Dr. Pilar de Ocampo brought to the Presi- 
dent's attention during the President's visit to Bulacan on January 25, 1989, their 
proposal for a dressing plant. 

President Aquino right then and there endorsed the proposal to the Depart- 
ment of Agriculture. The Department, in turn, assisted Dra. Ocampo and her group 
to conceptualize and lay the groundworks for the project. It commissioned the 
Urban Food Foundation, Inc. to prepare the project's feasibility study and under- 
take financial packaging. 

On September 13, 1990, a Memorandum of Agreement was signed between 
the Chicken Growers Federation, the DA, Urban Food Foundation, Inc., and the 
United Coconut Planters Bank (UCPB) as the lending institution. 

A total of P32 million business capital was raised from the pooling of resources. 
DA-LEAD gave a P5 million grant. The United Coconut Planters Bank extended 
P10 million loan. But the bulk of the business capital, PI 2 million, came from the 
pooled resources of the five cooperatives and its 8,000 members. 

In February 1992, the Federation's state-of-the-art chicken dressing plant on a 

A°nn^ Cta [?J 0t in Bala § tas ' Bulacan was inaugurated. No less than President 
Aquino cut the ribbon. 

The 1 

chicken trow"' b ° asted of Pressing 1,000 birds per hour. It assured backyard 
raised the ^ ° f read y stead Y market. And it effectively shut off middlemen and 
incomes of cooperative members. 

ureedthemTo A . qUi "° ex P re ssed elation over the plant's operation. The President 
' °' ° challen 8e big poultry business in the country. 

Small Cooperatives As R aison d , Etre 

Big groups as well as small groups benefited from the pro-poor thrust of the 
government. Landbank, true to its mandate, anchored its agricultural lending pro- 
gram on small farmers and fishermen. 



People Empowerment 



23 



In 1987, Landbank shifted to a cooperative lending strategy. Since then, 
Landbank had paved the way for increased number of cooperatives assisted from 
20 in 1987 to 6,360 in 1991. 

Prior to 1987, Landbank gave production loans strictly to the rice and corn 
agrarian reform benefiaciaries. It granted loans to about 10,000 farmers as indi- 
viduals, rather than as members of cooperatives. Sadly, due perhaps to the patron- 
age system being inculcated then, the farmers perceived the loans as dole-outs. As a 
result, practically nobody paid back. That led to the collapse of the much-touted 
Masagana 99 Rice Program. Later, too, that of the Kilusang Kabuhayan para sa 
Kaunlaran. 

When Landbank, as well as other agencies in the Aquino administration, shifted 
its strategy to wholesale lending, the reach of the benefits became much more exten- 
sive. Landbank alone was able to directly help almost half a million farmers from 
1987 to 1991. 

Landbank President Deogracias N. Vistan says that lending to cooperatives 
rather than to individuals made quite a difference "like night and day". He reports 
that the repayment rates rose to no less than 96 percent. 

The formation of cooperatives led to peer pressure. Says Vistan: "Our people 
are very conscious of a sense of being a part of a social unit. In this case, the coop- 
erative of their own community. Once they fail in their obligations, they are ostra- 
cized. No Filipino can bear that". 

In 1991, Landbank assisted cooperatives in 14,701 rural barangays or 41 per- 
cent of the total barangays in the countryside or to 1,339 rural municipalities or 85 
percent of all possible municipalities in the rural areas nationwide. 

Vistan adds: 'The President emphasized very clearly that she wanted to leave 
a very strong mark in terms of a package of benefits to what she referred to as the 
bottom 30 percent of our population. To the extent that we have started to make 
life viable for a portion of that 30 percent, then we attribute that to the President 
when she enunciated that particular mandate". 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Changing Lives 

One of the most publicized beneficiaries of the combined efforts of Landbank 
and the other departments is theTarlac Integrated Livelihood Cooperative (TILCO) 
pf Bernabe Buscayno or Kumander Dante, the former leader of the dreaded New 
People's Army - the armed group of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). 

President Aquino released Ka Dante, together with the CPP founder Jose Ma. 
Sison and hundreds of other political detainees in 1986. While Sison chose to op- 
pose the government, Buscayno opted to try his hands in farming. 

In 1988, he established a people's livelihood foundation which later became 
TILCO after personal consultation with the President, local officials of Tarlac, the 
late Don Chino Roces, DAR Secretary Phillip Juico, and TLRCs Sylvia Ordonez. 

The project utilized an integrated approach to production with the rice indus- 
try as centerpiece project - from planting to processing to marketing. The approach 
included financing, technical and training assistance, and values education. 



A year after its launching in 1988, the project was hailed 



a success. 



(PresldemT te Talagan § iniisi P ko na tumulong sa ating bagong presidente 

tude na ' ? Um0) ' Pala S a Y ko ay bibigyang pansin ng mga nasa bundok ang atti- 
iyong^nilan 11 k"? ^ ?reSidente ' Iton § k °operatiba na naglalayong pagbutihin 
unlad malakf ^ agayang P an § kab uhayan at magkaroon ng pangsosyal ng pag- 
insurgencysalu 118 nito u P an S hindi makaisip or hindi magkaroon ng 

hills will find tfr decided to help the new president. Those still in the 

cooperativesliill ' LL^T^ tkrust r ^s/un£. This thrust of encouraging 
nrnnnonH'nv, t • a Wrence in then lives and hopefully will discourage the 

propagation of insurgency)". 

For its main beneficiari^ r 
,., , , ai Aes / tne farmers, the cooperative meant access to low 

credit, seed production cpnt^r • r 

^- ULt?I / organic fertilizer laboratory, farm equipment pool, 

repair shop, facilities for postharvest (rice mills, solar and mechanical dryers, ware- 

house) and gains trading center. 



People Empowerment 



25 



It also meant improved production to 150 cavan per hectare, three times their 
original yield. And finally, it meant the start of their emancipation from indebted- 
ness and want. 

By 1 991 , Dante said, "Makita mo iyan sa kanilang pamumuhay ngayon kung 
ikumpara two years ago. Nakita mo pa iyong bahay medyo gumanda. Halos bato 
na nga iyong mga bahay dito. Pagkatapos marami na silang gamit sa bahay ngayon, 
may bisikleta sila. Iyong iba nagmamadali. Imbes ng bumili ng bomba ng tubig, 
bumili ng colored tv.(You can already see an improvement in their lives - 
renovated houses, new appliances, bicycles. The others are impatient. Instead of 
buying water pumps, they bought colored to instead)". 

And what did Dante feel about these changes? 

"Noon mas maraming panahon ko sa pagtatago kaysa doon sa involvement ko 
sa productive undertaking. Ngayon, halos araw-araw hanggang gabi, kahit holi- 
day, nandiyan kami sa mga trabaho namin. Masayang-masaya ako at gustong- 
gusto ko itong trabaho ko. Kasi may bunga kaagad (Before, most of my time was 
spent hiding. Today, almost daily, even after dusk, even if it is a holiday, we 
work. I am veiy happy and I love my work because I feel the benefits 
immediately) ". Indeed, fruitation did come. 

Repayment rate was 100 percent. As the farmer members kept up with loan 
payments, the cooperative's earnings were plowed into other livelihood projects: 
Tilapia fishpond, duck farm, cattle raising, 30-hectare nursery, seed production, 
hollow-block making, multi-cropping that included corn, asparagus, and green soya 
and okra for exports to Japan and other countries. 

By 1991, the cooperative's assets reached P35 million including threshers, 
trucks, bulldozers, and an irrigation system. Membership rose from 506 to 15,000 
farmers tilling more than 1 0,352 hectares of land in Tarlac alone. 

As Dante says with pride: "Sa fishpond amoy isda. Magpunta ka sa itikan, 
amoy itik. Magpunt ka sa bakahan, amoy baka. Magpunta ka sa bukid, amoy 
palay, amoy gulay. Iyan ang amoy ng buhay. Diyan nabubuhay ang mga tao sa 
amoy na iyan". 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Replication Of Success 

Ka Dante inspired many people. Julio Junio came to Manila for a vacation in 
November 1989and saw Ka Dante on television being applauded for his successful 
cooperative. To himself, he swore that he could do that too. When he returned to 
his hometown in Wao, Lanao del Norte, he broached the idea of setting up a coop- 
erative with his barrio folks. They thought he was just too drunk. 

Julio's neighbors in Wao were suffused with machismo. They were, after all, 
Batanguenos. Yes, Batanguenos who migrated to Lanao during the term of Presi- 
dent Magsaysay looking for better opportunities. Mindanao, then, was being pro- 
moted as the Land of Promise. 

But Wao did not turn out to be paradise. In fact, it was isolated from the 
world. Mayor Guieb of Wao says: "Our roads were impassable. No vehicle could 
reach us". 

The Batangueno farmers were in a worst situation. Their barrio, Sta. Clara, 
had no access road to speak of. Like many other rural folks who have steeled 
themselves against unceasing despair, they only had deaf ears for ideas like coop- 
eratives. They would rather sing over glasses of 'stainless' (gin) to while their wor- 
ries away. 

But then, as if by miracle, farm-to-market roads were built in Wao by the 
qumo government. Junio pushed for the cooperative. As stories of succes about 
coops in other remote areas filtered in, his barkada became more receptive. 

So, the Sta. Clara Multi-Purpose Cooperative was born, together with half-a- 
dozen other coops in Wao. Junio's group approached Landbank for a P2 million 
loan to help them, primarily, in their venture to produce corn. The Sta. Clara farm- 
ers were a hard-working group. They planted coffee beans, black pepper, soya 
beans, rootcrops, and rice. They wanted to expand. 

In less than two years, for demonstrating remarkable productivity, the Sta. 
Clara was one of the 10 model cooperatives cited by Landbank. Junio returned to 



People Empowerment 



27 



Manila on November 1991 to receive his group's plaque from President Aquino 
herself. He went to the Palace understandably tipsy with happiness and pride. 

Mirror Images 

Ka Dante also inspired a young priest, Fr. Rene Mangahas of Cabiao, Nueva 
Ecija, to replicate an integrated rice industry project in his parish. Fr. Mangahas led 
Alay Tangkilik Foundation to expand its program of free church services agro- 
industrial livelihood program. 

In April 26, 1990, Fr. Mangahas joined Ka Dante, some governors, and NGO 
and farmer leaders in a kaptitan/pulong-pulong held immediately after President 
Aquino inaugurated the huge warehouse and postharvest facilities of Ka Dante and 
his group. 

Inspired, the young priest shared to the forum his own experience of working 
with the Aquino government when his parish started livelihood projects in Cabiao. 
'The administration did not look at political or partisan leanings; it looked at what 
the people really needed". 

The unqualified support given by government agencies to Alay Tangkilik has 
resulted in the construction of its own postharvest facilities which included a huge 
warehouse, a mechanical dryer, a rice mill, a standby generator, and delivery trucks. 

Farmer members rose from 196 to 1,000. Incomes improved as they became 
free from usurers, middlemen, traders, and suppliers. They devised a saving scheme 
wherein age-old usury debts were reduced and a 'rainy-day' fund was started. 
Members were required to deposit with the coop two to five cavans of rice after 
every harvest. These, in turn, were given equivalent peso value based on prevailing 
market rates. This savings, now called provident fund, are now used for production 
loans, education loans, emergency loans, and death benefits. 

But more than these manifestations of success, Fr. Mangahas points to the strong 
community spirit, the camaraderie, and the liberating sense of self-reliance that 
now propel the people of Cabiao and its neighboring towns. 



28 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Patricia Sison of the Evelio Javier Foundation sums up the feeling of the hun- 
dreds of Julio Junios and Fr. Mangahases encouraged by President Aquino: "The 
NGO phenomenon . . . has succeeded in bringing about qualitative change in the 
psyche of the Filipino". 



NGOs for 

Disaster Relief 

and 
Rehabilitation 

THE PARTNERSHIP OF the government and the NGO in times of calamities 
and disasters is probably the oldest form of alliance between the two sectors. This is 
also true in times of war. 

Traditionally and in times of calamities, civic groups like the Red Cross and the 
Girl and Boy Scout Movement respond automatically to provide relief services and 
assistance. 

The killer quake of 1990 and the Mt. Pinatubo eruption in 1991, were unprec- 
edented and of such magnitude that the relief, rehabilitation work, and rebuilding 
from the ruins were just too big for the cash-strapped government to handle. It was 
this twin destruction which tested the government-NGO alliance to the hilt. 

Aid from foreign shores came. And the Aquino administration rose to the 
occasion and handled emergency situation excellently. But most of the heroic ef- 
forts, as the President had repeatedly acknowledged, came from the private sector. 

Helping Hands 

Alay sa Kapus-Palad Foundation, Inc. or AKAP, was formed in Baguio City, 
four days after the killer quake devastated Baguio and the neighboring provinces. 
It was organized by members of 10 religious congregations. 



30 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



AKAP went around Baguio City and nearby areas to solicit food, clothing, and 
medicine and distributed these to the earthquake victims. AKAP, however, did not 
stop at rendering relief services. They later provided rehabilitation, housing, health 
and nutrition, educational assistance, and livelihood development assistance to the 
people affected by the killer quake. 

In Benguet, the main source of livelihood of the people was vegetable farming 
and their produce were sold in key population centers in Luzon including Metro 
Manila. The earthquake, however, destroyed their communal irrigation system, veg- 
etable storage sheds, and farm-to-market trails/service roads. The calamity effec- 
tively halted their production. 

AKAP plodded on and spearheaded the implementation of the Upland Farm 
Systems Reconstruction project. The project was to benefit more than 2,000 farmer 
families, predominantly Ibalois and Kankana-eys in eight barangays in the towns of 
Itogon, La Trinidad, and Tuba. 

The farmers and AKAP joined hands to set up 36 communal irrigation sys- 
tems, build two units of water tanks, repair a 56 cubic meter storage sheds in each 
of the eight barangays, and rehabilitated 27 sections of communal foot trails and 1 6 
footbridges. 

Initial funding came from donations. But the bulk came from a P4.2 million 
grant from the Office of the President and the Presidential Management Staff-Inte- 
grated Livelihood Rehabilitation Program for Earthquake Victims. 

AKAP was also the PMS-NGO partner for the restoration project in Kabayan, 
Benguet. It was entrusted with a P3.1 million grant to implement the project. 

Kabayan is made up of 13 barangays populated by about 1,700 small farmers 
households. The people's main livelihood activity is upland farming of rice and 
vegetables. Prior to the earthquake, over 42,000 tons of rice and assorted vegeta- 
bles were produced annually in their centuries-old rice terraces. Productive activi- 
ties were paralyzed when the earthquake damaged most of the foot trails, foot- 
bridges, and communal irrigation systems. 



People Empowerment 



31 



Once again, AKAP and the people chalked up feats of socioeconomic won- 
ders: together they repaired and modified nine communal irrigation systems con- 
sisting of a total length of 12,400 meter canals and repaired pipe, restored nine 
sections of communal foot trails 30 kilometers long, and reconstructed 14 foot- 
bridges. 

The partnership with AKAP exemplified the collaborative approach adapted 
by the Aquino government in postrelief work. 

Donations amounting to P320.4 million which were received by the PMS, and 
P40 million from the President's Social Fund were entrusted to NGOs and POs to 
implement livelihood, small infrastructure, psycho-social workshops-seminars, NGO 
capability building, housing and food/cash for work for victims of the earthquake, 
the Mt. Pinatubo eruption, typhoon Uring and the red tide. 

The NGOs also pooled resources and formed the Corporate Network for Dis- 
aster Response (CNDR) in the aftermath of the July 1990 killer quake. 

Big Job, Big Response 

Right after the Pinatubo disaster, the government convened 200 people repre- 
senting GOs and NGOs at the Asian Institute of Management in Makati to draw up 
action plans to address the problems of the people affected by the eruption. 

The task force invited NGO representatives Jaime A. Cura of the Coalition for 
Transparency, Triccie Sison of the Muntinlupa Development Foundation, Joe 
Alejandrino, and Marietta Goco in the brainstorming and in the hands-on work. 

Soon enough, NGOs including the CNDR, which showed its mettle in speedy 
mobilization and expertise in relief and rehabilitation during the earthquake, formed 
a larger umbrella organization known as ANDAR, the NGO Network for Disaster 
Resettlement and Rehabilitation as the private sector's response to government ef- 
forts. 

ANDAR counted for its members, representatives from Katipunan, Evelio javier 
Foundation, Mercy Corps, Federation of Free Workers, FEED, PINOI, Medical Am- 



32 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



bassadors, Muntinlupa Development Foundation, Nueva Ecija NGO Forum, UP- 
PGH Psychiatrist Foundation, ABS-CBN Foundation, Philippine Association for 
Intercultural Developmnent, World Vision, and many others. 

In October 1991, ANDAR inked a Memorandum of Agreement with the Presi- 
dential Task Force to enhance GO-NGO collaboration specially in information shar- 
ing, monitoring, and in the implementation of the task force programs. ANDAR 
was to act as conduit for governent financial services and resources. 

Into The Soul Of Rehabilitation 

The magnitude of disasters did not only mean infrastructure and economic 
loss, but it also took its toll in the human capacity in coping with their loss. Particu- 
larly affected were the children who suddenly dreaded living day after day. It was 
in human rehabilitation wherein NGOs also helped a lot. 

Psychiatrists and professionals of the UP-PGH Psychiatrists Foundation were 
at the forefront of psychological interventions. Beyond extending medical relief, 
they also designed psychological and theraphy programs. They conducted trainor's 
training workshops for volunteers, students, and faculty of Behavioral Sciences amd 
related disciplines to equip them with skills in crisis intervention. 

Learning from the lessons of earthquakes and typhoons, NGOs also got in- 
volved in early warning systems. 

When the flood warning system was introduced, the local farmers and irriga- 
tion associations were part of the system which helped disseminate the information 
on water levels. They also initiated evacuation efforts to relocation sites when nec- 
essary. 

What was remarkable about the rehabilitation work was that NGOs who were 
victims themselves were able to shake off initial shock and joined in the damayan. 

Ka Dante's TILCO was greatly affected by the Mt. Pinatubo eruption. Ashfall 
devastated large portions of its farms, thereby causing some of the coop's farmers 
to put off payments. Yet, TILCO selflessly aided displaced Aetas. 



People Empowerment 



33 



TILCO helped build the resettlement in Barrio Kalangitan in Capas, Tarlac. 
Here, they led residents of Kalangitan in turning 70 hectares into a plantation for 
sugar, cassava, and even bamboo. 

Times of adversity heighten the Filipinos'sense of bayanihan. At such 
moments,they are models of a proud nation. EDSA was a shining example. The 
recent disasters revealed that the Filipino's sense of brotherhood could be harnessed 
in an organized manner. The larger role and bigger number of NGOs made this 
possible. Rehabilitation was quick. Epidemic was prevented from breaking out. 
Panic was quickly contained. 

The President personally visited calamity areas to see that work was being 
done. To her elation, her faith was confirmed: Filipinos are able. 



NGOs 
As 

Political Partners 



PRESIDENT AQUINO WAS never a member of a political party. Although 
she ran under Vice-President Salvador Laurel's UNIDO Party, she adamantly re- 
fused to be affiliated with it. She also resisted tremendous pressure to join the so- 
called administration party, the Laban ng Demokratikong Pilipino or LDP. 

Her refusal to join any political party stemmed not from her abhorrence of 
traditional politicians rather, it stemmed from her infinite faith in her people. The 
President always worked on the positivistic rationale. 

It was the people, after all, who formed the true base of her mandate. From 
the protest movement after the assassination of Ninoy Aquino in 1 983 until the Snap 
Elections of 1986, it was the people, and not any political party, who carried the 
brunt of the fight against dictatorship. 

The August Twenty One Movement. The Justice for Aquino, Justice for 
All. The Cory Aquino for President Movement. Doctors for Cory. Lawyers for 
Cory. United Concerned Christians. Muslims for Cory. And many other groups of 
different shapes, sizes, and colors. Quick and flexible, they sprouted every 
where and swarmed all over the monolith Kilusang Bagong Lipunan like deadly 
ants. 



People Empowerment 



35 



When Marcos declared curfew during the height of the EDSA Revolution and 
threatened to arrest all violators, the truth was: There was nothing he could do 
anymore. The people have discovered their power. 

President Aquino was bourne into office on the shoulders of the people, and 
this favor she returned a millionfold. 

Beyond Elections 

Before EDSA, the concept of people empowerment in the Philippines started 
and ended with exercise in suffrage. President Aquino changed all that. 

She said, "Empowering the people means more than just giving them elections 
every three years. It means enlarging their contact with government beyond elec- 
tions to its daily workings so that vast resources of one support the initiative of the 
other and the policies of government are refined by the insights of the people. 

By this means the lives of the people shall be constantly improved and the 
people themselves empowered by the habit of directing their own government. The 
constant revision of flawed policies and the wider application of good ones are 
possible only by bringing together the people and the government". 

President Aquino brought the government to the people. Together, they pro- 
ceeded in improving the livelihood projects in the countryside. With economic woes 
addressed, the involvement of the people in the daily affairs of the government 
would follow. 

Under President Aquino, participative democracy became a reality. 

People's Own Organizations 

During the Aquino presidency, the NGOs and the government provided the 
impetus for people's organizations. Since the government gave preference to help- 
ing organized groups, the people formed common agendas. Initially, economic. 



36 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



NGOs like the Philippine Business for Social Progress served as agents for or- 
ganizing beneficiaries. They oriented, trained, and guided farmers, fisherfolk, wives 
of rural workers, and even regular office employees to get organized, form coop- 
eratives to avail themselves of government's grants, loans, and other assistance. 

During a breakfast meeting with labor groups on May 1 , 1 991 , President Aquino 
directed the CD A to deputize trade union centers to help Filipino workers to set up 
their own cooperatives. In a year, 46 unions cum coops were registered with CD A. 

Bert Gonzales, Secretary-Treasurer of the NGO KMPI, is of the opinion that 
"President Aquino had succeeded in building a network of people's organizations 
that can surpass the most sophisticated network ever built in recent history, the one 
of the National Democratic Front Except that the NDF network has political vi- 
sion. With President Aquino's people's organizations network, there was no politi- 
cal agenda because she (did) not want a party". 

Events that would become historical facts showed that the President hardly 
needed one. People Power became President Aquino's strong shield against those 
who wished to destroy democracy . 

The Kabisig Movement 

In June 1990 President Aquino launched the Kabisig movement. To some sec- 
tors in the media, this was another pakulo. To dyed-in-the-wool politicians, this was 
read as the start of a political party for what they insisted as the President's reelection 
bid. 

But to all the criticisms, she said: "Kabisig is not a recent creation. Our move- 
ment had its roots four years ago when our people - coming from different sectors - 
linked arms to bring down a political nemesis. This coming together for a common 
cause, this linking for arms, we then called 'people power'. 

Since ours is a government installed by people power, it was but natural that it 
should conduct its business using the same people power. In the four years of 



People Empowerment 



37 



presidency, I have seen how our countrymen and our government have worked 
closely in a partnership whose strength is perhaps unprecedented in our political 
history. 

I have seen how such a partnership of our people and government has trans- 
formed the lives of many of our small farmers in the countryside through the thou- 
sands of cooperatives formed or reactivated after the February revolution I have 

seen this partnership at work in almost all of our efforts to improve the lives of the 
poorest among us. 

These can only mean one thing: The spirit of EDS A, the soul of people power is 
alive and well in our land. 

By establishing this movement - by calling 'Kabisig' we have merely formal- 
ized our people's silent crusade. And, perhaps more important, we are institution- 
alizing the empowerment of our people. We are institutionalizing our participatory 
democracy". 

Kabisig was also President Aquino's way to honor NGO partners and make 
partnership a hallmark of performance. 

She said, "Kabisig is meant to give recognition to what the NGOs have already 
been doing and to promote their cause. To those who say that the people were not 
consulted during Kabisig inception, I say that Kabisig's adopted strategy is from the 
work of people's organizations in alleviating poverty by fast-tracking the imple- 
mentation of projects". 

In effect, by launching Kabisig, President Aquino gave the signal for the rest of 
government to extend and support to the efforts of the NGOs and to strengthen 
their partnership for the benefit of the people. 

On hindsight, the activities of the people's organizationsdovetailed into the 
Kabisig. They were a means to prevent any attempt in the future in putting the 
country under a dictatorship. 



38 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



She said, "We have declared that in the future, no leader can again take away 
from our people the right and the power to take part actively in the business of 
government". 

NGO Liaison System 

And if the pronouncements regarding the role of NGOs in the business of 
goverment was not clear, President Aquino made formal the NGO liaison system. 

The NGO liaison system was an interagency body first headed by PMS and 
Cabinet Secretary Chito Sobrepena. It brought together all the NGO liaison officers 
of line departments and or agencies to coordinate their respective efforts in enhanc- 
ing GO-NGO collaboration. 

It served as a forum where the NGO liaison officers discussed issues and prob- 
lems, and shared experiences regarding their partnership with NGOs. 

It was formed as an offshoot of the President's directive as embodied under 
NED A Board Resolution No. 2 passed in March 1989. The resolution directed each 
department or agency to designate a specific unit or person in coordinating with 
non-governments at the national and local levels. 

The liaison system adopted the five-point action plan formulated by Secretary 
Edilberto C. de Jesus and approved by President Aquino as its framework. These 
were: to develop and maintain database on NGOs, improve access of NGOs on 
government, set up regular mechanisms for GO-NGO consultations, modify gov- 
ernment administrative and auditing participation in government programs and 
projects, and train and improve capability building of NGOs. 

Each NGO liaison officer was tasked to do the following functions: relate with 
the leaders of the major NGO networks and federations, assist in policy formula- 
tion, provide information regarding the progress of their efforts in their department 
and communicate to their local levels, policy and program developments related to 
GO-NGO matters. 

By June 1992, 70 government departments and agencies had liaison desks. 



People Empowerment 



39 



Meeting Grounds 

During the Aquino presidency, the government and theNGOs worked together 
for and against various issues - ranging from foreign debt to military bases, from 
violence to emergency situations. 

They formed coalitions or temporary alliances to promote common objectives 
or demands when an issue was "hot" or "sa oras ng kaguluhan". 

The partnership included: the Congress for a People's Agrarian Reform to 
address the controversy of land transfer and farmers' welfare, the Coalition for 
Peace to take up militarization and insurgency problems, and the Cordillera 
People's Alliance to tackle the question of autonomy in the highlands. 

Alliances were also formed to squarely face crisis situations. These included 
the rally at EDSA on December 5,1 989, the Lighting of Candles for Peace, the pooled 
editorial of national dailies in January 1990 to voice the people's non-support for 
coup attempts, the people's march and rally at the Ugarte Field to protest violence 
following the burning of buses during the Welga ng Bayan, and the formation o 
contingency plans during the Gulf crisis. 

The flexing of muscles by the people produced a sense of control over the 
course of destiny of their nation. 



Open Channels 

President Aquino kept the communication channels always open to all sectors. 
She was in constant touch with the businessmen, as well as with the workers. . Dur- 
ing the Aquino years, labor unrest dwindled down. Where there were 58T strikes m 
1986, this number shrank to 162 by 1991. This fact was attributed to the President s 
recognition of trade unions as an NGO partner. 

Trade unions, opines Bert Gonzales, are "about the only stable institutions for 
institutionalized people empowerment in the country. They have a long history and 
are highly organized. They are also the most volatile". 



40 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Yet, President Aquino, Gonzales says, succeeded in drawing away the labor 
sector from two extremes. One extreme were the trade unions which concerned 
itself with bread and butter issues. Another extreme were unions which demanded 
structural changes in the society. 

In 1986, the Labor Advisory Consultative Council (LACC) was formed to pro- 
vide as the President's mechanism for consultation and dialogue with the labor 
sector. The LACC was composed of the different labor leaders in the country. Later, 
the Kaunlaran ng Manggagawang Pilipino, Inc. (KMPI) became the mechanism for 
consultation and dialogue. 

Sectoral consultations were long, thorough procesess. According to those who 
were involved in the dialogues, each sectoral consultation was treated like a mini- 
summit meeting. There were prior consultations, smaller meetings, and shuttle 
diplomacy between the President, usually represented by the PMS, and the various 
labor groups. Most of the discussions were magdamagan (took very long hours). 

By the time the meeting with the President took place, extraneous issues have 
een eliminated, all options have been explored, and the discussion proper always 
zeroed in on gut issues. 

Such meetings, according to KMPI's Bert Gonzales, were fruitful. "Hindi na- 
rustrate ang mga tao. When President Aquino made a decision, alam n'ya may 
epe tosata °ngbayan. She was very confident. She had a network. That made it 
easy when she said: I want to talk to the farmers and workers". 

sectoral netWOrk of Presid ent Aquino also proved helpful in the choice of 
representatives in Congress and in peace-keeping missions. 

NGOs In Legislation And Peace-keeping 

The President is mandated by law to appoint sectoral representatives in 
choicest DUrin§ her first set of appointments, President Aquino made personal 
NGOs P W/ Second set of appointments, she made use of the network of 
eop e s organizations, big or small, got involved in the selection process. 



People Empowerment 



41 



With votes spread out, the sectoral representatives became more acceptable to a 
wider base. 

The government also worked hand-in-hand with NGOs in imposing rules and 
regulations such as pollution control, traffic management, anti-drug, crimewatch, 
and in the larger quest for peace in the country. 

President Aquino created the Office of the Peace Commission which sought 
nonmilitary means to address the problems of insurgency and the secessionist move- 
ment in the country. 

The Commission worked closely with the NGOs, mostly human-rights groups, 
church-based groups, and local neighborhood associations. Their collaboration led 
to the establishment of peace zones in five insurgency areas, which included Naga 
City and Sagada. 

In Sagada, the erstwhile bucolic tourist haven, the Commission facilitated dia- 
logues between the people and the government agencies concerned, including the 
military. Sagada as peace zone has held on. 



Energizing The Bureaucracy 

The hand extended across to the NGOs has not only helped the private sector, 
it has also redounded well for the government workers. "Nagbalik ang tiwala namin 
sa gobyerno", says Fr. Mangahas. By reposing worth on them, many government 
workers have been propelled to reassess, if not, appreciate, their role m nation- 
building. 

Fr. Mangahas' own experience indicated that, through President Aquino's lead- 
ership, government employees from DA, DAR, TLRC, LB, NEA, NIA, and Philnce 
- went out of their way to help. He says they overcame their feeling of doubt and 
complacency. 

The President, asserts Mangahas, "walked in our fields, sat with our farmers, 
talked to them and exchanged ideas with them napakalaking impact ng ganoong 



42 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



leadership". He says that the President influenced many employees of the govern- 
ment to reach out to the people as she did. 'The seeds of sincerity, seeds of really 
working for the people were sown and eventually grew, flourished, and reborn". 

At the same time, private citizens formed the National Coalition for Trans- 
parency to cut redtape and reduce domoralization in the front-line agencies. It 
gave awards to outstanding civil servants in cooperation with other NGOs, the reli- 
gious, and the academe. 

In response, government officials set off Panibagong Sigla 2000 to make their 
own workforce responsive. In seeking recommendations, suggestions, and new ideas 
from government employees, it sought to improve the delivery of services to the 
people. 

The most significant development in boosting the morale of government work- 
ers was when President Aquino gave the government workers the right to organize 
and bargain collectively for their wages and benefits like the private employees. On 
April 30, 1991, the President signed a memorandum of understanding with the 
Public Sector Compensation and Review Panel, Inc. which granted new benefits to 
government workers. Among these was the creation of the government employees 
union's cooperative. 

The President, without hesitation, released PI 0 million from her Social Fund as 
seed money for the government employees' cooperatives. 

The revitalized public sector, now with its own legitimate umbrella organiza- 
tion, has broadened the meaning of people empowerment in the Philippines. 

Fr. Mangahas enthuses: 'It's all mainly because of the leaders' image - the 
doubtless sincerity, the doubtless integrity. Naturally, this developed a certain kind 
of goodness, a certain kind of positive attitude, and a certain kind of response: let's 
do it again and let's try it again and this time we do it better because this time we 
have a good leader". 



Epilogue 



NOBODY KNEW WHAT to believe when Corazon C. Aquino said she would 
not run for reelection. Her detractors prayed she would not. Her followers wished 
she would. Besides, they thought, history showed a trend - incumbents always de- 
sired to extend their reign. This truism had something to do with the heady teeJing o 
power. 

But Corazon Aquino does not bend to history. It would not even be preump- 
tuous to say that she makes it. Besides, she always thought, the power must reside 
in the people. The President of any nation is only delegated power by the people. 

Again, she brought her case to her countrymen. She asked them pomtedly^f 
they wanted a continuation of her reforms. Again, they responded. In their hearts, 
the people chanted her name. 

In contrast to 1986, the transfer of the Presidency in 1992 «U I ana* ot 
pride and dignity - of a race which the world once accused as a bunch of cowards. 

By mid-1 992, Corazon Aquino has set into motion her own NGO. She is back in 
the arms of those who really make the destiny of a nation, the people. 



44 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



ADDENDUM 



CHRONOLOGY OF MAJOR GO VERNMENT-NGO PARTNERSHIP MODES 

Selected Listing 



YEAR PARTNERSHIP MODE 

1 986 TULONG S A TAO - SELF 
EMPLOYMENT ASSISTANCE 
PROGRAM 

1 987 PRESIDENT'S SOCIAL FUND 
(Formalized 1988) 



1 988 INTEGRATED PEOPLE'S 
LIVELIHOOD 
COOPERATIVES 
SYSTEM 

LIVELIHOOD ENHANCEMENT 
FOR AGRICULTURE 
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
(LEAD) 

AGRO-INDUSTRIAL 

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
(AIDA) 

NATIONAL RECONCILIATION 
AND DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM 

NATIONAL DISASTER 
COORDINATING COUNCIL 



COMMUNITY MORTGAGE 
PROGRAM 



BRIEF DESCRIPTION 

Loan assistance to labor intensive micro 
enterprises with NGOs as conduits for 
technical and loan assistance 

Financing for NGO-supervised small 
infrastructure projects (two-room 
schoolbuildings, potable water systems) 
and special concerns (literacy pro- 
grams, livelihood assistance) 

Soft loans and technical assistance in 
three major areas: crop production, 
capability-building and postharvest 
facilities 

Grants and technical assistance 
to facilitate bank loans to organized 
rural farming and fishing communities 

Government-initiated integrated support 
services for NGOs of agrarian reform 
beneficiaries in strategic operating 
provinces 

Assistance to rebel returnees which 
includes livelihood and skills training 
components 

Government linkages with NGOs 
tapped for relief in times of calamities, 
planning for disaster preparedness and 
rehabilitation 

Involvement of urban poor and 
community associations for socialized 
housing and formalized land tenure of 
illegal occupants in government and 
private properties 



People Empowerment 



45 



YEAR 

1989 



1990 



1991 



1992 



PARTNERSHIP MODE 

SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT 
AREA 

NGO LIAISON SYSTEM 



EMERGENCY COORDINATING 

MEMBERS ASSISTANCE FOR 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENTREPRENEURS!-! IP 

KABISIG PEOPLE'S 
MOVEMENT 



EARTHQUAKE FUND 



PINATUBO FUND 



WORKERS FUND 



PANIBAGONG SIGLA 2000 
AIDA II 

GOVERNMENT WORKERS 
FUND 



BRIEF DESCRIPTION 

Government-NGO partnership projects 
in vulnerable communities 

NGO liaison officers/desks in all 
departments and government offices 

Government linkages with NGOs 
tapped in times of destablization 

Revolving loan fund for SSS members 
training and capability building 
activities; implemented jointly by SSS 
and PBSP 

Government-NGO partnerships with 
greater local government participation 

Patterned after the President's Social 
Fund, this provides government assist- 
ance to NGOs for small infrastructure 
projects as part of rehabilitation to 
displaced families and communities 

Patterned after the PSF and the Earth- 
quake Fund but specifically for those 
displaced by the Pinatubo eruption 
Revolving fund for livelihood projects of 
the labor sector 

Involvement of government associa- 
tions in energizing the bureaucracy 
Private-sector initiated agro-industrial 
projects 

Revolving fund for government work- 
ers' livelihood cooperatives 



