
HI IP M 

i 



* 






» « 


i 


i 


I 





iiaLAffSHNir riBimiv 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 


Sptorii 
nf tijp 

€ott0titMttDual (HommiBaton 


PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 


VOLUME THREE 


Prepared by the Editorial/Publication Unit 
under the supervision of 

Hon. FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 






^ * i t 

J 




Republic of the Philippines 
THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 


THE OFFICERS: 



NAPOLEON G. RAMA 

Hoor Leader 


JOSE D. CALDERON AHMAD DOMOCAO ALONTO 

Assr. Floor Leader Asst. Floor Leader 



FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 



ROBERTO M. SAN ANDRES 

Sergeant-at-Arms 


COMMITTEES 


COMMITTEE ON PREAMBLE, NATIONAL TERRITORY, 
AND DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES 



Decoroso R. Rosales 
Chairman 


I'i 


Gregorio J. Tingson 
Vice-Chairman 


COMMITTEE ON CITIZENSHIP, BILL OF RIGHTS, 
POLITICAL RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS AND ' 
HUMAN RIGHTS 



Jose B. Laurel, Jr. Joaquin G, Benias 

Chairman Vice-Chairman 


Members: Bemardo M. Villegas 

Felicitas S. Aquino 
Florangel Rosario Braid 
Jose N. Nolledo 
Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Edmundo G. Garcia 
Crispino M. de Castro 
Vicente B. Foz 
Adolfo S. Azcuna 


Members: Yusup R. Abubakar 

Rene V. Sarmiento 
Edmundo G. Garcia 
Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Eulogio R. Lerum 
Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Jose C. Colay CO 
Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Bernardo M. Villegas 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Teodoro C. Bacani 
Teodulo C. Natividad 










COMMITTEE ON THE LEGISLATIVE 


COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY 



Hilario G. Davide, Jr. Adolfo S. Azcuna 
"Chairman Vice-Chairman 




Roberto R. Concepcion 
Chairman 


Ricardo J. Roniulo 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 

Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Yusup R. Abubakar 
Jose D. Calderon 
Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
Felicitas S. Aquino 
Alberto M.K. Jamir 
Roberto R. Concepcion 
Eulogio R. Lerum 
Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Edmundo G. Garcia 
Efrain B. Trenas 


Members: 

Jose C. Colay CO 
Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Alberto M.K. Jamir 
Florenz D. Regalado 
Jose E. Suarez 
Efrain B. Trenas 
Rene V. Sarmiento 
Lugum L. Uka 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
Teodulo C. Natividad 
Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 
Adolfo S. Azcuna 


COMMITTEE ON THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE ON CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS 

AND AGENCIES 



Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Chairman 



Florenz D. Regalado 
Vice-Chairman 



Vicente B. Foz 
Chairman 



Cirilo A. Rigos 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 

Napoleon G. Rama 
Jose D. Calderon 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
Roberto R. Concepcion 
Vicente B. Foz 
Regalado E. Maambong 
Alberto M.K. Jamir 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
Teodulo C. Natividad 
Rene V. Sarmiento 
Felicitas S. Aquino 
Joaquin G. Bemas 
Eulogio R. Lerum 


Members: 

Crispino M. de Castro 
Christian S. Monsod 
Yusup R. Abubakar 
Bernardo M. Villegas 
Decosoro R. Rosales 
Florenz D. Regalado 
Roberto R. Concepcion 
Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Alberto M.K. Jamir 






COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 


COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 
AND PATRIMONY 



Jose N. Nolledo 
Chairman 



Jose D. Calderon 
Vice-Chairman 



Bernardo M. Villegas Jaime S.L. Tadeo 

Chairman Vice-Oiairman 


Members: 

Gregorio J. Tingson 
Decoroso R. Rosales 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
Crispino M. de Castro 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Florenz D. Regalado 
Cirilo A. Rigos 
Alberto M.K. Jamir 
Bias F. Ople 


Members: 

Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Ricardo J. Romulo 
Christian S. Monsod 
Rene V. Sarmiento 
Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 

Bias F. Ople 
Jose E. Suarez 
Lugum L. Uka 
Teodoro C. Bacani 
Teodulo C. Natividad 
Vicente B. Foz 
Wilfrido V. Villacorta 


COMMITTEE ON ACCOUNTABILITY 
OF PUBLIC OFFICERS 


COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES 



Christian S. Monsod Jose C. Colayco 

Chairman Vice-Chairman 



Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Chairman 



Lugum L. Uka 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 


Members: 


Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Adolfo S. Azcuna 
Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Christine Tan 
Jose D. Calderon 
Gregorio J . Tingson 
Ricardo J. Romulo 
Lino O. Brocka 
Jose N. Nolledo 


Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Lino O. Brocka 
Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Christine Tan 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Cirilo A. Rigos 
Florangel Rosario Braid 
Efrain B. Trefias 








COMMITTEE ON GENERAL PROVISIONS 


STEERING COMMITTEE 


Florangel Rosario Braid 
Chairman 




Teodoro C. Bacani 
Vice-Chairman 





Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 
Chairman 



Napoleon G. Rama 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 

Cirilo A. Rigos 
Jose N. Nolledo 
Teodulo C. Natividad 
Lugum L. Uka 
Crispino M. de Castro 
Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Regalado E. Maambong 
Felicitas S. Aquino 


Members: 

Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr 
Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Ricardo J. Romulo 
Joaquin G. Bernas 
Francisco A., Rodrigo 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto 


COMMITTEE ON AMENDMENTS AND 
transitory PROVISIONS 



Jose E. Suarez 
Chairman 



Bias F. Ople 
Vice-Chairman 


COMMITTEE ON PRIVILEGES 


Yusup R. Abubakar 
Chairman 



Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 


Members: 


Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
Vicente B. Foz 
Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Regalado E. Maambong 
Crispino M. de Castro 
Rene V. Sarmiento 
Christine Tan 
Eulogio R. Lerum 
Gregorio J. Tingson 


Jose D. Calderon 
Gregorio J. Tingson 
Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
Jose N. Nolledo 
Roberto R. Concepcion 







COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 


COMMITTEE ON SPONSORSHIP 




Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Chairman 



Edmundo G. Garcia 
Vice-Chairman 


Members: 

Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Christian S. Monsod 
Felicitas S. Aquino 
Lino O. Brocka 
Jose E. Suarez 
Bias F. Ople 
Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Teodoro C. Bacani 
Edmundo G. Garcia 
Eulogio R. Lerum 
Christine Tan 
Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 
Francisco A. Rodrigo 


Members: • 

Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Christian S. Monsod 
Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Gregorio J. Tingson 
Felicitas S. Aquino 
Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 

Lino O. Brocka 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Regalado E. Maambong 


COMMITTEE ON STYLE 



Francisco A. Rodrigo Efrain B. Trenas 

Chairman Vice-Chairman 

Members: 


Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Napoleon G. Rama 
Jose N. Nolledo 
Ambrosio B. Padilla 
Yusup R. Abubakar 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
Edmundo G. Garcia 
Lugum L. Uka 
Adolfo S. Azcuna 
Rene V. Sarmiento 
Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 


COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC HEARINGS 



Edmundo G. Garcia 
Chairman 


Members: 

Joquin G. Bemas 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Christian S. Monsod 
Ponciano L. Bennagen 
Serafin V.C. Guingona 
Jose N. Nolledo 
Florangel Rosario Braid 
Jose E. Suarez 
Felicitas S. Aquino 



Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon 
Vice-Chairman 


Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
Minda Luz M. Quesada 
Adolfo S. Azcuna 
Lino O. Brocka 
Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
Decoroso R. Rosales 







EDITORIAL STAFF 


PABLO P. LIWANAG 

Chief, Editorial I Publication 

Editor in Chief 


HEIDI M. PASCUAL 
Supervising Editor 


Editors 


Avelina M. Atanacio 
Lorna P. Manarang 


Josefina T. Tamayo 


Ma. Priscila O. Palmiano 
Herminia N. Saet 


Editorial Assistants 


Ligaya M. Cinco 
Teresita L. Cordial 
Remedios S. Esquivias 


Angeles S. Hamtig 


Conchita A. Aquino 
Rhodora L. Pagayon 


Milagros M.G. Kagaoan 

Joseph Zeus A. Luna 

Ma. Lina Marciana C.T. Nario 


Indexers 

Fe B. Evangelista Preciosa I. Perez 

Typists 

Yolanda A. Bacero Lydia Abad Malig 

Alfredo D. Recella 


ROBERTO P. NAZARENO 

Technical Assistant for Operations 


FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 

Secretary-General 


Table of Contents 


Plenary Sessions 

Pages 

R.C.C. No. 50 (August 7,1986) 1 

R.C.C. No. 51 (August 8,1986) 61 

R.C.C. No. 52 (August 9,1986) 115 

R.C.C. No. 53 (August 11, 1986) 153 

R.C.C. No. 54 (August 12, 1986) 203 

R.C.C. No. 55 (August 13, 1986) 239 

R.C.C. No. 56 (August 14, 1986) 293 

R.C.C. No. 57 (August 15, 1986) 331 

R.C.C. No. 58 (August 16, 1986) 369 

R.C.C. No. 59 (August 18, 1986) 411 

R.C.C. No. 60 (August 19, 1986) 469 

R.C.C. No. 61 (August 20, 1986) 519 

R.C.C. No. 62 (August 21, 1986) 563 

RC.C. No. 63 (August 22, 1986) 579 

R.C.C. No. 64 (August 23, 1986) 631 

R.C.C. No. 65 (August 25, 1986) 669 

R.C.C. No. 66 (August 26, 1986) 705 

R.C.C. No. 67 (August 27, 1986) 741 


Appendices 

Land Reform - Pillar of the Nation’s Recovery 

by Commissioner Gregorio J. Tingson 784 

Explanation of Vote of Commissioner Monsod 785 

Position Paper on Health 

by Commissioner Minda Luz M. Quesada 786 

Position Paper No. 2 

by Commissioner Ahmad Domocao Alonto 788 

Structure of Government 

by Rev. Francisco Araneta, S.J 791 

The Need for a National Community 

by Commissioner Ahmad Domocao Alonto 794 

Letter-Petition to President Marcos Re Autonomy 

Mindanao, Sulu, Palawan, Basilan and Tawi-Tawi 799 

Manifesto of the Ansar El Islam 801 

Caucus of August 15, 1986 802 

A Monopoly of Nationalism and Merit? 

by Commissioner Jose D. Calderon 

Resolution No. 20 821 





REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION OF 1986 

QUEZON CITY, METRO MANILA 

Itecorb of the fltonetitutionnl ffomwitosion 

PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES 

R.C.C. NO. 50 
Thursday, August 7, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:46 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Eveybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Florangel Rosario Braid. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Lord of Creation: In 

supreme wisdom You have bestowed bountiful ^tts 
upon Your children. In this country of ours, 
been generous beyond measure. We marve a e 
abundant resources of nature, pleasing to the eye an 
provident to our physical needs. You have endowe 
many of Your children with talents to be dedicated to 
the service of humanity. And yet there is hunger an 
weeping in the land. The powers of darkness 
us, shaking our faith in ourselves. As we strive tor r 
and social justice, our thoughts dwell on the wor s 
the poet who said: 

To you the earth yields her fruit, and you shall not want 
if you know how to fill your hands. It is in exchanging t e 
gifts of the earth that you shall find abundance and be satis- 
fied. Yet, unless the exchange be in love and kindly justice, 
it will but lead some to greed and others to hunger. 

Help us see the need to be independent and the grace 
to admit our need for interdependence, the need for self- 


reliance and yet to be compassionate to others. 

We have completed an important milestone; we have 
listened to our people who have helped us identify the 
hues, the weave and the pattern of this tapestry — a docu- 
ment which hopefully would capture their aspirations. 

We thank You for the dedication of our fellow Commis- 
sioners, for the sacrifice of our Secretariat and support 
staff, and our fellow countrymen out there in the gallery, 
\ whose love for our country and people has motivated 
tlrem to share with us their hopes. Continue to inspire us 
to work for Your greater glory. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
please call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present' 

Aquino 

. Present 

Monsod 

. Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Nieva 


Bengzon 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Ople 


Bernas 

. Present 

Padilla 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 


Brock a 


Rama 


Calderon 


Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Colayco 


Rigos 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Foz 


Rosales 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present* 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon .... 


Suarez 

. . Present 

Guingona . . 


Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 


Tadeo 

. . Present 

Laurel .... 


Tan 

. . Present 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


2 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


Tingson Present Villacorta Present 

Trenas Present Villegas Present 

Uka Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Crispin C. Maslog, President of the 
Philippine Association of the Philippine Association of 
Communication Educators, College, Laguna, recom- 
mending a broad-based ownership of mass media, 
establishment of more community-based newspapers 
and broadcast stations, Filipinization of mass media 
ownership, and prohibition of cross-ownership of mass 
media, among others. 

(Communication No. 47 1 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Letter from the Daughters of Mary Immaculate, Our 
Lady of Remedios Circle, Malate Catholic Church, M. H. 
del Pilar, Malate, Manila, recommending some measures 
for the establishment of a moral regeneration of values 
throughout the country. 

(Communication No. 472 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


To the Committee on General Provisions. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 


the PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
pprwe the Journal of the previous session? (Silence) 

6 ^ hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


move that we 


^here any objection? (Silence) 
e Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Dusmess. 


reference OF BUSINESS 

following Proposed 

Pre<tident Communications, the 

President making the corresponding references: 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION ON FIRST READING 
Proposed Resolution No. 536, entitled: 

TWENTY-EIGHT 

THE RULES OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL rOMMT<;«;] 
BY ALLOWING RECONSIDERATION OF CONSTI 
TIONAL PROPOSALS EMBODIED IN THE fIJ 
DRAFT OF THE CONSTITUTION BEFORE ITS 
APPROVAL. 


Introduced by Hon. Sarmiento. 
To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Mr. Jaime Hermida Ching, a contract 
worker in Dammam, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, con- 
taining his suggestions in the framing of the new Consti- 
tution. 

(Communication No. 473 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter jointly signed by Messrs. Horacio M. Montefrio, 
Cesar P. Macasero, Arturo P. Casuga, and Pedro L. 
Esteban, requesting inclusion in the Article on 
Education, Science, Technology, Sports, Arts and 
Culture of the Constitution the following proposed 
provision: “THE STATE, IN PARTNERSHIP WITH 
THE INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS SECTORS, 
SHALL ESTABLISH, MAINTAIN AND SUPPORT AN 
INTEGRATED AND COORDINATED SYSTEM OF 
TECHNICAL AND VOCATIONAL EDUCATION AND 
TRAINING FROM THE SECONDARY TO TERTIARY 
LEVELS FOR MORE EFFECTIVE HUMAN RE- 
SOURCE DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION.” 

(Communication No. 474 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Fulgencio S. Factoran, Jr., Deputy 
Executive Secretary, Office of the President, Mala- 
canang, transmitting the letter of Sgt. Jovenal B. 
Giangan of PAF, Mactan Air Base, Lapulapu City, seek- 
ing the abolition of the political party system. 

(Communication No. 475 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


3 


Letter from Mr. Rolando Cimafranca of Chugum cor. 
Abanao Street, Baguio City, seeking a definite provision 
in the Constitution protecting the right to life of the 
unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 476 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Justino E. Honculada of 3 1 1 D. Alviola 
Village, Butuan City, expressing apprehension over the 
approval of a constitutional provision allowing illiterates 
to vote. 

(Communication No. 477 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Citizenship, Bill of Rights, 
Political Rights and Obligations and Human Rights. 

Letter from Mr. Victor Gruta of Biriran, Juban, Sor- 
sogon, submitting an unnumbered resolution of the 
Biriran Irrigators’ Service Association, requesting 
exemption of small landowners from the imple- 
mentation of the land reform program. 

(Communication No. 478 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Hilario L. de Pedro III, O.I.C. of Koro- 
nadal, South Cotabato by the municipal government of 
Koronadal, favoring, among others, the retention of 
U.S. military bases, a bicameral legislature, election of 
Congressmen by district, presidential type of govern- 
ment, and the abolition of the death penalty. 

(Communication No. 479 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication signed by Mr. Omar Mendoza of the 
UP Science Research Foundation and three thousand 
nine hundred thirty-five others with their respective 
addresses, seeking the inclusion in the Constitution of 
a provision obliging the State to protect the life of the 
unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 480 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from Mr. Haji Jameel Ramli A. Noor of 
38 Pangarungan Village, Marawi City, submitting for 
consideration by the Constitutional Commission a 
manuscript entitled; “Islamic Autonomous Govern- 
ment or Federal State for the Muslims: Tlie Only 
Acceptable Formula is Its Incorporation in the New 
Constitution to Formally and Finally Integrate the 
Muslims into the Philippine Body Politic.” 


(Communication No. 481 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Cesar V. Canchela, transmitting the 
position paper of the United Architects of the Philip- 
pines, CCP, Roxas Boulevard, Metro Manila, recom- 
mending, among others, for inclusion in the Constitu- 
tion the utilization of the services of Filipino profes- 
sionals and consultants on government projects funded 
by the Philippine government and from foreign loans 
and .grants. 

(Communication No. 482 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions 
and Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Santiago B. Galang of 14 7th Avenue, 
Cubao, Quezon City, expressmg apprehension over the 
influx of the Chinese and their monopoly of businesses 
in the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 483 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Isaias P. Costelo of 285 Picnic Ground, 
Tugbungan, Zamboanga City, proposing, among others, 
a presidential type of government with a bicameral 
legislature and the creation of a Commission on Ap- 
pointments. 

(Communication No. 484 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Ms. Edna Desalapo of 2258 Int. 

1 1-53 Leveriza, Malate, Manila and one hundred twenty 
others from Sta. Ana, Pandacan, Leveriza and San 
Andres Bukid, Manila, suggesting provisions on social 
justice, housing, education, labor, family and women’s 
rights, among others. 

(Communication No. 485 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Erlindo P. Llanera of Villa Maria Sub- 
division, Travesia, Guinobatan, Albay, suggesting a 
preamble couched in the language of God-loving citizens 
of a tree nation, a tour-year presidential term and 
nonimmunity from suit of the President. 

(Communication No. 486 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the Executive. 


4 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


Communication from Ms. Trifona P. Macapanas for the 
Ramis Barangay High School Students Organization, 
Hinabangan, Samar, submitting resolutions proposing 
the abolition of the National College Entrance Exam- 
ination and allowing colleges and universities to 
administer entrance examinations; and the adoption 
of Tagalog as the medium of instruction. 

(Communication No. 487 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Ms. Fe Samaniego for the National Spiritual 
Assembly of the Baha’is of the Philippines, Inc., 1070 
A. Roxas, Singalong, Manila, submitting proposals for 
the State to inculcate in the individual the conviction 
and consciousness of the essential unity of the human 
race as the only viable standard for social and economic 
justice, and for the State to provide free elementary 
and high school education in public schools wherein 
comparative religion shall be taught. 

(Communication No. 488 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take up the unfinished 
consideration of the Article on Social Justice wliich is 
now in the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection‘s (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of tlie Com- 
mittee on Social Justice are requested to please occupy 
the front table in order that we may proceed with the 
continuation of the period of amendments. 

y 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:02 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


Utter from Messrs. Lito Urgino and Frank Padilla for 
Families for Justice and Peace, 300 P. Guevarra, San 
Juan, Metro Manila, submitting 5,830 signatures in 
^pport of Resolution No. 272, introduced by the 
Honorable Commissioners Nieva, Bacani, Munoz Palma, 
gos, ascon, and Guingona, to incorporate in the 
ons itution a separate article on the protection and 
promotion of the rights of the family ; and recommend- 
ing e approval of a provision which mandates the 
protection of the hfe of the mother and the unborn 
human life from the moment of conception. 

~ Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 


To the (Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 

Declaration of Principles. 


Qjmmunicatmn from Ms. Maribel C. Purisima of th 

Ministry of Trade and Industry and one thousand fi\ 

• twelve other petitioners, seeking to includ 

^ P^^^ision obUging the State t 

IZtV tL moment c 

conception. 

(Communication No. 490 - Constitutionai Coramissic 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


At 10:08 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, while the text of the 
amendment of Commissioner Colayco to Section 3 is 
still being xeroxed, I move that we proceed to Section 
5 since there are no proponents of amendments for 
Section 4. 

May I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my amendment is 
in connection with the second sentence of Section 5 
which reads; “To this end, the State shall encourage 
. . .” After the word “shall,” put a comma (,) and add 
the words BY LAW then put a comma (,). So with my 
amendment, the sentence will now read: “To this end, 
the State shall, BY LAW, encourage and undertake the 
just distribution . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I call the 
attention of Commissioner Jamir to the clause “as 
Congress may prescribe.” Does the Commissioner not 
feel that the clause adequately satisfies the require- 
ment regarding the insertion of his amendment between 
the words “the State” and “shall”? The clause “as 
Congress may prescribe” is descriptive or restrictive 
of the previous phrase. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


5 


MR. JAMIR. I believe so, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Suarez refer 
to the clause “and other conditions as Congress may 
prescribe” which would not necessitate the insertion 
of the words “BY LAW” after “the State shall”? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Madam President. 

We suggest that there must be a comma (,) before the 
word “as.” 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, I am transposing my 
amendment to the first sentence instead. So after the 
word “shall,” it will read: “The State shall, BY LAW, 
undertake a genuine agrarian ...” 

MR. SUAREZ. I think there is merit in the trans- 
position. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we would like to call 
attention to certain slight corrections. We have already 
agreed to remove “genuine” as a qualifying word for 
agrarian reform on the first line. Tile Committee had 
already accepted this. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Jamir satisfied? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, the whole sentence 
would now read. The State shall, BY LAW, undertake 
an agrarian reform program ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we now proceed to vote? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President, because the 
amendment has been accepted by the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
amendment proposed on the first line of the draft of 
the committee report? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The amendment is very simple. On the third line of 
Section 5, between the words “farmworkers” and “to,” 
I propose to insert a comma (,) after “farmworkers” 
followed by the phrase ESPECIALLY THE LANDLESS 
then put a comma (,) after it. And on the fourth line 
after “till,” put a comma (,) so it will read: “and 
regular farmworkers, ESPECIALLY THE LANDLESS, 


to own directly or collectively the lands they till, OR, 
in the case of other . . .” 

MR. TADEO. Commissioner Davide, maaari bang 
pakiliwanag lamang kung ano ang ibig sabiliin ng “land- 
less”? 

MR. DAVIDE. The term “landless” refers to the 
regular farm workers or the farmers who do not own 
lands of their own. So, priority must be given to them, 
because the farmers and regular farm workers men- 
tioned here may or may not have lands of their own, 
and I want priority to be given to the landless of these 
farmers and regular farm workers. 

MR. TADEO. Marahil mas magaling kung ipaliliwa- 
nag natin ito nang mabuti. Ang programa nitong naka- 
raan sa ilalim ni Ginoong Marcos ay tinawag na “land 
for the tillers.” Ngunit noong panahon ni Presidente 
Magsaysay, tinawag naman itong “land for the landless.” 
Ang mga farmers at regular farm workers ay parehong 
landless. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not necessarily. In the course 
of my interpellation, the Gentleman admitted that if 
one has a small land but works on the land of ano- 
ther during the off-season, he may be entitled to get 
that particular land of another, in addition to his own. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that phrase may 
not be in the contemplation of the Committee because 
it means, as Commissioner Davide has said, that some- 
body who already has land and may be helping his 
neighbor by being a hired manager of the adjoining 
lot, would still be entitled to acquire that adjoining lot 
under the agrarian reform program. To include the land- 
less, meaning even those who already have land, to be 
beneficiaries under the agrarian reform program is not 
the intent of the Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, that was not the answer of Com- 
missioner Tadeo to my question before. 

MR. TADEO. Commissioner Monsod, palagay ko 
ay mayroong katuwiran si Commissioner Davide. Ang 
tinutukoy niya ay ang mga farmers and regular farm 
workers na walang sariling pag-aari at nagsasaka pa sa 
iba. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 

MR. TADEO. Ang binibigyan ng priority ay iyong 
landless farmers and regular farm workers na walang 
sariling lupang sinasaka at nakikisaka pa sa iba. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, I think that should really be 
the thrust of land reform. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, but there is a division in the 
Committee. When we say “especially the landless,” 


6 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


that suggests that even those who already have land 
would still be beneficiaries. 

MR. DAVIDE. Let us just clarify this for the record. 
What really is the objective of land reform? Is it to give 
priority to the landless and should not be applied to 
farm workers and farmers who already have lands of 
their own? 

MR. TADEO. I agree with Commissioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, I think the Commission will have 
to decide on this particular issue — the scope of agrarian 
reform. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I offer 
an amendment to the amendment of' Commissioner 
Davide? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Davide 
accept an amendment by placing the word “LAND- 
LESS” between “regular” and “farmworkers” so that 
it will read: “on the basic right of farmers and regular 
LANDLESS farmworkers. . .” 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment will not remedy the 
apparent conflict in the interpretation, because under 
that particular interpretation, it would apply only to 
regular landless farm workers but not to farmers with- 
out lands of their own. So, I really would seek a definite 
stand of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words. Commissioner 
Davide does not accept the proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because it will remedy only 
partly, not the entire concept of land reform. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:20 a.m. 

resumption of session 

At 10:21 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod will please 
proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. We have arrived at a formulation 
here, so instead of saying “ESPECIALLY THE LAND- 
LESS,” we will say WHO ARE LANDLESS. 


MR. DAVIDE. The amendment will be placed after 
“farmworkers,” so instead of “ESPECIALLY THE 
LANDLESS,” it should be “WHO ARE LANDLESS”? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it will now read; “The State shall 
by law undertake an agrarian reform program founded 
on the basic right of farmers and regular farmworkers 
WHO ARE LANDLESS to own directly or collective- 
ly . . .” 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree. Madam President, and there 
should be a comma (,) after “till” on the fourth line. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, just a question 
for clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the phrase “WHO ARE LAND- 
LESS” modify both farmers and regular farm workers? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Maybe between the words “LAND- 
LESS” and “to,” we should put a comma (,) so that 
it refers to “farmworkers WHO ARE LANDLESS, ...” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. How is that now? Will Commis- 
sioner Monsod please repeat. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the first part of 
Section 5 will now read: “The State shall by law under- 
take an agrarian reform program founded on the basic 
right of farmers and regular farmworkers, WHO ARE 
LANDLESS, to own directly. . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other proposed 
amendment on this first sentence so that we can vote 
on this? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, for the sake of 
our being able to explain it adequately to the people 
to whom we shall be explaining this, may I know how 
we justify the basic right of farmers and regular farm 
workers who are landless to own directly or collectively 
the land they till? I do not see any difficulty in saying 
that the farmers and farm workers have a right to some 
property because that is needed for dignified living. 
That they should have a basic right precisely to the 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


7 


land they till is, however, something I do not see very 
clearly and I would have to explain that to the people. 

1 see this distribution and redistribution as an 
exigency of the common good and, hence, instead of 
affirming that this is founded on the basic right of 
farmers and farm workers who are landless to own the 
land they till, I would rather say that it is “because 
the common good so requires it.” That would be an 
amendment 1 would like to introduce in case I do not 
get a satisfactory explanation. 

In other words, I am not against their owning directly 
or collectively the land they till. I think that is an 
imperative; I think that is necessary. What I do not see 
so clearly is that that action of the government should 
be premised on the basic right of the farmers or the 
farm workers who are landless to own precisely the 
land they till. 

MS. NIEVA. So, would the Bishop suggest that the 
phrase “founded on tlie basic right of farmers” be 
replaced by another phrase? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, and instead I suggest' “ON 
ACCOUNT OF THE EXIGENCY OF THE COMMON 
GOOD, the State shall undertake an agrarian reform 
program so that farmers and regular farmworkers 
WHO ARE LANDLESS, to own directly or collectively 
the land they till.” 

MR. TADEO. Commissioner Bacani, dati itong 
“primacy,” ngunit pumayag na rin kami sa inyong 
mungkahi sa isang pagpupulong ng Committee na gawin 
natin itong “basic right.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Hindi po ako ang nagmungkahi 
noon. Present ako, pero hindi ako ang nagmungkahi 
noon. Si Commissioner Monsod yata ang nagmungkahi 
noon. 

MR. TADEO. This is what “basic right” means - 
it is a principle in agrarian reform whereby those who 
actually till the land have the supremacy to own the 
same in a manner that is expeditious and/or in common 
with others. Ang mismong nagtatrabaho sa bukid, ang 
magsasaka, ay mayroong pangunahing karapatan or first 
opportunity na magmay-ari at unang dapat makinabang 
sa bunga ng kanUang pagod at pawis. Ito po kasi ang 
pangunahing principle at objective ng agrarian reform. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I do not deny 
that that is the principle. What I would like to know 
is how we will Justify that principle since it is not self- 
evident? That is what I am trying to say. It is not a 
self-evident principle that they should own precisely 
the land they till. Tliat they should have a primacy 
of right to the fruits is evident to me. That they should 
have also a basic right to some property is evident to 
me. But that they should have a basic right precisely 
to this land that they till is not as evident to me, and 


that is why I am not rejecting it as yet. I am asking for 
an explanation of that not self-evident principle. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I would yield to Commissioner 
Monsod, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MON SOD. Madam President, let me just give 
an example and see whether that concretizes what the 
Commissioner is talking about. 

Let us say that Juan is tilling the land of Jose. In 
the case of Jose, he may be one of those small land- 
owners allowed to keep their land under the retention 
limits as Commissioner de los Reyes said today. Now, 
Juan still has a right to own land because he is a tiller 
and he is landless and, perhaps, in such an instance, he 
would have a priority to public land that can be alien- 
ated. Is that what the Commissioner means? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. In other words, that is it. 
When we say that farmers have the basic right to own 
the land they till, it means that is true in each and every 
circumstance without any exception. So that when 
they till a certain land and they fall within this category, 
then they can claim the right to own that land and there 
is no possibility of denying that claim whatsoever. 

MR. MONSOD. This is just a trial formulation to see 
if it reflects the Bishop’s thinking. Suppose we amend 
the first part of this paragraph to read; “The State shall 
by law undertake an agrarian reform program founded 
on the basic right of tillers and regular farmworkers, 
who are landless, to own land directly or collectively or, 
in the case of other farmworkers, to receive a just share 
of the fruits thereof.” 

BISHOP BACANI. It does not seem to meet what I 
am trying to say. Can we really, upon having put this 
in the Constitution, explain this? I think this is one of 
the instances in the Constitution where we affirm 
something theoretical. 

MR. MONSOD. But that formulation took out pre- 
cisely the phrase “the lands they till” but recognizes 
that a tiller who is landless has a right to own land. 
I am only trying to see if this is what the Bishop has 
in mind, but this is certainly not the position of the 
Committee. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that would be what I mean 
when I say that they are entitled to some land, and 
they are entitled even principally to the fruits of that 
land but not necessarily entitled to own the land they 
till. 


8 


THURSDAY, AUC^UST 7, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, now we understand the point 
of the Commissioner, and maybe that is something for 
the Committee as a whole to consider. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, may I propose that as an 
amendment — the Commissioner’s own formulation 
which is a happy one for me and which,I think, meets 
the exigencies of land reform. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think our difficulty is with the 
interpretation of Commissioner Bacani that the phrase 
“basic right” means an unquaUfied and plenary right 
to claim. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. In other words, when we 
speak of a basic right, then we have a basic right to 
property or a basic right to life. 

MS. AQUINO. Would it satisfy the Commissioner 
if we find an alternative to the phrase “basic right” 
or to the word “right,” if only to approximate that 
kind of a difficulty and address the problem of that 
interpretation? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. I would argue for something 
like “a great appropriateness.” After “appropriateness” 

I do not know how to word it. There is really a great 
appropriateness for them to own the land they till. Or 
maybe we can even speak of an imperative. That is 
why on account of the common good there is that 
imperative. I do not argue against the fact that they 
must own land. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, the Commissioner 
does not want a strict absolute correspondence between 
the land that is being actually tilled and the right to 
own by a tiller. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but they ought to have the 
right to own some land and the government must 
guarantee that to them. 

MR. BE.NGZON. In other words, what the Com- 
missioner is saying is that it does not automatically 
mean that they have that basic right to own the land 
that they specifically till. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that is it; not in all cases. 
Ihe way it is fomiulated now does not seem to admit 
of any exception, if it is a basic right. 

MR. BENGZON. We understand that now. Would 
the Commissioner like to propose that amendment so 
that the Committee can react to it? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. May I propose the formula- 
tion of Commissioner Monsod which, 1 think, expresses 
it. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas desires 
to make some comments on this. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could I contribute some insights 
into the principle behind agrarian reform? In the 1973 
Constitution, Article XIV, Section 1 3 states: 

The Batasang Pambansa may authorize, upon payment 
of just compensation, the expropriation of private land to 
be subdivided into small lots and conveyed at cost to 
deserving citizens. 

If we will remember, this really made constitutional 
history because it went beyond the principle of eminent 
domain - that the State can expropriate lands in small 
lots for distribution to deserving citizens. But the 
principle behind this had nothing to do with the basic 
right of tillers to own the land they till. This was pre- 
mised on precisely the exigencies of the common 
good. The social function of property which requires 
that in specific circumstances when political and social 
stability is threatened, the government or the State lias, 
with just compensation, the right to expropriate lands. 

I completely share the fears of Commissioner Bacani 
about stating a basic right, and I would be more com- 
fortable if another reason were cited. I am very much in 
favor of giving lands to small farmers. I think that is a 
requirement of political, social and economic stability. 
But I think we are treading on dangerous grounds in 
articulating a certain basic right. Let us also keep in 
mind that there are certain countries like Taiwan which 
in 20 years or so, in one generation, has literally gone 
the full circle and is now implementing an agrarian 
reform program which is exactly the opposite — they 
are now trying to consolidate their small farms because 
the common good dictates that they should not have 
small farms anymore. 

A study of Taiwan in 1986 will show us their land 
reform program which is completely the opposite of 
what they implemented in the 1950s because they 
realized that the common good requires that they do 
not grow sugar in one-hectare properties, but should 
start to grow more and more in large-scale farming. 
We cannot constitutionalize certain provisions which 
are requirements of the common good today, but which 
20 years from now may be completely the opposite. 

That is why I am very much in favor of this provision 
making sure that today, in 1 986, the millions of landless 
farmers should have land that they can till which they 
can call their own, but let us be very careful about 
constitutionalizing that kind of an exigency of the 
common good today which may not be an exigency of 
the common good in the year 2000. 

MS. NIEVA. Is Commissioner Villegas proposing an 
amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, I propose an expression like 
“because of the requirements of the common good.” 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


9 


MR. TADEO. Madam President, gusto ko lang pong 
magpaliwanag. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 11:11 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. TADEO. Kung napapansin ninyo, nakalagay dito 
ang pariralang: “to own directly or collectively,” at 
sinasabi ninyong nagsasaad ang “collectively” ng 
common good. Ngunit mayroon pang mga lupain — at 
batay iyan sa uri ng pananim, gaya ng mais at bigas — na 
kinakailangang ariin mo tulad ng tricycle upang maalaga- 
an mong maigi. Ngunit actually liindi tayo titigil doon. 
Alam naman nating ang hiwa-hiwalay at pira-pirasong 
pagsasaka ay hindi produktibong pagsasaka. Kaya 
tutungo rin tayo roon sa yugto ng cooperative farming 
o collective farming at makakamtan din natin ang 
common good. Actually, hindi pa kayang tanggapin ng 
magbubukid sa kasalukuyan ang sama-samang pagma- 
may-ari, iyong sinasabi nating common good. For 
change to endure, the idea of the cooperative farm must 
come from within, not merely imposed on them. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. The common good and collective 
farming are not synonymous, so there is no corre- 
spondence between the use of the common good and 
the advocacy for collective farming. The common good 
is a high principle which 1 suggest as an alternative to 
the phrase “a basic right.” And definitely, as I said, I do 
not think we have reasons to quarrel over the final 
result. The linal result should be that small farmers 
today able to own their one-hectare, two-hectare, 
three-hectare lots planted to corn, coconut, cacao and 
other types of crops. So, there is no question about 
that. 


MR. BENGZON. Would Commissioner Villegas agree 
to a fonnulation being made by Commissioner Monsod 
which will coordinate and correlate with the amend- 
ment y Comm.issioner Bacani which states 

that; OF THE COMMON GOOD 

the STATE SHALL BY LAW UNDERTAKE AGRA- 
RIAN REFORM PROGRAM FOUNDED ON THE 

basic right of farmers and regular 
farmworkers, who are TILLERS AND LAND- 
LESS, TO OWN DIRECTLY OR COLLECTIVELY. . .” 

In other words, we inject the thought of the Com- 
missionei to the amendment of Commissioner Bacani. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponents have 
reached a meeting of minds, so may I call on Com- 
missioner Bacani to present the basic amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, after I present 
my amendment, the Committee itself will explain the 
meaning of a very important word which we have agreed 
upon to make it official. 

The amendment by deletion simply goes this way: 
“The State shall BY LAW undertake AN agrarian reform 
program founded on the right of farmers and regular 
faniiworkers, WHO ARE LANDLESS, to own directly 
or collectively the lands they till . . .” 

Madam President, a very vital explanation is on the 
word “right” and the elimination of the word “basic.” 

I would like that to come from the Committee itself 
since we already agreed on this. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair wishes to be clarified 
with regard to the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Bacani. In other words, it is still the same, except 
for the elimination of the word “basic.” 

BISHOP BACANI. The elimination of the word 
“basic” has left the word “right” being understood in a 
looser sense than one might first construe upon seeing 
it. And that is why I am asking the Committee to give 
that explanation. 

THE PRESIDENT. And is the Commissioner’s pro- 
posed amendment different now from the original 
version that was given to us by Commissioner Monsod? 
We just want to clarify that. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President, but the 
sense approximates that. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that formulation 
does not really mean an absolute correspondence be- 
cause that “right” is also subject to the second sentence 
which says, “subject to such priorities, retention limits 
and other conditions as Congress may prescribe.” How- 
ever, the Committee feels that it is important to retain 
the words “the lands they till” because really in 
practice that would be the preferential route as far as 
identification of the land is concerned. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. JHE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 

It was 10:42 a.m. nized. 


10 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. The deletion of the term “basic” is 
best understood in the context of the proposal of 
Commissioners Romulo and de los Reyes, which will be 
an insertion of a sentence after the word “compensa- 
tion.” However, preliminarily, it is the Committee’s 
position that the deletion of the term “basic” and the 
retention of the word “right” means that the polar 
star - when we expound the principle of land reform— 
is that the farmer has a right to the land he tills, but this 
is not an immutable right. In other words, his claim of 
ownership does not automatically pertain or correspond 
to the same land that he is actually and physically till- 
ing. It would yield to the limitations and adjustments 
provided for in the second sentence of the first para- 
graph, specifically the “retention limits” and the 
amendments of Commissioners Romulo and de los 
Reyes, which the Committee is accepting. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I think that is 
the official sense and it translates the meaning that was 
sought for in the amendment before, and that is why 
that is presented in this form now. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Villegas 
say? 


MR. TINGSON. I should like very much to support 
that amendment because I feel that that is very neces- 
sary in order for the small landowners of our country 
to feel that they are neither ignored nor their basic 
rights totally neglected. I understand. Madam President, 
that in one of the Supreme Court decisions, “small 
landowners” made references to the hardworking and 
frugal people who in a lifetime of sacrifice gathered 
their pitiful little savings and purchased small farms to 
supplement the inadequate pensions from the Govern- 
ment Service Insurance System or the Social Security 
System. So I would like to go on record that 1 am in 
favor of that amendment and I appreciate very much 
the privilege of being part of that amendment. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Will Commissioner de los Reyes 
accept an amendment to the amendment by eliminat- 
ing the word “FAMILY” - just say “SMALL LAND- 
OWNERS,” not necessarily “SMALL FAMILY LAND- 
OWNERS.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. I accept the formulation. Madam 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just pouit 
out two things here: In the first sentence, the ComS 
tee has already accepted the term “BY LAW” which was 
introduced by Commissioner Jamir; in the second 
sentence, we have formulated the phrase “as Congress 
may prescribe.” This sentence is really a long sentence 
and even includes the consideration of whatever law 
Congress shall prescribe. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, this is now accepted by the 
Committee. 

♦u AQUINO. Madam President, may we request 
a ommissioner de los Reyes be recognized to 
propose an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

heinf H amendment jointly 

being submitted by Commissioners Romulo, Monsod 

and Tingson. It is an additional sentence after the word 

^ fallows: THE 

STATE SHALL RESPECT THE RICHtq nc cAyrAi t 

FAMILY LANDOWNERS IN THE DETERMNAxtoN 

OF THE RETENTION LIMITS. i lUN 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nised. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Inasmuch as the Committee 
has already stated in advance that it has accepted my 
amendment, I would like to throw it to the Committee, 
although personally I have no objection to the elimina- 
tion of the word “FAMILY.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say to 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Regalado? 

MS. AQUINO. The Chairperson initially manifested 
the Committee’s acceptance of the amendment to the 
amendment; however, we wish to clarify that our refer- 
ence to small landowners does not necessarily mean that 
they should be owner-cultivators, according to the 
definition that we have adopted. In other words, small 
landowners here who are entitled to State protection do 
not necessarily refer only to owner-cultivators. How- 
ever, there is one basic principle which should be 
respected and which we would accommodate — that the 
tenancy relationship be abolished. This is the basic 
principle of all land reform codes presently in effect. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is in that spirit that this 
amendment is being offered. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes answer just one question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What does the Commissioner 
mean by “small landowners”? How big is the land 
owned? 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


11 


MR. DE LOS REYES. That will be as determined by 
law, although at present the retention limit, I under- 
stand, is seven hectares. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this section would 
now include or extend its coverage to all agricultural 
lands. So, we feel that Congress will have a better op- 
portunity to define not only limits for land but for 
specific types of land or crops, even perhaps suitable to 
different areas, because there are different conditions 
for different crops in different areas. We do not want 
to preempt Congress on this, although the intent is quite 
clear in the provision where we are referring to “small,” 
and it is up to Congress to define “small” in specific 
instances. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I do understand that there is a case 
entitled Nilo v.s. Court of Appeals, whereby the case 
states that “small landowners” are referred to as having 
24 hectares or less. Is that true to coconut? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee 
would just like to clarify that there may be cases defin- 
ing “small,” but since the coverage of this Article is 
wider than it was before, there would be need for 
additional congressional clarification of that point. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The question of defining “small” 
in terms of absolute figures is a tricky business because 
it depends on the number of variables, like soil, climate, 
and all that. In any case, I think the provision, as for- 
mulated, provides us some criteria, and these are subject 
to or shall take into account ecological, developmental 
or equity considerations. We cannot be definite as to 
sizes, with respect to rice, corn or whatever crops, be- 
cause these are variable, and this is proven by researches 
worldwide. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. JAMIR. Parliamentary inquiry. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner J amir is recognized. 


MR. JAMIR. May I know from the Committee the 
exact meaning of the words “agricultural lands.” I ask 
this question because our Supreme Court considers even 
residential lands as part of the agricultural lands. Even 
our 1973 Constitution divides lands into agricultural, 
mineral, and forest lands. So, I would like an authorita- 
tive definition from the Committee, if that is possible. 

MR. TADEO. Ayon sa aklat ni Commissioner Nolledo, 
ang Principles of Agrarian Reforms, Cooperatives and 
Taxation, ang definition ng agricultural land sa ilalim ng 
Section 166, RA 3844, ay land devoted to any growth 
including, but not limited to, crop lands, saltbeds, fish- 
ponds, idle land and abandoned land. 

MR. JAMIR. So, the provision of RA 3844 cited by 
the Gentleman is a definition of agricultural lands by 
the Committee. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I heard from Commissioner Aquino 
that there is absolute prohibition or abolition of the 
system of tenancy. I know that under RA 3844, some 
lands devoted to rice and com were subject to land 
reform, if there is a tenancy relation but not when there 
are farm laborers. In my opinion. Madam President, the 
position of a tenant, who since the time of President 
Quezon was given 70 percent of the produce of rice 
land, is better or preferable to a farm laborer who only 
receives a minimum wage. The tenant who receives 70 
percent of the produce is, in effect, an industrial partner 
who contributes his labor and yet receives the greater 
portion of the harvest; whereas a farm laborer does not 
share in the productive income of the farm but is only 
entitled to a minimum wage. 

I cannot understand why under RA 3844, there was 
preference for the farm laborer and discrimination 
against tenancy. In my opinion, the status of a tenant 
as an industrial partner is higher and better than a mere 
farm laborer who does not share in the profits of the 
farm but is only paid a minimum wage. So, I am sur- 
prised why there should be a statement that the land 
reform is based on absolute abolition of the tenancy 
relation in preference for some farms with farm 
laborers. Madam President, that was the loophole in the 
correct implementation of the land reform program. 
There were certain landowners whp were clever enough 
to make it appear that their tenants who are their 
industrial partners of their farm workers in the produc- 
tion of rice and corn were only farm laborers, and, 
therefore, no longer subject to land reform: whereas 
those who acknowledge the true fact that they had 
tenants as their industrial partners were subject to land 
reform. 


12 


THURSDAY. AUGUST 7, 1986 


So, I would like the Committee to respond whether 
the real intention is to abolish absolutely the tenancy 
relation because it is a social evil, because in my 
opinion, a tenant has a better and a higher relation than 
that of a mere farm laborer. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, I believe that is what the 
Committee and I mean. 

MR. RODRIGO. Regular farm workers, who are land- 
less, are regular workers in somebody else’s farm? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we agree that there 
may be instances of share tenancy where the tenant 
might actually receive more than if he were a mere 
employee. However, the system of tenancy is looked 
upon as the source of many evils, although not neces- 
sarily evil per se. How we want to solve the situation is 
the phrase in the first sentence where we talk about 
farm workers who have a right to receive a just share of 
the fruits thereof. We look at this as a solution to the 
question on whether they really end up in a worse 
situation by changing the system from tenancy relation 
to an employee-relation because then the concept of an 
industrial employee will come in when that employee 
receives a just share of the fruits thereof. If we notice, 
this is a parallel clause in the subsection on Labor 

because m a way there is a parallel situation in those 
two cases. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is a pending 
^endment which has been accepted by the Commit- 
Tu- proponent is insisting that it be voted on. 

his IS the amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that is also the meaning. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us say I own a fann, but instead 
of hiring regular farm workers, I hire planters during the 
planting season. Then I hire harvesters during the 
harvest season and I hire another group of threshers. 
These are not regular farm workers, are they? 

BISHOP BACANI. They do not fall under the term 
“regular farm workers.” 

MR. RODRIGO. And they are not farmers? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, in the sense given here. 

MR. RODRIGO. So if I am the owner, and I want to 
evade this provision, all I have to do is not to hire 
regular farm workers. 

BISHOP BACANI. That case will then have to fall 
under the following clause: “in the case of other farm 
workers, to receive a just share of the fruits thereof.” 


will first approve the amend- MR. RODRIGO. Yes, but those other workers are not 

cAnf ° omniissioner Bacani with respect to the first given the right to own the land. Is that it? 
senience. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I 
objection. 


am not insisting. There is no 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 
MS. NIEVA. That is right. 


“Tif ^ Bacani amendment reads this ' 

ine state shall by law undertake an agrarian re 

f3ri. wS ^ght of farmers and re; 

armworkers WHO ARE LANDLESS to own din 

farmwnV'^^ V the lands they till or, in the case of c 
famworkers, to receive a just share of the fmits t 


MR. RODRIGO. I was just talking to somebody from 
Quezon Province, and he told me that in coconut areas 
there are no farmers. Is this right? He said there are no 
farmers in coconut areas because they do not plow 
every year, they do not plant yearly but they just plant 
once and then wait for the coconut to grow. There are 
only coconut watchers or coconut pickers. 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 


BISHOP BACANI. I myself would not be able to . 
answer that. May I refer this to the Committee, Com- 
missioner Rodrigo? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. The ones who are covered b^ 
sentence are farmers and regular farm workers wh 
iBiidlcss. What is the proponent’s concept of a f' 
who does not own land? Is he somebody who ' 
another person’s land? Is that correct? 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. TADEO Commissioner Rodrigo, kapag sinabi 
nating “farmer, mayroong tenancy relation na tinutu- 
koy. Ang ibig sabihin ng tenancy relation, mayroon 
kang rental na ibinibigay sa iyong panginoon na inay-ari 
ng lupa. Sa ilalim ng niyugan, kapag tayo’y naghati, ang 
two-thirds ay sa panginoong may lupa at one-third sa 
magsasaka. Ito ang tinatawag na rental na ibinigay; may- 
roong tenancy relation. Hindi natin puwedeng sabihin 
ito dahil batay dito sa isang thesis na ginawa ni Col. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


13 


Virgilio David, sinasabi niya na mayroong 515,000 na 
tenant farmer families ang nasasangkot na mayroong 
sharing. Ang hatian po kasi sa niyugan, one-third, two- 
thirds — two-thirds sa panig ng panginoong may lupa at 
one-tliird sa panig ng tenant. 

MR. RODRIGO. Samakatuwid, ang ibig bang sabihin 
ng “tenancy” ay “crop sharing”? Kung mayroong “crop 
sharing,” iyan ba ang kahulugan ng tenancy? Kapag ako 
ang mayroong plantation ng coconut, at aalisin ko ang 
crop sharing . . . susuwelduhan ko lang ang mga pipitas 
ng niyog at wala na bang tenancy? 

MR. TADEO. Wala pong tenancy. Babagsak sila sa 
farm workers. 

MR. RODRIGO. Ngayon, sapagkat walang tenancy, 
ang karapatan lamang ng farm workers ay “just share.” 
Wala silang karapatang magmay-ari noong lupa. 

MR. TADEO. Ngunit kung regular ang participation 
ng farm workers, primary sa production. 

MR. RODRIGO. Kung regular. Ngunit kung bHang 
may-ari ng lupa, hindi ko gagawing regular at uupa ako 
ngayon ng isang grupo. Sa isang taon, uupa naman ako 
ng ibang grupo. Hindi magiging regular. Samakatuwid, 
hindi babagsak sa kategoriya ng “tenancy,” kayat hindi 
sila maaaring magmay-ari ng lupa. Ganoon po ba? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are instituting 
here a new provision which will take effect upon"* rati- 
fication. In that instance, there is already a history to 
look at. When we say that a particular piece of land 
comes under the agrarian reform provisions of the 
Constitution, then we can also look into the history of 
the relationship between that owner and the farm 
worker as defined over the years. In other words. 
Madam President, that landowner may not, upon ratifi- 
cation, change their relationship to get around the law 
because, after all, there would be records on what the 
relationship was. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Parang maganda yata ang tanong 
ni Commissioner Rodrigo. Doon sa deliberations, 
lumabas ang punto na ang sacada ay hindi kasama sa 
tinatawag na “farm workers.” Nabanggit ni Com- 
missioner Rodrigo na ang principle diyan ay mangyaya- 
ring irregular — seasonal worker na maaaring palitan at 
mas nakakahawig ng sacada kaysa isang regular farm 
worker. Ito ang sinasabi niya na maaaring loophole ng 
ganoong provision. That is the reason why Commission- 
er Monsod answered that the history of the relationship 
should be a safeguard against this possibility of circum- 


venting that provision of a landlord changing his rela- 
tionship with the tenants upon ratification of the 
Constitution. I think that is an important consideration. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Samakatuwid, ang isang hahmbawa 
nito ay iyong isang may-ari ng coconut plantation at ang 
kanyang pasunod sa kanyang mga trabahador ay “crop 
sharing” at iyan ay ipmasiya niyang palitan at gawing 
suwelduhan. Halimbawang limang taon nang suweldu- 
han? Titingnan pa rin ba ang history? At kung bago 
noong nakaraang limang taon, ang pasunod ay crop 
sharing, his workers will come under tlie first category' 
instead of under the second category. Ga:ioon ba? 

BISHOP BACANI. In that case, there would be no 
practical difference because if they escape the tenn 
“farmers” they would, under that circumstance, fall 
under regular farm workers. 

MR. RODRIGO. If there is crop sharing. 

BISHOP BACANI. No, if there is no crop sharing and 
they are paid for coming regularly, they would fall 
under the category of regular farm workers. 

MR. RODRIGO. Pero ang sinasabi ko nga, kung ako 
ay nagbabayad lamang ng pipitas, hindi ako kukuha ng 
mga regular na pipitas. Madali naman ang pumitas ng 
niyog. Kayat kukuha ako ng iba’t ibang tagapitas nang 
hindi maging regular ang tnga ito. 

MR. MONSOD. I think the example of the Com- 
missioner regarding workers who have been seasonal 
workers for the past five years would fall under the 
second part where they are entitled to receive a just 
share of the fruits. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. If upon ratification of the Constitu- 
tion a change in the relationship of a regular farm 
worker is made, it is quite obvious in that instance that 
the intent is to go around the law and, therefore, the 
facts would speak for themselves. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose, before ratification, nabali- 
taan doon sa Quezon na mayroong pinag-uusapang 
probisyon ang Con-Corn, maaaring bago ma-ratify ang 
Constitution ay papalitan nila ang pasunod sa mga 
trabahador nila. At hindi lang iyan, sinabi sa akin ni 
Ginoong Quintana, ex-Batasan MP, na maaaring kumam- 
panya silang huwag aprubahan ang Constitution sa 
Quezon Province. Iyan ay isipin dm natin. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Narinig ni Commissioner Ople. 
Nandito si Ginoong Quintana kangina. 


14 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. We realize, Madam President, that 
there will be some gray areas here. There will always be 
gray areas when we come out with an Article like this. 
With respect to the concerns of ex-Batasan MP Quin- 
tana, one reason why the Committee is willing to accept 
the amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes is that we 
are hoping that that would solve some of his concerns. 

MR. RODRIGO. There is another thing which I want 
to clarify. Do we mean to say that “crop sharing” is 
identical with the word “tenancy,” that whenever there 
is “crop sharing,” there is “tenancy”? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Tadeo answer 
that question? 

MR. RODRIGO. Is “tenancy” synonymous with 
“crop sharing”? In many advanced countries of the 
world, even in the United States, there is crop sharing. If 
we now say that crop sharing means tenancy, that 

would not be fair because crop sharing is unlike 
tenancy. 

MR. TADEO. Kung mayroong crop sharing, ay 
mayroong tenancy relation. 

MR. RODRIGO. Kahit doon sa atin sa Bulacan ay 
mayroong tinatawag na “hunos sa gapas, hunos sa 
anun. ng mga gagapas, sa halip na bayaran ng salapi 
y mayroong natatanggap na hunos. At ang mga nagta- 
bayaran ng salapi, mayroong hunos sa 
fp c umaani binibigyan sDa ng kaunting kapar- 

u nagkakaroon ng crop sharing, 

ivrmo sabihin niyan ay iyong mga gumapas at 

y g mga nagtanim ay mayroon ng tenancy relation? 

Wanlf tadeo. lyon pala ang ibig ninyong sabihin 


MR. RODRIGO. Hindi. Isang 
mayroon pang iba. 


halimbawa lang iyan. 


T^ma po iyan. Hindi ko lang k 
akikita kung ano iyong iniisip ninyo tungkol sa cr 

mga hunos at gapas at giik 
amu a sa atin sa Bulacan, sa isang daan at da 

^>ig ibinibigay sa mai 
gagapas at amm na kaban sa gumigiik. Hindi po iyon a 
ibig kong sabilung crop sharing. Ang ibig ko po 
sabihm ng crop sharing na tinugon ko po L ^yo 1 
ngma ay iyong binibigyan kita ne rental » - ^ ^ 
ang ibig kong sabihin kanginrSn 1 p " tom !y 
ang tinatawag naming mga hired laborers.. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I wanted to put a question to Com- 
missioner Rodrigo, and, perhaps, also to the Committee, 


depending on his answers. There is no necessary correla- 
tion between tenancy and crop sharing, depending on 
how you define crop sharing. 

Dito po sa palayan at maisan ngayon, ang nakakara- 
ming nabiyayaan ng reporma sa lupa ay hindi iyong 
tumanggap ng CLT na titulo. Iyon siguro ay mga labin- 
limang porsiyento lamang. Iyong walumpu’t limang 
porsiyento, iyon ang mga dating tenants na ngayon 
ay nauwi sa leasehold. Mayroon ding matatawag na 
sharing iyan — 75-25. Datapwa’t ang kaibahan, itong 
dating tenant, bagamat hindi siyang may-ari, siya 
ngayon ang complete manager ng kaniyang sinasaka. 
Samakatuwid ay hindi na tenant pero nagbabayad pa 
rin ng katumbas ng dalawampu’t limang porsiyento 
noong ani. Iyong leasehold, sa aming paningin, mas 
mataas ang naging antas ngayon kaysa doon sa magsa- 
saka lamang. 

MR. RODRIGO. Sang-ayon ako riyan, sapagkat ang 
inam noong “leasehold” ay ang ibinabayad na buwis ng 
magsasaka ay eksaktong halaga. Kayat, pag pinalaki 
niya ang ani noong kaniyang bukid, lahat ng madadag- 
dag na ani ay kanya na. Hindi katulad ng “crop 
sharing.” Nadagdagan ang ani, nadagdagan din ang 
kaparte ng may-ari. Pero sa leasehold may tiyak na 
ibabayad. 

Kapag nadagdagan ang ani, pag nagmasipag ang 
magsasaka, nagtanim ng vegetables, nagtanim ng ibang 
mga bagay sa lupa, ang lahat ay kanya. 


MR. OPLE. Hindi lang iyon, kundi lahat ng manage- 
ment decision ay nasa kamay ng nasa leasehold. Hindi 
katulad ng tenant na mayroong katiwalang araw-araw 
ay nag-uutos sa iyo kung ano ang gagawin mo. Samaka- 
tuwid, itatanong ko lamang sa Komite, ito bang lease- 
hold bilang isang uri ng land tenure ay kabilang dito sa 
agrarian reform na ating pinag-uusapan? 

MR. TADEO. Magandang katanungan. Commissioner 
Ople. Gusto ko lang liwanagin ang ibig sabiliin ng share 
tenancy — iyong 50-50, 60-40, 55-45, 70-30. Ito hong 
leasehold ay kasama rito sa ating pinag-uusapan dahil sa 
sinasabi nating retention limit, lalo na iyong hindi 
owner-cultivator, na nilinaw kanina ni Commissioner 
Aquino. Halimbawa, sabihin natin na ang gamitin natin 
ay ang P.D. No. 27, na ang seven hectares below ang 
maaaring iwan sa isang panginoong may lupa. Kaya 
iyong maiiwan sa kanya na seven hectares and below ay 
under leasehold system, kaya kasama rito ang leasehold 
system, dahil doon sa abolition ng share tenancy. 


MR. OPLE. Magandang balita iyan para sa maraming 
mga tenants ngayon na ang unang hakbang sa kanilang 
liberasyon marahil ay hindi iyong tahasan o tandisan 
na siyang magiging may-ari ng lupa, kung hindi maaaring 
nandiyan sa intermediate stage, sa kalagitnaan na lease- 
hold muna; hindi siya ang may-ari, datapwat siya ang 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


15 


may poder, siya ang manager, siya ang nagdedesisyon 
tungkol sa kanyang buhay. 

Salamat po, Ginang Pangulo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much, Com- 
missioner Ople. Now, just one more question. I had 
already asked this cursorily in a past session. I refer to 
the word “own” which 1 consider a very important 
word. I would not want to raise false hopes among our 
farmers. Ownership, as it is defined now in civil law, has 
different rights attached to it: jus posidendi, the right 
to possess; jus utendi, the right to a use; jus fruendi, 
the right to the fruits; and jus disponendi, the right to 
dispose ... I would discard jus abutendi or the right 
to consume the thing by its use, because it is anti- 
social. But then since we say that the farmers will own 
the land they till, can they dispose of it or can they sell 
it? 

MS. AQUINO. To the best of my knowledge, all of 
the laws pertaining to the implementation of land 
reform as a policy of the government would program 
and limit the right of a beneficiary-farmer who has been 
given an Operation Land Transfer or a certificate of 
land transfer and would have delimited options in imme- 
diate disposition of the property. Even with the Home- 
stead Act, one is not allowed to dispose a homestead 
that has been granted to him within a period of 50 years 
from the period or from the time it was granted. It may 
be a question of programming or regulating or de- 
limiting prerogatives of disposition. It is provided by 
law. 

MR. RODRIGO. In other words, may Congress limit 
the farmer’s right to sell, to dispose, even to mortgage 
the land? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Another right is the right to be- 
queath. We know that we have close family ties in the 
Philippines. Many people work and they try to have a 
parcel of land for the security of their children. Let us 
say that a farmer obtains under this land reform pro- 
gram a 2-hectare land. He has five children. The farmer 
dies. Will his five children inherit the land? 

MR. TADEO. Maaaring manahin. 

MR. RODRIGO. Ng lima niyang anak? 

MR. TADEO. Hindi po. Ngunit ang batayan po kasi 
nitong land fragmentation ay ang economic family-size 
farm; hindi mo ito napapasabog. Hatiin mo, halimbawa, 
sa lima mong anak ang matitira dito; sabihm nating .5 
hectares o 5,000 square meters lamang. Hindi na iyan 
makasasapat sa kanyang pamilya. Ang tunay na inten- 
syon ng agrarian reform program, kapanabay nito ang 
pagtutulak ng national industrialization, ay ang sobrang 


lakas-paggawa na papasok sa industriya para mapanatili 
ang economic family-size farm. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, this is another limitation on the 
ownership, should this proposal be approved as a 
constitutional provision. Congress can then place limits 
on the right of the heirs to inherit from the fanner who 
will be benefited by this provision. 

Now, just one last point. May he transform a portion 
of the land which is agricultural to a residential lot? 

MR. TADEO. Under RA 1199, ang isang ektaryang 
sinasaka ay nagkakaloob ng 300 sq. m. na home lot. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, does Congress also have the 
discretion on this matter? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. TADEO. Hindi maaaring subdivision, maaaring 
magkaroon siya ng home lot o lupang tirahan. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, tliis first sentence in 
Section 5 has been sufficiently discussed. May I ask tirat 
we take a vote on it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there still need to read it again? 

MR. RAMA. There is no more need to do so. We have 
read it several times. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those who are in favor of the 
proposed Bacani amendment to the first sentence of 
Section 5, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Tliose who are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor, none against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. There are still pro- 
ponents ahead of Commissioner de !os Reyes, but 
Commissioner de los Reyes is requesting that his amend- 
ment which has been accepted by the Committee be 
voted upon before we take up the other amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner de los Reyes 
please read his proposed amendment. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. As an additional sentence to 
Section 5: THE STATE SHALL RESPECT THE 

RIGHTS OF SMALL LANDOWNERS IN THE DETER- 
MINATION OF THE RETENTION LIMITS. 


16 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. Those who are in favor of the de 
los Reyes amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 36 votes in favor and no vote 
against; the amendment is approved. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, just for the 
record, I think Commissioner Villegas should be a co- 
sponsor of the amendment I presented.* 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, on the same second 
sentence of Section 5, I ask that Commissioner Trenas 
be recognized. • ^ 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trefias is recog- 


MR. TRE5JAS. Madam President, may I propose an 
^endment to the last part of Section 5 which says: 
and subject to a just and progressive system of com- 
pensation. I propose to eliminate “and progressive 
system of’ so that it will read: “and subject to a just 
compensation.” 


Madam President, in almost all the provisions of tl 
Constitution, especially in the Bill of Rights, we ha 
uniformly used the words “just compensation.” In ca 
pnvate property is taken for public use, we use t! 
wor s just compensation.” In jurisprudence, it h 
een interpreted by the Supreme Court in a lot 
cases. However, it seems strange that in this provisit 
on a^anan reform, in which a property of a landowr 
'^ •11 ^od ^ven to farm workers, just compensate 
w e quahfied by the words “progressive systen 
cause again a lot of legal complications as 
u 11 “'^®^’^®tation of “progressive system” a 

1 e ay e payment of just compensation. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

Tffi PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 


inchide th^woM^‘‘ Committee decide^ 

Z . ” we intended it to I 

™ The phrase 

bigger tracts of land be made lowe, p™squarrr 
to smto tracts of land. That was the id?a behj 
It has nothmg to do with the manner of payment E 
means does it have any allusion to the payment ( 
percent down or 90 percent to be paid later on Ii 
only in the context of reflecting the market reaU 
real estate transactions. 


If the honorable Commissioner is willing to accept 
that kind of interpretation, that this reflect the fact that 
bigger tracts of land usually are priced at a lower price 
per square meter, then that may not be necessary in this 
sense. We just want to get away from a purely market 
price and to refine it in that sense. 

MR. TRENAS. Even in that sense, it will still end in 
“just compensation,” without the use of the words 
“PROGRESSIVE SYSTEM.” 

My purpose here is to simplify and use it uniformly 
because in the Bill of Rights, we used the words “just 
compensation.” However, to that extent, why add 
“PROGRESSIVE SYSTEM”? So it will have a more 
uniform interpretation, we eliminate “PROGRESSIVE 
SYSTEM.” 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, maybe the explanation given by 
economist Mahar Mangahas might help. He said that all 
that this implies is that the compensation formula 
should be progressive in the sense that income taxation 
is progressive; that is, the proportion of the landowners’ 
sacrifice should be greater, the larger the size of the 
landed estate. For example, if the purchase price is 
P20,000 per hectare for the first 10 hectares, then it 
could be reduced to PI 5,000 per hectare for the next 
10 hectares; and PI 0,000 for the next 10 hectares and 
so on. 

MR. TRENAS. I agree with that. That is still just 
compensation. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. In other words, the word 
“PROGRESSIVE” does not quaUfy the word “just,” 
but rather the word “compensation.” So, it would still 
resolve in a “just compensation.” Maybe this is an 
important point that we would like the body to vote on, 
whether it should still be included or subsumed in the 
word “JUST.” 

MR. TRENAS. From the explanation of the Com- 
mittee itself, it seems that the phrase “JUST AND 
PROGRESSIVE SYSTEM” is not necessary because it is 
included in “just compensation,” and this may just 
cause complications later on, especially since we have 
been using the words “just compensation.” That is my 
purpose here. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. Madam President, may we ask 
the body’s judgment on it. I think the proponent has 
already explained, and so does the Committee. 

MR. TRENAS. Yes. The only amendment is to 
eliminate “PROGRESSIVE SYSTEM OF” and just 
make it “JUST COMPENSATION” to make it simpler. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


17 


I'HH PRHSlDliNT. Coinniissionor Benias is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BF.RNAS. We discussed earlier the idea of a 
progressive sysleni of compensation and I must admit, 
that it was before I discus,sed it with Commissioner 
Monsod. I lliink what is confusing the matter is the fact 
that when we speak of progressive taxation, the bigger 
the tax ba.se, the liigher the rate of tax. Here, what we 
are saying is Unit tiie bigger the land is, the lower the 
value per square meter. So, it is really regressive, not 
progressive. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, it is true. It is 
progressive with respect to the beneheiary and re- 
gressive with respect to the landowner. 

FR. BF:RNAS. But is it the intention of the Com- 
mittee tliat tlie owner should receive less than the 
market value? 

MR. MONSOD. It is not the intention of the Commit- 
tee that tlie owner should receive less than the just 
compensation. 

FR. BERNAS. In what way, therefore, is it beneficial 
to the buyer if the owner will not get less? 

MR. MONSOD. As we said earlier, it was only meant 
to reflect the market reality that in bigger tracts of land, 
the cost per square meter goes down. Since the priority 
of the land reform really starts from bigger tracts of 
land, there would be benefits to farmers, if the bigger 
tracts of land are first covered by the land reform 
program. 

FR. BERNAS. I am not sure that the word “pro- 
gressive” helps. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Because if the idea of a “progressive 
system” is that the buyer should actually pay less, but 
somebody else makes up for the difference, like the 
State, then it is clearly progressive in that sense for the 
tenant, and it is also Just for the owner. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, yesterday we 
answered that question in which we said that just com- 
pensation to the landowner does not necessarily mean 
that the full payment will come from the beneficiary, 
because in some cases, the State has to step in to make 
up the difference between what the farmers can afford 
and what is just compensation to the landowner. 

FR. BERNAS. If the meaning calls for a kind of 
subsidy from the State, rather than use the word pio- 
gressive,” it is probably better to use a different ex- 


pression clarifying the fact that this may involve subsidy 
by the State. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, in fact, we 
were saying that we want the body to decide because it 
may not be completely necessary at this point. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, I just would like 
to express the same sentiment. As an economist, 1 find 
the word “progressive” really ambivalent in that specific 
context. When we say “progressive”' in economics, it 
really means the principle of giving more in law to those 
who have less in life, but somehow it does not capture 
this specific meaning in the phraseology that is used. I 
would use another word, or just delete “progressive.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, tlie Committee is 
also willing to consider an amplification of the ideas of 
Commissioner Benias, that in some cases the State may 
have to step in to make up the difference between just 
compensation to the landowner and affordable cost to 
the farmer. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Concep- 
cion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized; afterwards we will recognize Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 

I think the thrust of the amendiiient of Commissioner 
Trenas is that the term “just compensation” is used in 
several parts of the Constitution, and, therefore, it must 
have a uniform meaning. It cannot have in one part a 
meaning different from that which appears in the other 
portion. If, after all, the party whose property is taken 
will receive the real value of the property on just com- 
pensation, that is good enough. Any other qualification 
would lead to the impression that something else other 
than that meaning ot just compensation is used in other 
parts of the Constitution. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was about to say what Commis- 
sioimr Concepcion said. 1 just want to add that the 
p lase just compensation” already has a definite mean- 
ing in jurisprudence. And, of course, I would like to 
leiteiate the fact that “just compensation” here is not 


18 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


the amount paid by the farmers. It is the amount paid 
to the owner, and this doe^ not necessarily have to come 
from the farmer. The State should subsidize this and 
pay a just compensation to the owner and let the tenant 
pay the State in accordance with the capacity of the 
farmer. If there is a difference, let the State subsidize 
the difference. So, I support the amendment of Com- 
missioner Trenas. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I propose a substitute amend- 
ment to read: “just, AND WHERE NECESSARY, 
STATE-SUBSIDIZED compensation.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Trenas accept 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Bernas? 


MR. TRENAS. May I have it again? 


FR. BERNAS. It will read: “ 
AND WHERE NECESSARY 
COMPENSATION.” 


and subject to a JUST, 
STATE-SUBSIDIZED 


MR. TRENAS. I accept. 


MR. OPLE. Yes. I object to constitutionalizing the 
subsidy. It is a power inherent in the State. The commit- 
ment to agrarian reform as a central policy of social 
justice is very imperative. And I think constitutionaliz- 
ing at this point an obligation of the State to subsidize 
purchases of lands under the land reform program might 
be taken as a mandate to fund all aspects of this pro- 
gram with taxpayers’ money, even if a little more 
imagination in planning and skillful implementation 
could save the people lots of money. Instead of giving 
a fiat right here in this Article, that the National 
Treasury ought to be opened all the way in order to 
subsidize the difference in costs, I think just compensa- 
tion to the landowner need not mean government 
subsidy. If subsidized compensation would become a 
built-in fiat in this Article, it will be made the rule 
rather than the exception. In the nature of the real 
world in which a government functions, it will tempt 
every land reform planner to begin by saying that the 
State must subsidize this. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Rega- 
lado would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DA VIDE. Madam President, 
nized^ Commissioner Davide is recog- 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose an amendment to the 
amendment? The amendment will read: “just com- 

GOV?Sm^En¥.” SUBSIDIZED BY THE 

ownw sense is, it must be just to the 

MR. TRENAS. Precisely. 

vain^ owner should get the full market 

the payment lVcom?trom"’"'‘' ’ 

his™opSfaTO„toem?' 

Davide, so it wohih kq 

BE SUBSIDIZED BY rarCOTER": 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other idea? 
Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I propose an 
amendment to the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Trenas. I support him in his statement that 
the words “just compensation” should be used there 
because it has a jurisprudentially settled meaning, in- 
stead of putting in other ambivalent and ambiguous 
phrases which may be misconstrued, especially con- 
sidering the fact that the words “just compensation” 
appear in the different parts of the Constitution. How- 
ever, my proposed amendment would read: “subject to 
THE PRIOR PAYMENT OF JUST COMPENSATION.” 
Let me explain. The purpose of this land distribution 
scheme is that those whose properties may be under 
land reform may be thereby placed in a position after 
they have relinquished a portion of their property to 
invest in other gainful occupation. That was one of the 
purposes mentioned by the Committee. If we just 
provide for payment of just compensation without 
stating at what particular time that payment should be 
made, what happens to the landowner who has now 
been dispossessed of his property? Where can he make 
investments since he has not been given payment? We 
are aware of the Land Bank bond wherein the amount 
is realizable only after the lapse of 20 years. It cannot 
even be used to pay PNB or DBF loans; it can only be 
used to pay taxes. 

Furthermore, it is also established in jurisprudence, in 
the case of Commissioner of Public Highways V 5 . San 
Diego, L-30098, February 18, 1970, that where a pro- 
perty has already been thereby condemned — I used the 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


19 


word “condemned” in the sense of expropriation, 
because that is tlie other tenn — even if there is already 
an award, such an award, even by a judicial order, is not 
realizable upon execution; so the poor landowner will 
Just have to wait patiently until such time as Congress 
appropriates the amount. 

In the case of Commissioner of Public Highways vs. 
San Diego, it was specifically stated that the judgment 
rendered requiring payment of the award determined 
as just compensation for the condemned property, and 
as a condition precedent for the transfer of the title to 
the government, cannot be realized upon execution, as 
the legislature must first appropriate the amount over 
and above the provisional deposit. 

So, my question here is: If we do not require prior 
payment, what happens to the landowner now? Must 
he wait indefinitely? While in tlie meantime we have 
given priority to the landless, we have created another 
problem for the erstwhile landed gentry since they 
cannot, in any way, use either the property or the sup- 
posed proceeds from the property of which they were 
dispossessed. If the landless have rights, even the landed 
also have rights; or, as Clarence Darrow says, “Even the 
rich also have rights.” 

We are not talking about the rich here. He is already 
parting with his property, and yet we go into an 
ephemeral, indefinite statement, “subject to the pay- 
ment of just compensation.” And the question is: Where 
in point of time will that compensation be made? That 
is why I ask that this amendment be accepted subject to 
the prior payment of just compensation. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. There is no need to get excited, 
Madam President, because the Committee is not insen- 
sitive to the needs of the landowners. When the Com- 
mittee placed this paragraph or statement here, it was 
the sense that the landowner would be immediately paid 
the just compensation. Otherwise, that compensation 
would not really be just at all. 

And apropos of this, I would like to ask a question 
of Commissioner Ople in the remarks that he just 
made — that when he objected to the constitutionaliza- 
tion of the State subsidy, I hope he did not mean that 
the State would not in any case at all come to the rescue 
of the farmer where necessary and pay the landowner in 
the event that the farmer is unable to pay the just 
compensation. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think I made my 
meaning clear that subsidies may be necessary to make 
up the difference in price so that the landowner may be 
justly compensated. But, at the same time, subsidy must 
always be a policy of last resort. And I think the less 


that is said about it, the better so that it does not be- 
come an open invitation in the future to potential con- 
fabulators. We know all about some of these scandals in 
land pricing. It is very easy for a government bureau- 
crat and a landowner in Mindanao to fix a price so that 
both of them will gain at the expense of the taxpayer. 

So, I am not against subsidy from the State. What I 
am saying is that this should be a last resort and it is 
amply covered by all the existmg laws. May I remmd 
Commissioner Bengzon Uiat just tlie otlier day P29 
billion was allocated as government subsidy to a few 
government banks which are government financing 
institutions like tlie PNB and DBP in particular. This 
P29 billion is bigger than the budget of the Ministry of 
National Defense, the entire Armed Forces, the Ministry 
of Health and the Ministry of Education, and I suspect 
that we have to subsidize from pure taxpayers’ money 
these several financial institutions because we have been 
faced with a fait accompli. Tliis has been going on for 
some time because there is no curb on it. 

And so, I agree that we subsidize the purchase of 
lands, but to raise it to the level of a constitutional 
mandate^ I would have serious scruples about that. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just one statement. 

MR. TADEO. Sandah lang po. Madam President. 
Tungkol sa pagbabayad ng lupa, gusto ko po lamang na 
malaman ninyo ang panig ng magbubukid. 

Sa halim ng RA 3844, on the rights of preemption 
and redemption, ang pinagbabatayan ditong naapruba- 
han noong August 8, 1963 — kaya naman monumental 
ang araw na ito — ay reasonable capacity of the farmer to 
pay. Sa ilalim ng P.D. No. 27, ang naging halaga ng lupa 
per hectare ay P7,000 to P8,000 plus 6 percent interest 
for 1 5 years of equal annual amortization, inabot na ng 
PI 5,000 at huhulugan pa iyan for 15 years. Nandiyan 
ang Minister of Agrarian Reform at ano ang sinasabi 
niya? Nine percent lamang ang nakabayad. 

Sana ang inyong mga mungkahi ay hindi magpabigat 
sa aming mga magbubukid kung hindi magpapagaan. 
lyon lamang ang pakiusap ko sa kagalanggalang kong 
mga kasama. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, two points only. 
First, after listening to the observations of Com- 


20 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


missioner Ople and on the understanding that it does 
not exclude the possibility of subsidy, I would gladly 
remove that because I also want to avoid a situation 
where we make acquisition of land so easy that, in 
effect, it may encourage the inefficient use of resources. 
So, provided that it is understood that we are not ex- 
cluding subsidy whenever it is necessary, then I would 
be willing to limit the matter to the phrase “just com- 
pensation.” 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, the Committee ac- 
cepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Committee please allow 
Commissioner Bemas to finish his statement? 

FR. BERNAS. My second pomt is: I would object to 
the addition of the phrase “PRIOR COMPENSATION” 
because even if one looks at existing jurisprudence on 
expropriation, there is no requirement of immediate, 
prior compensation. Just compensation simply requires 
that there is an assurance that compensation will be 
given. Jurisprudence has not required prior com'pensa- 
tion. So, if at this stage when we are trying to do some- 
thing for the underprivileged, we make expropriation 
more difficult, then again we will be retrogressing. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The original amendment of Com- 
missioner Trenas stands. 

MR. TRENAS. And it has been accepted. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, the Committee has accepted the 
frefias amendment. 

MR. TRENAS. I am very grateful to the Committee. 

Thank you very much. 


The results show 39 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

As many as are in favor of inserting the word 
“PRIOR” . . . 

/ 

MR. REGALADO. Before we do that. Madam Prc.s- 
ident, may I just explain? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. It is not correct to state that juris- 
prudence does not require prior payment. Even tlie 
recent presidential decrees of the President always 
require a partial deposit of a certain percentage and the 
rest by a guaranteed payment. What 1 am after here is 
that, as Commissioner Bernas has said, there must at 
least be an assurance. That assurance may be in the form 
of a bond which may be redeemable later. But to say 
that there has never been a situation where prior pay- 
ment is not required, that is not so even under the 
Rules of Court as amended by presidential decrees. Even 
the government itself, upon entry on the land, has to 
make a deposit and the rest thereafter will be guaran- 
teed under the judgment of a court, but which judg- 
ment, as 1 have pointed out, is not even realizable by 
executory process. Here is the government coming in 
now. Does it mean to say that the government can take 
its own time in detennining when the payment is to 
be made? At least simultaneously, there should be an 
assurance in the form of a partial payment in cash or 
other modes of payment, and the rest thereof being 
guaranteed by bonds, the issuance whereof should be 
simultaneous with the transfer. That is my only purpose 
in saying that there should be prior payment — not pay- 
ment in cash physically but, at least, contract for 
payment in the form of an assurance, a guarantee or a 
promissory undertaking. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just read 
the phrase as now accepted by the Committee? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. The phrase shall read: “and subjec 
to the payment of just compensation.” 


VOTING 

"’“.first, and 

anrendment of inserting the word'-TRlOR”* w°e"wiU 
vote on that later. 


As many as are in favor of the Treflas amendment, 
please rarse then hand. (Semral Members raised their 
hand.) 


THE PRESIDENT. WUl Commissioner Regalado 
please restate his proposed amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. The proposed amendment will 
read: “and subject to THE PRIOR PAYMENT OF just 
compensation.” 

THE PRESIDENT. It was accepted by the Commit- 
tee. 

MR. REGALADO. The word “PAYMENT” there 
should be understood in the sense that I have explained, 
that there must at least be an assurance on the part of 
the government. 

FR. bernas. Madam President. 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 

Member raised his hand.) 


the president. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 198 


21 


FR. BERNAS. I must say, I did misunderstand Com- 
missioner Regalado. I read him as requiring prior full 
compensation. But if the intention is merely to maintain 
what obtains now, mainly, that it is enough that there 
is a partial deposit as it exists under existing law, 1 
would agree with him that that is fine. But then I would 
still oppose putting it down in writing by itself because 
it can be construed as requiring prior full compensation. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Bengzon has just told me that anyway those remarks are 
already in the Record. And my remarks, according to 
Commissioner Bengzon, have been taken into account 
and have been accepted in the sense in which they were 
intended. Then, provided it appears in the Record that 
that is the purpose of the amendment and such ex- 
planation in the Record shall stay, I withdraw the 
proposed amendment to the amendment. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the withdrawal is based on what 
was supposedly agreed with the Committee, I will still 
object because we will have the concept of just com- 
pensation for the farmers and the farm workers more 
difficult than those others in cases of eminent domain. 
So, we should not make a distinction as to the manner 
of the exercise of eminent domain or expropriations and 
the manner that just compensation shall be paid. It 
should be uniform in all others because if we now allow 
the interpretation of Commissioner Regalado to be the 
concept of just compensation, then we are making it 
hard for the farmers and the farm workers to enjoy the 
benefits allowed them under the agrarian reform policy. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, as we stated 
earlier, the term just compensation” is as it is defined by 
the Supreme Court in so many cases and which we have 
accepted. So, there is no difference between “just com- 
pensation’ as stated here in Section 5 and “just com- 
pensation” as stated elsewhere. There are no two 
different interpretations. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we also state 
that we have accepted the opinion or interpretation of 
Commissioner Bernas, that the State may, in some cases, 
have to step in to make up the difference. So, it does 
not necessarily follow that these will hurt the farmers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I would like to 
pose what I consider an important question for the 


Committee to answer, because we have practically ap- 
proved the whole section already. When we speak of the 
right of fanners, farm workers, the landless, etc., are 
they obliged to exercise that right? Shall they be com- 
pelled to exercise that right or does it mean that they 
are free to use or not to use the land? 

MS. NIEVA. That is right. We feel that tliis is tlieir 
right, but this is a right that they may waive if they 
prefer to do so. They are not obliged to avail of that 
right. It is there. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Is that the official interpretation of the 
Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. May I point out that under the Labor 
Code, the rights may not be waived by the workers. 

MR. BENGZON. The Labor Code has to give way to 
the constitutional provision in this case. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, because the farmers may not want 
to exercise their right. 

MR. OPLE. Because this interpretation can actually 
legitimize in advance various pressures so that the 
farmers will not exercise the right that the same Consti- 
tution now purports to give them. I think it is a 
dangerous interpretation. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. The exercise of this right by the 
farmers involves assumption of obligations. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. COLAYCO. Obligations which he may either not 
be in a position to pay or may not wish to assume at all. 
So, I agree with the conceptual thinking expressed by 
the Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may 1 pomt out that 
the reason we are building certain innovations institu- 
tionalizing people s participation at various levels of the 
agrarian reform is precisely to uisuiv that these rights 
will become effective and that they will, in fact, be 
exercised, especially considering the realities in many 


22 


THURSDAY. AUGUST 7, 1986 


parts of our countryside where all the social structures 
are stacked up historically against the exercise of these 
rights. We may have it in the law but the day-to-day 
social pressures will make it impossible for many of the 
beneficiaries to exercise these rights or even to invoke 
them unless there are countervailing means of enabling 
them to exercise these rights. And if the position of the 
Committee now becomes official, these rights can be 
waived because the obligations may be declined. I think 
we are treading on a dangerous borderline that may be 
self-defeating in the end. But I leave these all to the 
Committee. 

The other point I want to make is whether or not the 
Cornmittee accepts the fact that the reason why in most 
countries land reform programs have been successful is 
because of newly liberated resources from land reform; 
that is, the new capital made available to expropriated 
landowners have been turned into fuel for industrializa- 
tion. This was what happened in Taiwan. Within five 
years of the land reform program, $2 billion (Taiwan) 
was released for the industrialization of Taiwan and, 
therefore, there was some synergy at work in a land 
reform policy. It helped the farmer; the social purposes 
were met but, at the same time, the need for economic 
development and accelerated industrialization were also 
met with the same weapon. 

And so, I would like to alert the Committee with my 
mtention to propose a brief amendment under the same 
section which would try to optimize these resources 
oc ed up in the land but which will be released as a 
resu t of the land reform policy for industrialization. 

Thank you. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, for the Committee. 


II ^^MA. Madam President, I think we shov 
a ow the Committee members to eat first so they c 

Membe^ ^swer correctly the questions from t 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino desires to 
rep y. an we listen first to Commissioner Aquino? 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, Madam President. The Commit- 

ee wou ike to clarify and eliminate the cobwebs that 
are presented so far. 


sociaHnctw^p'^^ ^^^cept and the mandate ol 

to a comnnk'^'^ ^ reform program do not amount 
tions which thp workers to assume obliga- 

words the rn ^ Prepared to assume. In othei 

from ihe landZ“e° Thfell™ cooperation 

the mtended beneficiary of the program. The right tc 

waive is not recognized when it ammmto • 

r- r xi. o . 11 amounts to a waiver m 

favor of another. Surely, we will recognize the freedom 

of choice pertainmg to the worker, on whether or nol 

he is willing to assume the obligation. 


I hope that clarifies the conceptual variance. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. The interpretation is acceptable to me in 
the light of the freedom of choice that we have, but the 
caveat I have made in the real world, I think, is very real 
as well, and I will be grateful if the Committee can take 
that into account. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. It is already twelve thirty- seven. Madam 
President; I move that we suspend the session until two- 
thirty. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:37 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:47 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, on the issue raised by 
Commissioner Ople, Commissioner Nolledo would like 
to have two minutes to comment on that issue of the 
waiver of rights by the farmers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoHedo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to make a few remarks on the statement 
of the Committee that the rights under the land reform 
program are subject to a waiver. Madam President, I 
join Commissioner Ople in his opinion that the members 
of the Committee in making that statement are treading 
on dangerous grounds. The land reform program is 
societal in nature, that it is demanded by the imperative 
need to diffuse property ownership as a matter of 
national and public policy. If we adopt the general rule 
that the rights under the land reform program of the 
government are subject to waiver, then we will open the 
avenue towards circumvention thereof by the landlords 
in many subtle ways. So, I will agree to the statement of 
the Committee that we cannot compel a tenant to 
assume obligations or to avail of the benefits afforded 
by the land reform program, if that statement is given a 
restrictive meaning, because if the tenant does not avail 
of the benefits and rights under the land reform pro- 
gram, then he will forfeit his right and his share should 
accrue to other beneficiaries of land reform. 

So, I think, the general rule is that the benefits and 
rights under the land reform program of the govern- 
ment should not be subject to waiver, because the land 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


23 


reform program is grounded on public policy. Otherwise 
we will have what is known as unique influence. The 
landowners may put their minds over the minds of the 
tenants whose intelligence may not be at par with the 
landowners, so they have many ways of threatening the 
tenants to make the waiver for a consideration. And 
these tenants are poor. They do not enjoy financial 
capacity. They may be paid, for example, P5,000 to 
sign deeds of waiver. And if we adopt the statement of 
the Committee in this sense, I am sorry to say that the 
land reform program of the government will be com- 
pletely negated. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. LERUM. As a member of the Committee, my 
understanding is that the provision does not con- 
template a waiver but that the tenant may not want to 
exercise his right. That is its meaning. In other words, 
while we provide here that the tenant has a right to 
own, but if he does not want to buy, why should we 
force him to buy if, for example, he does not have the 
means to do so? As a member of the Committee, that is 
my understanding. There is no waiver, but the tenant 
may not want to exercise his right. There is a big dif- 
ference between a waiver and not wanting to exercise a 
right. For example, under the Constitution, there is a 
provision there that says that the workers have a right to 
form unions. But there are many workers who do not 
want to form unions. We are not forcing them. They 
have that right but they do not only want to exercise 
that right. So, my understanding, as a member of the 
Committee, is that it is not a waiver but not wanting to 
exercise a right granted to them. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized to amend the second 
sentence of Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my amend- 
ment is an amendment by deletion. I move that we 
delete the words “priorities” and “and other conditions 
as Congress may prescribe.” May I briefly explain my 
amendment? It is my humble submission that the in- 
clusion of these words will seriously impair the agrarian 
reform program in our country. This will further limit 
the scope of agrarian reform. 

Madam President, we must remember that in 1972, 
President Marcos declared the whole country covered 
by land reform through P.D. No. 2. A month later, P.D. 
No. 27 was issued limiting the scope of land reform only 


to rice and com lands. He later issued several decrees 
further impairing the agrarian reform program. For 
instance, he issued P.D. No. 1 942 which limits the scope 
of land reform. Under that decree, lands which were 
newly converted to rice and com are exempted from 
land transfer. In 1974, he issued General Order No. 47 
on Corporate Farming Program. Under this order, land- 
owners have found a convenient excuse to avoid land 
reform by leasing their landholdings to a corporate 
farm. As of 1979, about 15,000 hectares of land 
originally occupied by tenants, small settlers and small 
owner-cultivators have been lost to corporate farms. 
Many alienated peasants were absorbed as workers in 
the corporate farms. Others had simply nowhere to go. 
Some of these agribusiness corporations operating in 
Mindanao availing of the benefits under General Order 
No. 47 are the following: Tagum Agricultural Develop- 
ment Incorporated (TADECO), Davao Foods Corpora- 
tion, IHO Plantation Incorporated, NTC GUTHRIE 
Estates Incorporated, Sime Darby International Tire 
Company, Davao Agricultural Ventures under TADE- 
CO, San Miguel Corporation and Ayala Agricultural 
Development Corporation. And, lastly, he issued LOI 
No. 143 which exempts landowners who are members 
of tlie Armed Forces of the Philippines and other 
branches of the government from inclusion in Operation 
Land Transfer. 

It is my humble submission that if we include the 
words “priorities” and “and other conditions as 
Congress may prescribe,” we open tlie floodgates to 
more restrictions and limitations thereby seriously im- 
pairing the crucial provision in our Constitution on 
agrarian reform. Therefore, I humbly request that these 
words be deleted. 

Finally, because of these decrees and the conditions 
issued by Mr. Marcos, the effect according to one article 
was this, and I would like to quote it: 

The Marcos regime promoted the full commercialization 
of agriculture with unparalled vigor justifying such thrust in 
the name of seemingly pro-people programs such as land 
reform and agricultural modernization. Backed up by 
tremendous funding from the World Bank group, the pro- 
gram of modernization sometunes dubbed as rural mobiliza- 
tion turned out to be a mere vehicle for the unprecedented 
expansion of agri-business interest. 

Mindanao and Palawan were divided, salami style, into 
different plantations owned by agri-business transnationals 
and local corporate interests led by Marcos cronies such as 
Antonio Floirendo and Eduardo Cojuangco. 

In Luzon and in Visayas, the small farmers were gradual- 
ly trapped inside the huge agri-business net through the new 
seeds dependent on expensive agri-business inputs, the cor- 
porate-contract growing system and the so-called interplay 
of market forces. 

So, Madam President, on the basis of these manifesta- 
tions, I suggest that we delete the words “priorities” and 
other conditions as Congress may prescribe.” 


24 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


responsive than we are. And so, I do not think that we 
should limit unnecessarily the discretion of our 
Congress in implementing this land reform. 

Thank you very much. 


MR. RODRIGO. May I say a few words against the 
proposed amendment? 

Honestly, I do not feel that we in this Constitutional 
Commission are better qualified or better equipped to 
decide on this matter and to go intolhe details of this 
land reform than the representatives and senators who 
will be elected by our people and who will compose 
the membership of our Congress. I think we are begin- 
ning to lose confidence in our officials who will be 
elected. We seem to suffer from paranoia because of 
what Marcos did. But, Madam President, Marcos was a 
dictator; he declared martial law. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is happening, Commissioner 
Rodrigo? 

MR. RODRIGO. There was a conversation going on 
beside that microphone and I could not concentrate. 
Madam President. It is all right. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May the Committee now ask for 
a vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the Com- 
mittee first? 

MR. BENGZON. I believe the Committee will not 
accept the amendment. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


^ thought Commissioner Rodri 
go s freedom to speak is being censored. 

bei^^b Madam President. I was jus 


the president. Please proceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. I need a little peace and quiet 
that I can concentrate. 

Madam President, we should not base our judgmc 
imripr Congress on what President Marcos ( 

ana hp ^ one-man legislatu 

frnino cronies because he thought he v 

^ dictator for life. But remember that 1 
members of our Congress wUl be elected by the peo 

sensitWp t^^th ’'®®^®^tion, and so they have to 

not think °wp ^ and feelings of the people. I 

into the deta i^'^^f *^'^^hfied than they are to 
into the details of this land reform nrogram I et us f 

It. We are appointive officials T^r cn 

will be elected from all o“r th^ PWrlT ' p 

in coconut lands I have nTknVri ''“'l 
lands. I am not acquainted'' ” Tgf 
tobacco-growtng regions; I have no knowledge of tl 
But the coming Congress will have representatives fn 
the coconut region, the sugar region, the tobacco-growi 
region and other regions, and they will know how 
act and they will be responsible to the people, m* 


MR. BENGZON. The Committee is divided that is 
why we will submit it to a vote. Madam President. 


MR. TADEO. Ang mga sinabi ni kasamang Rene 
Sarmiento ay wasto naman. Naging loopholes ang mga 
ito sa pagpapatupad mismo ng P.D. No. 27. Tungkol 
sa “subject to such priorities,” sa pananaw ng mag- 
bubukid, kung ito ay mananatili, ang ibig sabihin ay 
magsisimula ito doon sa sinasabi natin kanginang equity 
— iyong sobra at labis na lupain ay mapupunta roon sa 
maliliit na magbubukid, sa mga landless na sinasabi natin 
kangina. Totoong maselang umpisahan ang land reform 
program sa small landowner. Magkakaroon talaga 
tayo ng problema. Kaya ang ibig naming sabihin ay 
kung mananatili ang phrase na ito ay magsisimula tayo 
sa big tenanted landholdings, ill-gotten agricultural 
lands, tenanted agricultural lands, idle and/or aban- 
doned agricultural lands. 

Ang tanong kasi ni Commissioner Ople noong isang 
araw ay, “Jimmy, kung isang malaking plantasyon 
na ten hectares, paano ba ito?” Narito ngayon ang 
sagot. Uumpisahan natin sa malalawak at malalaking 
lupain, kasi nandoon talaga iyong tinatawag nating 
equity — magsisimula sa labis at sobra, ibibigay doon 
sa landless at hindi sa small landowner na sinasabi ni 
Commissioner Nolledo. Ito iyong sa huling bahagi na 
sinabi ko noon pa, regardless of crops. Pero dapat 
i-delete iyong other conditions, dahil magkakaroon 
dito ng napakalaking loopholes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


C '£02 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


25 



THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I move that we vote on the 
amendment individually. I think Commissioner Tadeo 
has a very good point. I may want to keep that phrase 
“subject to sucli priorities” because he has advocated 
that in the Committee for a long time. I think that that 
will make for a very reasonable land reform and the 
other one may be an onerous provision — “and other 
conditions as Congress may prescribe.” And so, I 
would not want to have a wholesale vote on the two of 
them. 


BISHOP BACANI. I have a motion that they be 
taken and voted on separately because that will not 
prejudice anybody. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Sarmiento and that would depend 
on him. He was the one who made this amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, following the 
Chair’s instruction and manifestation, may I move that 
we first vote on the deletion of the word “priorities”? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


MR. TADEO. Madam President, pabor ako; kaisa 
ako sa mungkahi ni Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I suggest that we 
preserve the words “retention limits.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. That phrase is preserved. Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but I also would move for the dele- 
tion of “other conditions.” May I visualize for the 
body the situation that will transpire in the future 
Congress? 

Most of those who will be elected by legislative dis- 
tricts will represent landed interests, and they will focus 
on these other conditions to legitimize all manner of 
circumventing the heart and the spirit of Section 5. I 
support Commissioner Tadeo in his position that the 
words “other conditions” would mean providing in 
advance a weapon for future adversaries of Section 5 
the Congress in order to circumvent the entire 
Section 5. 

SR. TAN. Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes. I think we should take this up 
because when we discussed these priorities in the 
meeting, we have agreed that we would first concentrate 
on the big landholdings and that there would be a 
timetable; and only then would we gradually go down 
to the smaller landholdings. That is what we meant by 
“priorities.” So, we are willing to put this to a vote. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, if my memory 
serves me right. Commissioner Tadeo was the main 
proponent of this. 

MR. TADEO. PagUlinaw, Madam President. Ang una 
kong option dito ay ang deletion of “priorities” and 
“other conditions.” Ang point ko lang ay kung mana- 
natili pa rin ito, ang ibig sabihin ng priorities ay iyong 
ipinaliwanag ko kanina. Pero ang una kong option dito 
ay to delete “priorities” para maiwasan na ang prob- 
lema. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

I am not referring to 

^ t ^ referring to ourselves. 

Since we started this agrarian reform, I get the im- 
pression that we are cutting more and more the rights 
of the farmers. First, we removed “basic,” so it was 
only right , then, we added “retention rights”; then, 
we just and progressive system”; we just 

have just with the understanding that there is prior 
payment, now we have “and other conditions as 
Congress may prescribe.” So, I feel at this moment 
that this land reform is for the benefit of the middlemen 
or the middle class or the elite class. So, I am pleading 
that at least that phrase “other conditions” be deleted. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. I object to eliminating the very 
important phrase “as Congress may prescribe.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we will be 
voting on the first issue, the elimination of the word 
“priorities.” Thereafter, we will vote on the deletion 
of the words “other conditions.” 

the PRESIDENT. Yes, but Commissioner Sar- 
miento’s amendment includes the deletion of “as 
Congress may prescribe.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. No, Madam President. My amend- 
ment is the deletion of “such priorities” and “and other 
conditions. So, it will read: “subject to reasonable 
retention limits as Congress may prescribe, taking 
into account ecological, developmental or equity 
considerations and subject to a just compensation.” 

May I just inform the body, Madam President, that 
Article XIII, Section 12 of the 1973 Constitution does 



26 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


not even contain qualifications and limitations. It 
simply states: 

The State shall formulate and implement an agrarian 
reform program aimed at emancipating the tenant from the 
bondage of the soil and achieving the goals enunciated in 
this Constitution. 

What we have is a list of restrictions and limitations 
under this new Constitution, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


with coconut and sugar. There are so many questions 
that will have to be resolved by technical studies so that 
we can establish priorities. So, this is not only a ques- 
tion of big versus small landholders but we are con- 
cerned with the various crops planted on these lands. 
Since we are interested with all crops, we cannot im- 
plement the land reform simultaneously; we will have 
to set priorities. That is why, 1 think, the expression 
“subject to such priorities” would be very much needed 
in order that Congress will know that we are cognizant 
of the fact that there are priorities even as far as crops 
are concerned. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. I understand that the Committee’s 
interpretation of “other priorities” would refer to the 
prioritization of the application. So, it should start 
first with the big landed estates and then those who 
would be affected later will be the small landowners. 
To me, that is a very sensible limitation, because if 
we do not establish the basis for a priority. Congress 
may also adopt the reversed system; start first with the 
small landowners because they are not represented in 
Congress. So, we will have Congress attending only to 
the vested interests of the big landowners. The small 
landowners will be victimized now by an act of Congress 
which IS controlled by a group with a vested interest. 


Insofar as the Article referred to by Commissioner 
armiento is concerned, that was even dangerous, 
oecause It was a mere declaration of a principle that the 
■ ^ an agrarian reform program, and that 

IS he reason why President Marcos abused that 
particular declaration of principle. Now, we are man- 
atmg Congress to especially provide for an agrarian 
retoim program in order that the landless will now 
e the owner of the property they are tilling, and 
necessarily we have to take into account also the 
developmental and ecological objectives of the State 
ecause of necessity to balance interests. We are 
rath Congress the parameters in the imposition 
rather than in the exercise of a duty to pursue the 
objectives of land reform. 


So, I would 
words. 


object to the proposal to delete these 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear first Commissioner 
Bemas. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I quite realize that 
there may be a need to establish priorities, but if for the 
understanding of the meaning of priorities we always 
have to go to the debates of the Constitutional Con- 
vention, then that is a difficult situation. In constitu- 
tional construction, the first rule is that one looks at 
the meaning of the word, and it is only secondarily 
that one goes to the record. As it is now, with this 
enumeration of so many things, it would seem that 
we are constricting the power of Congress to push land 
reform rather than strengthening it. Anyway, we have 
the clause “as Congress may prescribe.” Moreover, 
it says; “taking into account ecological, developmental 
or equity considerations and subject to a just com- 
pensation.” All of these are merely a repetition of the 
fact that Congress after all has plenary powers as far 
as legislation is concerned. Congress can exercise and 
restrict. So, I disagree with those who may say that, in 
effect, we are preempting the right of Congress to 
establish priorities. Rather, what I say is that we must 
avoid the impression that we are really almost un- 
willingly recognizing the power of Congress to under- 
take a land reform program — that impression jumps 
out from the text when one looks at the enumeration 
of all those limitations on the power of Congress. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man please yield to some questions? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, 
niz™ Commissioner Villegas is recog- 


FR. BERNAS. Very willingly, Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Could I also add some areumer 
support of Commissioner Davide’s wanttofto r 
the word pnonties ? ® 


As already emphasized by Commissioner Rodrigo, 
this body is not technically competent to determine’ 
for example, whether or not we should first complete 
the rice and, com land reform program and then start 


MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to give emphasis to 
the words “may prescribe.” Would the Gentleman 
agree with me that if I say “subject to such priorities, 
reasonable retention limits and other conditions as 
Congress may prescribe,” we are giving Congress a 
discretion to set forth priorities? The words “may 
prescribe” would mean that Congress may not pres- 
cribe priorities after all? 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


27 


FR. BERNAS. It is possible that in the judgment 
of Congress, what it considers priority may be to set 
priorities. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is aware that the 
Ministry of Agrarian Refonn, as announced in today’s 
papers or yesterday’s papers, is also observing some 
sort of priorities in the sense that they would like to 
complete the rice and com land reform program before 
going to coconut or sugar land because we do not have 
the necessary funding to finance the entire land reform 
program. 

FR. BERNAS. The point is, I am not denying the 
right of Congress to set priorities. All I am saying is 
that by enumerating all these, we give the impression 
that we are trying to constrict the power of Congress. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Based on the explanation of Com- 
missioner Tadeo, we are not constricting the power of 
Congress because Congress may begm first with the 
big landholdings and later on with medium-sized land- 
holdings, and perhaps later on with small landholdings 
unless they are exempt by Congress. 

FR. BERNAS. But as I understand Commissioner 
Tadeo, he sees the difficulty now and, as a matter of 
fact, he is willing to eliminate “priorities.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that was his first choice. But 
later he said that his second choice, based on his inter- 
pretation is that the word “priorities” may exist here 
after all. I think Commissioner Bernas would like to 
eliminate the word “prioiities” because of the words; 
“taking into account ecological, developmental or 
equity considerations” which will take the place of 
“priorities.” 

FR. BERNAS. Correct, Madam President. That is 
a sufficient guideline for Congress. 

MR. NOLLEDO Would that guideline be less em- 
phatic than the word “priorities”? 

FR. bernas. When Congress takes into con- 
sidera ion eco ogical, developmental or equity con- 
siderations, in fact, it will be setting the priorities. 

MR- NOLLEDO. The word “priorities” is more em- 
phatic. Why do we not place it there? 

FR. BERNAS. It is excess verbiage; it gives the 
impression that we are more interested in limiting 
Congress than in pushing Congress towards land reform. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. Madam President, 
because of the words “may prescribe.” In fact, we are 
giving flexibility to Congress, considering, as stated by 
Commissioner Rodrigo, that we do not enjoy the man- 


date of the people. We are merely appointed. Why do 
we not let Congress, whose elective members enjoy 
the mandate of the people, determine the set of 
priorities? 

FR. BERNAS. I am not denying that at aU. I think. 
Madam President, we have sufficiently discussed this. 
It is a question of perceptions; we submit it to a vote. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Tliank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the issue has been 
amply debated. I move that we vote on this particular 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tlie body will vote on the dele- 
tion of the words “such priorities.” Is that correct. 
Commissioner Sarmiento? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. That is what we will do. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Sarmiento to delete the words “such 
priorities” from the second sentence of Section 5, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 20 against; 
the amendment is lost. 

What is the other amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. My second amendment, Madam 
President, is the deletion of the words “and other 
conditions.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
deletion of the clause “and other conditions,” also on 
the second sentence of Section 5, please raise then- 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 15 against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is still one 
proponent of an amendment to Section 5 . 

May I ask that Commissioner Rosario Braid be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid 
is recognized. 


28 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I have an 
amendment by addition on the second sentence of 
Section 5. Between “encourage” and “and,” insert 
the phrase VOLUNTARY LAND SHARING. May 
I please give the background of my amendment? 

I think we are all convinced that the government 
should take the prime responsibility in agrarian reform 
and that we should put more teeth in the imple- 
mentation of the program so that we can redress present 
imbalances and inequities. But 10 years from now, we 
would like the government to assume a lesser role. We 
would like to see more initiative from the people. We 
would like to encourage efforts hke what is happenmg 
in Negros in terms of voluntary land sharing. We would 
like to be able to help reorient the middle class, the 
landlords, the employers so that we can change adver- 
sary or confrontational strategies to cooperative and 
harmonious relationships. There are actually projects 
like human resource development programs, which 
bring together the landlords and the planters with the 
sacadas. In this dialogue, the spirit of cooperation and 
harmony is forged and, consequently, is voluntarily 
shared. We would like to see the Ministry of Agrarian 
Reform move towards creating a climate where private 
initiative could thrive. And so, I would request the 
Committee to consider including an amendment on 
voluntary land sharing. After all, in the labor sector, 
Aey agreed on voluntary modes of settling disputes! 
This would encourage government and other non- 
government organizations to move towards this 
direction. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

the president. May we have the proposed 

amendment? 

“ ROSARIO BRAID. Between “encourage” and 
and, insert VOLUNTARY LAND SHARING. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that a new sentence? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No, it is in the second 
sentence which will then read; “To this end, the State 
shall encourage VOLUNTARY LAND SHARING 
and undertake the just distribution of all agricultural 
lands . . .” 

MS. NIEVA. Does not Commissioner Rosario Braid 
think that that is included in the phrase “the State 
shall encourage”? By encouraging, would that not 
necessarily include voluntary and all modes of land 
distribution? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It might be. Madam 
President, but it does not provide a mandatory’ direction 
that would move towards this direction. Actually, I 
see voluntary land sharing as the wave of the future 
in land reform. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, will the Com- 
missioner please agree to an amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Certainly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If we adopt Commissioner Ro- 
sario Braid’s amendment now, it might result in a 
nebulous provision. Would she agree with me if we 
make it as the last sentence of Section 5: THE STATE 
SHALL FOSTER VOLUNTARY LAND SHARING? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It is all right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Instead of putting it there, we 
should place it at the end of Section 5 because in the 
amendment, we cannot begin: “To this end, the State 
shall encourage. . .” I think the sentence, as alrea^ 
amended, will be adversely affected if we put “VOLU 
TARY LAND SHARING,” because it might create 
the impression that what the State fosters is 
voluntary land sharing, which is not the case, 

ever, we can supplement the provision by stating- „ 
STATE SHALL FOSTER VOLUNTARY LA 
SHARING as the last sentence of Section 5. 
my amendment to the amendment. 

th ^ 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Accepted, as long as 
concept is there. 

f* 

MR. NOLLEDO. I ask that the 
Committee please consider seriously the ^ . fjj-st 
of Commissioner Rosario Braid, corn- 

provision excluding her amendment will ^^^*^^^jggjoner 
pulsory land distribution while that of Co gj^aring- 
Rosario Braid encourages only voluntary 1^*^ ^dholder 
That is without State intervention. Any ^ perhaps 
may adopt a voluntary land sharing pfogt^ ’ 
with the support of the State. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent yield to some 
questions? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Certainly. 

MR. DAVIDE. By voluntary land sharing, would it 
also encompass the right of the landowners to share 
their landholdings? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Certainly. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is so, would it not defeat the 
objective of land reform, because if they now volunta- 
rily share their landholdings, it could be beyond the 
reach of land reform? 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


29 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No, not necessarily; it can be 
a complementary program. 

MR. DAVIDE. It could be, but tliat is also a right 
conceded to the landowners. So, how can we remove 
from them what they have already obtained by reason 
of an exercise of a right? So, if we now allow land 
sharing among landowners, it will remove the right to 
implement the land reform over these land areas which 
are subject of the land sharing. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think the future legislature 
could come up with provisions that would specify the 
size of land that could fall under voluntary land sharing 
and other specifics. The concept is to ensure that this is 
also taken up as complementai-y program. 

MR. DAVIDE. 1 would have no objection if the land 
sharing will be by the farmers and the farm workers, 
because that would amount to collective ownership. 
But, if it would apply even to the landowners whose 
lands may be the subject of land reform, then that 
might be dangerous. We give it as an option to the farm 
workers and the farmers, but not to the landowners. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think it could be stated as 
an option, and we should encourage it as long as it 
would not prejudice the existing land reform program. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, as an option to the beneficiaries, 
but not to the original landowners. I would agree with 
the proponent because it would really encourage the 
establishment of cooperatives or partnerships among 
the beneficiaries. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. But not in favor of the original land- 
owners. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Could we work on an amend- 
ment that would capture the spirit of what Commission- 
er Davide said? 

MR. DAVIDE. If it would be an option to be granted 
to the beneficiaries, I think the word COLLECTIVELY 
would already embody the concept. They are entitled 
to own singly or directly, on the one hand, or collec- 
tively on the other. That would already include land 
sharing. That is my own perception. I do not know the 
position of the Committee on the matter. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, could I just ask a 
few questions from the proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. The proponent said that the basis 
for this proposal was the experiment that her organiza- 


tion tried out in Negros. Could she just enhghten the 
Committee on the background of such a proposal which 
has served as tlie basis for this amendment on land 
sharing? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It has emerged out of a dire 
need in the province of Negros. As a matter of fact, it is 
perhaps the most imaginative and most successful pro- 
gram now. They have Ed Locsin of Chito Foundation 
and his colleagues and these programs are supported by 
the Farmers’ Human Resource Development Programs 
of Mrs. Magsaysay and others. This experiment is 
spreading in tlie region and has proven worthy of 
replication. It has been evaluated in many reports. 
Among the benefits is ^ the establishment of a more 
cooperative, harmonious environment. Having the land- 
lord and the worker together reduces confrontational 
and adversarial relations. It is a complementary strategy 
to the traditional land reform program. 

MS. QUESADA. Does tire proponent emdsion the 
government to come in to this kind of an arrangement? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, by creating the cUmate. 
Tliey have a number of programs, primarily, training 
and research programs. Some of the resources could 
support the replication of tliese projects throughout 
the country. So, instead of using the resources in just 
supporting the traditional land reform programs, they 
can develop the pilot communities throughout the 
country. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the amendment has 
been clearly explained by the proponent and I think 
it is time to vote on that amendment. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. We will give the Committee a few 
minutes to deliberate on this. 

The session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 3:33 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:35 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the Committee has 
decided to put to a vote the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we please 
explain our position. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, let us hear first the Commit- 
tee. 


30 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, when the Commit- 
tee drafted this section, we put the word “encourage” 
precisely not to preclude voluntary modes of just dis- 
tribution. However, the section is very clear, that the 
coverage is all agricultural lands. 

I think the proposal of Commissioners Rosario Braid 
and Nolledo is not precluded by the word “encourage” 
because it is possible, in order to encourage, that the 
government will give incentives to accelerate the 
program in its system of priorities. So, I do not think 
that that is precluded, and it is unnecessary. 

•So, the Committee feels that it cannot accept the 
amendment because it might confuse or it might open 
the section to a different interpretation, and we want to 
establish the coverage to all agricultural lands. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I answer 
very briefly? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Nolledo. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is designed to really accelerate 
land reform program with respect to those who would 
like to comply voluntarily with it, expecting that they 
will be given incentives by the government. 


We have amended the amendment already, Madar 
resi ent. Landowners who are willing to adopt volur 
Th” ^ afraid of paying capital gain 

rnmni ^ Tu ^ Christian brotherhood, t' 

P y with the land reform program of the goverr 
men , even disregarding priorities that may be set fort 
y ongress. But they like the government to give ther 
incen ives, like exemption from capital gains tax. 


And so. Commissioner Rosario Braid may read the 
proposed amendment as amended. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


The results show 16 votes in favor and 14 against; tlic 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, for a one-word 
amendment, I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my amendment is 
with respect to the second sentence; insert tlic woid 
ARABLE between “all” and “agricultural.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Jamir please 
explain? 


MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. I propose to 
insert the word ARABLE to distinguish this km o 
agricultural land from such lands as commercia an 
industrial lands and residential properties hecause a 
of them fall under the general classification o 
cultural.” And since the intention of the Comnii 
apparently, is to limit the application of the 
“agricultural” here to land subject to cultivation a 
adding the word ARABLE. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

The words “agricultural lands” have already 
defined repeatedly, that they are no't suppose 
include commercial and industrial lands. But 
contemplation of the Committee in its definition wo 
be limited to arable and suitable agricultural lands. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. If the Committee will allc 
^^^"dment, it wUl be; THE COVER 
INCENTIVES TO THOJ 
WHO ADOPT VOLUNTARY LAND SHARING. S 

this will be the last sentence. 


MR. JAMIR. So it is clear that “agricultural lands o 
not include commercial, industrial and resideiitia 
lands. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is correct. 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. This has been sufficiently d 

the suspensic 

of the session. So, they are ready to vote 


As many as are m favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commtssioner Rosario Braid to add a sentence to 
Section 5 which she has just stated, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


MR. JAMIR. With that explanation, I voluntarily 
withdraw my amendment. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. In consequence of the amendment of 
Commissioner Sarmiento, there is a necessary one-word 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


31 


addition to this Section 5. May we call on Commissioner 
Sarmiento, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What happened to the Jamir 
amendment? 

MR. RAMA. It was withdrawn because of the ex- 
planation of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Vice-President is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. With regard to the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Jamir and the explanation of 
Commissioner Suarez, I would like to state that public 
lands are broadly classified into timberlands and agri- 
cultural and mineral lands. 

But under the term agricultural lands, there are 
subdivisions, as mentioned by Commissioner Jamfr, 
which may include residential, commercial and indus- 
trial lands. So to make it clear, especially because there 
is the word “all” to “agricultural lands,” I think that the 
proposed amendment of putting “ARABLE” - and 
Commissioner Suarez even added, “AND SUITABLE”— 
would be acceptable. Tliat while it says, “all agricultural 
lands,” it is limited to agricultural lands that are open to 
farming or agricultural cultivation, etc. 

So with the permission of Commissioner Jamir, I 
would propose that we adopt, subject to what the Com- 
mittee feels, the insertion of the word “ARABLE” be- 
cause the word “all” was not deleted. So, in my 
opinion, we can either eliminate “all” and just say 
“agricultural lands,” or if the word “all” is retained, 
insert the word “ARABLE.” 

What does the Committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Just in support of what Com- 
missioner Padilla has stated and for symmetry and 
uniformity of both expression and intendment, we may 
take into account the provisions of Section 7 with 
respect to lands of the public domain which also specif- 
ically state “suitable to agriculture.” So I think the same 
intent also applies to private lands. 

Therefore, aside from the possibility of using the 
word “arable,” we can say DISTRIBUTION OF ALL 
LANDS SUITABLE TO AGRICULTURE just to make 
it jibe with the same phraseology in Section 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to Com- 
missioner Padilla? 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us "get the reaction first of 
Commissioner Padilla on the proposed amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection to the proposal 
of Commissioner Regalado because it expresses the same 
substance. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will Commissioner 
Padilla yield? 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear Commissioner Ben- 
nagen first, as member of the Committee. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

There is a distinction in the use of “agriculture” in 
Section 7 and its use in Section 5. The reference to the 
use of “suitable to agriculture” in Section 7 has some- 
thing to do with other natural resources including lands 
of the public domain, whereas in Section 5, the refer- 
ence is clear, that it is to “agricultural lands.” In any 
case, we have three criteria which have to be taken into 
account in all those proceedings; ecological, develop- 
mental and equity considerations. I think those should 
be taken into account. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

0 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I just quote for the benefit of the Com- 
missioners, the Ministry of Agrarian Reform survey 
report of May 1986, defining the meaning of agricul- 
tural lands for land reform purposes: 

Agricultural lands mean lands devoted to any growth, 
including but not limited to, crop lands, salt beds, fish- 
ponds, idle lands and abandoned lands. They include all 
arable public and private lands, regardless of crop, size of 
landholding and tenurial arrangement. 

I hope that will satisfy the observations of Commissioner 
Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. Precisely the Commissioner’s defini- 
tion or that definition uses the word “arable.” So we are 
just adopting that word. 

MR. SUAREZ. No. That is why it is already included 
in the words “agricultural lands,” Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. No. 

MR. SUAREZ. I am referring to the word “arable.” 


32 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. No, it is not included because the 
term “agricultural lands” is very broad. Agricultural 
lands are only distinguished from timberlands and 
mineral lands. All other lands are agricultural but 
definitely not all agricultural lands are arable. 

MR. SUAREZ. The problem is, if we define it with 
the word “arable,” it might exclude the possibility of 
setting up, for example, a salt bed, a fishpond, which 
may not, strictly speaking, be fit for cultivation or may 
not be arable. That is the fear of the Commiteee, so we 
would rather that this be broadened by just saymg 
“all agricultural lands,” which would necessarily include 
even salt beds and fishponds. 

MR. PADILLA. In that case, if the Commissioner 
feels that arable” does not cover everything that 
should be covered by agricultural lands, except those 
mentioned as residential, commercial and industrial, 
then we just say “agricultural lands” without using the 
word “all.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, my concern is about 
the more or less 600,000 kaingineros all over the coun- 
We all know there is a program of the Ministry of 
atural Resources granting stewardship contracts to 
ese ainpneros that later on can mature into owner- 
s ip, so t at they stop burning our forests, destroying 
ur watersheds and causing calamities on the lowlands, 
^ through floods. Will this definition of “arable 
thp ^ from the purview of agrarian reform 

ir. '^nd-bum farmers of whom we have, accord- 

ing to the NEDA, no fewer than 600,000 right now? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, some of these 
aingineros bum trees within timberlands or forest 
an s, an these are illegal acts. It is worse if they cut 
rees ecause that has given rise to many adverse 
~ erosion of soil, floods and others. So if 
timberlands and not classified as agricultural 
nr private grants hke homestead, lease, 

T KpUp methods recognized by the Public Land Law, 

Still, or should remain as, 
trppc ^berlands. The trouble is that when the 
fnr!L soil, the lands within the 

Rut 1 hpp ^ P^^nting agricultural crops 

lands are ^nn^i ^^riions of the forests or timber- 

Dublic forestlands, then by 

the one hanH a ^ Forest Development or 

should agree to^ de i ^ Lands, on the other 

already avaUable to fepotitiofto f ' 

purposes of agriculture. S‘be"toe S”, ^^ruere :i 

1 H difference between minera 

lands, timberlands and agricultural lands. 


MR. OPLE. May I ask the Committee, therefore, 
what Its position is - whether under this definition of 


“arable lands” and “all agricultural lands” proposed to 
be distributed under Section 5, that the riglit of the 
kaingineros to their own piece of land already released 
by the Bureau of Forest Development will not be pre- 
judiced in the light of this agrarian refonn program that 
is before the Commission? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Ang mga kaingineros ay dapat 
kasali sa mga beneficiaries of agrarian reform, pero 
iyong bahagi ng gubat na kanilang tinatamnan, dahil sa 
kawalan ng patag na kanilang matatamnan, ay hiiuli 
kasali sa agrarian reform. Ito ay sa dahilang by defini- 
tion, according to existing laws, pag lampas na sa 18 
percent degrees slope, hindi na kasama sa agricultural 
land kundi sa forest. Kaya mahalagang may distinction 
iyong kaingincro mismo at ang kanilang lupang tina- 
tamnan. 

MR. OPLE. Does the Commissioner mean that above 
an 18 percent degrees slope, this is no longer covered by 
agrarian reform? 

MR. BENNAGEN. No, kasi hindi pa iyon A and D. It 
is' not classified as alienable and disposable. It belongs to 
the classification of forest land. 

MR. OPLE. I hope that the Commissioner’s interpre- 
tation is correct. But I can assure him right now that 
there are millions of hectares in the Philippines above an 
18 percent degrees slope and are considered eminent y 
cultivable. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, that is right. As a matter of 
fact, there was a big debate on the issue of 1 8 percen , 
because 18 percent considers only the slope and not le 
other variables that have to do with productivity. 

MR. OPLE. The Committee on the Executive, there- 
fore, should keep an open mind about this limit, 
because I think it might just succeed in excluding 
hundreds of thousands of hectares from agrarian reform. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No. I am merely referring to the 
1 8 percent in relation to this concept which is being 
subjected to debate, partly in relation to ancestral lands 
and partly in relation to the other variable, such as 
factors of productivity that have to be taken into 
consideration, not only the slope. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Concepcion be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

The term “agricultural land” as found in other 
provisions of the Constitution, particularly those refer- 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


33 


ring to the conservation of natural resources and public 
utilities, apparently partakes a different meaning when 
used in connection with land refonn. For purposes of 
consistency and uniformity, therefore, I believe the use 
of the tenn “agricultural lands” as applied in this 
particular provision should be made to connote the 
same meaning when applied to other provisions in the 
Constitution . . . the same policy as observed in the use 
of the term “just compensation.” 

Under these provisions on conservation of natural 
resources, all lands which are neither timberlands nor 
mineral lands fall under the category of agricultural 
land. The reason, according to the authorities, is that 
lands are per se agricultural. However, in view of the 
wealth in mineral deposits as may be found in parti- 
cular areas, these areas, although rich in agriculture, may 
be classified as mineral lands as determined by the 
national government. 

For similar reasons, forest lands are classified as 
timberlands, although they have no forests but, by 
reason of topography, they are suitable watersheds. 
These areas rich in agriculture are, however, not con- 
sidered as agricultural lands but are classified as timber- 
lands. Ironically, some of these timberlands are now 
denuded. 

It is all right to have different categories of agricul- 
tural lands, but these categories of agricultural lands 
under land reform were not found under the old Consti- 
tution. Hence, the use of the term under land reform 
would have a different meaning when referring to the 
provisions on the conservation of natural resources, or 
vice versa. It would create a great confusion if the term 
“agricultural lands” were to connote a different 
meaning when used in different provisions of the 

Constitution. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


Now, in the committee report on the Article on the 
National Economy and Patrimony, we recommended 
that we go back to the 1935 classification, as suggested 
by Commissioner Concepcion, so that we just have 
three — mineral, timber and agricultural — and then we 
add a fourth one, national parks, which is the innova- 
tion of tliis Constitution after a lot of public hearings 
where we got this recommendation. We will discuss this 
at the opportune time. So we are suggesting four classifi- 
cations now, tlie tliree tliat appeared in the 1935 
Constitution plus national parks. 

I agree that it may not be necessary to add the word 
‘^ARABLE” because I think tliere is already a juris- 
prudential definition of “agricultural.” And since this is 
something that is subject more to further determination 
of the legislature because, as already mentioned by 
Commissioner Bennagen, there are all sorts of techno- 
logical changes that may render certain types of steep 
mountains arable in the future. And as this body pro- 
bably knows, there are a lot of industrial tree plantations 
that are much more agricultural really than timberland. 
There ^e a lot of fast-growing trees that are being 
grown in the same way as we grow sugar cane so the 
distinction between timberland and agricultural land is 
becoming thinner and thinner. That is why in the com- 
mittee report on the Article on the National Economy 
and Patrimony, we are recommending a new provision 
that the legislature or Congress should fix the definition 
of forest lands which should not be diminished there- 
after, but the fixing would be subject to a lot of studies 
because Congress would have to get experts to deter- 
mine exactly what is timberland and what is agricultural 
land. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponent of the 
amendment insists on a vote on his amendment. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, for a final comme 
the same Padilla amendment, I ask that To 
Villftpas be reco?ni7pH 


qXI tne A cuiiciiuia 

niissioner Villegas be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. It is Commissioner Padilla now 
because Commissioner Jamir withdrew his amendment. 
How does Commissioner Padilla’s amendment read? 


the president. Commissioner Villegas is recog- MR. PADILLA. Delete the word “all” so that the line 
nized. would read “just distribution of agricultural lands.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam Pr^cin 

formation to anticipate reallv on ’ some in- 
‘ X irn tViA M * , discussion on the 

^ticle on t e National Economy and Patrimony, 

because er are a lot of relevant data on the specific 
classification ot natural resources: 


If we will rernember, in the 1973 Constitution, lands 
were classified into too many categories and this gave 
the Marcos regime tremendous elbow room in actually 
reclassifying lands, especially for the benefit of the 
Ministry of Human Settlements. If we will remember 
also, that regime reclassified lands into agricultural, 
industrial or commercial, residential, resettlement, 
mineral, timber or forest, and grazing lands. 


the president. Do we have 
Committee? 


any reaction from the 


MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we do not accept the 
amendment. 


VOTING 


ini: rrvnaiutJNl. The Committee does not accep 
the amendment. So let us proceed to vote then. 


Those m favor of deleting the word “all” before the 
word agncultural” will please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


34 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


Those against will please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 7 votes in favor and 26 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Ipinakikiusap lamang sa aming 
mga bisita dito sa session hall na huwag pumalakpak o 
gumawa ng anumang reaksyon kung may botohan o 
talakayan dito sa Komisyon. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, before we move over 
to the next section, 1 ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 
be recognized for a perfecting amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move for the 
insertion of the word AND between “priorities” and 

reasonable.” The reason for this is the consequence of 
our decision to delete the words “and other conditions.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So the phrase reads “such priori- 
ties AND reasonable.” 

Is this accepted by the Committee? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President, we accept it. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

On Section 6, we notice the incorporation of the 
words “research and development” as an amendment to 
the original proposal. I am for its deletion because re- 
search and development, if development is related to 
research, would already be included in the word “tech- 
nology.” 

MR. BENGZON. Is Commissioner Davide talking of 
Section 6? 

MR. DAVIDE. Section 6, page 2. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we vote on Section 5 first? 

Madam President, we have not voted on the whole of 
Section 5. If there are no more amendments to Section 


5, we request that the body vote on the whole section, 
as amended. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, 1 seek clarification 
on this very crucial part of Section 5. Ito pong “just 
compensation,” kung ang kahulugan nito ay hindi ang 
reasonable capacity of the farmer to pay under the right 
of preemption and right of redemption, 1 would like 
to cite the case of Valdez vs. Balmocena, CAGR No. 
01487-R, October 7, 1976. Dito po ay ipinaliwanag ang 
right of redemption, na kapag ibinenta ng panginoong 
may-ari ng lupa ang lupang sinasaka ng magbubukid sa 
iba, may karapatan ang magbubukid na maghabol at ang 
babayaran ng magbubukid ay hindi batay sa usapan ng 
vendee at ng panginoong may-ari ng lupa kundi batay sa 
reasonable capacity of the farmer to pay. Kung hindi po 
ito ang kahulugan ng “just compensation,” ay binabawi 
ko po ang boto ko. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Ang pagkaunawa natin dito sa 
“just compensation,” isinasaalang-alang dito ang kakaya- 
han ng magsasaka at kung hindi niya ito makakaya, dito 
papasok ang pamahalaan. Kaya, batay din ito sa afforda- 
ble cost na makakaya ng magbubukid o sa kanyang 
limitasyon. lyon ang pagkaunawa natin kanginang 
umaga. Maaari ring market value, kaya ang primary con- 
sideration ay ang kakayalian ng magsasaka. Kung ano 
ang hindi kaya ng magbubukid, dadagdagan ng pamaha- 
laan. That is our understanding. Kailangang just din ang 
kabayaran doon sa pagmumulan ng lupa. 

MR. TADEO. That is only a clarification. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we vote now 
on the whole section? 

MR. RODRIGO. May I request that the whole section 
be read? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, may we read the whole section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please read the whole section. 

BISHOP BACANI. Just a moment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Do we understand that there has 
been an addition of meaning or a change of meaning 
which was explained this morning? I ask this because I 
think it was insisted that “just compensation” is the 
compensation paid to the landowner. 

MS. NIEVA. To the landowner. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. And that is the prime considera- 
tion there? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


35 


BISHOP BACANI. Whether it will then be subsidized 
by the government, 1 hope that that is not lost. 

MR. BENGZON. No, it is not lost. Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. Section 5 now reads as follows: “The 
State shall by law undertake an agrarian reform pro- 
gram founded on the basic right of farmers and regular 
farm workers, who are landless, to own directly or 
collectively the lands they till or, in the case of other 
farm workers, receive a just share of the fruits thereof. 
To this end, the State shall encourage and undertake 
the just distribution of all agricultural lands, subject 
to such priorities and reasonable retention hmits as 
Congress may prescribe, taking into account ecological, 
developmental or equity considerations and subject to 
the payment of just compensations. The State shall 
respect the rights of small landowners in determin- 
ing retention limits. The State shall further provide 
incentives for voluntary land-sharing.” 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just a clarifica- 
tion. Was there a comma after “farm workers” so that 
the phrase “who are landless” will refer to both regular 
farm workers and farmers? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. I am sorry I did not mention the 
comma. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee please read again the last two sentences. 

MS. NIEVA. The State shall respect the rights of 
small landowners in determining retention limits. The 
State shall further provide incentives for voluntary 

land-sharing.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this proposed 
amendment to Section 5, as read by the honorable 
Chairman, will please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 36 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment to Section 5 is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

The amendment on Section 6 would only be to delete 
the newly incorporated words “research and develop- 


ment” on the second from the last line, the reason being 
that this is already included in the word “technology.” 
We cannot have technology without research and its 
development. 

MR. BENNAGEN. How about deleting “and develop- 
ment” only? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, I propose to delete “research and 
development.” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Let me explain why I insist that 
“research” should be here. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen may 
proceed. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, Madam President. 

In various studies on agrarian reform, it has been 
shown that many agricultural practices are location- 
specific; meaning, that agricultural practices in the 
United States, in China, or in India, are not necessarily 
transferable to Philippine conditions. And even within 
Philippine conditions, specifically because of the great 
variability of ecological conditions, one cannot easily 
generalize, and, therefore, it is necessary to have site- 
specific or location-specific research and development. I 
am willing to have “and development” be stricken off, 
but not “research.” 

MR. DAVIDE. I will agree, in view of the explana- 
tion. So, only the words “and development” should be 
stricken off. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I be 
recognized. This is an amendment to Commissioner 
Davide’s. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Rosario Braid 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 

recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I am glad that “research” is 
retained, but I wonder if we could include TRAINING 
instead of “development” the deletion of which I 
accept, so that the phrase reads: “research and TRAIN- 
ING” because “training” is very important. 

Madam President, I beUeve that 
training is already included in “technology” because 
how can the government transfer technology to the 
farmers and the farm workers without the necessary 
training for said technology? So it is mherent in tech- 
nology. 


36 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner satisfied? MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It is accepted. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I withdraw then with that THE PRESIDENT. How about the Committee? 
explanation. 

MS. NIEVA. If it is acceptable to Commissioner 
THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? Rosario Braid, the Committee accepts. 


MS. NIEVA. We accept the amendment of Com- 
missioner Davide deleting the words “and develop- 
ment,” so the phrase reads: “appropriate technology 
and research.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide which 
has been accepted by the Committee? 

Is there any objection to this proposed amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is ap- 
proved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, for another amend- 
ment to the same section, I ask that Commissioner 
Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, on th 
^ propose to delete “and marketing as 
substitute it with the words SUPPOR' 

rial n A adequate finar 

S SUPPORT SERVICES.” The reason i 

han;o f Other important services; namely, pos 

rliiH ^ ®^hnology and extension services. If we ir 
e marketmg, then we might as well include all th 
omer support services. Post harvest technology, if I ma 
xp am, includes storage, abattoirs and processir 
I ^ different from marketing sy 

nnri^’ delete “and marketing assistance 

na in lieu thereof, insert SUPPORT SERVICES aft( 
the word “production ” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Rosario Braid 
and Davide which has been accepted by the Commit- 
tee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 

MR. RAMA. On the same section. Madam President, 
I ask that Commissioner Rigos be recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I propose a minor 
amendment in the first portion of the sentence which 
says: 

The State shall recognize the right of farmers and farm- 
workers, of cooperatives and other independent farmer s 

organization and land owners . . . 

by placing the word “landowners” immediately after 
“farm workers” so that we refer to people first — 
farmers, farm workers and landowners — then followed 
by cooperatives and organizations which are associa- 
tions. So we just put them together. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? ( Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. For the last amendment to Section 6, I 
ask that Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


me^f NIEVA. Madam President, we accept the amend- 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


MR. DAVIDE. This is a very minor amendment. 
Madam President. After the word “organization” on the 
third line, add S and transpose the apostrophe on 
“farmer’s” to after “s,” so it should be “farmers’ 
ORGANIZATIONS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 


Sa^ce” “and mark 

assistance and addmg what have been ctateH 

OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES. So! atr 
delete the word and and after “assistance ” ad 
following; AND OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid? 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, it is just a small spelling error, a 
perfecting amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. There are no more proponents to amend 
Section 6, Madam President, so I ask that we take a vote 
on the whole Section 6. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


37 


MS. NIEVA. Section 6 reads: “The State shall recog- 
nize the right of farmers, farmworkers and landowners, 
of cooperatives and other independent farmers’ organi- 
zations to participate in the planning, organizing, and 
management of the program and shall provide support 
to agriculture through appropriate technology and 
research, and adequate financial, production, marketing, 
and other support services.” 

MR. DAVIDE. It should be “marketing assistance.” 


May I point out tliat in Indonesia this is the principal 
mode of land reform where approximately five million 
people have been transferred from overcrowded Java to 
the outer islands of Indonesia througli what tliey call a 
transmigration policy which, of course, is supported by 
irrigation, one year of free subsistence, donation of all 
the tools required for cultivation, and amenities like 
schools and clinics. 

So it is in that spirit that we propose this amendment. 
Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, 1 am sorry. It is “marketing assist- 
ance, and other support services.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. May we ask Commissioner Ople whether 
the tenn “WORKERS” would include the landless 
farmers or industrial workers. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Can we not substitute “or- 
ganizing” with ORGANIZATION? I think the phrase 
should be “the planning, ORGANIZATION. . .” 

MR. BENGZON. We accept, yes. 

MS. NIEVA. We accept. 

MR- DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to Section 
6? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 

approved. 

MR. RAMA. On Section 7, Madam President, I ask 
that Commissioner Ople be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

On behalf of Commissioner Nolledo and myself, may 
we propose an amendment in the form of an additional 
sentence which can be indented as a new paragraph 
under Section 7, which reads as foUows: THE STATE 
may resettle the LANDLESS WORKERS IN ITS 
OWN AGRICULTURAL ESTATES WHICH SHALL BE 
DISTRIBUTED TO THE BENEFICIARIES ACCORD- 
ING TO THEIR QUALIFICATIONS. 

The reason for this amendment. Madam President, is 
that the State itself may want to establish model estates 
for agrarian reform and, as a matter of fact, this was the 
preeminent form of agrarian reform initiated by Pres- 
ident Magsaysay in 1953 when the NARRA Settlement 
was established in Palawan and earlier when the EDCOR 
was established in Mindanao. This will complement the 
first part of Section 7 which deals with the lands of the 
public domain suitable to agriculture under lease or 
concession, but in this case it is the State that sets up 
the model agrarian reform estates at its own expense 
just like in the case of the two examples that I cited. 


MR. OPLE. I am referring mainly, in this instance, to 
the landless agricultural workers who do not even till 
their own plot of land and who, according to the statis- 
tics of the NEDA, are now, far in excess, numerically 
speaking, of those engaged in tenancy or sharecropping. 
And that is why as the arable land keeps stable and the 
population keeps exploding, we have this phenomenon 
of millions of landless rural workers who can no longer 
be accommodated in the farms and, therefore, whose 
prospect, unlike that of the tenant farmers and the 
regular farm workers, for ever acquiring land is nil and 
whose prospect for finding jobs outside of agriculture is 
also probably nil. And that is the reason why this is just 
an additional permissive mandate to the State to under- 
take its own agricultural estates where the landless 
workers may be given the opportunity to engage in 
productive work and ultimately own the lands that 
compromise the government’s own agricultural estates. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

We just would like to clear up the definition of the 
word “WORKERS from Commissioner Ople because 
it might give the impression that it refers to industrial 
or commercial workers. But I understand from his state- 
ment that he is limiting the word “workers” to farmers 
and regular farm workers. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. Maybe we can change the word 

“WORKERS” to FARMERS AND REGULAR FARM- 
WORKERS. 


MR. OPLE. I would have no objection to that, 
although that is a longer term. 

MR. SUAREZ. And then after the word “DIS- 
TRIBUTED, would the Commissioner have any objec- 


38 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


tion to inserting the phrase TO THEM IN THE MAN- 
NER PROVIDED BY LAW? 

MR. OPLE. I want to thank Commissioner Suarez for 
a major improvement on the language of the proposed 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

As the proposal would stand, it reads: “THE STATE 
MAY RESETTLE THE LANDLESS FARMERS AND 
REGULAR FARMWORKERS IN ITS OWN AGRI- 
CULTURAL ESTATES WHICH SHALL BE DIS- 
TRIBUTED TO THEM IN THE MANNER PROVIDED 
BY LAW.” 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President, I accept. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May we ask Commissioner Opie 
one more question? Is the idea of the State having its 
own agricultural estates for government to set up and 
manage these agricultural estates? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, this will be subject to the provisions 
of Section 6 in which organizations of farmers, workers 
and landowners — in this case, the government is the 
landowner — cooperatives and other independent 
organizations shall participate in the organization, 
management and direction of the program. 


MR. SUAREZ. ILiank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople as revised 
by the Committee? 

MR. OPLE. Commissioners Ople and Nolledo, Madam 
President. 


MR. BENNAGEN. What would be the relationship 
of the workers to the State and to the agricultural 
estate? They will just be employed agricultural workers. 

MR. OPLE. No. TTiey are resettled there and the term 
of resettlement is clear in the legal literature. This means 
that they are potential owners of these lands upon meet- 
ing certain standards as may be provided by law. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. BENNAGEN. In other words, at some future 
time, these agricultural estates will be dissolved as State 
agricultural estates? 


THE PRESIDENT, 

nized. 


Commissioner Padilla is recog- 


^'^ays insist on “REGUL>^ 
^ WORKERS”? Precisely, those who are n 
regUiar y employed may be the better beneficiaries 

recipients of this State-organized agricultural sett 
ments. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, and they may, of course, establish 
their own voluntary system of associating with each 
other through a cooperative, if they like, or some other 
mode. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Already independent of the 
State? 


MR OPLE. 1 support, the PadUla amendment to my 
amendment with the permission of the Committee. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Committee would have no objec- 
the descriptive word “REGU- 
as applied to farm workers. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I thank Commissioner Ople . 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, could I volunteer 
an information just to concretize the proposal of 
Commissioner Ople? 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will 
the amendment please. 


Commissioner Suarez read 


STATE MAY I 

wriRkFR^TN ITQ FARMERS AND FAP 

AGRICULTURAL ESTAT 
WHICH SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO THEM IN T 
MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment to Section 7? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas may 
please proceed. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Malaysia has a very successful 
model that implements the concept of Minister Ople 
through a government corporation called FELDA, 
Federal Land Development Corporation which actually 
distributed small plots of land to farmers. And through 
a nucleus estate which the government put up that 
would process, for example, rubber, they helped thou- 
sands of small holders of rubber trees to actually be 
productive in the growing of this very important crop. 
And little by little, the small holders learned how to 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


39 


get together on their own and form cooperatives. This 
Malaysian model is something that a lot of Filipinos 
are looking at, not only for the government to imple- 
ment but also for private sector groups to implement. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. I am thinking about industrial workers 
who lost their employment but want to go back to the 
province and engage in farming. Are we not dis- 
criminating against tliem if we limit the benefit only 
to farm workers? 

MR. OPLE. I am inclined to support Commissioner 
Lerum ’s intervention for laid-off industrial workers 
who want to go back home and who in the meantime 
may have no land to go back to. 

So, I do not know if the Committee, at this point in 
time, would be able to accommodate. 

MS. QUESADA. Our understanding is that when 
these workers go to the provinces and end up becoming 
workers in these agricultural estates, then they become 
farm workers. So, they would be entitled under this 
provision. 

MR. OPLE. So, they are embraced within the scope 
of “workers” here? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, as long as that is on 
record, I am satisfied. 

MS. NIEVA. Therefore, the entire additional para- 
graph of Section 7 reads as follows: “THE STATE MAY 
RESETTLE LANDLESS FARMERS AND FARM- 
WORKERS IN ITS OWN AGRICULTURAL ESTATES 
WHICH SHALL BE DISTRIBUTED TO THEM IN THE 
manner PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Villegas want 
to say something? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Before we vote on Section 7, may 
I get some clarification about the phrase “in the dis- 
position of other natural resources”? 

As we had already discussed previously, there are 
only three types of public land - mineral, timber or 
agricultural. Of course, if we decide on the national 
parks later on, it would be the fourth. 


MR. BENGZON. We are not yet on that; we are still 
voting on the Ople-Nolledo amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular amendment of Commissioners Ople and 
Nolledo which has been accepted by the Committee? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Romulo be recognized to make an amendment 
to the same section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Actually I had an anterior amend- 
ment, but 1 did not want to disturb Commissioner 
Ople. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may please 
proceed. 

MR. ROMULO. On line 2, I propose that between 
the words “reform” and “whenever,” insert the phrase 
OR STEWARDSHIP to enable the State to dispose of 
lands of the public domain under the concept of ste- 
wardship. 

MS NIEVA. So, after “agrarian reform” the proposal 
is to insert “OR STEWARDSHIP.” 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, so the line would read: “The 
State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform OR 
stewardship whenever applicable in accordance 
with law ...” 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. I would like to support this amend- 
ment, because the word “STEWARDSHIP” must be 
applied to the concept of landownership. We are not 
really the owners of land. When we really analyze it, 
Madam President, it is God who owns the land. We are 
only but stewards, so 1 would like to support the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Romulo ex- 
plain? 

MR. ROMULO. I have explained it. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee accepts. Madam 
President. 


40 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Villegas 
have any remark on this? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President, may I 
clarify this phrase: “disposition of other natural 

resources.” I think only agricultural lands are alienable 
in the Article on the National Economy and Patrimony. 
Timberlands and mineral lands are not alienable. What 
is really the objective of applying agrarian reform to 
“disposition of other natural resources”? 


BISHOP BACANI. So that I may vote intelligently, 
may I just ask Commissioner Romulo to explain what 
he means by the principle of stewardship, because 
from the philosophical and theological point of view, 
I find that very laudable; however, I do not know 
whether there is a legal meaning to it which may be 
different from that. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the word “dis- 
position” there does not mean transfer of title. It may 
mean, for example, in the case of forest areas, that in 
the giving of concessions, the people in the community 
around the forest should be given some preferential 
attention or treatment. So, that does not necessarily 
mean transfer of title, and the addition of the words 
‘ OR STEWARDSHIP” probably clarifies it even more. 

MR. VILLEGAS. And so, even in mineral lands the 
Committee is also thinking of small-scale mining? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, because as ■ the Commissioner 
knows, that is also included in the Article on the Na- 
tional Economy and Patrimony where we talk about 
small-scale utilization of natural resources. 

MR. VILLEGAS. As long as the word “disposition” 
IS eg^y understood not to be synonymous with 
alienation, then I think it is clear. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Azcuna be 
recognized for an amendment to the same section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


President, I just would like 
to add the words OR UTILIZATION after “disposition” 
o ma e it clear that it really refers more to the use of 
°r resources since only public lands are 


MR. MONSOD. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee accepts. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President may we iust 
pJam something. While the word “disposHkj^- doe 
necessarily mean transferring legal 11^ we 1 env 
situations where land which is of the public doma 
because we say “including lands of the public don 
suitable to agnculture - becomes available for 
position when the State changes the classification 
we accept the amendment “OR UTILIZATION ” 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President, I propose 
it in the legal sense actually; that is, that the individual 
would have free use or free occupancy but he would 
not be given a legal title to the land. That is what we 
call in law as usufructuary. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Nais ko lang idagdag dito iyong 
nabanggit na ni Commissioner Ople kangina tungkol sa 
kaso ng mga kainginero. Mahalaga kasi sa mga lugar na 
classified as forests pero puwedeng agricultural — ka- 
sama dito iyong tree plantations na nabanggit ni Com- 
missioner Villegas — na maaari nilang gamitin ang lupa 
kasama ang principles of agrarian reform; meaning, 
mayroong complementary structures and services that 
would support the use of forest lands for agricultural 
purposes. Ito iyong agro-foresty na tinatawag. Kaya ang 
punto dito, bagaman hindi ibibigay sa kanila ang titulo 
ng lupa, magagamit naman nila ang lupa for a certain 
period of time subject to renewal. In practice, umaabot 
ito ng 25 years o 50 years pero the title is never given 
to them; ito ay kanilang kontrata sa pamahalaan but 
subject to the principles of agrarian reform. Ang ibig 
nitong sabihin, susuportahan ito ng pamahalaan sapag- 
kat sa karanasan ng integrated social forestry program, 
kung walang suporta iyan batay dito sa principles of 
agrarian reform, lalong nasisira ang gubat at hindi 
rin umaasenso ang kabuhayan ng kainginero. 

MR. RAMA. Since there are no more amendments. . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we proceed first to vote on 
the Romulo and Azcuna amendments as incorporated 
by the Committee? Will the Committee please read the 
first three lines? 

MS. NIEVA. “The State shall apply the principles of 
agrarian reform OR STEWARDSHIP whenever appli- 
cable in accordance with law IN the disposition OR 
UTILIZATION of other natural resources ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote on those amend- 
ments first. 

Is there any objection? 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


41 


MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, in Section 5, the 
State shall undertake an agrarian reform program to 
enable the fanners and regular farm workers to own 
the land. As a matter of fact, this was the subject of 
my interpellation — ownership of the land. 

Now, in this Section 7, we use “STEWARDSHIP” 
but we also say we apply the principles of agrarian 
reform. Does this mean that the words “to own” also 
apply to Section 7? 

MS. NIEVA. I think that was explained, that in 
many instances where the lands belong to the govern- 
ment and may not be alienated, they will not receive 
the title. As it was stated here as an example, the 
600,000 kaingineros — of whom Commissioner Ople 
was very concerned — can take advantage of the utiliza- 
tion of these natural resources, receiving the support of 
the State. And this is what we mean by the principles 
of agrarian reform — that the State shall give them all 
the support and the assistance that they would need to 
be successful in their utilization of these natural re- 
sources, but they will not receive the titles. 

MR. RODRIGO. Not to own? 

MS. NIEVA. Not to own. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask Commissioner Ople because he said tliat in the case 
of what we call government estates, eventually these 
will be partitioned so that the farmers can own them. 

MR. OPLE. This will lead directly to ownership. 
Madam President. 

In the case of the agricultural estates established 
by the government itself and where the government 
is the landowner, there is no obstacle to the distri- 
bution of the lands on an ownership basis. In the 
case of the kaingineros, I think what prevents the 
conferment of titles of ownership is precisely certain 
classifications of lands. So that if ownership cannot 
yet be vested because of these problems of classi- 
fications, then a stewardship contract is issued to 
them which, I understand from the Ministry of Natural 
Resources, can even be negotiable in terms of a colla- 
teral in a bank. It is that important a piece of paper, 
not yet equivalent to ownership, but it vests certain 
attributes of ownership to the kaingineros who have 
been issued this stewardship contract. 

I think this is related to the usufruct right that 
Commissioner Romulo had earlier talked about, which 
means that under conditions of usufruct one is, for all 
purposes, the owner except that there might be no 
infinity built into his ownership. Most usufruct would 


terminate in 50 years. In Europe usually it is 99 years. 
And so these are all the attributes of ownership except 
in perpetuity. 

MR. RODRIGO. There is no such thing as infinite 
in this world. So when I say, “I am the owner,” it is 
understood that it is not infinite because I am not 
infinite; not even this world is infinite. 

What I would hke to clarify is this: What is the 
underlying philosophy of Section 7? Can the bene- 
ficiaries of Section 7 own, or may they only be stewards 
of the land? I ask so because in Section 5, it is owner- 
ship. 

MR. OPLE. The Committee can speak for itself, 
but before I resume my seat, may I just say that as soon 
as the conditions ripen into ownership, then nothing 
should prevent vesting the full ownership in the holder 
of a stewardship or a usufruct contract. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is why I come back to my 
question: What is the underlying philosophy of Section 
7? Would the farmers under this section eventually 
own the land, or would they be only stewards of the 
land? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it would depend 
on the natural resources we are talking about. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let us say disposable public land. 

MR. MONSOD. If it is an alienable and disposable 
public land, then they may acquire title. As a matter 
of fact, in applying the principles of agrarian reform, 
the State should start with its own backyard, which 
are alienable and disposable public lands suitable to 

agriculture. 

MR. RODRIGO. In this Section 7, is the philosophy 
of “land to the filler” also apphcable as it is applicable 
in Section 5? In Section 5, the heirs or the children of 
the owner may not inherit tlie land; the owner may 
not dispose of nor sell the land. Is that true also of 
Section 7? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, it would apply, but it would 
be applied a little differently if we were talking about 
forest land. For example, where the land itself is not 
alienable but one has a concession to utilize the forest, 
then the laws on forestry would apply, except that 
there would be preferential treatment of the com- 
munities. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am speaking of disposable, alien- 
able pubUc land. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, it would apply. 


42 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. So the same limitations on the 
ownership of the farmers and farm workers under 
Section 5 would apply to the beneficiaries of Section 
7? 

MR. MONSOD. That is right, that is precisely why 
we say “the principles of agrarian reform.” 

MR. RODRIGO. I thank the Commissioner. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we just want to 
emphasize that in Section 7, the coverage is wider 
because there is mention here of “other natural resour- 
ces.” And so, in the case of timberlands and mineral 
lands, the principles of agarian reform by way of owner- 
ship and grant of title will not apply. That is where the 
principle of stewardship will apply. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor the proposed 
amendments of Commissioners Romulo and Azcuna 
as incorporated by the Committee will please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand. ) 

Those against will please raise their hand. (No Mem- 
ber raised his hand.) 

tv, ^®sults show 31 votes in favor and none against; 
the two amendments are approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask the Chair- 
man of the Committee to read the entire section as 
amended. 

Section 7 shall now read as follows: 
Ihe State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform 
or stewardship whenever applicable in accordance with 
aw in the disposition or utilization of other natural 
resources, including lands of the public domain suitable 
0 agriculture under lease or concession, subject to 
pnor rights, homestead rights of small settlers and the 

rights of indigenous communities to their ancestral 
lands. 

The State may resettle landless farmers and farm- 
workers m its own agricultural estates which shall 
e IS n ute to them in the manner provided by 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. TADEO. Madam President, for clarification. 
Prior rights refer to previous rights of indigenous cul- 
tural communities and settlers over the land on which 
they live and cultivate or use for livelihood. 

MR. BENGZON. That is among others. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. So are we ready now to vote? 

Is there any objection to Section 7, as amended? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; Section 7, as amended, 
is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair calls for a suspension 
of the session for a few minutes. 

It was 4:57 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:29 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Florenz D. Regalado presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized to present amend- 
ments to Section 8. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. This amendment is a joint 
amendment of Commissioner Teodulo Natividad, myself 
and the honorable Presiding Officer. 

On Section 8, line 1, delete the word “preferential 
between the words “the” and “rights”; insert the word 
PREFERENTIAL between the words “the” and “use” 
on line 3; and insert the word COMMUNAL between 
the words “oF’ and “marine” on the same line, so 
that the sentence will read: “The State shall protect the 
rights of marginal fishermen and local communities 
to the PREFERENTIAL use of COMMUNAL marine 
and fishing resources, both inland and offshore, 
particularly municipal fishing grounds.” 

The other sentence will be amended correspondingly 
so that the section will not be too long. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will the distinguished proponent 
please yield to some questions? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, willingly. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


43 


MR. NATIVIDAD. The phrase “direct or communal” 
was deleted by the Committee. I am with the Commis- 
sioner in this amendment to retain “communal” because 
it might give rise to an impression that communal 
fishing grounds — as we know it now and as should 
be reserved in the future by future Congresses — are 
being frowned upon. 1 welcome the use of the words 
“communal fishing grounds” because this is the only 
way we can give preferential rights to marginal or poor 
fishennen. Ang ibig ko pong sabihin, ang mahihirap 
na mangingisda, katulad din ng mga mahihirap na mag- 
sasaka, ay isang kahig, isang tuka lamang. Hindi po nila 
kayang mabuhay kung sasabihin nating mangisda sila 
sa dakong ilalim ng karagatan, sapagkat wala silang 
kasangkapan o walang bangka. Therefore, even if we 
place in the Constitution the word “preferential,” it 
is a hollow word if we do not reserve an area for them 
in terms of communal fishing grounds where those in 
the same situation in life - iyong mahihirap na ang 
tanging kasangkapan ay iyon lamang generator, isang 
bangka at isang maliit na lambat — can earn their live- 
lihood. 

The other thing I would like to note in this amend- 
ment, in which 1 am joining the Commissioner, is the 
matter of municipal fishing grounds. Doon po sa lala- 
wigan ng Bulakan ay mayroong tinatawag na propyos 
_ propyos ng Hagonoy. propyos ng Paombong, atbp. 
Ang ibig sabihin ng propyos ay municipal fishponds 
or municipal fishing grounds, which are properties 
of the municipality since time immemorial. I think 
we should use another term to avoid confusion. And 
these fishponds are not communal fishing grounds. 
Sa communal fishing grounds, basta mababaw na pook 
ng dagat, lahat ay makapanghuhuli ng hipon at lahat 
ng uri ng maldiit na isda. Hindi bawal sa sinuman 
ang pumasok diyan, basta’t hindi lang gagamit ng 
heavy equipment. lyan ang concept ng communal 
fishing grounds. So I would suggest that “municipal 
fishing grounds” should have another name because 
they might be confused with the municipal fishponds 
that we have in many provinces. Sa inga propyos, hindi 
maaaring manghuli ng isda because these are fishponds 
being leased or operated by municipalities for added 
income of the municipalities. And nobody can fish 
there because these are all encircled by dikes. There- 
fore, they should not be confused with these municipal 
fishing grounds in this article which, to my mind, are 
communal fishing grounds. 

I also agree with the use of the word “conservation” 
because I believe that the State should not only develop 
tliese areas but should also conserve or protect them 
from foreign encorachment and from encroachment 
of rich fishermen or fishpond owners. Sapagkat sa 
aktuwal na situwasyon, maraniing lalawigan ang dapat 
nating tingnan. The borders of communal fishing 
grounds are fishponds. And the fishpond owners, by 
operation of law, extend the boundaries of their fish- 
ponds. Ang tawag namin dito sa Bulacan ay “naglala- 
bas ng palaisdaan,” naglalagay ng pilapil upang sakupin 


ang palaisdaang bayan. That is why I would like to inject 
into this debate that the conservation of these communal 
fishponds should include their protection from en- 
croachment of rich fishermen and fishpond owners, 
wiiich has been the root of many historic struggles 
between the rich and the poor, in this case, between 
the rich fishermen and the poor fishermen. Kaya kung 
tayo man ay nagpapakita ngayon ng pagmamahal sa 
mga magsasaka, nais nating sabihing kasama sa ating 
pagmamalasakit dito ang mahihirap na mangingisda. 

Salamat po. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to inquire from the 
proponent certain matters. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the use of the word “COM- 
MUNAL” as proposed by the Commissioner now 
qualify marine and fishing resources? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is correct. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, may Congress set aside certain 
areas as communal marine and fishing areas? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No. Pursuant to Commissioner 
Davide’s explanation yesterday, Congress may not do 
that because all these lakes are communal. 

MR. DAVIDE. That was precisely the idea of my 
earlier proposal to delete the words “the direct or 
communal use.” Now, under the Commissioner’s pro- 
posal, he would in effect allow Congress to define what 
area within the marine and fishing resource area should 
be considered communal, not the entire area itself. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On the contrary, it will pre- 
vent Congress from doing what the Commissioner 
envisions. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, under this proposal, 
the meaning would be that all marine and fishing 
resources must be communal. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is the meaning, I would have 
no objection to it. The purpose of my inquiry was 
precisely to prohibit Congress from defining a particular 
area as the only communal area. 


44 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
is the position of the Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we just 
ask the proponent a clarificatory question? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is our understanding correct that 
the communal character would be applied to fishing 
grounds and resources and not to their use? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. No, the use is preferential. 
In the light of the query yesterday of Commissioner 
Ople whether, for example, fishermen from Bulacan 
going to Quezon wUl be denied the use of the communal 
fishing grounds, the answer of the Committee was that 
that was not the intention, but with preferential right 
to marginal fishermen and local communities. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. None, because “communal” 
qualifies marine and fishing resources. 

MR. MONSOD. What about the fishponds, what do 
we call those? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The fishponds not situated 
in lakes and rivers are different; these are already 
private property. That is precisely the intention of the 
amendment, to do away with fish pens situated within 
lakes and rivers which properly belong to the people 
and to the State. Under land reform, we are taking away 
private property and giving it to the poor, but with 
regard to lakes and rivers, we are doing the reverse. 
The lakes which are communal in nature are instead 
being given or allocated to the rich to the exclusion 
of the marginal fishermen. 

MR. MONSOD. Is the Commissioner saying that 
with this definition, fish pens would no longer be 
allowed? 


MR. SUAREZ. Because as originally proposed by the 
Committee, it would be communal use rather than 
communal marine and fishing resources. But the in- 
tention is clear here that what the Commissioner wants 
to e owned by the community are the fishing resour- 
ces and grounds? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR SUAREZ. And the use will be preferential in 
character for the marginal fishermen? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

qufstionf ^ proponent a 


MR. DE LOS REYES. That will be the ultimate 
effect in communal lakes. 

MR. MONSOD. What about Laguna de Bay? Ui 
specific terms, would this Article now prohibit the 
granting of licenses to have fish pehs in Laguna de 
Bay? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is the intent of the 
amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask the proponent a few 
questions? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Con 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

iv ^ Commissioner correc 

arp nnw marine and fishing resourc 

of the queSon S ^^st an amplificatic 

Article contemplate thauiw"" ® 

are now communal, or doel S^Tha 

SVSL^rrl^rJ^r* ™ri, 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What does the Commissioner 
mean by “marginal”? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “Marginal” is not my term; 
that is the definition of the Committee and, therefore, 
the Committee should answer that question. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I know the meaning of 
“marginal”? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. It is the nrpfp.. i 

1 j p- u- la xne preterential use 

communal and fishmg resources. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Let us 
hear from the Committee. 


MR. MONSOD. Are there marine and fishing resour- 
ces that are not communal? 


MS. NIEVA. By “marginal” I think we are referring 
to the small fishermen. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


45 


MR. DE CASTRO. What does the Committee mean 
by small fishermen? 

MS. NIEVA. Those who do not operate large fishing 
fleets and so forth; those who are barely eking out their 
living from fishing. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
volunteer this infonnation or data on small fishermen. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Let us 
hear from Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR. SARMIENTO. According to IBON facts and 
figures, the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources 
estimates that there are 550,731 municipal fishermen. 
They are distinguished by the fact that they operate in 
coastal waters less than seven fathoms deep, using 
motorized or nonmotorized bancas weighing less than 
three gross tons. Because of the seasonality of fish, 
municipal fishermen operate only on an average of 
five hours a day, twenty days a month and six months 
a year. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I ask another question. Does tliat mean that 
if one operates a banca weighing less than tliree tons, 
he is a small fisherman? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, according to this infor- 
mation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. In Laguna de Bay, fishermen, 
including big fishpen operators, use bancas weighing 
less than a ton, say, 16 horsepower. Are they small or 
marginal fishermen? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. NIEVA. May we have the question again? 

MR. DE CASTRO. From the definition of Honorable 
Sarmiento, he said that the fisherman’s banca must 
weigh more than three tons for him to be classified as 
a big fishermen. But in Laguna de Bay, big fish pen 
operators have a banca less than one ton using the 
Briggs and Stratton 16 horsepower, a small engine. 
Is he classified a small fisherman? 

MR. MONSOD. By the Gentleman’s own definition, 
he would not be a small fisherman because the classi- 
fication is not only on the size of the banca. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What is the other classification? 

MR. MONSOD. Apparently, there are other con- 
siderations such as the size of the holding and the 


capitalization required. These are all the considered 
criteria for determining if a fisherman is small or big. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is not the definition offered 
by the Honorable Sarmiento. Does the Gentleman 
mean to say that his definition is not the definition 
of the small fisherman? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I give this additional in- 
formation because the municipal fishennen were classi- 
fied into two sectors and I think marginal fishermen 
will fall under this second sector. The first sector 
includes those who use motorized bancas and fishing 
gears; the second includes those who use only wooden 
bancas and who are equipped only with hook and line 
and/or small nets. The Ministry of Natural Resources 
estimates that there are 600,000 of the latter sector 
called subsistence fishermen. I think these are the 
marginal fishermen. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, if a fisherman uses a wooden 
banca with a small-powered motor, principally perhaps 
the Briggs and Stratton 16 horsepower, and uses hook 
and line. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Equipped with hook and line 
and/or small nets. 

MR. DE CASTRO. How small will that net be? 

There are what we call small fishermen in Laguna 
de Bay using nets of about 5 kilometers long known 
as pukot. They are people who are poor, fishing in 
Laguna de Bay using about 5 kilometers long of net 
and using diesel bancas and yet are still considered 
small fishermen. That is why I would like to have a 
definition of a small fisherman because it is possible 
that very small fishermen who depend all their life on 
fishing may be excluded. 

MS. NIEVA. That is why we have used the word 
“marginal.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then what is “marginal”? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the presiding OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think there are criteria 
like the annual income of the family. The marginalized 
fishermen, according to research, are usually below the 
poverty-threshold income and are usually the ones who 


46 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


join fishermen’s associations in order that they can get 
loans and marketing and technical assistance. 

A project called FIRM has organized all the marginal- 
ized fishermen, of which there are about 3,843. They 
are all below the poverty income which is one criterion 
added to what we have said earlier. According to a 
survey, 40 percent own their boats and only 20 percent 
own any land. This is probably what would qualify 
them to become marginalized fishermen. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will give an example. 

In our place, there is a man who is a fisherman 
since birth. In fact, he seldom uses clothes on his back 
and his hair is already red because he is always fishing 
in the sea. He was able to build a good house made of 
hoUow blocks and cement because of his fishing and is 
now considered one of the richest fishermen there. 
He uses about three or four bancas powered by a 
Briggs and Stratton 16 HP. He has about five or ten 

baklads connected with fish pens and catches a good 
amount of fish everyday. He earns a much better 
earning than a regular employee, earning perhaps 
PI, 500 a month. Is he a marginal fisherman under this 
term? If he is not a marginal fisherman, then he will 
not have the right, the preferential right, to fish in 
Laguna de Bay. 

I want to make this clear because he may say, “I am 
a sniall fisherman” and yet he earns more than what a 
regular employee or a lawyer in our place earns. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 


MR. BENGZON. On the basis of all these obser- 
ya ions and doubts of Commissioner de Castro, may we, 

herefore, hear his amendment, if he has formulated 
one. 


R. DE CASTRO. I have not formulated any amend- 
men . would like first to understand what is meant 
by marginal” and what is meant by “small.” 


^ the Committee say 


man whoLe^^^^?’ 1°’ Gentleman means a fis 
man who lives on a hand-to-mouth existence? 


MR. BENGZ()N. That is the meaning that the Com- 
mittee contemplated when it used that word “mar- 
ginal.” If the honorable Commissioner has some dif- 
ficulties with respect to its interpretation, we would 
be happy to consider his amendment. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I will think about it. 

May I ask another question of the proponent? 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a clari- 
fication. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. It would not be correct to say that 
a fisherman, if he is not classified as “marginal,” would 
not be allowed to use marine and fishing resources. He 
will not only be allowed preferential use. That is what 
would not be allowed unless he falls under “and local 
communities.” But I do not think it would be accurate 
to say that he would be banned from using such resour- 
ces because he is not a marginal fisherman. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. There is a pending issue at hand and 
that is the amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes 
with respect to the definition of “communal.” I sugges 
that we dispose of that issue first before we get en- 
tangled in another issue as to the definition of 
marginal fishermen and other questions, so that we w 
have some kind of order. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then I reserve my other questions 
to the proponent. 

MR. RAMA. On the same issue as proposed by Com 
missioner de los Reyes, I ask that Commissioner Villegas 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villegas is recognized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I make a 
clarification? I think I was in error when I referred to 
the four categories - agricultural, forest, mineral lands 
and, if possible, national parks as categories of natural 
resources. Those are the categories of lands of public 
domain. What we have decided in Section 7 is to apply 
the principles of agrarian reform or stewardship to all 
the natural resources which include water, mineral, 
coal, petroleum and other mineral oil, all forces of 
potential energy, fisheries, forests, flora and fauna and 
other natural resources. So, I would like to clarify the 
implication of Section 7 as applying to all the natural 
resources and not only categories of public lands that I 
referred to earlier. In this regard, I would like to dis- 
agree with the suggestion that communal waters like 
Laguna de Bay be so defined to prohibit fish pens. 

1 think there is a provision in the Article on National 
Economy that the State can limit the use of water rights 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


47 


for irrigation, water supply, fisheries or industrial uses 
other than development of water power to beneficial 
use. It would prejudice eight million consumers of fish, 
for example, in Metro Manila if we do not allow a high- 
ly productive technology of fish farming that can be 
given to specific entrepreneurs who can actually fish, 
have fishponds of bangus or other types of freshwater 
fish. As long as we have the prefential rights given to 
these marginal fishennen, I do not tliink we should 
completely prohibit the State from giving this type of 
natural resources to individuals who can productively 
make use of these waters for the benefit of eight million 
consumers of fish in Metro Manila. That is why it is 
very much parallel to the concept of agrarian reform 
where we do not prohibit the private cultivation of 
land by individuals. We have, for example, the retention 
limit. So, I would object in saying categorically that 
fish pens are prohibited in communal waters like Laguna 
de Bay. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Villegas 
answer one question? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. In his experience and studies, 
does the Gentleman know of any other country that 
allows its lakes and rivers to be fenced in such a manner 
that a few moneyed people are able to' exclude the 
marginal fishermen from fishing in the communal 
fishing grounds? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, definitely. In fact, Nigeria 
has imported Philippine technologists to teach her 
how to do inland fish farming. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Aside from Nigeria. 


MR. VILLEGAS. There are not so many countrie 
Ulce the Philippines that have developed the indigenou 
technology of fish farming Actually, for the infoi 

mation of the body, we foe pacesetters in the worl( 
in fish farming, and I thmk it would be very much ini 
mical to the very mterest of the poor. Remember tha 
50 percent of the diet of the poor depends on fish, an( 
if we start preventing technology from being used in th 
cultivation of water resources — I repeat, I am no 
against the application of the principles of agrariai 
reform and stewardship to the marine resources; I an 
very much in favor but I think we cannot be exclu 


sivists — and say that absolutely no use of communal 
waters will be allowed for a technology that has been 
evolved through the years in the Philippines . . . Just to 
allay the fears about the small fishermen, we are also 
recommending in the Article on the National Economy 
that priority be given to cooperative fish farming in 
rivers, lakes, bays and lagoons. So, in the same way 
that in agrarian reform we say direct use or collective 


use of land, we can also include in foe provision for 
small fishermen that they can get together and, in a 
cooperative way, take advantage of foe technology of 
fishfarming. But it does not mean that we cannot 
completely prohibit a private individual from doing foe 
same thing. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes will first reply to the clarification 
of Commissioner Villegas. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Ako ay walang tutol na mag- 
karoon tayo ng teknolohiya upang lalong maging 
masulong ang pangingisda. Subalit hindi ito dapat gawin 
sa Laguna Lake at sa iba pang communal fishing grounds. 
Dapat itong gawin sa mga inland fishing grounds. 
Kaya ko ipinaglalaban ang sampung libong mangingisda 
na naninirahan sa paUgid ng Laguna at Rizal ay madali 
silang mahihikayat ng ating mga kapatid sa labas na 
lumaban sa kasalukuyang sistema ng ating pamahalaan 
sapagkat sinasabi ng ating mga kapatid sa labas na ang 
ating batas ay para sa mayayaman lamang. Kapag sini- 
mulan nating bigyan ng pagkakataon ang mga fish pen 
operators, wika nga ni Ka Bias Ople, in foe real world 
ay hindi naman magiging preferential lamang. Unti- 
unting mawawala ang small fishermen at magiging ka- 
tulad ng mga American-Indians na sinasabing hindi 
pipinsalain subalit unti-unting napapapunta sa Indian 
reservations. lyon po ang aking ipinaglalaban dito. 
Sampung libong pamilya ang nahihikayat na ng ating 
mga kapatid na sinasabi nating naliligaw ng landas. 
Gusto nating magkaroon ng pagkakataong ipakita sa 
kanila na sila ay hindi nalilimutan ng pamahalaan. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Regalado). We will 
hear briefly from Commissioner de Castro on a point 

of information. 


MR. DE CASTRO. May I offer some information 
in the light of the fact that we are talking about Laguna 
Bay. Laguna Bay has an area of 90,000 hectares. The 
Laguna Lake Development Authority has limited the 
fish pens to about 2 1 ,000 hectares and only in a certain 
area, the reason being that it really supplies a greater 
amount of fish in Metro Manila and these fish pens 
employ approximately 5 to 10,000 employees in their 
fish pens. Also, with fish pens given the right to be built 
in Laguna de Bay, all the places beginning from Ilocos 
down to the southernmost of Mindanao have a good 
way of living because of catching the fries — ’yung 
kawag na tinatawag na nagiging bangus. Ngayong mga 
panahong hindi pa dumarating ang bagyo, maraming 
kawag sa Ilocos Norte, Zambales, Bataan hanggang 


48 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


Aurora, then down to Zambales,to the whole Bicol 
region, Palawan, Mindoro and the whole Visayas up to 
Zamboanga. Ang hanapbuhay ng mga tao sa tabi ng 
dagat ay manghuli ng kawag at sila ay kumikita ng 
malaki rito. At ang mga kawag na ito ay kailangan 
sapagkat ginagamit ng ilang fish pens sa Laguna de Bay. 

Will the proponent answer one question? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is the Gentleman aware that there 
are fish pens established by the so-caUed small fishermen 
through the ADB-OPEC funding? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. There is such a program and I 
also know that these fishermen who claim to be fisher- 
men are not really fishermen but dummies of moneyed 
people. 


MR. DE CASTRO. So, the Gentleman wants to say 
manipulated this money for ADB- 
, which money was taken from the Organization 
® Exporting Countries through a loan and 

t en given to the LLDA for the construction of fish 
pens of supposedly small fishermen who have estab- 
lished themselves into cooperatives. Is the Gentleman 
now tellmg me that the ADB-OPEC funds have been 
misused by the LLDA? 


is REYES. I am not saying that the LLDA 

IS dehberately misusing the OPEC funds. What I am 

ymg IS t at even the LLDA people are being misled 
class who act as dummies of the moneyed 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). With 
tins mformation given to us and the statistical data 
ma e available, what is the position of the Committee? 

Pre“Lg'ofn«?^*' Mr. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, there has been 

no proposal for amendment. 


u perhaps Commissioner de los Reyes, and ( 
ommissicmers Natividad and Davide, can summ< 

rnmmn^ 1 regarding the proper definitioi 

communal manne and aquatic resources. 


MR. VILLEGAS. May I have 
one final reaction. 


one last word please; 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
missioner Villegas may proceed 


(Mr. Regalado). Com- 


• ^ thmk we are already treading 

m legislation because we are talking about Laguna de 
Bay. I think I would completely agree with Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes regarding the general principle he 


mentioned that there are other inland waters that can 
be used for fish pens. I think he did admit already that 
in principle he is not against having other inland waters. 

The only bone of contention right now is whether or 
not Laguna de Bay is going to be included among these 
bodies of water. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just interrupt. The reason I 
wanted Commissioner de los Reyes to speak is that 
earlier we had asked him if his amendment auto- 
matically means that the entire Laguna de Bay, as an 
example, is considered a communal marine and fishing 
resource. We would want to seek a clarification of his 
answer because his initial answer was that the entire 
Laguna de Bay can be considered communal. That is 
the reason we wanted a clarification. Perhaps, that 
could also help the Gentleman’s concern. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
does Commissioner de los Reyes say? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. After conferring with Com- 
missioners Natividad and Davide and explaining to me 
the situations obtaining in their respective provinces, 
I am beginning to believe that we should have senators 
so that they will have parochial views. I think I might 
be having parochial views with regard to Laguna de 
Bay. 

But, according to Commissioner Natividad, the 
shallow portions should be considered commun 
because that is where the marginal fishermen cou 
fish. But the deep portions of bays, rivers or lakes are 
where marginal fishermen could not fish. Therefore, 
nonmarginal fishermen, those who have big bancas, 
can be allowed to fish in deep portions, giving pr^ 
ferential right, however, to marginal fishermen to ns 
in the shallow portions. 

Therefore, hearing the different views submitted to 
this representation the suggestion is to insert the w.or 
THE before “communal” to read: “to the preferential 
use of THE communal marine and fishing resources to 
convey the idea that it refers only to that portion whicrn 
is declared communal. Considering that legislation is 
the art of the possible, I am willing to accept that 
suggestion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officerj may I ^sk 
one question of the proponent? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR- DE CASTRO. When the Gentleman says “deep” 
and he refers to Laguna de Bay, may I know how many 
feet is the deepest portion of Laguna de Bay? 

I know that Laguna de Bay is deepest during the 
rainy season, especially from August to September, 
reaching about 1 5 feet; then during smmmer, it is only 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7,1986 


49 


12 feet. What is now the communal portion since it 
is sometimes deep and sometimes shallow? I know 
this because I live near Laguna de Bay and I may even 
be considered a marginal fishennan. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The problem in Laguna, as the 
Gentleman very well knows, is that fish pens are be- 
ing constructed in those portions where traditionally 
the small fishermen fish. Because of their big capital, the 
big fishermen could move their fish pens somewhere in 
the middle of the lake. 

Also, the problem in Laguna de Bay is that there is 
progressive and uncontrollable siltation. The Gentleman 
knows what siltation is. Laguna de Bay is becoming a 
dead lake; it is getting shallower and shallower. And the 
reason is the fish pens, the bamboos stuck in Laguna de 
Bay prevent the free fiow and circulation ot water and 
that is the cause of siltation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, that was the 
statement made by our governor. He said that bamboos 
cause siltation and nets prevent water circulation. It is 
mere common sense, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Let us 
hear from the Committee whether they are satisfied by 
the clarification given by Commissioner de los Reyes. 

de CASTRO. The holes of nets are big and the 
water can flow througli. 

MR. BENGZON. We are already zeroing in on a 
specific portion of the Philippines . . . 

MR. DE CASTRO. I only made these comments 
because I happen to know Laguna Lake which we are 
talking about, and I am giving this information for the 
benefit of the Committee. 

MR BENGZON. May we hear from Commissioner 
Monsod m representation of the Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. The explanation of Commissioner de 
los eyes of his proposed amendment now clarifies the 

poin we raised before, and we are accepting his amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de los Reyes will please read his proposed 
amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “The State shall protect the 
rights of marginal fishermen and local communities to 
the preferential USE OF THE communal marine 
and fishing resources, both inland and offshore ...” The 
coauthors are Commissioner Natividad, the Presiding 
Officer and Commissioner Davide. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
amendment has been accepted by tlie Committee. Is 
there any objection? 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Now that the Committee has ac- 
cepted that amendment, I would like to propound a few 
questions to the Committee for clarification. 

The provision now states tliat the State shall protect 
the rights of marginal fishennen and local communities 
to the preferential use of the communal marine and 
fishing resources, both inland and offshore. 

So, there are two conditions in order to get a prefer- 
ence: first, he must be a marginal fisherman; second, he 
must live in the local community. Must these two con- 
ditions both be present? In other words, does one have 
to be bodi a marginal fisherman and live in the com- 
munity? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, those are not 
conjunctive. In other words, one may be a marginal 
fisherman and be entitled to preferential use or it may 
be the entire local community. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, a marginal fisherman, let us say, 
from Bataan, can fish in Bulacan waters, in the com- 
munal fishing ground in Bulacan. 

MR MONSOD. We are referring to the fishermen in 
the area. And what the Committee had in mind was 

ally either individually or the entire community be- 
cause there are local communities that have formed 
fishing cooperatives. 

MR RODRIGO. I am not speaking of cooperatives 
but of marginal fishermen. May any marginal fisherman 
from any part of the Philippines have preferential right 
to fish in the communal fishing ground by the shores of 
Bulacan Province, or only the'marginal fishermen in that 
aria of Bulacan Province? 

MR. MONSOD. I think we answered the question 
yesterday during the interpellations of Commissioner 
Ople, that it is not the primary intention of the Com- 
mittee to exclude. In other words, somebody from 
another place who is a marginal fisherman may avail of 
the preferential use of these marginal areas. So, because 
it is not exclusive to the people in the area marginal 
fishermen may avail of them. This was asked yesterday 
by Commissioner Ople. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, provided one is a marginal 
fisherman, he is given preferential right to fish in any 
communal fishing ground anywhere in the Philippines; 
is that right? 


50 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RODRIGO. If one lives in the vicinity, even if he 
is a rich fisherman, he can fish in the communal fishing 
ground of the vicinity. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, the preferential use is for certain 
people. 


MR. RODRIGO. Let us discuss the implementation 
of this because I would not want to raise the hopes of 
our people, and afterwards fail in the implementation. 
How will this be implemented? Will there be licensing or 
giving of permits so that government officials will know 
that one is really a marginal fisherman? Or if policemen 
say that a person is not a marginal fisheiman. he can 
show his permit, to prove that indeed he is one. 


MR. RODRIGO. The Gentleman said this is either-or. 
As to a marginal fisherman, he does not have to live in 
the local community to get preferential treatment. 

How about those who live in the local communities? 
Do they get preferential treatment only if they are 
marginal fishermen? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Or is it enough that they live in the 
local community? 

MR. BENGZON. No. If an individual lives in a local 
community but he is not a marginal fisherman, he does 
not have preferential treatment. 

^ MR. RODRIGO. What is then the use of placing 
local community" here? We might as well delete the 


MR. BENGZON. Certainly, there will be some mode 
of licensing insofar as this is concerned and this parti- 
cular question could be tackled when we discuss the 
Article on Local Governments — whether we will leave 
to the local governments or to Congress on how these 
things will be implemented. But certainly, I think our 
congressmen and our local officials will not be bereft of 
ideas on how to implement this mandate. 

MR. MONSOD. There are two aspects to this: the 
aspect of exclusion and the aspect of inclusion. In the 
case of exclusion, it is easier. In other words, in areas 
considered communal, the putting up of fish pens 
or allowing big fishing enterprises to fish in that area 
may be prohibited. That is the exclusion aspect. In the 
case of inclusion, on who are considered marginal fisher- 
men or what are marginal local communitiesj I believe 
the answer of Commissioner Bengzon would apply- 
There might be a need for identifying them by a system 
of licensing. 


nf ^'■®siding Officer, is it the intent 

e ommittee to refer to groups or to persons who 
tish as a group in the local community? 

MR RODRIGO. But suppose marginal fishermen 
r(^ alawan, fishing as a group, come to Manila Bay to 
1 m the communal fishing ground by the seashore of 
u acan. They are marginal fishermen working as a 
group; are they entitled to preference? 

MR. BENGZON. We believe that that is really theore- 
ic and may remain theoretical because marginal 
IS ermen, for example, in Palawan, whether they go as 
m ivi uals or in groups, cannot afford to go to Manila, 


MR. RODRIGO. So, once one is licensed as a mar- 
ginal fisheiman, he can go anywhere in the Philippines 
and fish in any fishing grounds. 

MR. BENGZON. Subject to whatever rules and regu- 
lations and local laws that may be passed, may be 
existing or will be passed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I think the issue has been sufficiently 
debated. I move that we take a vote. 


MR. RODRIGO. Palawan 
about from Cavite? 


is indeed too far. How 


MK. BtNGZON. Even then. The real intei 

inXiduaUy w af a ^ou^^ If°5hey^'’"^'"'‘”^*-®^’i 
men, then they have preferential trealTnt'ove 
who are not marginal, whether they Uve in th 
munity or not. 


MR. RODRIGO. As long as they are marginal. 
MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, just a possible 
amendment to avoid confusion on the phrase “local 
communities." I think it is quite clear that what the 
Gentleman meant was directly or collectively, as he said 
in the provision on agrarian reform. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villegas is offering an amendment to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is right. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Regalado). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


51 


MR. VILLEGAS. After the phrase “rights of,” add 
MARGINAL FISHERMEN DIRECTLY OR COLLEC- 
TIVELY TO THE PREFERENTIAL so that the phrase 
“local communities” is not misunderstood. So, the pro- 
vision will read; “The State shall protect the rights of 
MARGINAL FISHERMEN DIRECTLY OR COLLEC- 
TIVELY TO THE PREFERENTIAL use of THE COM- 
MUNAL marine and fishing resources . . .” 

MR. MONSOD. What about “INDIVIDUALLY OR 
COLLECTIVELY”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. “INDIVIDUALLY OR COLLEC- 
TIVELY.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Does 
Commissioner de los Reyes accept the proposed amend- 
ment to his amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Will Commissioner Villegas 
repeat his amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. “Tlie State shall protect the rights 
of MARGINAL FISHERMEN INDIVIDUALLY OR 
COLLECTIVELY TO THE PREFERENTIAL use . . .” 
and all the rest will be like the Gentleman’s proposal. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. What happened to “local com- 
munities”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. “COLLECTIVELY” refers to 
“local communities.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. We accept the amendment. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. We accept, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment, as amended 
by Commissioner de los Reyes? 

MR. RODRIGO. Just one question. Are the words 
“local communities” deleted? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, the phrase “local communi- 
ties” was deleted and replaced by the word “COLLEC- 
TIVELY.” 

MR. BROCKA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog- 
nized? 

MR. RODRIGO. May I just pursue this point, just 
one sentence. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Brocka is recognized. 


MR. BROCKA. I am a member of the Committee and 
when we were discussing this — “local communities” 
specifically — this was in reference to that particular 
example given, the Laguna de Bay fishermen. So, the 
phrase “marginal fishermen INDIVIDUALLY AND 
COLLECTIVELY” does not quite catch the reference 
to a particular community in that particular area. When 
we were discussing this particular phrase “local commu- 
nities,” it was in direct reference to a particular fishing 
community like Laguna de Bay. The amendment does 
not quite catch the meaning of the discussions on that. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, when we used 
“local communities” earlier, it was appropriate because 
we were also using “communal use.” Then we enlarged 
the meaning so that we took out “beneficial or com- 
munal” and just left “use.” We can change the wording 
to “COLLECTIVE” because it would have the same 
meaning in that context. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the meaning be preserved if 
we say “The State shall protect the rights of marginal 
fishermen ESPECIALLY THOSE IN THE local com- 
munities to the PREFERENTIAL use of the COM- 
MUNAL marine and fishing resources . . .”? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. The amendment does not capture 
our real intent. 

BISHOP BACANI. The amendment includes marginal 
fishermen and the preference for them in the local com- 
munities because obviously in the Committee, we did 
not intend to give preference even to the nonmarginal 
fishermen in the local community. The real stress was 
for the marginal fishermen in the local communities and 
I think the amendment will actually express what you 
are trying to do in the community. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). So what 
is the position of the Committee? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Otficer, may we have a 
minute to consult with the rest of the Committee on 
this? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 6:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:35 p.m., the session was resumed. 


.52 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
session is resumed. 

Will the Committee now state its phraseology of this 
proposed sentence? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we ask 
that Commissioner Bacani be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, after confer- 
ring with the members of the Committee, it seems we 
are all agreed now. The provision will read: “The State 
shall protect the rights of MARGINAL FISHERMEN 
ESPECIALLY OF local communities to the PRE- 
FERENTIAL USE OF THE communal marine and 
fishing resources.” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment as read by 
Commissioner Bacani? 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, “the preferential use of com- 
munal marine and fishing resources.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Will 
Commissioner Bacani please read again his proposed 
amendment? 

BISHOP BACANI. I will read it again although that 
was not the particular point of the amendment I intro- 
duced. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). And 
that continues to “both inland and offshore, PARTI- 
CULARLY IN MUNICIPAL FISHING GROUNDS.” 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, the Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
any objection to this proposed amendment? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Before we vote on this, may I be 
a lowed to reserve my definition of “marginal fisher- 
ecause I intend to make the research tonight 
and see what “marginal” is. As of now, 1 am not cleared 
o what is marginal” and what are “small fishermen.” 
May I reserve the right to define these terms? 


the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr 
inclusion in the Journal tomorrow. 


Regalado). 


Jo^ml inclusion in 

“mareinal” the change of the Wi 

marginal based on the definition because as of n 
the definition is hand-to-mouth. ^ ° 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is this 
within the entire proposed present text? 

BISHOP BACANI. “The State shall protect the rights 
of marginal fishermen ESPECIALLY OF local com- 
munities to the PREFERENTIAL use of THE COM- 
MUNAL marine and fishing resources both inland and 
offshore PARTICULARLY IN MUNICIPAL FISHING 
GROUNDS.” 

MR. PADILLA. Will the proponent consider the right 
of marginal fisherman in his local community? 1 make it 
singular because when you say in their respective or 
local communities, while it is singular, the preferentia 
right applies to all marginal fishermen. 

BISHOP BACANI. There are two senses that we 
wanted to preserve and that is why that formulation was 
presented by myself first, that we should also accord 
preferential treatment to fishermen from other com- 
munities provided they are marginalized. Second, we 
should especially accord the right of preferential use to 
fishermen who belong to the local community. We do 
not intend to give the right of preferential use to rich 
fishermen in the local communities. That is the reason 
for the special formulation. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we ask 
for a vote? 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr Regalado) W 
does the Committee say? Kegaiado). w 


MR. BENGZON. We request that we first vote on the 
amendment of Commissioner Bacani and then we will 
decide on the proposal of Commissioner de Castro. 


the presiding OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). As 
many as are in favor of the proposed first sentence 
of this section, as amended, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


53 


Tlie results show 30 votes in favor and none against; MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
the amendment is approved. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I now reserve my right to 
define marginal fishennen? May I be given at least to- 
night to do my research on what “marginal” means? 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would Commissioner Davide 
accept an amendment to his amendment? I was wonder- 
ing if he can delete the first “support” so that it will 
just read: “THE STATE shall ALSO provide appropriate 
technology . . . AND OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, we only want a 
symmetry of this proposal with the earlier wordings on 
Section 6, and symmetry in the benefits and advantages 
to be given to both the farmers, farm workers, coopera- 
tives and so on on the one hand, and to the marginal 
fishermen on the other. I would like to consider Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid as a coauthor in view of the 
use of the words AND OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES, 
which was her amendment to Section 6. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendments to Section 8 are very simple. I hope 
the Committee will accept the same. This would be on 
lines 5, 6, and 7. On line 5 between the words “provide” 
and “appropriate,” insert SUPPORT THROUGH; be- 
tween “appropriate” and “financial,” insert the follow- 
ing: TECHNOLOGY, RESEARCH AND ADEQUATE. 
Then delete “tech” at the end of the line. On line 6, 
delete “nical” and the words “and research” and before 
“assistance,” insert PRODUCTION AND MARKETING. 
After “assistance,” insert the words AND OTHER SUP- 
PORT SERVICES. So, the two lines will read: “grounds 
and shall provide SUPPORT THROUGH appropriate 
technology, research and ADEQUATE FINANCIAL 
PRODUCTION AND MARKETING ASSISTANCE 
and OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES.” 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Just a 
moiTieiit, Commissioner Davide. After “grounds ” there 
is a period. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid satisfied with the Gentleman’s 
withdrawing her amendment to the amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I am just concerned about 
the use of the words and I would be willing to have the 
anterior amendment in Section 6 and just say “shall 
provide appropriate technology.” It is really just a 
matter of style and maybe the Committee on Style can 
handle it. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, the intention 
here is just to provide support. But if we remove the 
word “support,” it would be mandatory on the part of 
the State and the State may not be able to afford this. 
So, I think providing support is the better compromise. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Regalado). Is Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid satisfied with that explanation? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I pro- 
pose an amendment to the amendment? 


MR. DAVIDE. Was it placed already? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). So the 
first sentence ends after the word “grounds.” What the 
Gentleman is now proposing will be the second sentence. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, the second sentence will read: 
“THE STATE shall ALSO provide SUPPORT THROUGH 
appropriate technology, research and ADEQUATE 
FINANCIAL, PRODUCTION AND MARKETING AS- 
SISTANCE AND OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES, TO 
SAID FISHERMEN for the . . .” 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I yield to Commissioner 

Sarmiento. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Is Commissioner Davide willing 
to delete the word “SUPPORT” in the phrase “AND 
OTHER SUPPORT SERVICES” because we would be 
having two supports.’ So, the amendment will read: 
“provide SUPPORT THROUGH appropriate techno- 
logy, research and ADEQUATE FINANCIAL, PRO- 
DUCTION AND MARKETING ASSISTANCE AND 
OTHER SERVICES.” 


I 


54 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. DA VIDE. We are agreeable with the interpreta- 
tion that these other services would simply mean other 
support services. But just to avoid repeating the word 
“support,” we are agreeable. 


MR. SUAREZ. Will the Honorable Davide agree to 
change the beginning of the sentence from “THE 
STATE” to IT because there is already a repetition? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). So, how 
will the proposed second sentence now read? 


MR. DAVIDE. It will now read as follows: “IT shall 
also provide SUPPORT THROUGH appropriate tech- 
nology, research and ADEQUATE FINANCIAL, PRO- 
DUCTION AND MARKETING ASSISTANCE* AND 
OTHER SERVICES, TO SAID FISHERMEN for 
the . . .” 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). May we 
hear from the Committee? 


MR. BENGZON. We accept the amendment. 

Officer Committee accepts, Mr. Presidir 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
My objection to the proposed amendment constituting 
the second sentence of this section? (Silence) The Chair 
nears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. I wonder if Commissioner Ople would 
have no amendment. 

MR. RAMA. He has an amendment on the same 
section. 


additional sentence which, of course, 
wou require dropping the phfase about foreign intru- 
sion. 


MS. NIEVA. The phrase was dropped. 

MR. OPLE. Was it already dropped? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, this was a mistake yesterday. 

MR. OPLE. So, I do not think I would stand in the 
way of any further amendment by Commissioner 
Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. The words “and from intrusion of 
foreign investments . . .” 


MS. NIEVA. The phrase was dropped by the Com- 
mittee. It was only typed in by mistake of the staff. 
There is a corrected page but we are just using this one. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, this was dropped already because 
my proposal will be to delete tliis phrase. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). So, 
where will the sentence end? 

MR. DAVIDE. However, I would like to insert the 
word PROTECTION and a comma (,) before “develop- 
ment” on line 7 because this wilt give way to another 
proposal regarding foreign intrusion but worded dif- 
ferently. I understand that Commissioner Ople will have 
an amendment to that effect. So, in anticipation of his 
amendment which would relate tb protection, we 
would now insert the word PROTECTION and a 
comma (,) before “development” to read: “PROTEC- 
TION, development and conservation of such resources. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Then 
we delete “and from intrusion of foreign investments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that has already been deleted. So, 
it is just the insertion of the word PROTECTION fol- 
lowed by a comma (,) before “development” on line 7, 
to give way to the Ople proposal which I also am willing 
to support. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none, tie 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The proposed amendment which is a new sentence 
under Section 8 shall read as follows: THE STATE 
SHALL ESTABLISH A POLICY TO PROTECT FROM 
FOREIGN INTRUSION THE NATIONAL TERRITO- 
RIAL WATERS WITH THEIR MARINE WEALTH 
WHICH SHALL BE RESERVED TO EXCLUSIVE 
EXPLOITATION BY FILIPINO CITIZENS ESPECIAL- 
LY SMALL FISHERMEN. This amendment is proposed 
jointly by Commissioners Natividad, Rodrigo, de los 
Reyes, de Castro, Davide and myself. I think I will spare 
the Commission and the Committee the reiteration of 
the basis for this amendment which I made yesterday 
during the general debate. We all know that the intru- 
sion of foreign fishing vessels in our fishing waters, 
among the richest in Southeast Asia and the Pacific, has 
reached scandalous proportions. In a place just off Iba, 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


55 


Zambales — and this incident I had the occasion to 
report to this body yesterday — to add insult to injury, 
Japanese fishing vessels even have the temerity to ram 
the small boats of small Filipino fishermen. This was 
brought to my attention and a report was sent by me to 
competent authorities concerning this. Therefore, I 
think tliis will round off the section immediately pre- 
ceding m terms of declaring a policy to protect our 
marine wealth in our own territorial waters from the 
intrusion of foreign fishing vessels and from foreign 
capital. There is an element m the last part where a 
policy of preserving tlie exploitation of our marine 
wealtli to Filipino citizens especially small fishermen is 
set forth. So, I ask for the Committee’s kind considera- 
tion of this proposed amendment. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May I ask just one question of the pro- 
ponent of the amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. By national territorial waters, are we refer- 
ring to the territorial sea of the Philippines? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, especially the coastal waters which 
are exploited but which should be exploited by our own 
fishermen alone, by our own citizens alone. 


MR. FOZ. Are we also referring to the so-called 
archipelagic waters? 

MR. OPLE. I am not sure but I understand the speci- 
fic meaning of archipelagic waters. But if they belong to 
our territorial waters, then they are comprised by these. 

MR. FOZ. What about th^e internal waters as men- 
tioned and more or less defined in our Article on the 
National Terntory? 

undoubtedly, Mr. 


MR: FOZ. What about the waters in the sok: 
exc lustve economic zone over which, under the 
vention of the Law of the Sea, the PhUippines 
jurisdiction? 


MR. OPLE. The construction of the 200-mile econo- 
uiic zone by most authorities pertains to the wealth in 
the seabed. I think in the same degree that Filipino 
fishermen are allowed to fish in the 200-economic mile 
zone of our neighboring countries, then this same 
privilege should not be denied to the fishermen of other 
countries. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The 200-mile exclusive econo- 
mic zone is now part of the internal waters of the 
Philippines. Our base line is drawn from the farthest 
points into the sea. The line drawn extends from 
Batanes to Palawan, down to the southernmost part of 
Mindanao, following the farthest point of our territory 
into the sea. The economic zone starts from the base 
line at present. There is no question, therefore, that 
from the old meaning of these terms, the area in ques- 
tion is included within our internal waters, which is 
subject to our sovereignty. 

MR. OPLE. I want to thank Commissioner Concep- 
cion for offering this information, although this may 
differ somewhat from the meaning attributed by others 
to the 200-economic mile zone. I do not think the 200- 
mile economic zone has a one-to-one correspondence 
with our internal waters. As a matter of fact, these 
economic zones have to be negotiated with neighboring 
countries when there is an overlap of the 200-mile eco- 
nomic zones. An example is Taiwan which is separated 
from the northern cape of Luzon by just about 120 
miles, and where do we put the economic zone of the 
Philippines and of Taiwan in that respect? 

MR. CONCEPCION. That was before the adoption of 
the archipelagic doctrine but not since then. 

MR. OPLE. To the extent that Commissioner Con- 
cepcion is right, so long as an economic zone is under- 
stood to comprise part of our internal waters, then there 
is a call under this paragraph for the Philippines to 
protect these waters and their marine wealth from 
foreign intrusion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR- BENNAGEN. May we ask the proponent for the 
sake of the record as to what is encompassed by foreign 
intrusion? 

MR- OPLE. Foreign intrusion in this respect refers 
above all to fishing vessels which directly encroach on 
marine wealth that should be enjoyed exclusively by 
our fishermen. Secondly, it refers to foreign capital 
because as we can see in the last clause, the marine 
wealth in this territorial water shall be reserved to ex- 
clusive exploitation by Filipino citizens and, therefore, 
foreign capital is considered a form of intrusion once 
this is adopted. 


56 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the Gentleman have any objec- 
tion to going for the jugular by removing the phrase 
“ALSO ESTABLISH A POLICY TO” such that the 
proposed amendment would read: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT FROM FOREIGN INTRUSION...”? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I welcome the amendment which 
improves the paragraph, as a matter of fact, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


scope of this article which is meant to be an article on 
social justice, in support of social justice for fishermen 
to something like a national policy on national security 
and foreign relations. So, I want to be more modest — 
keep the idea of this protection within bounds and to an 
extent that the State, without arousing false hopes and 
expectations, can actually endeavor to carry out. And I 
feel safer when for purposes of detennining the intent 
of this Commission, we really want to confine ourselves 
to protecting the territorial waters of the Philippines. 
Maybe someday when we have a real navy and a coast 
guard capable of policing the entire length and breadth 
of the country which is twice the coastline of the 
United States, then the construction of this paragraph 
can rise to a new level; it also means that tlie State has 
a duty to protect our marine resources and the rights of 
our small fishermen from foreign intrusion in the 
territorial sea. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
missioner Davide is recognized. 


(Mr. Regalado). Com- 


MR. DAVIDE. Just for the record, I would like to 
read the Article on National Territory that the Commis- 
sion had approved. 


• ^ intention of Commissioner Ople will onl 

include the territorial waters; it would not expand t 

h.vp a w- Philippines would sti 

have junsdiction. The article reads: 


The national territory comprises the Philippine archipe- 
ago, with all the islands and waters embraced therein, and 
a 0 er territories over which the Philippines has sover- 
ei^ty or jurisdiction, consisting of its terrestrial, fluvial, 
an aerial domains, including the territorial sea, the seabed, 
t e subsoil, the insular shelves, and other submarine areas 
• waters around, between and connecting the 

IS an s of the archipelago, irrespective of their breadth and 

pensions, form part of the internal waters of the Philip- 
pmes. 


. inquire from Commissioner Ople il 

y em onal waters” he would include the territorial 
s a over which the Philippines has jurisdiction? 


MR. OPLE. I would like 
Officer. 


to say, yes, Mr. Presiding 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just ask a clarificatory 
question? We are now including areas that could be the 
subject of exploitation by commercial fishing. Would 
the Gentleman include in the definition of Filipino 
citizens corporations of which 60 percent is owned by 
Filipino citizens? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, in accordance with the provision of 
the Article on the National Economy which very soon 
will reach the plenary session. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Davide may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Just an additional question for Com- 
missioner Ople. By territorial waters, would the Gentle- 
man actually mean the internal waters of the Philippines 
as defined under the Article on National Territory 
which will not include the territorial sea? 


sh^lld rwd^*.^^‘ provision 

sentence? ^ "linute. May I please continue that 


MR. OPLE. Yes, without prejudice to any other 
section of the Constitution, raising its sights higher with 
respect to the protection of our territorial seas for 
purposes of national security. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


“y but whei 

we speak of the temtonal sea, this can extend I under 
Stand, to about 300 miles from the nearest base line 
under the archipelagic theory. This may modify th( 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words. Congress may have, 
subsequently or later, the authority to include in terri- 
torial waters the territorial sea itself? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I want to confirm that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


57 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). So, may 
we have the proposed amendment with the deletion and 
the transposition duly taken into account. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. The amend- 
ment reads: “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT FROM 
FOREIGN INTRUSION THE NATIONAL TERRITO- 
RIAL WATERS WITH THEIR MARINE WEALTH 
WHICH SHALL BE RESERVED TO EXCLUSIVE EX- 
PLOITATION BY FILIPINO CITIZENS ESPECIALLY 
SMALL FISHERMEN.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. We just want to ask some clarifica- 
tion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. As we said earlier, we are referring 
particularly to the interest or to the protection of small 
fishermen. But with the statement “to the exclusive ex- 
ploitation by Filipino citizens,” is tlie Gentleman also 
not disregarding the interest of big fishermen in this 
particular provision? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the emphasis is especially small 
fishermen. The position in which 1 see the bigger Fili- 
pino fishermen is relative to Japanese, Taiwanese and 
Korean intruders into our shores; they are the victims 
of social injustice. 

MS. NIEVA. Will the Gentleman give us one minute? 
We are trying to formulate or reformulate this in such a 
way that the social justice aspect will not be lost, as the 
Commissioner said. 


MR. BENGZON. The intent of this paragraph, 
believe, is to protect the small fisherman. 


MR. OPLE. I am absolutely at the disposal of the 
Committee. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, and the rights of the Filipino people, 
to whom the fishermen belong as a major group, to the 
exclusive use of their own marine resources that God 
has given them. 

MR. BENGZON. Then this is not really a paragraph 
that pertains to this particular Article. This should be 
a paragraph that pertains to the Article on the National 
Economy because it is wider in its scope. 

MR. OPLE. It does pertain, Mr. Presiding Officer, to 
social justice. It pertains to the rights of small fisher- 
men, but within the context of a policy to reserve the 
marine wealth of our own territorial waters, especially 
of our internal waters, to exclusive exploitation by 
Filipino citizens; meaning, in the majority of cases, 
Filipino fishermen. 


MR. BENGZON. Would the Gentleman have any 
objections if we defer this until we discuss the Article 
on the National Economy? Perhaps we could include 
this concept on the Article on the National Economy? 


MR. OPLE I think this is appropriately located as 

is. I do not thmk a nationalistic doHp., , ^ 

„+ihip with th<» policy would be mcor 

patible with the nghts of small fishermen esnecial 

when we are thmking of conserving thesreasilvTeplet 
tesources for the use and en^oyZnt 7 

men and of our own people. So, I do not believe it mu 
wait for another committee, dealing with nation 
patnmony, to send its report to this Committee befoi 
we act on this provision which has been under debai 
since yesterday. 


MS. QUESADA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask 
some clarificatory questions of Commissioner Ople? 


MS. NIEVA. I think we are more concerned here 
with the protection of the rights of the small fishermen 
from foreign intrusion. We believe that the parts about 
“exclusive exploitation by Filipino citizens” belong 
rightly to the Article on the National Economy. How- 
ever, for social justice, we agree that the rights of the 
small fishermen should be protected from foreign intru- 
sion. So, we are trying to reformulate. 

MR. MONSOD. In effect what we are saying is that 
the marginal fishermen have certain traditional areas 
where they fish. These areas are not necessarily the 
areas that large-scale corporations can fish in. And, if we 
get the Commissioner’s original intent, areas v/hich are 
the traditional fishing grounds of marginal fishermen 
should be protected. 

With respect to the general principle of exclusive use 
of marine and fishing resources in territorial waters, that 
might be more appropriate in the Article on the National 
Economy. So, if we can insert a phrase regarding mar- 
ginal fishermen in the same section, we may serve the 
Commissioner’s purpose and then transpose the bigger 
paragraph in the Article on the National Economy 
section. 

MR. OPLE. That is precisely my point, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, that there is a full-bodied context to the rights 
of the small fishermen in this paragraph. Although we 
try to distinguish here between the small fishermen and 
the bigger fishermen, we might lose sight of a com- 
munity of interest between them in the sense that they 
have to share the same marine resources that should be 
reserved to the exclusive enjoyment of Filipino citizens, 
especially fishermen, and more especially, the small 
fishermen. What I am saying is that if we had inserted in 


58 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


the previous section the objectives of protection and 
conservation and development of our marine resources, 

I see no reason why we cannot transpose the same prin- 
ciple in a more nationalistic context where there is a 
unity of interest between the small fishermen and the 
big fishermen and the Filipino people as a whole. 

May I call your attention to the fact that the deep-sea , 
fishing fleets of the Philippines are just about gone. 
They cannot compete with Taiwanese, Korean and 
Japanese fishing operators who routinely, habitually, 
and with total impunity intrude into our waters, deplet- 
ing the marine resources that should be reserved to the 
exclusive exploitation and enjoyment of the Filipino 
people. So, why do we have to truncate this paragraph, 
separate the class context from the national context, 
just because we have to satisfy some needs or standards 
of division between the Committee on the National Eco- 
nomy and the Committee on Social Justice? I believe 
that a great part of the contextual meaning intended for 
this paragraph is lost. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
Committee is still determining the proper situs for this 
^endment. Let us hear from Commissioner Rigos 
because his amendment may have a bearing on this. 

REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not detect 
any strong objection of the Committee to this proposed 
amendment. Perhaps, we can act on this proposed 
amendment with the understanding that should the 
tyle Committee find that it belongs more properly to 
another article, that said Committee be given the 
privilege to transfer it. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioncr Sarmicnto is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I personally believe that this 
section should not express the unified interest of small 
and big fishermen. I think this section should only per- 
tain to small fishermen. May I be allowed to explain 
briefly? 

Our small fishermen are complaining against big 
fishermen We have Filipino big fishermen who have 
modern fishmg technology with sonars, radars and 
n track down fish at the expense of 

small fishermen^ As a matter of fact, fishermen from 
San Sebastmn, Samar expressed that there are big fish- 
ing capitalists who are subdividing sea areas among 
themselves and are collecting tributes from fishermen 
who trespass. In Lilanga Lake, Zambales - again, this 
pertains to Filipino big fishermen - there are rich busi- 
nessmen who have been appropriating for themselves 
large portions of Lilanga Lake to develop into fish- 
ponds. The lake is 20 hectares wide in San Roque, 


Lilanga, Zambales. So, I personally believe that this 
section should not express the' unified interests of two 
sectors — small and big fishermen. I think this should 
express the interest of small, marginal fishermen. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am for conserving 
time and for conserving the efforts that have already 
been exerted especially on this subject by the Committee 
which has been working hard the whole day. If it needs 
this new line of thought that there should be no bond 
of unity between one upper crust and one lower crust of 
the same fishermen sector in Filipino society tor pur- 
poses of the Article on Social Justice, I would be amena- 
ble right now to saying that this protection from foreign 
intrusion shall pertain mainly to the rights of the small 
fishermen so that the provision will read: “The State 
shall protect FROM FOREIGN INTRUSION THE 
NATIONAL TERRITORIAL WATERS WITH THEIR 
MARINE WEALTH WHICH SHALL BE RESERVED 
PRINCIPALLY TO THE USE AND ENJOYMENT OF 
SMALL FISHERMEN.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. If incidentally, this benefits the richer 
fishermen, then that is completely incidental. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent agree to some 
amendments without prejudice to introducing in the 
proper Article on the National Economy and Patrimony 
the bigger concept? If the intention is just to harmonize 
this totally for social justice, the proposed amendment 
would read as follows: after “resources,” insert a 
comma (,) and the following: INCLUDING PROTEC- 
TION AGAINST INTRUSION BY FOREIGN IN- 
TERESTS IN THE USE AND ENJOYMENT THERE- 
OF. 

So, that would leave the matter completely to the 
marginal fishermen. But it would also mean protection 
not only of the fishermen but also of the marine and 
fishing resources against intrusion by foreign interests in 
the use and enjoyment thereof. 

I used the word “interest” so it will qualify all kinds 
of foreign intrusion, whether it would be by a capitalist 
or whether it would be by a dummy. I wonder if that 
would be acceptable to the Committee. But we leave 
the matter of general principle on reserving these fishing 
and marine resources to Filipino citizens only in the 
Article on the National Economy and the Patrimony of 
the nation. 

MR. OPLE. Before I yield on this point, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, and I am so concerned that the Commission 
should now take a well-earned rest at the end of a very 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


59 


tough and exhilarating day, may I know whether the 
Chairman of tlie National Patrimony Committee who is 
here will agree to a clause or a sentence when the 
patrimony amendment reaches the floor that will em- 
body this concept of the exclusive exploitation by 
Filipino citizens of our own marine resources? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Villegas is recognized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. In fact, 
it fits very well into one of the articles. 

MR. OPLE. On that basis then, I am receptive to the 
Davide amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer, unless it clut- 
ters up unduly this well-sculptured preceding sentence. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. We would like to sleep on this thing 
but we would like to suggest that perhaps, we can draft 
something that might express the concern of small 
fishermen in the seashores that was referred to by Com- 
missioner Sarmiento if we say: “THE STATE SHALL 
PROTECT THE TRADITIONAL FISHING GROUNDS 
OF MUNICIPAL FISHERMEN FROM THE INTRU- 
SION OF FOREIGN FISHING VESSELS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. That would not convey the fullness of 
the idea. It is not just shipping vessels but foreign corpo- 
rations, partnerships or associations or fishermen fishing 
in these areas. It is not intrusion by the use of vessels 
passing through or over it. 

MR. MONSOD. The intrusion of foreign interests. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is it. So, it is just to continue the 
original wording. After “resources,” add a comma (,) 
and the following: INCLUDING PROTECTION 

against INTRUSION BY FOREIGN INTERESTS IN 
THE USE AND ENJOYMENT THEREOF, meaning, the 
marine and fishing resources. 

MR. OPLE. Will Commissioner Davide consider an 
alternative amendment which I would like to propose 
on behalf of Commissioner Romulo and myself, as well 
as Commissioner Davide, if he is willing to associate 
with a somewhat amended version of his version? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. The amendment will read: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT THE SMALL FISHERMEN IN THE 


NATIONAL TERRITORIAL WATERS. THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT THE SMALL FISHERMEN FROM 
FOREIGN INTRUSION.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, the idea of my 
proposal is to widen the umbrella of the protection. It is 
not only protection of the interest of tlie marginal 
fishermen but also of the resources themselves. 

MR. BENGZON. Then that is not social justice any 
more. 

MR. MONSOD. That would be national economy. 

MR. BENGZON. That is already national territory'. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, it is not, because these natural 
resources are reserved for the marginal fishermen. 

MR. BENGZON. Not only for marginal fishermen. 

MR. DAVIDE. Not necessarily the marginal fisher- 
men. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I call the at- 
tention of Commissioner Davide once again to this 
formulation: “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT THE 
SMALL FISHERMEN IN THE NATIONAL TERRI- 
TORIAL WATERS FROM FOREIGN INTRUSION.” 
By construction, foreign intrusion refers to foreign 
fishing vessels with their superior equipment, and also to 
foreign capital or its agents. 

MR DAVIDE. I would propose an amendment: 
against FOREIGN INTERESTS. 


MR. OPLE. The amendment is accepted, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. In its latest permutation may I read the 
amendment, as amended: “THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TECT THE SMALL FISHERMEN FROM THE INTRU- 
SION OF FOREIGN INTERESTS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. AGAINST FOREIGN INTERESTS. 

MR. OPLE. “AGAINST FOREIGN INTERESTS.” 
But that sounds slightly xenophobic. In a Constitution, 
one has to look for a buffer between intrusion and 
interests. 

MR. LERUM. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask a ques- 
tion. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


60 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 7, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). Com- 
missioner Monsod is>recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. May we request an adjournment of 
the session so that each of us can go back and draft a 
proposal along the same lines. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I endorse the proposal, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Regalado). The 
consideration is deferred and the session is adjourned 
until 9:30 a.m. tomorrow. 

It was 7:23 p.m. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


61 


R.C.C. NO. 51 
Friday, August 8, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:45 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is ealled to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Eveybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for tiie Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Gregorio J. Tingson. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. TINGSON. Our dear loving Heavenly Father, we 
realize only too well that “unless the Lord builds the 
house, they labor in vain who build it." 

We are mandated to build a charter for our country 
that will stand the test of time and the changing tempers 
of men. We need wisdom, dear Lord, to do this task for 
we are but men with finite understanding and limited 
knowledge. 

We confess that we do not have the wisdom of a 
Solomon, the wit and brilliance of an Aristotle, the deep 
insight of Jose Rizal, nor the homespun zing of a Will 
Rogers. But with the evcr-availablc aid of the Holy 
Spirit, we now humbly beseech Thee not for tasks equal 
to our power but for power equal to our heavy task. 

Father in heaven, we are humbled by the words of 
our Sublime Paralytic: 

No matter how the government tries to renew itself, all 
of its efforts would amount to naught if there would be no 
corresponding change in the hearts of the people. 

Help us, dear Lord, to come up with a Constitution 
that will, in essence, continually remind our people of 
the timely words of the Prophet: 

If My people, who are called by My name, wUl humble 
themselves and pray and seek My face and turn from their 
wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven and will forgive 
their sin and will heal their land. 

♦Appeared after the roll call 


Help us to finish our new fundamental law in Thine 
own good time as we 48 Commissioners bear in mind 
that in things major we should have unity; in things 
minor, liberty; but in all things always to demonstrate 
charity. 

We adore Your Holy Name; we praise You for what 
You have done in and through us; and we petition Thee, 
loving Heavenly Father, for a greater measure of Your 
instruction, inspiration and sanctification. 

This is our individual and collective prayer in the 
wonderful and matchless name of our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present* 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present* 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Tan 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Absent 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas 

. . Present* 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Uka 


Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Monsod 

. Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 32 Members responded to the call. 


62 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence 
of a quorum. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

Tffi PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
Ine Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

TTe Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Busmess. 

reference of business 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications and Committee Reports, the President 
making the corresponding references: 


sion of the writ of habeas corpus shall need confirma- 
tion of the legislature, and the nationalization of 
industries and the exploitation of natural resources. 

(Communication No. 493 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Position paper of the Filipino-American Chamber of 
Commerce, P.O. Box 7258, San Francisco, California, 
94120, U.S.A., signed by its President, Mr. Juan G. 
Collas, Jr., suggesting among others that the new Consti- 
tution shall embody some features that can attract 
foreign capital, that regulation of foreign capital shall 
be left to legislation, and that FUipinos be allowed dual 
citizenship. 

(Communication No. 494 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Letter from Mr. Norberto Navarro Caparas of 555 Kaun- 
laran Street, Barangay Commonwealth, Quezon City, 
proposing an amendment to Section 1 1 of the Proposed 
Amendment to the Article on Social Justice, to wit: IN 
APPROPRIATE CASES, LANDS OWNED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT BUT WHICH HAVE ALREADY 
BEEN CONVERTED BY OCCUPANTS INTO A 
VIABLE COMMUNITY SHALL BE DONATED TO 
THEM SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS IN A LAW TO BE 
ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE. 

(Communication No. 495 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 


To the Steering Committee. 


To the Steering Committee. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

^tter from Mr. Jovito A. Avancena of 25 Asteroid, Bel 
Air, Makati, Metro Manila, and three hundred ninety 
ot ers with their respective addresses, seeking the in- 
cusion in the Constitution of a provision obliging the 
State to protect the life of the unborn from the moment 
of conception. 

(Communication No. 491 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Tomas S. Tuazon of Motrico, La 

Hrh anriTh Protection of the law fo 

rich and the poor to promote national unity 

(^Communication No. 492 - Constitutional Commi 
To the Committee on Social Justice. 


Communication from Mr. Pelagio B. Estopia, proposing 
a parliamentary form of government with a bicameral 
legislature, that declaration of martial law and suspen- 


Letter from Mr. Edmundo A. Damatac of Lallo, Caga- 
yan, advocating that the incumbent President and Vice- 
President be given the chance to serve the six-year term 
for which they have been elected. 

(Communication No. 496 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 


Communication jointly submitted by the Bagong Alyan- 
sang Makabayan, Society of Professionals for the Ad- 
vancement of Democracy, League of Filipino Students, 
Kapunungan san mag uuma sa Masbate, Simbahang 
Katoliko sa Barangay, Kabataan para sa Demokrasya at 
Nasyonalismo, and Masbate People’s Organization, all in 
Masbate, suggesting among others the following: ( 1 ) re- 
moval of the U.S. military bases in the Philippines, 
(2) abrogation of the U.S.-R.P. Mutual Defense Treaty, 
Military Assistance Agreement, R.P.-Japan Treaty of 
Amity, Commerce and Navigation, (3) right to strike 
and collective bargaining, and (4) creation of a human 
rights commission. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


63 


(Communication No. 497 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Cesar P. Nimez of Suba. Lilo-an, Cebu, 
transmitting a joint resolution adopted by various civic 
associations and organizations of Lilo-an, Cebu, con- 
taining among others the following proposals: (1) all 
title/lease contract documents of foreshore lands issued 
during the Marcos regime be revoked or declared null 
and void; (2) all foreshore land must be turned over to 
the municipal government where they are situated; and 
(3) all foreshore lands cannot be leased/titled for busi- 
ness purposes. 

(Communication No. 498 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Mr. Roberto Lazaro of Mandaluyong, 
Metro Manila, advocating that the Philippines be one of 
the regular states of the United States. 

(Communication No. 499 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

COMMITTEE REPORTS 

Committee Report No. 35 submitted by the Committee 
on the Legislative re Proposed Resolution No. 411 and 
Proposed Resolution No. 428 informing the Com- 
mission of their incorporation in Committee Report 
No. 22 on the Article on the Legislative Department, as 
reported out on July 7, 1986. 

To the Archives. 

Committee Report No. 36 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 537, prepared by the Committee on Preamble, 
National Territory, and Declaration of Principles, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE DECLARATION OF 
PRINCIPLES, 

recommending its approval. 

Sponsored by Hon. Davide, Jr., Nolledo, Sarmiento, 
Tingson, Bengzon, Jr., Aquino, de los Reyes, Jr., Rigos, 
Rosario Braid, Quesada, de Castro, Nieva, Villacorta, 
Rama, Bacani, Colayco, Calderon, Suarez, Ople, Gascon, 
Villegas, Rosales, Azcuna, Foz and Garcia. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. ROMULO. I move that we continue tlie con- 
sideration of Committee Report No. 34 on Proposed 
Resolution No. 534. We are still in tlie period of amend- 
ments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of the Com- 
mittee will please occupy the front table. 

At this juncture, may we acknowledge the presence 
of a good number of students from Maryknoll College, 
St. Scholastica’s College, St. Joseph’s (Tollege and St. 
Bridget’s College. So, we welcome all these young 
people who have come to see our proceedings and to 
show their interest in the documents that we are draft- 
ing for our people. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. When we adjourned yesterday, we 
were in Section 8 and Commissioner Ople was discussing 
his amendment. Inasmuch as he is not here, may I ask 
the Committee if they are willing to defer consideration 
of Section 8 and move to Section 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
Are we ready to proceed to Section 9? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we are. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. So, Madam President, may 1 ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized for his amendments 
on Section 9. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, before we move 
on to Section 9, could we just have some clarifications 
on Section 8? Is Commissioner Ople here? 

THE PRESIDENT. He is not yet heie. So, we will 
defer it. 

MS. QUESADA. My concern. Madam President, is 
about a member ol the fishing -industry called the 
kasama or the equivalent of the tenant. They are not 


64 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


covered in the provision on the preferential rights given 
to fishermen who we refer to oftentimes as the small 
boat owners. Actually, we are leaving out a particular 
sector which, 1 understand, composes one of the largest 
groups of this sector. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will take that up when Com- 
missioner Ople is here. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. We actually have a proposed sentence 
there which will be an amendment to the amendment 
of Commissioner Ople. We are going to have it typed 
and distributed so that by the time he arrives, we can 
consider it. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, can we then proceed to 
Section 9? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

Q amendment is only to transfer Section 

0 the Article on the National Economy and Patri- 
mony which contains the general constitutional man- 
a es or directives affecting all natural resources in- 
cu mg agricultural, fishing and marine resources 
^ ject, of course, to the provisions on this particulai 
Article. But since this would involve the main thrusi 
toward industrialization, I think the proper situs foi 

ection 9 is the Article on the National Economy anc 
Patrimony. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, 
ni^^^ president. Commissioner Bennagen is recog 

MR. bennagen. I object to the deletion of Sectioi 


MR. DAVIDE. This is not a deletion but merelv 
transfer to another Article. merely 


MR. BENNAGEN. But it *• 

Article on Social Justice. 


MR. DAVIDE. Not from the Constitution. 
MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. It is still in the Constitution. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I am interested in the provision as 
part of the Article on Social Justice for tlie important 
reason that agrarian reform as well as the other reforms 
that have to be done in other areas, such as fishing and 
marine resources, should be done in relation to the 
complementary processes of industrialization. We do 
not want to give the impression that the agrarian reform 
program is the terminal act. We want Congress to look 
at this as a part of the long-range process that ultimately 
would lead to some kind of industrialization without 
suggesting the type of industrialization that shall take 
place. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would not be the effect. Madam 
President, because I am sure that the Committee on 
National Economy and Patrimony will have to consider 
all these. So, an integrated development plan would 
necessarily be under the Article on National Econoiny 
and Patrimony, but I am sure it will take into account 
the provisions of social justice. 

MR. BENNAGEN. We have already dropped the word 
“integrated” partly because of its unsavory history. 

MR. DAVIDE. Even so, may I request that Commis- 
sioner Villegas, who is Chainnan of the Committee on 
National Economy and Patrimony, be recognized for a 
particular opinion on this matter? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, thank you. 

As I said during the period of interpellations, 
the section is really misplaced in the Article on 
Justice because the very question of balance . 

agriculture, industry and other sectors is a ^ 

question that has to be addressed by a planning ® 
or the legislature at a very specific moment ot _ 
I do not think that it is a question of justice or . 

being committed. That is why, as I mentioned, . 

1 of the Article on the National Economy an 
mony states the following: 

The State shall develop a self-reliant and independent 
national economy. The goals of the national economy are 
more equitable distribution of income and wealth, full em 
ployment of humane, physical and technological resources, 
and sustained increase in the amount of goods and services 
produced by the nation for the benefit of the Filipiao 
people. 

So, that addresses already the issue of whether or not 
we will produce goods for the basic needs of the 
pie. It is stated very clearly that the goods, whether ey 
be agricultural or industrial, should be produced or le 
benefit of the Filipino people, with priority to e 
welfare of the poor. In fact, that is very explicitly stated 
here. In the attainment of these goals, all economic 
sectors shall be given optimum opportunity to develop. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


65 


and a broader ownership base of private enterprises shall 
be encouraged. So, the very question of how to develop 
the various sectors is already addressed in this Section 1 
of the Article. Tliat is why Section 9 is misplaced in the 
Article on Social Justice. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I do not think that the section 
just read refers to the idea of linking the development 
of agriculture, fishing and marine resources, specifically 
with the idea of the complementary process of indus- 
trialization. No reference was made to the concept of 
a balanced agricultural and industrial development. 
That is not the intent. We are merely suggesting that in 
the process of domg reforms in agriculture, fishing and 
marine resources, we should not forget the objective of 
meeting the basic needs of the people, and eventually 
also the process of industrialization. It has happened 
that in the process of developing agriculture, fishing 
and marine resources, the primary consideration has 
been to respond to the demands of the external market 
at the expense of meeting basic needs such as food. And 
so, we are saying that it is a matter of social justice that 
in the process of agricultural, fishing and marine 
development, we should respond to the domestic needs 
of consumption rather than the needs of the export 
market. 

We are saying that the proceeds from this develop- 
ment, as well as the proceeds from export, should be 
plowed back to agriculture and industry. But we are not 
suggesting a kind of balanced agro-industrial develop- 
ment because we foresee the time that the development 
will take on a different course, even including the 
tertiary sector. 


has something like 10, 15, 20 or even 50 hectares and 
he has five, seven or eight children? Eventually, we end 
up with very small plots that are no longer productive. 

So, we are saying tliat if agrarian reform is accom- 
panied by industrialization, the labor surplus would 
be absorbed by the industrial sector and would not 
necessarily result in fragmenting the already fragmented 
lands. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I always have tlie impression that 
the body is very clear that the agrarian reform program 
is not in any way incompatible with industrialization. 
On the contrary, a lot of people are talking about how 
former landowners who are now going to receive just 
compensation can spend their money on starting indus- 
tries and other nonagricultural activities. I think that 
was very, very clear in tlie minds of everyone. So, I 
really do not see any danger in having a section on 
agrarian refonn which would give the impression that 
we are not interested also in industrialization. I do not 
see the need to make that linkage explicit. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Our feeling is that it is necessary 
to put that here as a whole package. So, maybe we can 
put that to a vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Before we put it to a vote, Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. But a very explicit statement was 
already made, that all goods produced in the nation 
shall be for the benefit of the Filipino people. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, but this could only refer to 
agricultural goods and not industrial goods. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, “goods” mean all kinds of 
goods. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No, but we want a specific linkage 
of the development programs in agricultural, fishing 
and marine resources to meet our basic needs, export 
needs and the need for industrialization. What is im- 
portant is not to give the impression that agrarian 
reform is a terminal act. Without this provision, pending 
the deliberation on the Ople proposal linking agrarian 
reform to industrial development, one gets the im- 
pression. that we are only interested in agrarian reform. 
The history of agrarian reform all over the world tells 
us that the only successful agrarian reforms were linked 
with industrialization. 

I think that also answers the apprehensions of many 
of us with respect to inheritance. For instance, the 
question has been raised that what happens if one only 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, should 
Section 9 were to remain in the Article on Social 
Justice, may I offer an amendment which will read: 
THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE THE DEVELOP- 
MENT OF AGRICULTURAL, FISHING AND 
MARINE RESOURCES TO MEET THE BASIC NEEDS 
OF THE PEOPLE PARTICULARLY THE SUB- 
SISTENCE SECTORS AND THE PROMOTION OF 
SMALL- AND MEDIUM-SCALE ENTERPRISES TO 
ACHIEVE THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OBJECTIVE 
OF THE COUNTRY. 


medium-scaie enterpnses” from Section 10 and als 
to focus on the miportance of the so<alled “altemativ 
economy or ‘underground economy” of the unde 
pnvileged subsistence sectors. 


mix. IVWIVIULU. So, Madam President mav I ask that 
we vote on the Davide amendment first? ’ 

DavwLmend^^^^r *o resolve the 

to keen Serb ‘f the body resolves 

amendLnt T ^ the Article on Social Justice, the 

. . ® Commissioner Rosario Braid can be 

taken up. 


66 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


So, are we now ready to vote on the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide? Commissioner Davide 
seeks to transpose Section 9 of the Article on Social 
Justice to the Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony. The reasons have been explained particularly by 
Commissioner Villegas who is the Chairman of the 
Committee on National Economy and Patrimony. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Davide with respect 
to Section 9 which has been accepted by the Commit- 
tee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment 
is approved. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, we are willing 
to transpose Section 9 to the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony provided the idea already 
expressed in Section 1 of the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony will be so expanded as to 
accommodate the spirit of Section 9, of course, on the 
assumption that the Ople amendment will also be 
considered part of the Article since that takes care of 
the idea of linking agrarian reform with industrialization 
in a very precise sense. 

MR. ROMULO. I ask that Commissioner Villegas 
be recognized. Madam President. 

President, commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, I think it can be incorporated 
m Section 1 and we will welcome specific amendments 
when the occasion arises. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Committee on Social 
Justice can prepare its recommendation as to how the 
same w be drafted. How about the statement regard- 
ing Commissioner Ople’s amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 


. MONSOD. We have also discussed with Commii 
sioner Ople the transposition of certain ideas introduce 
m le Article on Social Justice which are more apprc 
pnate m the Article on National Economy and Patr 
mony. And I think he is amenable to that provide 
a some ideas are incorporated in the Article o 
,, specifically refer to marginal < 

sma ishermen. So, that has already been discusse 
among the proponents. 

of manifestation the 

Section 9 to^ the [aspect to the transposition « 

should be considered wi,hd"aw„ 

MR. DAVIDE. No, it was accepted by the Cor 
mittee. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, will Commissioner 
Ople manifest that he agrees with the statement of tlie 
Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I do manifest my concurrence to the Committee s 
proposal to transfer to the Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony the national context with respect to the 
exclusive reservation for the exploitation of our marine 
wealth by Filipino citizens especially the small fisher- 
men. But ahead of that. Madam President, if I am now 
in the appropriate place, in behalf of the Committee 
which has indicated its prior agreement, I would like 
to read a modified amendment of Section 8. H 
actually a joint formulation of the Committee and 
the proponent. After the clause “protection, develop- 
ment and conservation of such resources,” add tl"^ 
following: THE PROTECTION SHALL EXTEND TO 
THE OFFSHORE FISHING GROUNDS OF SMALL 
FISHERMEN FROM FOREIGN INTRUSION. 

With respect to the words “municipal fisherrnei 
and after taking counsel with Commissioner Rodrigo, 
we felt that SMALL FISHERMEN would be more 
appropriate because there are parts of the country, 
for example, in Bulacan, which might be understoo 
by municipal fishermen to refer to the “Propios or 
the municipal fishponds owned by the municipa 
governments for their income. 

So, if the Committee accepts that change, I would 
submit it. Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, the Committee accepts. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Point of clarification. Madam 
President. In Section 8, we used the term “marginal 
fishermen”; now we are using “small fishermen.” 
Yesterday, I made a reservation to look into the 
meaning of “marginal.” If the honorable President will 
allow me, I am ready to explain this. 


THE PRESIDENT. Was it accepted by the Commit- THE PRESIDENT. May we know the result of the 
tee? Commissioner’s research? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


67 


MR. DE CASTRO. It is not exactly a research. It is 
just getting the full meaning of “marginal” which was 
used as an adjective to “fishermen.” When we say 
“marginal,” we mean a margin close to the hmit; and 
more, particularly, in business it is referred to as 
marginal profit or marginal cost. But if 1 were to get the 
thinking is that the meaning of “marginal” is one living 
almost within the margin of the standard of living, then 
because if it is used as an adjective, such as in “marginal 
fisherman,” he could be a fishennan today but a laborer 
tomorrow because he is within the margin of being a 
fisherman or something else. So, if tlie Committee’s 
thinking is that tlie meaning of marghial is one Uving 
almost within the margin of the standard of livmg, then 
perhaps it may be used. My objection is the use of 
“small fishermen” and “margin^ fishermen” in the 
same section. I suggest that the Committee use the 
same term in this section. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner OpIe 
say? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in the interest of style, 
I think we need not be bound to one uniform word 
that is repeated everytime the concept of a small fisher- 
man or a marginal one must be reflected. If Commis- 
sioner de Castro considers “small fishermen” as being 
synonymous with “marginal fishermen,” then I think 
the problem will not arise. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

We will just address a few clarificatory questions 
to the Honorable Ople. 

When we speak of “marginal,” as correctly pointed 
out by the Honorable de Castro, it connotes the mean- 
ing of a standard of living; and when we speak of 
“small,” we are referring to size. Upon the other hand, 
when we speak of “municipal,” we are thinking in 
terms of a unit. That is why, for purposes of the record, 
it is necessary to give meaningful interpretations to 
these three terms as they are applied in the provisions 
of the Article on Social Justice, because the words 
“marginal” and “small” may be interchangeable but 
not in connection with “municipal.” Is my under- 
standing of the differentiation among these three terms 
correct? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think, if we were to 
look for the widest common denominator to all of these 
modifiers of “fishermen” - “marginal” in the sense that 
he stands at the very margin of existence, he stands on 
the very edge of life referring to his income and the 


needs of his family; and then the concept of “municipal 
fisherman” which has all the jurisprudential support 
because this is really the technical term, except that this 
is geography-bound — then the common denominator 
would be “small fishermen.” It is in that sense that this 
word is proposed to be used in the amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, is the Commis- 
sioner suggesting that we employ the term “small”? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, when we talk of 
the word “marginal,” it is quite clear that everyone is 
thinking not of the act of fishing but the economic 
situation of the fisherman. I think that is a common 
understanding. As an alternative, the phrase “sub- 
sistence fisherman,” which was earlier suggested by 
Commissioner Rosario Braid, is completely unam- 
biguous. It is understood that one is referring to what 
Commissioner Natividad mentioned as “isang kahig, 
isang tuka.” 

MR. OPLE. I am willing to accept the amendment. 
Madam President, so that the word “subsistence” 
becomes the common denominator that I had spoken 
of earlier. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MS. NIEVA. As long as the small fishermen are 
accorded protection, we would abide by that word 
“subsistence.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that is accepted. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 

recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would Commissioner Ople 
yield to a question on his amendment on Section 8? 
Would this include protection from commercial fisher- 
men in terms of complying with the seven-kilometer 
ban on commercial vessels? There is an existing ban 
on commercial vessels within seven kilometers from 
the shoreline. 

MR. OPLE. The seven-kilometer ban is an ad- 
ministrative law that more or less fixed an arbitrary 


68 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


legal distance from the shoreline. Although my under- 
standing of the seven-kilometer ban from the shore is 
that tliis is flexible because the coastlines of the country 
are not uniform in terms of the appropriateness of a 
seven-kilometer distance, the assumption is that in many 
cases, the fishing grounds within seven kilometers are 
most accessible to the small, municipal or marginal or 
subsistence fishermen and that, therefore, no heavy 
trawlers, whether Filipino or foreign, should be allowed 
to fish in those waters. In this respect, I am not sure 
that commercial fishing vessels of Filipino citizens are 
banned. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


by changing the word “from” to AGAINST. I was 
thinking it might be more emphatic. So, it would read: 
“AGAINST foreign intrusion.” 

MR. OPLE. I will have no objection, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote on this 
particular amendment? 

MS. NIEVA. We are ready now for the voting. 


BISHOP BACANI. May I ask Commissioner Ople if 
his intent is really not to protect small fishermen even 
though they may not be subsistence fishermen? For 
example, m the case he mentioned in Zambales, I have 
been acquam ted with them having worked there. There 
are ishermen who are not subsistence fishermen in the 
sense that they are not “isang kahig, isang tuka.” They 
can be rather prosperous, and yet they would still need 
k intrusion which the Gentleman 

interest 5 ^ not be looking after the 

who wniiiH h portion of our Fhipino population 
intmsion u/ ^ io subsistence level if foreign 

thev arp allowed to continue. At present, because 

level yet ^ ^ ° ^ subsistence 

ople Madam President, the phrase “subsistence 
4. ^^nnld be used Uberally in the sense that it 
restricted to the poorest fishermen who 
npr,-^” -f existence day to day and who will 

mkf V ^ tomorrow. I think it is a 

liifp iK^ -7 io many of our fishermen in places 

a, Zambales the idea that they are rich fishermen, 
e are a king about varying degrees of self-sufficiency. 

commercial or industrial nabobs in Iba, 
a es. Some fishermen may be a little bit more 
oth&Ts, but by the standard of the 
sktA« ®°™”'®^‘^ial fishing vessels, they are all sub- 
k 5iim^ cnnen. And so, the intent of the proposal 

artnai ^ P®’^‘r°*ripassing with respect to real and 
actual nshemen m the area who fish for a liviug. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Ople and the 
others, which was accepted by the Committee? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, just for clarity. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. When we use the word “sub- 
sistence,” as a logical process, we also protect the in- 
terests of the small fishermen and this protection is not 
excluded by the use of the word “subsistence,” which 
we should look at as small but through a kind of socio- 
logical and historical process, could be progressive but 
still small in relation to an ever-increasing scale ot 
production. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. And we do not intend to penalize 
them for their efficiency and success. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And so, I think it was in that context 
that I accepted the explanation of Commissioner Bacani 
earlier. 

MR. BENNAGEN. It is also the sense that we should 
give the vvord “marginal” a sociological and historical 
process. What is marginal at some point could be 
progressive at a future time but still marginal. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it is in that relative sense that we 
deliberately employ the words “subsistence fishermen.” 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I wonder if Commissioner Ople THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
or the Committee will accept the perfecting amendment nized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


69 


BISHOP BACANI. In relation to the use of whatever 
word, our Chairman, while we were discussing briefly, 
pointed out that this does not mean tliat we will not 
protect the other fishermen as well. We are just em- 
phasizing that we will protect the subsistence fishermen 
and, in the process, protect the interest of Filipino 
fishermen as well. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, that consequence follows, Madam 
President. 

MR. ROMULO. Can we have the amendment before 
we vote, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Will the Chairman please 
read the sentence. 

MS. NIEVA. Tlie sentence will read: THE PRO- 
TECTION SHALL EXTEND TO THE OFFSHORE 
FISHING GROUNDS OF SUBSISTENCE FISHER- 
MEN AGAINST FOREIGN INTRUSION. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

Can we now proceed to vote on the entire Section 8? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there are still two 
registered speakers for amendments on Section 8. I ask 
that Commissioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, relative to the 
statement of Commissioner Ople that the word 
“municip3l which has a technical meaning cannot be 
understood or can be misunderstood by our common 
people, I propose the following amendment on line 4, 
on the phrase “particularly municipal fishing grounds”: 
delete the word “municipal” and m lieu thereof insert 
COMMUNAL; after “grounds,” delete the period (.) 
and add FOR SMALL FISHERMEN, so that that 
phrase would read: “particularly COMMUNAL fishing 
grounds FOR SMALL FISHERMEN.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We just want to ask Commissioner 
Rodrigo that if one were to read the entire first part, 
would there be a redundancy? We are talking about the 
protection of the rights of subsistence fishermen 
especially those from local communities to the pre- 
ferential use of the communal marine and fishing 
resources, both inland and offshore, and now we will 


also say “particularly . . .” What is the word, Madam 
President? 

MR. RODRIGO. COMMUNAL. I wiU have no objec- 
tion. 

MR. MONSOD. Would it be repetitive? 

MR. RODRIGO. My only objection here is the use of 
the word “municipal ” because “municipal fishing 
grounds” can be misunderstood. As Commissioner Ople 
has said, in my home province of Bulacan, his home- 
town, the Municipality of Hagonoy, owns fishponds. I 
know that the Municipality of Paombong also owns 
fishponds. I know that the Municipality of Paombong 
also owns fishponds called “Propios.” And so, when 
fishermen or people in Bulacan read “municipal fishing 
grounds,” they will think that these refer to fishponds 
owned by the municipality, which is not the case. 

MR. MONSOD. That is true. 

MR. RODRIGO. But if the Committee will agree to 
the deletion of the whole phrase, I will have no objec- 
tion. 

MR. MONSOD. We think we see the problem there. 
May we ask Commissioner Ople, from whom this came 
from in the first place — the other day when he wanted 
to make particular mention of municipal fishing grounds 
— whether the use of the words “the communal marine 
and fishing resources” in the previous line already 
covered the intention he had the other day? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I do not think there is any intention 
to refer to the municipal “Propios” of the coastal towns 
of Bulacan, Madam President. On the point raised by 
Commissioner Rodrigo, the concern is really about the 
popular perception of what will mean in some parts of 
the country, including Bulacan, although I would like to 
assure Commissioner Rodrigo that this phenomenon 
known as the municipal “Propios” so far, according to 
my best knowledge, is still unique to the coastal towns 
of Bulacan, meaning, this is an innovative municipal 
income scheme which is not yet shared in other parts of 
the country. So, if there is any danger of popular mis- 
understanding, it will be confined to those towns in 
Bulacan that Commissioner Rodrigo has earlier 

enumerated. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the Committee intend to 
delete the whole phrase “particularly municipal fishing 
grounds”? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, we are asking this clarificatory 
question. If the words “communal marine and fishing 
resources, both inland and offshore” already would 
include the idea of municipal fishing grounds, then this 


70 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8. 1986 


particular phrase may be deleted to avoid misunder- 
standing. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I think so, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, I modify my amendment to 
delete the phrase “particularly municipal fishing 
grounds.” 


MS. NIEVA. The Committee accepts. 


MR. OPLE. My only difficulty, Madam President, is 
that if the term “municipal fishermen ” which has a 
very rich legal foundation in jurisprudence, it being the 
precise legal term, is encountered elsewhere in the 
Constitution, will Commissioner Rodrigo still raise the 
same concern and anxiety? 


MR. RODRIGO. We understand the technical mean- 
ing of “municipal,” but let us not forget that this 
Constitution will be submitted to the people in a plebi- 
scite and they may not understand “municipal fishing 
pounds. They might think that these are fishponds 
belon^g to the mumcipality or these are fishing 

^ ^ municipality, which is 

not the intended meaning of “municipal” in this phrase. 

th^^nrnnn^^i Context, I am glad to support 

President ° Commissioner Rodrigo, Madam 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


MS. NIEVA. Thank you. 
accede to the deletion of 
municipal fishing grounds.” 


As we said before, we 
the phrase “particularly 


THE PRESIDENT. The whole phrase will be deleted? 
MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President. 


tion nf th there any objection to the d 

grniinHc” f ^ “Particularly municipal fish 

nnnp th ^®otion 8? (Silence) The Chair hi 

none, the amendment is approved. 




MR. ROMULO. Madam President I ask 

missionerdelos Reyes be recognized 

de los Re 


MR. DE LOS REYES Moh n • 

to propose to the Committ^ 

ambit of protection what is knn withm I 

.. 7 known as fish workers 

the kasama ng mga mangingisda. workers 

I discovered from Commissioner Quesada and a 
from some complaints of small fishermen that in 1 
same way that there is the sharing system or kasa, 


system in agricultural lands, there is also such a thing 
among the small fishermen who, it would appear, are 
actually the most exploited class of fishermen, even 
more exploited than the marginal fishermen that we 
were talking about. And this kasama fishermen who 
comprise 45,000 of the total work force of commercial 
fishing operations are the former subsistence fishennen 
who were dislocated by the monopolizing and superior 
commercial operations of the big fishermen who own 
boats and all that. Thus, they find no alternative but to 
join the operations as fish workers. Their daily income 
is only about P5.00 a day, because like the kasama in 
agricultural land, all expenses are deducted from their 
share and this sharing arrangement, which is prevalent 
in municipal and commercial fishing, does put these 
fish workers or the kasama or small fishermen at a great 
disadvantage. And this is true in Bulan, Sorsogon, 
Danao, Cavite, Laguna Lake, and others including 
Albay. 

And so, my proposal, subject to style, of course, is 
to include a sentence somewhere in Section 8 that fish 
workers shall receive a just share of their labor in the 
enjoyment of marine and fishing resources. We shall 
include fish workers in the same manner that we in- 
cluded farmers, regular farm workers and seasonal farm 
workers in the agrarian reform. Thus, we protect 
everybody. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will the Commissioner 
from Laguna yield to a question? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. If these are workers of commercial fish- 
ing vessels, should they not fall under the labor provi- 
sion of the Article on Social Justice? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Ordinarily, they should fall 
under the provisions on labor, but from my knowledge, 
they are not covered by existing labor laws. 

MR. OPLE. I would like to assert. Madam President, 
that there is no ground whatsoever why they should not 
be covered by labor laws when there is a very clear 
employer-employee relationship in commercial fishing 
operations. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, for the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee would like to be 
enlightened on the basis of a specific and expressed 
proviso that would address this particular group. Speci- 
fically, how significant is the group that Commissioner 
de los Reyes is referring to in terms of number? How 
significant are they as far as the specificity of their 
demands is concerned because, offhand, our perception 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986‘ 


71 


is that they could be rightfully covered under “farm 
workers” or, parenthetically, the labor law might apply 
if there is an employer-employee relationship. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But, as found in the book 
Countryside Report by Lusa Research Staff which 
focused on five major industries: rice, coconut, sugar, 
fishing and abaca, basnig workers alone or trawl workers 
comprise 45,000 of the total work force of commercial 
fishing operations and there are those who merely rent 
small motorized bancas. It is true tliat tliese workers 
could be covered ordinarily by the provisions on labor, 
but tlien there is no specific mention of small fish 
workers. Inasmuch as we are discussing aquatic reform 
in the same way that we have given protection not only 
to tenant farmers but to regular farm workers which, 
as explained, refer to wage farm workers, as well as 
seasonal fami workers, I believe there is also a necessity 
for specifying protection to fish workers. 

MR. OPLE. The term “fish workers” appears for the 
first time in the vocabulary of labor. This can refer to the 
workers assisting fish vendors in Divisoria, for example. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. According to this definition, it 
includes bugadores, refening to fish haulers; maniniklis, 
fish sorters; and Pescadores, fish haulers and sorters. 

MR. OPLE. So, these are workers in the commercial 
fishing industry. The fish worker, who is undoubtedly 
valid in the context of this survey which looks like a 
socioeconomic suiwey, has gained no definite meaning in 
law and jurisprudence, unlike municipal fishermen. But, 
apparently, they exist as a class; or better yet as a sub- 
class of the huge underclass of subsistence fishermen. I 
do not know if the concern of Commissioner de los 
Reyes should be accommodated specifically, or the 
Committee might want to record very clearly and 
definitively the intent of Section 8 as being able to 
embrace the problems and the need for social justice of 
this subclass of the fishing underclass. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, although we 
can always place on record that Section 8 embraces 
fish workers, yet if it is not specifically provided in the 
Constitution, it will amount to nothing useful to these 
fish workers. These fish workers are usually hired on a 
temporary and contractual basis. They have no security 
of employment, for which reason their employment is 
hanging. Because of this, trawl owners maintain a firm 
hold over them. They are also being forced to do other 
jobs like painting and repairing of fishing gears without 
pay, and they are even obliged to dry fish for free. In 
other cases where the workers become physically dis- 
abled, the owner automatically retires him from his job 
without any compensation whatsoever, with no social 
security compensation. Therefore, although there has 
been no jurisprudence yet which states that there is 


such a thing as fish worker, I find notliing wrong in 
starting it now in this Constitution which we are pro- 
mulgating. That is why we are revising and amending 
this Constitution to inject ideas. And since we are 
already in the process of protecting all marginal people, 
all people who are on the subsistence level — we have 
given protection to industrial labor; we have given pro- 
tection to farm workers — I certainly find nothing 
objectionable in emphasizing also the rights of aquatic 
workers. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
ask some questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. Commissioner de los Reyes spoke of 
exploitation. Who are exploiting these so-called fish 
workers? Do they have employers? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The owners of motorized 
bancas, the owners of the trawlers employ these people 
who are not given their just wage. 

MR. LERUM. In that case, they are covered by the 
labor provision of this section. That is why I ask: Who 
are exploiting these people? If the Commissioner says 
that their employers are exploititig them, then there is 
the so-called employer-employee relationship and this 
is covered by the social justice provision that we are 
talking about now. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But even under the existing 
Labor Code, agricultural laborers are included, and yet 
this Commission found it necessary to classify agricul- 
tural workers as a different group. So, if the Gentle- 
man’s reasoning will be followed, there would have 
been no necessity to place in this report of the Com- 
mittee on Social Justice any provision specifically 
dealing with agrarian reform, because agricultural 
laborers, like those laborers working in big haciendas, 
sugar mills and agri-business types like Canlubang, for 
example, are actually covered by the labor laws. I think 
the Gentleman knows that very well because he is the 
lawyer of the labor union in Canlubang. But we still 
provided for a separate section on agrarian reform to 
emphasize the rights in particular of land workers. And 
now, this proposal is an attempt also to emphasize the 
rights of the small fish workers, because in our desire to 
help the marginal fishermen or those who actually catch 
fish, we forget the fish workers. 

MR. LERUM. May I call the Gentleman’s attention to 
what we have already approved. We have provided for a 
living wage, and since this class of workers is covered, 
then they are entitled to a living wage. Maybe the 


72 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


trouble is in the implementation of the provisions of the 
Labor Code. Maybe these people are not organized, and 
so they are subject to exploitation. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. They are forgotten. But if we 
place this in the Constitution, they will no longer be 
forgotten because our attention will be called to their 
specific plight. That is the sense. 

MR. LERUM. They are not really forgotten because 
we are trying to organize them. As a matter of fact, we 
are now going into the organization of workers in 
fishing boats. But always there is that apathy on the 
part of the workers that it is better if they are not or- 
ganized because if they are, they are afraid that imme- 
diately after organization, many of them will be 
dismissed. We have to remove this obstacle. But with 
regard to the Gentleman’s concern, 1 can assure him that 
these workers are already covered by the provision on 
labor in the Article on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is seeking 
recognition. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We support the sentiment behind tlie 
proposal of Commissioner de los Reyes. Some members 
of the Committee, however, feel that once we start 
enumerating, we might be excluding. For example, how 
do we treat the workers in poultry farms? What about 
the helpers in sari-sari stores who are exploited by the 
owners particularly foreign or Chinese store owners? 
We can go on and on and we are afraid that we might 
then go into too much detail for a Constitution. 

However, I believe that the answer of Commissioner 
Lerum that they are deemed included in the Article on 
Social Justice might be adequate for Commissioner de 
los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about Commissioner Maam- 
bong? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MS. QUESADA. Yes. Thank you. Madam President. 

In the definition of fish workers, did Commissioner 

e os eyes also include the kasama ng maliliit na 
mangingisda? 

MR_ DE LOS REYES. That is precisely the bulk of 
these fish workers. 


a ff ■ ^ think this particular group would 

1 er rom the commercial fish workers because these 
asama ng maliliit na mangingisda are those who hire 
out their services to small boat owners, who may or may 
not own a boat and whose remuneration comes in the 
orm 0 a share in the catch after all the expenses in the 
production are deducted. This particular group, who 
would be the equivalent of tenants, are not covered 
by the ^bor Code because they are not considered 
workers but are called kasama. Is that then a part of the 
definition of fish workers? 


h f tv. is not only a part but tf 

u 0 the definition of fish workers. But I did n< 

anymore because kasama is usually ass< 
ciated with agncultural tenancy operation. 

MS. QUESADA. But they compose the majority ( 
what we call municipal fishermen. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Precisely, Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA^ Municipal fishermen in the Philip- 
pines, as of the 1982 data of the Countryside Report, 
comprise 72 percent or 574,000 of those employed in 
the fishing industry alone. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will Honorable de los Reyes entertain a question 
regarding his proposed amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Gladly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am constrained to rise because 
I come from an area where there are trawlers and purse 
seiners. 1 would like to mform the honorable Corn- 
missioner that in that area, most of the workers lu 
trawlers and purse seiners are paid under a share system 
in the sense that whatever catch the trawler or the 
purse seiner will get, they have a certain percentage. And 
while they are at sea, they are given subsistence and that 
is charged to their share. That is in general terms. 

There are also trawl owners whci really pay them 
wages, just like what Commissioner Lerum has said, and 
probably those persons are covered by the Labor Code. 

My question is this: Is the proposed amendment 
directed to those fishing workers in trawlers or purse 
seiners who are paid on a share system? And is the pro- 
posed amendment also intended to cover those using 
the same kind of fishing methods and who are paid 
under the system covered by the Labor Code? Are both 
these employees or shareholders of these fishing vessels 
covered? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. They are covered. But as I was 
saying, although it is true that ordinarily they should be 
covered under the Labor Code, the fact of the matter 
is that we concentrate our minds and energies on indus- 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


73 


trial laborers. The labor leaders do not have time for 
these small fish workers. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As I said, I am concerned because 
most of the people living in my area, in the towns of 
Asturias, Tuburan and Balamban, are actually working 
in these trawlers, and they feel oppressed also because 
in the sharing, they only get so much of the catch, and 
if there is no catch at all — sometimes they do not have 
any catch at all — they do not get anything. At the same 
time, the expenses which they mcur while they are on 
the vessel keep on growing every day, especially the 
subsistence; and that is why I also share this concern. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we request a 
vote? 

MR. ROMULO. May we have the amendment. 
Madam President, and then the vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The general concern seems to be 
that the matter proposed by Commissioner de los Reyes 
can be the subject of legislation, rather than being 
placed in the Constitution. So then, will Commissioner 
de los Reyes read his proposed amendment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. Subject 
to style and relocation, it will read; FISHWORKERS 
SHALL RECEIVE A JUST SHARE OF THEIR LABOR 
IN THE ENJOYMENT OF MARINE AND FISHING 
RESOURCES. That is very simple. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 13 votes in favor and 11 votes 
against; the amendment is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, there are no 
further registered speakers. I believe it is time to vote on 
Section 8 as a whole. 

MS. NIEVA. Can we have the last sentence again, 
because there have been so many changes? 

MS. AQUINO. Is there any definite formulation here? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, he had an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment of Commissioner 
de los Reyes? 

MS. NIEVA. We would like to have the amendment 
of Commissioner de los Reyes again. 


MR. ROMULO. Having won a victory, he has dis- 
appeared. 

THE PRESIDENT. I have a copy. 

MR. ROMULO. Will Commissioner de los Reyes give 
his amendment which he just won? 

THE PRESIDENT. We are giving a copy of the pro- 
posed amendment to the Chairman. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The new sentence will read: 
Fishworkers shall receive a just share of their labor in 
the enjoyment of marine and fishing resources. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. As amended by Commissioner 
Ople, the sentence will read: “Fishworkers shall receive 
a just share of THE FRUITS of their labor.” 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President,with due respect to 
Commissioner de los Reyes, without intending to over- 
turn the whole thing in the body, is he definite in that 
formulation because the impression we got is that he 
wanted it placed somewhere in Section 8 as a concept. 
Or should we place it as it is now formulated? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, because Section 8 refers 
to marine and fishing resources. If we will repeat the 
words “marine and fishing resources,” there will be re- 
dundancy. That is why I said this is subject to style. But 
as reworded now, it conveys the idea that we sought for. 

the PRESIDENT. Will it be the last sentence of the 
section? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It could be the last. No, I 
think it should be before the last sentence because the 
Ople amendment refers to intrusion of foreign invest- 
ments. 

MR. ROMULO. So, what is the amendment now? It 
seems to me we voted on something else. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is just in placing it; that is only 
the form. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It is already the problem of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. (Laughter) 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. In the meantime, can we have it 
on the last sentence while the Committee on Style 
decides where to put it? 


74 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, Madam President. MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, just a point of 
clarification. Are employers of trawlers included in fish 
workers? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Would it not dilute his approved 
amendment if we use the words “fishing workers” be- 
cause I feel that the term “fishworkers” is not really. . . 

MR. DE LOS REYES. What word does the Gentle- 
man want? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Fishing workers. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, that is the explanation. 

MR. MONSOD. Also employees of large fishing com- 
panies? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Fishing workers? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. If it would dilute the inten- 
tion, I will not press. I am Just asking this question. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. I am not a grammarian; if 
“fishing workers” is better, it means the same thing; 
it refers to fish. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Point of inquiry, Madam Pres- 
ent. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 


MR. BENGZON. Can we not leave that to the Com- 
mittee on Style? 

MR. MAAMBONG. We can leave that to the Com- 
mittee then. 

Thank you. 


hav'!tted\po''nf ^ ' 

the president. No, those are just clarificatioi 

tioTK^ CASTRO. Or are we making some clarifi 

amp ^ worker is because there was 

upon? Commissioner Ople that we have vol 


THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me, let us have some 
order, please. There being some changes, I believe the 
Chair will submit the whole motion again to a vote, 
because we do not know anymore what has been voted 
upon. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. I think if we 
do not get the precise definition of “fish workers,” then 
the whole voting process would be misunderstood. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

monsod. I think the Committee is being i 
styling in rewriting the sentence. W 

hpin t included because that might 

help to the drafters of the sentence. 

^ ^ question; Would work( 

ish cannenes be included in the word “fish worker 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will call for a suspen- 
sion of the session for a few minutes. And Commissioner 
de los Reyes will please approach the Committee so as 
to clarify this matter. 

It was 11:08 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION' 


MR. DE LOS REYES T • j 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maamboi 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would just like to ask 
missioner de los Reyes a clarificatory question. 


At 1 1:20 a.m. , the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Before we suspended the session, the Chair had 
already indicated its reaction to the voting - that there 
has been some confusion on the issues involved in the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 
So, shall we have Commissioner de los Reyes read again 
his proposed amendments? 

Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8. 1986 


75 


SR. TAN. Point of order, Madam President. I am all 
confused in tliis forest of amendments. I thought we 
liad already finished the interpellation, and were sup- 
posed to be in the period of amendments. But then, we 
were questioning each other and amending and debat- 
ing. That is why we got confused. And tlien, this fish 
story came in. It did not pass the Committee; it was 
not in the interpellation and we are supposed to vote. It 
is all confusing. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where is Commissioner de los 
Reyes? 

MR. ROMULO. Commissioner de los Reyes has 
sought refuge somewhere else. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have his proposed amend- 
ment as reworded or whatever, submitted. 

Will Commissioner de los Reyes please state his pro- 
posed amendment because the Chair has resolved to 
submit it to another voting in view of the confusion of 
some of the Members? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I ask the Secretariat to 
read what has been approved? 

THE PRESIDENT. What we have here, the first 
version reads: “Fishworkers shall receive a just share 
from their labor in the enjoyment of marine and fishing 
resources.” Then it was amended by Commissioner 
Ople, and it now reads: “Fishworkers shall receive a just 
share from THE FRUITS of their labor.” Is this last 
statement correct? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I just agreed 
to the Ople suggestion because I thought that this is just 
a matter of style. But if that amendment will cause 
confusion which will warrant another voting I will just 
stick by my former amendment and reject the Ople 
amendment. And I respectfully object to another voting 
because we have already won by a slight margm and we 
have worked hard for that amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So then the provision reads: 
“Fishworkers shall receive a just share from their labor 
in the enjoyment of marine and fishing resources.” Were 
there some questions being propounded by members of 
the Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I voted in favor of the amendment but 
on deeper reflection, I realize that it is rather very con- 
fusing especially with the clarifications made later. So I 
am seeking for a reconsideration of the approval of the 
proposed amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
motion for reconsideration of Commissioner Davide just 
to eliminate all forms of confusion over this particular 
amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion 
is approved and the matter is again submitted to the 
body. 

Is there any further question from the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. May we request a vote, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I know from Com- 
missioner Davide what particular answer to the inter- 
pellation caused the confusion? 

MR. DAVIDE. The confusion arose out of the 
admission by the Commissioner that fish workers would 
even apply to the so-called employees of big business 
engaged in fishing. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Not canneries. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. DAVIDE. For instance, trawlers or purse 
seiners, or employees engaged as such would be con- 
sidered fish workers. To my mind, they should be 
covered by the ordinary rules on labor legislation under 
which they would enjoy better benefits. Now, if we will 
reduce their category to that of an ordinary fish worker 
entitled only to a just share in the fruits of their labor, 
we would be treating them in a much lower category 
and, therefore, we would be reducing the benefits that 
they would be entitled to. 

My understanding of the original proposal for which 
reason I voted was that they would refer still to the so- 
called marginal fish workers who, in certain areas like 
Southern Cebu, may become, in effect, partners in a 
bigger enterprise owned by the privileged class. 

And so, I feel that we must have to distinguish the 
particular class of fish workers, whether fish workers of 
big capitalists or fish workers engaged only in marginal 
fishing. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Am I to understand that fish 
workers employed by big capitalists are not exploited? 

MR. DAVIDE. They are exploited, but we have the 
labor laws which will apply to them, and we have 
approved already the subdivision on labor. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. This proposal covers what the 
Commissioner envisions. The fishing workers in Cebu 
are suffering under the exploitation of trawl operators, 
but if it includes also big-time capitalists, what is wrong 
in stating that fishing workers shall receive a just share 
of their labor? 


76 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. That is the problem, because with a 
separate provision for them, it may be construed as 
making a separate provision for them with the possible 
interpretation that they are no longer within the scope 
of the provision on labor where the ordinary laborers 
really have greater benefits, advantages and privileges. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe that this 
matter has been discussed for almost an hour now. May 
we request a vote because all the arguments have already 
been ventilated in this body? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It was discussed, and we 
already won by two or three votes. The discussion has 
been prolonged because there was a motion for recon- 
sideration. I already explained that this refers to 
kasama ng maliliit na mangingisda or simply kasamd 
I yield to the Chair. 


VOTING 


The State shall protect the rights of subsistence fishermen, 
especially of local communities to the preferential use of 
the communal marine and fishing resources, both inland 
and offshore. It shall provide support to such fishermen 
through appropriate technology, research, financial, pro- 
duction and marketing assistance, and other services. The 
State shall also protect, develop and conserve such re- 
sources. The protection shall extend to the offshore fishing 
grounds of subsistence fishermen against foreign intrusion. 
Fish workers shall receive a just share from their labor in 
the enjoyment of marine and fishing resources. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I just would like to invite the atten- 
tion of the Committee that before ‘‘provide” in t le 
second sentence, there is the word “also”; and be ore 
“financial,” there should be “and adequate,” whici 
were not read. 

MS. NIEVA. The reason we removed the first “also ^ 
is that this was such a long enumeration that we fe w 
could cut some of the sentences. 


« amendment reads: “FISE 

SHALL RECEIVE A JUST SHARE FROf 
THEIR LABOR IN THE ENJOYMENT OF MARIN 
AND FISHING RESOURCES.” 


Those in favor of this particular proposed amend- 
ment will please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 


Those against will please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 19 votes in favor and 13 against; the 
amendment is approved. 


MR. DAVIDE. It is all right, but what about the 
words “and adequate”? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. It should read “adequate financial. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection 
entire Section 8 as read by the Chairman of the ® . 
mittee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the w 
section is approved. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. May I go out, Madam Pres- 
ident. I was about to answer a phone call when I was 
called. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, 
nized ^ PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. There are no more sections under 
“Agrarian Land Reform” to be amended. I 
Committee if it would now like to take up the Co y 
amendment on the section on labor. 


8 f wb^p^ Perhaps we can now vote on Sectic 

8 as a whole. Madam President. 


MS. NIEVA. May I just comment that the complete 
title is “Agrarian and Natural Resources Reform. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Will the Chairman read the 
entire section as drafted. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, Madam President. 

The body will notice that since we had many enu- 
merations in the second part, we have changed some of 
the punctuation marks. Section 8 reads as follows; 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, apropos of this, may I 
reserve the right, together with Commissioner Bennagen, 
immediately afterwards, to propose an . amendment, 
consisting of a new section under the group of sections 
denominated as “Agrarian and Natural Resources 
Reform.” 

Thank you. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


77 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I am asking the 
Committee if it would now like to take up the Colayco 
amendment. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Since the Committee agrees, Madam 
President, I ask that Commissioner Colayco be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. That refers to Section 3 (a), (b), 
(c) and (d). 

Commissioner Colayco is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I realize tliat since my proposal I have become 
persona non grata to some members of the Committee. 
I want to assure them that in pushing for this amend- 
ment I share their sentiment for the cause of labor and 
that I am acting from a firm conviction that it will 
improve not only the fonn of our Constitution but, at 
the same time, enhance the cause of labor. Surely, 
personally, I do not think that in pushing for this 
reform, I am doing labor a disservice. 

The body will notice that Section 3 starts like this: 
“It shall be the duty of the State to afford full protec- 
tion to labor,” and then it proceeds to enumerate the 
different rights which have been granted to the workers 
under current legislation. All these rights are enume- 
rated in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c). When Commissioner 
Aquino interpellated me and asked me why this 
enumeration was felt to be necessary, she explained that 
it was the intention of the Committee to elevate the 
laws that have provided for these benefits to labor to a 
constitutional level. I have no quarrel with that, and I 
am sure that everybody else would like to afford to 
labor every possible protection available under our law. 
My reservation, as I expressed earlier, is that there 
would seem to be no need for this enumeration be- 
cause these laws are a full guarantee, as they stand, for 
the protection of these rights are already in our law 
books. 

But, as I mentioned earlier, we cannot ignore the 
growing complaint, if not attack, against the way 
we are formulating our Constitution, to the effect that 
we are unnecessarily using too many words, too many 
sentences, too many paragraphs which could be com- 
pressed probably in one or two sentences. And this 
particular comment is applicable to this present section. 
If the purpose of the Committee is to guarantee the 
rights heretofore granted by law to labor, we can do 
that in one sentence and, at the same time, accomplish 
what it wants us to do — to elevate the protection to 
labor to a constitutional level. And so, 1 came out with 
the first sentence which takes care of this. My proposal 
is for the first sentence to read like this: THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT ALL THE RIGHTS GRANTED BY 
THE LAW TO WORKERS. That simple sentence is a 


mandate to future Congress. Do not touch; do not clip; 
do not diminish; do not repeal any of the laws which 
have been granted or which have been approved for the 
protection of labor. We cannot ask fora more emphatic 
and clear mandate to Congress to preserve, to maintain, 
to protect all the rights granted by the law. As to the 
last sentence in paragraph (b), the Committee wants to 
emphasize, among other rights, the right of labor to 
participate in policy- and decision-making processes 
affecting its interest. This is good but I think my second 
sentence goes even beyond that because I say, PRO- 
MOTE MUTUAL COOPERATION BETWEEN WORK- 
ERS AND THEIR EMPLOYERS — this is the important 
phrase - BASED ON SHARED RESPONSIBILITY. The 
words SHARED RESPONSIBILITY mean nothing else 
but the right to share in decision-making after consulta- 
tion; and if we want to go further, even the right to 
representation in the board. 

These are concepts which may sound new to us, and 
I understand the concern, even impatience, of my 
friend. Commissioner Foz, that we should grant to labor 
everything possible. But we are not yet attuned to these 
concepts, althougli these concepts are now applied and 
accepted in other countries. Nevertheless, sooner or 
later, we will reach this. We will turn capital toward this. 
If I may use a favorite Visayan saying which I have 
managed to learn: “Hinay-hinay, basta kanunay.” Let us 
go easy; we will reach that, we will get it; impatience 
will not help us nor will it help labor because we will 
only succeed in antagonizing capital. Little by little our 
capitalists or employers are beginning to understand 
that it is their duty to share the benefits of their indus- 
tries with labor. 

The last paragraph, paragraph (d), of Section 3 says: 

Regulate relations between workers and employers in 
a manner that recognizes the primacy of the rights of labor 
to its just share and the corresponding rights of business 
enterprises to realize their growth potential and reasonable 
returns on investments. 

This is a very nice statement, but I believe it can be 
trimmed down. At first — I do not mind telling this 
body that I burned the midnight oil just to compress 
this, and at the same time, to retain the purpose of 
the Committee — I was tempted to use the phrase 
“decent living wage” appearing in paragraph (b) of this 
article. The phrase “decent living wage” was first used 
in, I think, the encyclical of Pope Leo XIII entitled, 
Renm Novarum; living wage includes not only food and 
recreation; but social and religious opportunities not 
only for the worker but also for his wife and his family. 
But I did not think that this was enough and so I came 
with this expression: AND ENSURE THEIR JUST 
SHARE OF ALL THE FRUITS OF THEIR LABOR. 
The term “fruits” of labor covers not only their just 
wages and profit sharing, but also sharing in ownership 
because all these are fruits of their labor. 

So I believe that in compressing the four paragraphs 
into the three sentences which I am proposing, 1 was 


78 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


able to retain the substance and the intent of the 
Committee. 

I am, therefore, requesting the Committee to accept 
my proposal to trim down the wording of Section 3, 
and, if I may paraphrase the inimitable colleague of 
ours. Commissioner Uka: “What is one word less among 
friends?” 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. On behalf of the Committee, first, 
we deeply regret that we cannot accept the proposal 
of Commissioner Colayco, although we view with 
enthusiasm the introduction of a new concept of 
shared responsibility” which we could eventually want 
to incorporate in the draft. With due respect to Com- 
missioner Colayco, we sincerely appreciate his concern; 
however, we are deeply disturbed by this preoccupation 
with brevity. It is already some kind of a short-lived 
atavism that is going a bit too far. The draft admittedly 
is too long but it is long because it precisely reflects 
the gains that have been made by the workers and the 
labor force in its thorough-going push-and-pull struggle 
or the assertion of their rights. Ln fact, the gains have 
been mstitutionalized in the 1935 and 1973 Constitu- 
ticms. The minute we scuttle that, it amounts to no 
other interpretation but withdrawal. We could talk 
ourselves blue in the face and insist for the record that 
there is no intention to withdraw or diminish, but 
after they have been virtually institutionalized in the 
two fundamental documents, it would amount to 
nothing else than diminishment. It is our concern, 
because we have been exposed in the public hearings 
with the labor group, that all of the rights provided 
herein are their barest minimum and irreducible 
demands. It is our fear that the minute we touch it, 
history will judge us unkindly. The future generation 
will judge us harshly. It is our concern that if we 
sacrifice the sanctity of the mandate in the altar of 
brevity, we might end up scorned both ways. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I answer? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. COLAYCO. I share the Commissioner’s concern 
for the laborers because earUer, before I stood up, I 
tried to sound her out. I am referring now to Commis- 
sioner Aquino. I tried to sound her out on how we 
could get some possible compromise, but she said the 
laborers would be disappointed if this Utany of rights 
is not spelled out. But without sounding critical, we are 
not a Code Committee here. We are trying to frame a 
Constitution and we have to observe certain cardinal 


traditional norms which have been followed in almost 
all Constitutions. 

The Constitution of India has been mentioned; but 
remember, India has millions and millions of people. 
We are only 55 million. That is why in the composition 
of the Constitution of India, there are several sections 
which are addressed to the different provinces and 
tribes, we might call them, which compose the entire 
nation of India. 

At any rate, I do not think that the statement that 
the State shall protect all the rights granted by law to 
workers is a withdrawal from a higher or better position. 

I think that this concrete, clear statement is a clearer 
mandate. Pardon me for citing a new statement on the 
question of brevity. The first quality, brevity, is to 
emphasize its uniqueness or distinctiveness in relation 
to ordmary forms of lawmaking. A Constitution is, 
after all, rather different from a municipal ordinance 
on sewers and drains. A short text, by its very simplicity, 
can also be more readily comprehended by the genera 
public, and this facilitates national consensus building 
which is one of the prime objectives of democratic 
constitu tionalism . 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, on behalf of the 
lay people in this Constitutional Commission, I vvou ^ 
also like to express our sentiment after getting hold o 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Colayco. 

We said that the Constitution we are drafting is 
to be a new one that would truly be reflective o 
sentiments and aspirations of our people. We wou i ^ 
this to be a Constitution which ordinary indiyidua 
nonlawyers, farmers, workers, urban poor, fislierm » 
fish workers, women, and even children — can eas 
understand, so that when they read the Constitu lO » 
they do not have to dig up the Journal of the Conimi 
sion to understand the intentions. 

Fo example, with the proposed amendment 
says; “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT ALL 
RIGHTS GRANTED BY THE LAW TO WORKEK^^^ 
I, an ordinary worker, would not know just 
these rights are if I have not even gotten hold ot 
Labor Code and if I do not know how to read as goo 
as professionals. So, I would not really know just wha 
the new Constitution has provided this time. 

In our prayers, we often say, “Let those who have 
less in life have more in law.” If a worker would not get 
hold of this provision, then he would very well ask, 
“What has the new Constitution granted me?” We say 
that labor has already enjoyed some of these rights and 
we would like to define and constitutionalize these 
rights which, as Commissioner Aquino has said, workers 
have won through their struggles. 

So I feel that we should not only be concerned with 
brevity. It was the Commissioner himself who told me 
one day that he had researched on the different Consti- 
tutions and found out that not only India but many 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


79 


other countries have expressed the provisions of their 
Constitutions in the way that ordinary individuals 
would be able to understand. When we say it should be 
something that the public would be able to under- 
stand, still this amendment is not something an ordinary 
individual would be able to understand. One would have 
to refer to law books, Labor Code and to the minutes 
of this Constitution to find out just what are these 
rights referred to. So, 1 believe we should not really 
be concerned about making this section brief. 

Romania’s Constitution had 105 Articles; Portugal’s, 
29 pages and 143 Articles; Spain’s, 58 pages and 169 
Articles; Sweden’s, 37 pages and 13 Chapters; Switzer- 
land’s, 26 pages and 1 23 Articles and so had many other 
countries’ constitutions. As a matter of fact, our Article 
on Social Justice is quite short compared to the Article 
on the Executive which has 1 1 pages and the Article 
on the Judiciary which has more. 

In the overriding concern about brevity and broad- 
ness, we may overlook the sentiments that went into 
the production of our work. So, we hope the Com- 
missioner understands our feelings about cutting down 
to size this important article for many workers. 

MR. COLAYCO. It is a good thing the Commissioner 
brought up my comments to her earlier because to be 
honest with her, on my own, I undertook a little 
research since I heard outside comments that this 
particular article was rather lengthy. While I am not 
saying that I do not share the Commissioner’s personal 
views notwithstanding what I told her and Chairman 
Nieva here who sounded that I had become almost a 
traitor to her, I find this particular section like an over- 
loaded small vehicle. 

Anyway, now that I have heard the comments and 
accepted the attitude of the Committee, may I make 
one very unusual and special request. Madam President, 
I hope that I will not be misunderstood here again. I 
understand that there are 1 7 members in this Commit- 
tee alone, so that they alone will be sufficient to throw 
jue to Kingdom Come insofar as this amendment is 
concerned. And I know, too, that like everyone else, 
they would not have any trouble about showing where 
their opinion lies. However, I feel that to afford a better 
assurance of freedom of expression of their choice, I 
would like to propose that the voting on my proposal 
be by secret balloting. 

the PRESIDENT. Does the Acting Floor Leader 
have anything to say? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

bishop BACANI. Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Before we vote, let me just also 
add these two notes: First, post factum after what we 
have done in the provision on agrarian reform which is 
also lengthy, to cut down this section on labor would 
now make its place in the Constitution so dispro- 
portionately small. Second, I am not a constitutional 
lawyer myself, but it seems to me tliat the cardinal 
rule in the making of a constitution should be its 
responsiveness to the people. 1 do not know whether 
we should follow a hard-and-fast rule regarding brevity 
and conciseness. I thmk the principle here should be 
rather the common good or the common welfare. And 
it does not seem tliat the common welfare is better 
served by making this already brief section briefer 
still. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE president. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. May I be allowed to ask Commissioner 
Colayco some questions? I understand that his purpose 
in proposing this amendment is to condense the provi- 
sion of tlie proposed section which appears on the left 
of his proposal. Is that correct? 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. Madam President. 

MR. LERUM. In other words, as far as the Commis- 
sioner is concerned, he does not object to any provision 
appearing on the left of his proposal, but his only 
intention is to condense the same in just a few words. 
Is that correct? 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct, I have no objection 
to the substance. 

MR. LERUM. So what is the use of a secret voting 
now, just for the purpose of condensing? 

MR. COLAYCO. No, I mean there may be members 
of the Committee who may have their own opinion 
about this different from the other members of the 
Committee and the same with the rest of the Commis- 
sioners here. 

MR. LERUM. Does the Commissioner mean to tell 
us that there are some Committee members who are 
afraid to expose their vote? 

MR. COLAYCO. No, I am not saying that. 

MR. LERUM. And also some Members of the Com- 
mission who are also afraid to express their vote in 
public? 

MR. COLAYCO. I am not saying that. 


80 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. LERUM. I am very blunt about this because I 
want to be very clear about this portion. We are here 
representing our own sectors, and it is only correct that 
our sectors should know how we voted. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, before we 
proceed to vote, may I ask Commissioner Colayco one 
or two questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes may 
proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
cognized. 

MR. ROMULO. As an observation during our caucus, 
if the body will recall, we did agree and approve that 
where the Committee does not accept an amendment, 
one may ask for a secret balloting. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

Believing that the request of Commissioner Colayco is 
meritorious, the Chair declares that such request is 
granted and that the voting on this proposed amend- 
ment will be done by ballot. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

President, I am making a 
recor at am against secret voting on this proposal. 

president. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 


MR. DE LOS REYES. The amendment says; “THE 
STATE SHALL PROTECT ALL THE RIGHTS 
GRANTED BY THE LAW.” In other words, this refers 
to existing laws and laws that may be enacted. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Therefore, these laws could 
also be repealed or amended. And if we amend these 
laws, we will lose all these rights enumerated in Section 
3 as proposed by the Committee. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. That is why my pro- 
posal says: THE STATE SHALL PROTECT ALL THE 
RIGHTS GRANTED BY THE LAW. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. For example, there is a law 
which allows the workers to strike or to engage in 
concerted activities, then another law can be passed 
to repeal those rights. 

MR. COLAYCO. Not if this sentence is approved. 


vote. Madam Presiden 

tie y speak against the Colayco amendment? 
pr<K^^ president. Commissioner Sarmiento m< 

MR. SARMIENTO. This is from one who is not 
member of the Committee on Social Justice. 

Madam President, the classic formula in constitutio 
mg is that a constitution should be clear, conci 
an comprehensive. But that classic formula should n 
A ^ dogma. Constitution-making should re 
no” 1 times, to the clamor of tl 

is that rights should be enumerat( 
MoH and satisfaction. For instanc 

iirharT* resident, I was with a group of workers ai 

thev leamlri^tv. happy wh< 

wis " 

nate all these rightsTouW Jo 

unhappy. That to Cm ’ 

Dogmas and foCulas\oul7°'‘ ^ 

the labors, the w^k of JusJke ^ 

also to consider the clamor the wishP^°V^ appeal to hi 

me Wishes of our people. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please distribute the baiiots. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Therefore, no law can be 
passed which shall remove all these rights? 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That will take a constitutional 
amendment to remove or to take away from the 
laborers all these enumerated rights. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recog- 
nized. 

MR. FOZ. I would like to oppose the amendment, 
and may I make a few statements in connection with 
that. 

The Colayco amendment would give primacy to 
legislative enactments by saying that: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT ALL THE RIGHTS GRANTED 
by THE LAW TO THE WORKERS.” 

As a matter of fact, the amendment here even has 
footnotes referring to the specific laws which the 
provision or the amendment would like the rights 
granted to be preserved. It bothers me because it would 
seem that the existing laws regarding these rights of 
labor might not at all be subject to repeal or even to 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


81 


amendment. In other words, there is an element here in 
the amendment that would make it difficult for Con- 
gress even to change what is now provided in existing 
laws. 

If the Constitution would not specify the rights of 
labor, tlien what is the use of such a provision? We 
might as well have no provision at all and just depend 
on Congress to provide whatever are or should be the 
rights of labor. 

I would like to remind my colleagues here that if we 
approve these amendments as proposed, then we would 
do away not only with paragraphs (b), (c) and (d), 
but also with (a). This is an amendment by substitution 
to the entire section on labor. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do all Commissioners have copies 
of the provisions of Section 3 as formulated by the 
Committee and which are sought to be substituted by 
Commissioner Colayco? 

MR . ROMULO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Now in voting, may I request 
some assistance from the members of the Committee. 
What would they desire? Shall we vote separately for 
each of the sentences or shall we just vote for the entire 
substitution? 

MS. NIEVA. I think it is the entire article. 

MR. COLAYCO. It is the entire amendment. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will vote on the entire 
amendment by substitution of Commissioner Colayco 
which reads: “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT ALL 
THE RIGHTS GRANTED BY THE LAW TO WORK- 
ERS PROMOTE MUTUAL COOPERATION BE- 
TWEEN THEM AND THEIR EMPLOYERS BASED 
ON SHARED RESPONSIBILITY, AND ENSURE 
THEIR JUST SHARE IN THE FRUITS OF THEIR 
LABOR ” If approved, it will substitute for Section 3, 
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the Committee’s 

draft. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam Chairman, if we are 
for the amendment, we vote yes; and if we are against 
the amendment, we vote no. Is that it? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, if the Commissioner is for 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Colayco, 
put yes; if he is against, put no. 

VOTING 

this juncture, ballot forms were distributed to 
the Commissioners. After the ballots were filled out, 
the same were submitted to the Secretary-General. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General says there 
are 45 Commissioners in the session haU. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, if the Secretary- 
General is looking for one ballot, I have it here and 
my vote is no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. We request the Com- 
missioner to submit his ballot. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results of the voting show 13 
votes in favor and 31 against; the proposed Colayco 
amendment is lost. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. We have not voted nor have we had 
aniendments to Section 3 (c) and (d). We have registered 
speakers here for amendments on (c) and (d). However, 

I recall that before we took up this section on labor. 
Commissioner Ople had reserved his right to propose 
an amendment to Section 8. In view of the hour, I 
wonder if the Committee would allow that we take 
up that new section of Commissioner Ople; then after 
lunch we go back to Section 3 . 

May we hear from the Committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Ople? 

MR. ROMULO. He is ready to present his amend- 
ment to Section 8. 

MR. OPLE. Am I recognized, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. This is actually a proposed new state- 
ment which probably can be another section imme- 
diately following Section 8. The proponents besides 
myself are: Commissioners Bennagen, de los Reyes, 
Romulo and Bengzon. It probably can be called the 
“industrialization statement” under agrarian reform 
and will replace Section 9 which, by agreement, has 
just been transposed to the Article on the National 
Economy and Patrimony. It reads as follows: THE 
STATE SHALL REDIRECT IDLE CAPITAL IN LAND 
UNLOCKED THROUGH AGRARIAN REFORM TO- 
WARDS ACCELERATED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOP- 
MENT AND EMPLOYMENT CREATION. BONDS OR 
OTHER FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS ISSUED AS 
PAYMENT FOR LANDS UNDER SECTION 5 OF 
THIS ARTICLE SHALL BE HONORED AS EQUITY 
IN GOVERNMENT INVESTMENTS OF THEIR 
CHOICE. 


82 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


May I explain very briefly the principle behind this. 
Agrarian reform has a tremendous synergy: (1) it can 
liberate the tiller from the bondage of the soil; and 
(2) it can accelerate industrialization and employment 
expansion. 

Accelerated mdustrialization is the other major 
goal of agrarian reform in modem times. However, 
landowners whose lands are expropriated find that after 
losing their lands, the bonds issued to them as payment 
by the government are next to useless. This new section 
will ensure that these bonds are actually converted into 
dynamic new capital for industrial growth and ex- 
pansion of job opportunities. 

And so, I ask that the Committee consider this pro- 
posal, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we 
request that copies of that proposal be distributed to 
the Members of the Commission. 


THE PRESIDENT. Have copies been distributed? 

MR. BENGZON. Copies have been distributed yester- 
day. 


MR. SARMIENTO. We have no copies yet. 

Secretariat to reproduce 

the text of the amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Shall we give the 
to deliberate on this particular proposed 


Committee time 
amendment? 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Committee 
would hke to ask some questions, in addition to the 
observations made. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. Is it also the intention to allow that 
these bonds, if bonds are indeed paid, be used for pay- 
ment of taxes or loans from government corporations? 

MR. OPLE. This is already an existing policy. How- 
ever, am sorry to report that its implementation has 
been extremely erratic. 


MR. BENGZON So :c .u • x ^ xv 

omonHmont ‘ j j- • ’ ^ mtentiou of tY 

has already Uculater" *° Comniissiora 


pos*fd ■ sfcton, bondrwh“hToi!Ilan ‘1'“ 

percent of the payment to a landowner''cove"red S"ant 
reform (the remamder being cash) wUl be raised to t 
more senous level as a negotiable instrument. 

However, in the text of this proposed araendmen 
what is given pnde of place is the role of this nev 


capital that should be honored as equity or shares of 
stock in government investments of their own choice. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. May we request that we be furnished 
copies of the proposal before any further interpella- 
tions, so we can follow intelligently? 

THE PRESIDENT. We have already instructed the 
Secretariat to reproduce copies. 

MR. OPLE. If the Committee so desires, we can wait 
until the Secretariat delivers copies of the text. May I 
point out that the Committee had been furnished copies 
of this proposed amendment ahead of time. I hope the 
Committee confirms this. 

, MR. SUAREZ. Yes, the Committee itself had been 
furnished copies of his proposal. Madam President, 
but I doubt if the other Members had been furnished. 

MR. OPLE. May I know the pleasure of the Acting 
Floor Leader while waiting for the copies of the pro- 
posed amendment? Would he like to propose some 
other activity for the Commission? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, I propose that we have lunch. 
Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. I support the proposal, Madam President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. In order to afford the Members ari 
opportunity to go over the draft, the Chair suspends the 
session for lunch. We will resume at 2:30 p.m. 

It was 12:21 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

May we ask the honorable Chairman and members 
of the Committee on Social Justice to please occupy the 
front seats. 

May we know from the Floor Leader if the Com- 
mittee is now ready to react to the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Ople. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Ople be recognized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


83 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I think copies of this proposed amendment in its 
latest permutation have already been circulated by the 
Secretariat. 

May I identify the proponents of this amendment: 
Commissioners Rustico de los Reyes, Ricardo Roniulo, 
Jose Bengzon, Ponciano Bennagen, Adolfo Azcuna, 
Florenz Regalado, Christian Monsod and Regalado 
Maambong. 

The amendment reads as follows: SECTION 9. THE 
STATE SHALL PROVIDE INCENTIVES TO LAND- 
OWNERS TO INVEST THE PROCEEDS OF THE 
AGRARIAN REFORM PROGRAM SO AS TO PRO- 
MOTE INDUSTRIALIZATION, EMPLOYMENT 
CREATION AND PRIVATIZATION OF PUBLIC 
SECTOR ENTERPRISES. FINANCIAL INSTRU- 
MENTS USED AS PAYMENT FOR LANDS SHALL 
BE HONORED AS EQUITY IN SUCH ENTERPRISES 
OF THEIR CHOICE. 

This amendment may be denominated as the indus- 
trialization provision of agrarian reform. I think it fills 
a need in the Article on Social Justice in the sense that 
industrialization is really the other major goal of 
agrarian reform. And earlier on we talked about the 
power of synergy mherent in agrarian reform and, for 
that matter, social justice as a whole to liberate the tiller 
from tlie bondage of the soil and also to release idle 
private capital now locked in the antiquated land 
system, so that it becomes available for industrialization 
and employment expansion. We all know, those who 
have taken a glance at the history of land reform in 
Japan, Taiwan and Korea, that the economic miracles 
that have taken place in tliose countries and have 
compelled the admiration of the whole world, to a 
large extent, were rooted in the earlier land reform 
program pursued by their governments. 

And so that is the reason for this proposed new 
Section 9, Madam President. I would like to seek the 
Committee s approval of this amendment as now 

reworded. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

the president. The Committee may please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, just a question 
for clarification. What is the meaning of “PROCEEDS” 
on line 3? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, “PROCEEDS” really 
refer to the proceeds that the landowners will recover 
through a just compensation program. 


BISHOP BACANI. This is, therefore, the payment of 
the land? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask a few questions, for clarification in the record. 

The Commissioner will remember tliat he invited me 
to coauthor this proposal; and I said I like the objective 
of the proposal, but I was sorry I could not affix my 
signature because I wanted a clarification of the last 
sentence which reads: “FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS 
ISSUED AS PAYMENT FOR LANDS SHALL BE 
HONORED AS EQUITY IN SUCH ENTERPRISES 
OF THEIR CHOICE.” When I read the sentence, I 
immediately remembered the “Land Bonds” under the 
Marcos regime. The landowners, from whom the land 
was taken, were paid mostly in “Land Bonds,” redeem- 
able after 20 years. Does this last sentence mean that 
such kind of bonds come under the meaning of “FINAN- 
CIAL INSTRUMENTS” issued as payment for lands? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. But we already burned our fingers 
with those “Land Bonds” during the Marcos regime. 
Is there a difference between these financial instruments 
provided for in this proposed section and the “Land 
Bonds” issued during the Marcos regime as payment 
for lands which were covered by land reform? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, financial instruments 
do refef to bonds as a mode of payment for lands 
covered by land reform. May I explain briefly that 
under P.D. No. 27, which placed all com and rice lands 
under land reform, the mode of payment is 10 percent 
in cash and 90 percent in bonds. In Taiwan for rural 
land reform only, it is 70 percent in bonds and 30 per- 
cent in shares of stock in government corporations; 
and for urban land reform, there is a stipulation, if I 
remember right, of a 60-percent cash recovery for the 
landowner. 

The last sentence in this proposed amendment will 
precisely correct the situation earlier complained of 
by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Not only by me. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, by many thousands of landowners 
who feel that they were gypped by the government. 
After havmg surrendered their lands for cash bonds, 
they later found out that the cash bonds did not have 


84 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


the utility which they were made to believe they had. 
For example, although I knew that there were circulars 
sent to the government banks saying, “Please honor 
Land Bank bonds as collaterals for loans”; or “Please 
honor Land Bank bonds as offset payments for taxes 
or for arrears that have been incurred in previous loans,” 
most of the boards of directors of government financial 
institutions did not honor those bonds, pleading as a 
reason their financial straits in which they found them- 
selves at the time. 

So, the last sentence here supporting the principles 
of the linkage between land reform and industrialization 
in the first part seeks to mandate the State or Congress, 
if we Uke, in the future to make sure that landowners 
who will lose their lands to the tillers under this land 
reform program will be given financial instruments in 
payment for their lands, including bonds that will have 
real utility. One way of giving more strategic develop- 
ment values to such bonds is to insure right here that 
these bonds will be honored as equity in public enter- 
prises chosen by the landowners themselves. 

May I give an example. There are not too many 
^yemment corporations here making money now. In 
^wan, it is the opposite situation because almost all 
the government corporations are highly profitable. And 
so, it is also profitable for landowners that have been 
divested of their landholdings to put their bonds in 
ese profitable corporations. But in our country there 
are not too many of these. There are, however, some 
T vehicles for investments. One example is the 

n 3nk of the Philippines which in 1985, when most 
anks did not make money, made more than P400 
^ ion in net earnings. That is the right vehicle imme- 
lately available for a bondholder, like Commissioner 
8oc Rodrigo, who lost some of his lands in Bulacan 
under P.D. No. 27. 

MR. RODRIGO. All of my lands which were not 
too big. 

MR. OPLE. So this is one way of redressing that 
admittedly deplorable and cavalier treatment given to 
Land Bank bonds in the past. 

MR. RODRIGO. Under this provision, is it possible 
the implementing agency to repeat what 
the Marcos regime did, to pay the landowners from 
whom lands were taken ... 10 percent in cash and 90 
percent in bonds? 

\A is no such specific mandate, 

Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it would not be a violation of 
t IS section if the legislature or the implementing 
agency so prescribes? 

MR. OPLE. I think all the development planners 
know that given the magnitude of the agrarian reform 


that now has to be financed through Congress in tlie 
coming years under the land reform provision of the 
Article on Social Justice, the government cannot pay 
in cash except partially for lands that will be acquired 
by it for distribution. 

MR. RODRIGO. The question has not been answered 
categorically. My question is: Would it be a violation 
of this provision in the proposed Section 9 if Congress 
or the implementing agency again rules that lands taken 
from landowners will be paid 10 percent in cash and 
90 percent in bonds? 

MR. OPLE. It would not. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee reply because we have accepted the amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, please. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MONSOD. If the payments or payment terms to 
the landowners are similar to the previous program 
where the transfer value was 40-60 percent of the face 
value of the bonds, I think it has already been answered 
by this Committee, Madam President, that that would 
not constitute just compensation if that system were 
repeated by Congress. So it is the intent of the Com- 
mission to give this interpretation to the meanirig ot 
just compensation. And the problem that arose, if we 
will recall, was the question of the farmers’ affordability, 
and the answer was that that is where the State should 
probably step in to cover the difference between just 
compensation and what the farmers can afford. So the 
answer to the Commissioner’s question is that the terms, 
as he described, would not constitute just com- 
pensation. 

This Article, if the Commissioner would notice, starts 
with the words “SHALL PROVIDE INCENTIVES. 
So there is a mandate to the Congress that the value of 
the payments and the terms of conversion should be 
such that there would be an incentive for the land- 
owners to invest in these enterprises, and a conversion 
value of 50 percent of the face value would not be an 
incentive. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I am sorry but my 
question has not been answered yet categorically- So 
let me give a specific case. Let us say that the land of a 
certain landowner is taken, under land reform. The 
government determines its value and arrives at the 
conclusion that the “just compensation” is PI 00 , 000 . 
Would it be a violation of this proposed section if the 
implementing agency tells the owner: “All right, I will 
pay you only PI 0,000 in cash and P90,000 in bonds”? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it would not be 
just compensation if the terms of the bonds are such 


FRIDAY, AUGUSTS, 1986 


85 


that the present value would not be equal to PI 00,000. 
If the interest, for example, on the bonds is way below 
the market rate of interest so that the present value of 
the stream of payments under the bond issue would be 
much lower than the balance of P90,000, it would not 
constitute just compensation. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it is possible to pay only 10 
percent in cash and 90 percent in bonds regardless of 
the interest on the bonds. 

MR. MONSOD. That would be possible here because 
I think when you pay full value, it can be in many 
forms and combinations. It can be all in cash, it can be 
payment terms over a period, but it must approximate 
the present value that is given to the market price of 
the land. 


MR. RODRIGO. The sentence further reads: 
“SHALL BE HONORED AS EQUITY IN SUCH EN- 
TERPRISES OF THEIR CHOICE.” Does the word 
“ENTERPRISES” mean public enterprises, or does it 
include private enterprises? 

MR. MONSOD. I think this would have to be read in 
connection with the first sentence where the phrase 
“PRIVATIZATION OF PUBLIC SECTOR ENTER- 
PRISES” appears because that is witliin the power of 
the government to accept any exchange of the financial 
instruments for equity shares of these corporations. 

MR. RODRIGO. Public corporation. 


MR. MONSOD. “PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES.” 
In the case of private sector enterprises, I do not think 
that the government has the power to direct or com- 
mand private sector enterprises to accept the bonds as 
exchanged. However, if the value of the bonds is such 
that the present value reflects the real values, then it is 
possible because then there would be no loss for private 
enterprises to accept it in order to accelerate the broad 
participation of co-ownership of their companies. 


MR. RODRIGO, ta short, if the bonds are invested in 
government corporations, it can be compulsory for a 
government coiporation to accept these bonds if that 
corporation is the choice of the landowner. Is that 

right? If It IS a public corporation? 


MR. MONSOD. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. But, if it is a private corporation? 


MR. MONSOD. It cannot be compulsory. In that 
case, market forces will have to operate and that is 
where the value of the bonds will be a consideration. 

MR. RODRIGO. But, if the private enterprise opts to 
accept, can it accept? 


MR. MONSOD. That would be the operation of the 
market. 

MR. RODRIGO. In short, as regards to public cor- 
poration it is compulsory to accept the bonds as equity; 
but in regard to private corporation, it is optional. Is 
that correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the problem is that I do not 
know of any public or government corporation in the 
Philippines which is making money, except perhaps the 
Land Bank. But can the Land Bank accommodate all 
the land bonds that will be issued for land reform? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it is not exactly 
correct to say that there are no public sector enter- 
prises other than the Land Bank. By the way, there are 
six banks and the other five, if I recall it correctly, are 
all making money. ComBank is making money; Union 
Bank is making money; then, of course. National Steel 
Corporation is making money — it is going to make, 
I think, over P500 million this year. There are several 
companies that are profitable, although we read only 
about the unprofitable ones. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I am not an economist but 
I read about the billions upon billions of indebtedness 
of the PNB and the DBP. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. BENGZON. The Committee reiterates its accept- 
ance. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. The issue has been amply debated, but 
Commissioners Colay co and Davide have some questions 
before we take a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colay co is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

My question is addressed either to Commissioner 
Ople or to the Committee. The proposal says “THE 
STATE SHALL PROVIDE INCENTIVES.” Will the 
payment be mainly in the form of financial instru- 
ments? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. COLAYCO. Can the Committee spell out its 
idea of what these incentives are going to be for the 
guidance of Congress? 


86 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Let me just give one example but 
which is not exhaustive. This would be in the pricing 
of the shares of the public sector enterprises, in the 
terms of payment of the shares of these private firms. 

MR. COLAYCO. I want figures. The bad experience 
of Commissioner Rodrigo and others has shown that the 
1 0-percent cash payment was just a drop in the bucket 
of the price paid. Does the Committee intend to follow 
the same percentage of cash payment? 

MR. MONSOD. When we answered Commissioner 
Rodrigo, we said that it is not really a question of 
whether it is paid in cash or not. Even if it is paid only 
10 percent in cash, the problem in the previous system 
was that the balance of 90 percent was payable over a 
long period of time at a very low interest rate, so that 
the present value of that bond was way below the real 
value of the property. Now, even if we have long-term 
payment and its balance is in bonds, if the interest rate 
on the bonds is such that the present market value of 
the bonds equals the price of the land, it is possible to 
exchange that in the free market, even in the private 
sector, because then there will be a market for such 
bonds. When the government unloads these public 
sector enterprises, then it is possible, in addition to 
gi^^g them the real value in terms of bonds, that the 
pncing of the shares is such that it gives an incentive for 
inem to buy those shares. 

MR. COLAYCO. Does the Gentleman think that his 
1 eas wm sufficiently guide the legislature to avoid past 
mistakes? 


owned or controlled corporations or banks, as the 
case may be, this will be among the incentives for the 
acceptance of these land bonds. 

MR. BENGZON. It is not only among the incentives, 
but it is the intent of the Committee in proposing this 
section here, that that be one of the consequences. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I seek enlightenment on some of the ramifications of 
this proposed section. Would we now allow the land- 
owner to negotiate the financial instruments, and for 
the person to whom it is negotiated to avail of the 
rights provided for under Section 9, or shall it be a 
personal right? 

MR. MONSOD. It is our understanding that bonds 
or financial instruments representing proceeds under the 
agrarian reform program would be negotiable instru- 
ments. 

MR. DAVIDE. And would the transferee or indorsee 
of that financial instrument be allowed to exercise the 
right under Section 9? 


MONSOD. There are, I think, enough records of 
Inis Commission which define just compensation. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


REGALADO. I had previously discussed tl 
ma er with Commissioner Monsod, and I just want it 
e on the record. With respect to the incentives that w 

bonds, among oth 
ment^nf acceptable for the pa 

navmpnt lof* ° l^andowner concerned, and for t) 
pay ent, let us say , of loans from government banks? 

afflfi^ already articulated in tl 

affirmative by Comniissioner Ople this morning, and v 

reiterate that it is the intention of the Committee 
be such. 


A^R. REGALADO. In other words, whenever it is an 
obligation in favor of the government or of any of its 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, precisely because if we can 
create a market for those bonds and financial instru- 
ments, it would give incentives for more investments. 

MR. DAVIDE. The second question is on public 
sector enterprises: Will the reference of this be only 
government-owned and controlled corporations or their 
subsidiaries? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. That is the meaning in this 
sentence, because the government would not have the 
power to oblige private sector enterprises to accept 
these bonds. 

MR. DAVIDE. Even corporations exercising quasi- 
public functions, like public utilities? 

MR. MONSOD. That would then be a matter of 
public policy on which enterprises would be privatized. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words. Section 9 will be 
interpreted to mean that Congress will have the freedom 
or the liberty to include quasi-public utilities or cor- 
porations as one of the entities in which the landowner 
may use as equity the financial instruments issued to 
them in payment for the land. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


87 


MR. MONSOD. If that k within the context of the 
privatization program of government, they would be 
included. 

MR. DA VIDE. With this particular section, we not 
only institutionalize the bonds which were used in pay- 
ment under the agrarian reform program, but also 
enshrine the right of Congress to require payments for 
lands taken under the agrarian reform program by way 
of bonds. Could it exclusively be bonds? 

MR. MONSOD. No. I think the reason why we used 
the word “financial instruments” is that we did not 
want to preempt the possible range of financial instru- 
ments that could be issued under the agrarian reform 
program. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, financial instruments may include 
any negotiable instrument for that matter — certificate 
of indebtedness, promissory notes, and other instru- 
ments. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 


thing? This appears to be a long provision. I think by 
capturing the concept of coop.eration with private 
enterprise and the goal, as well as the purpose for the 
investment, could we rephrase it in some other way? 

MR. MONSOD. Does the Commissioner have any 
suggestions? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I do not know if this amend- 
ment captures the meaning I wish to convey: THE 
STATE IN COOPERATION WITH THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR SHALL PROMOTE INDUSTRIALIZATION 
BY EMPLOYMENT CREATION AND PRIVATIZA- 
TION OF PUBLIC ENTERPRISES. TOWARDS THIS 
END, IT SHALL PROVIDE INCENTIVES TO LAND- 
OWNERS WHO INVEST PROCEEDS FROM AGRA- 
RIAN REFORM BOND ON VITAL ENTERPRISER. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the second 
sentence would convey the ideas we have here but the 
first sentence sounds hke a general statement that 
might belong in the Declaration of Principles and State 
Policies or in the Article on the National Economy 
and Patrimony. If we count the words, there are about 
the same as in the original. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Ro- 
sario Braid seeks to be recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I with- 
draw the amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Just a clarificatory question. 
Would “ENTERPRISES OF THEIR CHOICE” mean 
that we give the landowners the freedom to choose from 
all available enterprises or does the State suggest vital 
enterprises? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, what we mean is 
within the number or ^e range of enterprises which 
the government has decided would be privatized Then 
the landowners or the holders of these instruments 
make a choice from among those enterprises. It is not 
the landowners who direct which public sector enter- 
prises will be pnvatized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would hke to ask a question of 
my fellow member of our Committee. 

This is meant to be an incentive. Now I would like to 
ask a similar question to the one that I asked yesterday 
regarding land reform. Supposing a landowner does not 
want to take advantage of this incentive and then he 
says, “I will not sell my land until you give me cash and 
that is the only one that I will accept.” Will the land- 
owners prevail or can they be forced to accept these 
financial instruments other than cash? 


tadustriauzation ia 
the goal, sho we not qualify it by saying a VITAL 

t^make free choices? 

MR. M^NSOD. That might be an unnecessary ad- 
jective ere ecause there are other sections in the 
Constitution that define more clearly and in more 
detail the areas or the manner by which the govern- 
ment can get involved in hidustrialization. This would 
not be the article for that definition. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Lastly, in the spirit of 
brevity, could this not be shortened to mean the same 


MR. MONSOD. During yesterday’s discussions, we 
defined the agrarian reform program in terms of the 
exercise of police power, because in this case there is a 
higher level of objective and value than the landowner’s 
option to hold on to the private property. In that case, 
to refuse to participate or to allow the land to be part of 
the agrarian reform program merely on the basis of the 
fact that he wants all payments in cash probably would 
not be allowed. However, the owner is entitled to ask 
that the just compensation be really that. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


88 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMrA. Commissioner Lerum seeks to b^. recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Lerum is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I just want to ask a 
few questions. 

I agree with the purpose to the effect that it will 
liberate the tiller from the bondage of the soil. That is 
the first purpose. The second purpose is to release idle 
capital locked up in the antiquated land system and 
therefore accelerate industrialization and employment 
expansion. I am just curious — what is this capital that 
is locked up in this system? Will the sponsor kindly 
explain this? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, there is a lot of poten- 
tial capital locked up in a land system which does not 
encourage productivity. For example, just to cull from 
some of the most recent examples under P.D. No. 27, 
there are many landed estates in rice and com that 
were broken up, and so I am speaking of absentee 
landowners. By the coverage of the land reform pro- 
largely idle capital of the absentee landowner 
which relies on the tenants’ efforts to generate pro- 
uction, IS released in terms of the compensation 
pven him. So that this gives him the opportunity to 
ranstorm his role from an absentee landowner not 
re y connected with the productive process, a virtual 
parasite of society, into an entrepreneur or perhaps 
even just as an investor. In the case of Taiwan, within 
live years from the inauguration of its land reform 
program, NT$2 billion was released to industry as a 
result of the agrarian reform program which otherwise 
would have been capital lying dormant in the land. 

MR. LERUM. The Gentleman is referring to Taiwan, 
but we are taking about the Philippines. Does this 
locked-up capital refer to the payment that should 
have been received by the landowner? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the proceeds of agrarian reform. 

MR. LERUM. But according to the statement of the 
Gentleman, the 90 percent which should have been 

^^1,- ^ u in bonds is almost worthless, so where 
IS this locked-up capital that we are talking about? 

place, Commissioner Lerum 
would hke to outlaw any reference to the experience 
of a foreign country and I think that is less than 
courteous, especially when one sits in a committee I 
deplore that. 

MR. LERUM. I am sorry if that is the impression 
of the Gentleman, but I have to ask the question be- 


cause in the proponent’s own explanatory statement, 
the 90 percent that was paid in bonds is worthless. So, 
I want to find out where this locked-up capital is. 

MR. MONSOD. May the Committee answer. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. There are many ways to look at this, 
but assets can either be in the form of land, bonds or 
cash. Cash is the easiest to use in terms of investments. 
When the agrarian reform program is implemented and 
the landowner exchanges bonds for his land, the bond is 
closer to liquidity than land. As we have stated before, 
if it is in the form of bonds and it really constitutes 
just compensation so that it bears the market rate of 
interest, that becomes a highly liquid asset that can be 
negotiated and, therefore, may be used as payment 
for equity, thereby increasing investment in the country 
in new or ongoing enterprises. I think that is the sense 
in which locked-up capital is referred to. It is really 
locked-up if it is not available for investments. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there has been suffi- 
cient debate and discussion on the matter. 

MR. LERUM. May I be allowed to reply? 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that we take a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Floor Leader, may we give a 
chance to Mr. Lerum to reply if he is satisfied \vith the 
response of Commissioner Monsod? Is Commissioner 
Lerum satisfied with the explanation? 

MR. LERUM. No; I have to make a reply, Madam 
President. 

Ordinarily that is so. But in the case of the bonds 
paid by the government to the landowner, these are not 
new capital but indebtedness to the landowner, so we 
did not create any capital. My contention is that there 
is no such Iqcked-up capital because the bond represents 
indebtedness of the government to the owners of the 
land which was given to the tillers of the soil. That is 
my point. 

MR. MONSOD. I am sorry, but I do not agree with 
the Gentleman. 

MR. LERUM. I am through. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. When we talk about capital, we have 
to distinguish between different types of assets. And 
usually in economics when we talk about investment, 
it is the creation of new productive enterprises or new 
productive assets. What we are saying here is, that is 
possible because then there would now be money avail- 
able to finance new productive assets. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


89 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Maambong 
have anything to say? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. In fact, 
I am one of the proponents of Section 9, but I would 
like to present to the Committee a perfecting amend- 
ment to delete the words “SO AS” after the word “PRO- 
GRAM” in the third line so that it will read: “THE 
STATE SHALL PROVIDE INCENTIVES TO LAND- 
OWNERS TO INVEST THE PROCEEDS OF THE 
AGRARIAN REFORM PROGRAM TO PROMOTE 
INDUSTRIALIZATION.” 

Would that be acceptable? 

MR. MONSOD. We accept. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may we now take a 
vote on Section 9? 

THE PRESIDENT. Does everybody have a copy of 
this proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople and 
several others? 

MR. BENGZON. Everybody has a copy. Madam 
President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those who are in favor of the 
proposed Section 9 of the Article on Social Justice, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

Those who are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(One Member raised his hand. ) 

MR. RODRIGO. Please register my abstention. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 30 votes in favor, 
none against, and 1 abstention; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Section 3 of this 
Article has not yet been fully amended. May I ask that 
Commissioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

My proposed amendment will be on Section 3, para- 
graphs (c) and (d). With respect to paragraph (c), it is 
more of a perfecting amendment on the last clause 
which says: “and enforce mutual compliance thereof’ 
- I propose to change “thereof’ to THEREWITH, 


because one complies with something and not of some- 
thing. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I have that again. Commis- 
sioner Regalado? What line please? 

MR. REGALADO. The fourth line of Section 3, 
paragraph (c), page 2, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner proposes to 
change the word “thereof’ to “THEREWITH.” 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. BENGZON. It is a matter of style, Madam 
President; we accept. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote on the amendment 
first. Is there any objection to the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Regalado to change the word 
“thereof’ to “THEREWITH.” (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we rnake a request from the 
Floor Leader? 

The principal author of this section, Commissioner 
Aquino, had to be called outside on a long distance 
call and we would like to wait for her. Can we defer 
on the others and just proceed with Urban Land Reform 
and Housing? 

MR. REGALADO. This is Section 1 1? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. So, I will just defer my proposed 
amendment to paragraph (d) of Section 3. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Foz be recognized to amend Section 1 1 . 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, before we go to the 
amendments from the others, I would like to explain 
some minor changes that we would like to propose on 
Section 1 1 . 

This is on the line that says: “a continuing urban 
land USE and Housing program. “First of all, “Housing” 
should be with a small h. And we would like to add the 
phrase IN COORDINATION WITH THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR, and then, “will MAKE decent housing.” 


90 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, our amendment will 
also affect the same line. 

MS. NIEVA. As Qiairperson of the Committee, may 
I be allowed to continue? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MS. NIEVA. The rest of the sentence shall read: 
“continuing urban land USE and housing program that 
IN COORDINATION WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
will MAKE decent housing”; and then here we add: 
“AND SERVICES AVAILABLE at affordable cost to 
deserving low-income citizens in urban centers and 
resettlement areas." 

The reason for this is that we realize the magnitude 
of the housing problem in the country. We know that 
at this stage, there is a nationwide backlog representing 
just the households in slums and blighted areas esti- 
mated at 992,000 households and these blighted areas 
are 80 percent privately owned. Of these 992,000 
squatter households, some 282,000 are in Metro Manila. 
The studies have shown that these sites, in order to be 
upgraded, will cost approximately P543 biUion, while 
t e b^ance of the households will have to be resettled 
m various government resettlement sites and this again 
million. It is also estimated that every 
home lots have to be developed over the 

^ost approximately P460 
milhon. This is just for Metro Manila where one-third of 
the urban poor dwellers are located. 

A similar situation is evident in the 1 9 major regional 
urban centers outside Metro Manila for some 213,000 
squatter households living in slum areas. An estimate 
s owed that more than P3 billion will be needed to 
up^ade these areas in the provinces. So, in view of this, 
M we have supporting statistics here, we realize that 
making decent housing and services 
av able cannot be done by government solely. In fact, 
we eel that the government’s main job is to make the 
opportunities present and provide what they call new 
approaches of sites and services and development of 
improved infrastructure, leaving the matter of direct 
ousmg opportunities to the private sector, which in- 
cludes the people themselves, the different landowners, 
an developers, financing institutions, and for them to 
cooperate and work together to solve this problem that 

of all urh*^n AP problem, but is the problem 

of aU urban centers throughout the world. 

DIN^TION '■’e phrase IN COOR- 

maLT clrs ™E.'’R'''ATE SECTOR so as to 
make it clear that our mtention here is not for the 

government alone to be responsible fnr ^ a 

+UV ‘'=i>PonsiDie tor answermg and 

addressmg his very senous problem of our urban poor 

dwellers m the country. 


MR. RAMA. Commissioner Foz has the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. We would like to propose an amendment 
for the entire Section 1 1 in the form of an amendment 
by substitution. Let me read the proposed amendment. 
Madam President. It says: “The State shall ESTABLISH 
AND IMPLEMENT AN URBAN LAND REFORM 
PROGRAM TO PROMOTE THE RENEWAL, DEVEL- 
OPMENT AND MODERNIZATION OF HUMAN COM- 
MUNITIES FOR THE COMMON GOOD. IT SHALL 
PURSUE A SOCIAL HOUSING PROGRAM TO MAKE 
decent housing AND OTHER COMMUNITY SER- 
VICES AVAILABLE TO deserving low-income citizens.” 

First of all, the amendment seeks to reinstate the 
word “REFORM” as part of the term “urban land 
REFORM program.” The term “urban land use,’ 
Madam President, has a limited imphcation. Basically, it 
has to do only with zoning function, and does not cover 
the other components of an urban land reform program. 
The usual components of an urban land reform program 
are the following: First, to hberate human communities 
from blight, congestions and hazards and to promote 
their development and modernization; second, to bring 
about the optimum use of land as a national resource 
for public welfare rather than as a community of trade 
subject to price speculation and indiscriminate use; 
third, to provide equitable access to and opportunity 
for die use and enjoyment of the fruits of the land, 
fourth, to acquire such lands as are necessary to prevent 
speculative buying of land for public welfare; and, 
finally, to maintain and support a vigorous private 
enterprise system responsive to community require- 
ments in the use and development of urban lands. These 
are the reasons why we propose the reinstatement of 
the word “REFORM” to constitute urban land reform, 
and not only use. 

This amendment is being submitted not only by 
yours truly but also in collaboration with Commis- 
sioners Sarmiento, Trenas, Tan and Villegas. 

As to the statement of Commissioner Nieva that the 
provision of housing to low-income citizens should be in 
collaboration with the private sectors, there is actually 
no controversy about that. That is all very well under- 
stood in this provision. Madam President. We would like 
to hear the response of the Committee to the proposed 
amendment. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, there is some dis- 
cussion here and a recommendation that we first take 
the first proposal, the first amendment, changing the 
term “urban land USE” to “urban land REFORM.” 
We would like to throw this to the body because even 
the Committee is divided on the choice of words. 


THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Floor Leader, who is the first 
in the list? 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I would like to make 
clear that “urban land USE” is a very limited concept. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


91 


It consists mainly of zoning. It does not involve provT 
sion for housing and acquisition of land which may be 
necessary for the government to implement its housing 
program for the low-salaried citizens. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just have a 
short reply? 

If we look at the wording of the Committee, it is 
“urban land USE and housing program.” Nonetheless, 
we would hke to ask the judgment of tlie body on 
whether we should use the word “USE” or “REFORM.” 

MR. FOZ. May we add the information that the 
present Constitution already provides for an urban land 
reform program. So, if we use the word “USE,” we are 
now backtracking. This is withdrawing from the 
original concept now institutionalized in the present 
Constitution. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we hear 
from Commissioner Tan who is a member of the Com- 
mittee and who proposed this particular section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I really did not propose this particular 
section. 1 was just in agreement with certain parts but 
I welcome this section. The first part is the change of 
the word “REFORM” from “USE” because land use 
could be applied to anybody. While if we say “RE- 
FORM,” it means to say that land has been used un- 
justly, so, we are trying to reform. So, I welcome 
“reform.” But as to the other two, I would suggest that 
instead of simply saying “TO MAKE decent housing and 
other community facilities available,” we say “TO make 
decent housing AND BASIC COMMUNITY FACILI- 
TIES OR SERVICES AVAILABLE.” One could have a 
swimming pool, like what is in the BLISS projects, but 
would not have the “basic”running water in the wash- 
room. I consider the use of the term “low income” not 
good, because “low income” is relative. An army soldier 
could be in the low-income group as a squatter could 
also be in that group. Perhaps a better word would be 
UNDERPRIVILEGED; but I welcome the way this has 
been revised. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Ville- 
gas would like to comment on the same amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could I just supplement the reason 
why I think the word “REFORM” in “urban land 
REFORM” should stay? I think it has to be clear that 
we are giving the State the authority to expropriate 
large urban tracts of land for redistribution to deserving 
citizens in the spirit of agrarian reform. So, 1 think the 


State cannot only expropriate large agricultural lands; it 
can also expropriate large urban lands for the common 
good. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:41 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:57 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponents have 
reached a meeting of the minds. I ask that Commis- 
sioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam’ President, after consultation with 
the Committee, as well as with other Commissioners, 
including Commissioners Trenas, Sarmiento, Tan, Rama, 
Villegas and de los Reyes, we have come up with a com- 
mon formulation on Section 1 1 , and which the Com- 
mittee is accepting. 

So, I would like to read for the benefit of the Com- 
mittee the entire provision, as reworded or reformulated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. FOZ. “The State shall BY LAW and for the com- 
mon good undertake a continuing program OF urban 
land REFORM and housing IN COORDINATION WITH 
THE PRIVATE SECTOR that will MAKE decent 
housing AND BASIC SERVICES AVAILABLE at 
affordable cost to UNDERPRIVILEGED AND HOME- 
LESS CITIZENS in urban centers and resettlement 
areas.” 

That is the amendment to Section 1 1 , Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we are accept- 
ing the suggestion of Commissioner Nolledo that instead 
of “COORDINATION” we use the word COOPERA- 
TION which better reflects the idea of the Committee - 
“IN COOPERATION WITH THE PRIVATE SECTOR.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I will explain. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

V MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to be 
recognized. 


92 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to explain why I 
suggested the word “COOPERATION” instead of 
“COORDINATION.” When we coordinate, we talk 
only of efforts. The word “COORDINATION” may 
preclude investments. So, I recommended to the Com- 
mittee that instead of “COORDINATION” we should 
use the word “COOPERATION.” I think Commissioner 
Foz will understand. 


MR. FOZ. So, the Gentleman would exchange 
“COORDINATION” for “COOPERATION”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because I feel that “CO- 
OPERATION” is a stronger term than “COORDINA- 
TION.” 


MR. FOZ. But is it not the other way around? 
MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. 


MR. FOZ. Coordination is a stronger term than 
cooperation, because with coordination there is in- 
vovement of efforts and also money — funds, while 
with cooperation, the private sector will just say, 

we agree, but there is no involvement, no commit- 
ment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so, because when we • 
coor mate, we coordinate only efforts on the part of 
either side. But when we use “COOPERATION,” then 
cooperation may include investments, efforts and other 
tactors. I would even recommend COLLABORATION 
~ the original word that the Gentleman used. 

MR. FOZ. Actually, the word “COORDINATION” 
was suggested by the Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why I explained to the 
Committee and the Committee accepted my suggestion. 

MR. FOZ. In that case, we also accept, Madam 
President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I really feel I 
ave o react to this watering down of this particular 

°^8inal that the Committee pre- 
“BY th t regulate.” But when we say, 

fhA manHQtrt th legislation which removes 

the mandate that ^ along we have wanted the urban 
poor to enjoy as a form of social justice 


ship, use and disposition of property and its increment” 
is already stated in Section 1. Therefore, the general 
rule affects all the sections on Social Justice. So it does 
not dilute or diminish because the general rule is very 
strong and is in the first section. 

MR. FOZ. And in addition, the term “urban land 
REFORM” involves the idea of regulation. 

THE PRESIDENT. How does the section read now? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Foz 
will read the complete text. 

MR. FOZ. The provision reads as follows: “The 
State shall BY LAW and for the common good under- 
take a continuing program of urban land REFORM 
and housing IN COOPERATION WITH THE PRIVATE 
SECTOR that will MAKE decent housing AND BASIC 
SERVICES AVAILABLE at affordable cost to UNDER- 
PRIVILEGED AND HOMELESS citizens in urban 
centers and resettlement areas.” 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, before we vote, I 
would like to explain briefly why I asked that the word 
“deserving” be deleted and that instead we add me 
words “HOMELESS citizens” after “UNDERPRI- 
VILEGED AND,” the reason being that there are under- 
privileged citizens that have homes by inheritance. 
Our main concern here are the homeless citizens w o 
live on the sidewalks, on top of garbage dumps an m 
shacks. So, that is the explanation why I ^ 

words “AND HOMELESS citizens.” May I ask tnar 
we now take a vote. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify: we also have the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Trenas. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, we have incor- 
porated all our ideas. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of this particular 
amendment on Section 11, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and 2 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized, 
answer our colleague because the reason we agreed to 

the removal of the words “regulate the ownership” MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento 

that the general rule on “regulation, acquisition, owner- be recognized to amend Section 1 2 . 


FRIDAY, AUGUSTS, 1986 


93 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my amend- 
ment is an amendment by deletion. May I propose 

* that we delete the words “with valid claims” after 
“dwellers”? 

MS. NIEVA. We have taken that out. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that has been 
taken out. 

MR. BENGZON. We have taken that out. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. We also deleted the words “due pro- 
cess,” and instead we use “IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
law.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Nieva kindly 
repeat that. 

MS. NIEVA. Line 3 reads as follows: “Urban poor 
dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings 
demolished EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH law 
AND ALWAYS IN A JUST AND HUMANE MANNER.” 
But I think we have not yet finished it. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I be clarified on why we 
removed the words “due process” and replaced these 
with the word “LAW” instead? 

MR. BENGZON. It is a redundancy. If it is in accord- 
ance with law, it means to say it is with due process. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

My other amendment on Section 1 2 is for the reten- 
tion of the lines originally deleted by the Committee, 
and these are the words “and their involvement in its 
planning and implementation.” 

Madam President, I conferred with a group of urban 
poor and they asked that these lines be retained because 
they wanted to participate not only in the planning but 
also in the implementation. These two lines, they said, 
are crucial lines which ought to be retained. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. Will the Commissioner kindly repeat 
that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. My suggestion, Madam President, 
is for the retention of the lines “and their involvement 
in its planning and implementation” because this 
resettlement will definitely affect the urban poor 
numbering more than one million in Metro Manila. So 
they are suggesting — and I hope the Committee will 
accept this proposal — that we retain the words, “and 
their involvement in its planning and implementation.” 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the reason that 
was deleted is that there is already that understanding 
when we inserted the word “consultation.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. But for clarity — and what are 
two lines among friends — I propose that we retain 
these. After all, this was the original proposal of the 
Committee for the inclusion of these two lines. May 
I suggest, therefore, that we retain the same. 

MR. BENGZON. The situation we are really trying 
to avoid is that, if after all the planning which is done 
by the government in consultation with these people, 
they ultimately refuse to be resettled, then everything 
will have gone to waste. After all, this phrase is already 
covered in the word “consultation.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Anyway, if the real intent of the 
Committee is for that consultation to cover their 
involvement in planning and implementation, then I 
withdraw my amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

May I inquire from the Committee whether the 
words here, “urban poor dwellers shall not be evicted,” 
refer to the squatters? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Under existing law, squatters are 
perse illegally occupying the land. 

MR. BENGZON. That is why we say, “IN ACCOR- 
DANCE WITH LAW,” because if he is a squatter, under 
the law, he is a nuisance per se. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. He can be evicted because of the 
very fact that he is a nuisance per se, which is in accord- 
ance with law. However, the eviction will have to be in 
a just and humane manner, not in the manner by which, 
for example, the squatters in the Tatalon Estate were 
evicted or were attempted to be evicted. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will agree on the use of “JUST 
AND HUMANE MANNER.” But when we say that they 
cannot be evicted nor their dwellings demolished except 
in accordance with law would that force the poor owner 
of the land being squatted on to go to court to evict 
them? 


94 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. That is why I say that if the illegal determine whether he is a professional squatter or 

squatters are a nuisance per se, an eviction, without just a mere squatter? We are constitutionalizing squat- 


going to court, would be in accordance with law. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. So, the owner of the land on 
which they are squatting will have to go to court to 
evict them. Is that right under this provision? 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Suppose the poor owner does not 
have the means to go to court because litigation is costly, 
will he then have to hve with the situation that what he 
owns he does not have? With the statement “urban 
poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings 
demolished EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW 
AND ALWAYS IN A JUST AND HUMANE MAN- 
NER,” we are forcing the owner of the land to go to 
court, in accordance with law for the eviction. If the 
owner has no money because court litigation is quite 
expensive, then we are liable to have a small landowner 
ending up without any land at all. 

MR- BENGZON. Madam President, may we request 
Commissioner Regalado to explain this. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. As we were saying, a professional 
squatter with no valid claim whatsoever can be con- 
si ered a nuisance per se. And in the abatement of a 
nuisance per se as distinguished from a nuisance per 
uccidens, the owner does not have to go to court. He 
can report to the municipal authorities or to the health 
authorities or he can seek the aid of the police author- 
ities. If, on the other hand, it is a nuisance per accidens 
which requires a determination of facts, then that will 
be the time when judicial recourse will be necessary, 
^so, the owner himself, under the law on property, 
is entitled to use a reasonable cost in defense of his 
property, whenever there is a clear, patent infringement 
upon his property rights. Now, this does not compel 
the owner to go to court. If it is a nuisance per se, all 
he has to do is to seek the help of the local authorities. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I make 
some remarks on Commissioner Regalado’s remarks. 

Commissioner Regalado speaks of professional 
squatters, who are to him a nuisance per se. When he 
^ds a squatter, that is a nuisance per accidens to him. 
Now, how can we determine whether or not he is a 
professional squatter? In the first place, when we see 
a man squatting on our property, it is illegal per se 
from the very beginning. What about in the city where 
somebody occupies your land which measures up to 
250, 300 or 350 square meters? How can the owner 


ting. I will really agree on a humane and Just manner 
of evicting them, but to require the owner of that land 
to go to court so that he can comply in accordance 
with law, will be too much punishment for the poor 
owner who is perhaps as poor as the squatter himself. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, to begin with, 
even at this moment or even without this particular 
paragraph, one cannot get a squatter out unless one 
sues him in court, unless, as we said, the squatter is a 
nuisance per se. And if he is a nuisance per se or a 
professional squatter, the landowner does not have to 
go to court, as explained by Commissioner Regalado. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is my main difficulty. 

MR. BENGZON. That depends already upon the 
facts of the case. We cannot put all of those exceptions 
and explanations in here, except the ones that are m 
the Journal. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I would then make an amendment 
by deleting the first sentence of Section 1 2 because 
we are constitutionalizing squatting in this Constitu 
tion. 

MR. BENGZON. Would the Gentleman propose his 
amendment then so that we can act on it? 

MR. DE CASTRO. I suggest that the foUowing first 
sentence of Section 12 be deleted: “Urban 

dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings 
molished EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH law 
AND ALWAYS IN A JUST AND HUMANE MANN 
the reason being that we are constitutionalizing ® 
squatting whether it is professional squatters or J 
mere squatters. We have no reason to constitutioim ize 
what is nuisance per se or what is nuisance per acciaen 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I recog 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. I would like to make a comment 
on Commissioner de Castro’s comments on this. We 
are not out to find out, I think, in this particular section 
whether or not they are illegal or professional squatters. 
This particular section is premised on the fact that they 
are human beings and should be protected by law. They 
should not be driven away like animals, in the way the 
demolition of shanties was done in the past wherein a 
group of army or military or security guards would 
just come, without due process of law. In certain cases, 
some people have been killed . An example has already 
been cited in the case of the Tatalon Estate. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


95 


The particular section is premised on the fact that 
squatters, whether they are there illegally or not, 
whether they are professionals or not, are human 
beings. It is not their fault that they are poor. Under 
the law, they should be protected. That particular 
protection is what we are asking under this section on 
social justice. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, it has been 
accepted by the Committee that when we talk of urban 
poor dwellers, we refer to squatters. I do not say that 
they are animals; neither do I say that they should be 
driven like such. But what I am questioning. Madam 
President, is why we are constitutionaUzing squatting. 
So, I do recommend that the first sentence in Section 
12 be deleted. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
amendment by deletion? 

MS. NIEVA. No, the Committee does not accept. 
Madam President. 

VOTING 

MR. RAMA. May we take a vote on this? 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner de Castro to delete the 
first sentence of Section 12, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

Those against, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 vote in favor and 30 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, before going to 
Section 11 or 12 in the draft, may I be allowed to go 
back to Section 1 1 after the Foz amendment. With 
the permission of the Commission, we failed to answer 
a basic demand and a basic right for the urban poor 
dwellers and resettlement dwellers. 

I seek to add, after the Foz amendment, the follow- 
ing sentence with the permission of the Commission; 
IT SHALL ALSO PROVIDE ADEQUATE EMPLOY- 
MENT OPPORTUNITIES TO SUCH CITIZENS. This 
is an amendment jointly proposed by Commissioners 
Nolledo, Sarmiento, Foz, Bennagen and Tan. Perhaps, 
in the euphoria of our desire to answer the needs of 
the urban poor dwellers, we forgot one very important 
and significant assistance which we should give to them. 


MS. NIEVA. Madam President, the original committee 
report carried the phrase “employment-generating 
economic activity.” Yes, that is very important. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the Committee willingly 
accept this amendment? 

MS. NIEVA. We are accepting that amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
repeat the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is to place a new sentence after 
the Foz amendment: IT SHALL ALSO PROVIDE 
ADEQUATE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES TO 
SUCH CITIZENS. Commissioners Foz, Sarmiento, 
Nolledo, Tan and Bennagen are coauthors. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment which has been accepted by 
the Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 1 2 of the proposed draft, 

I am constrained to present this amendment because my 
past is haunting me. I come from a very poor rural com- 
munity. But at the start of Section 1 2, we only speak of 
the urban poor dwellers. So, I seek to insert between 
“urban” and “poor” the words AND RURAL. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May we ask the proponent what 
to include under the category of “rural poor”? 

MR. DAVIDE. The same as the “rural poor” referred 
to in the phrase “No resettlement of URBAN OR 
RURAL DWELLERS” appearing in the second sentence. 
These are the rural poor. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Would these include also rural 
communities that are threatened by huge infrastructure 
projects? 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. NIEVA. The Committee gladly accepts the 

amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 


96 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Still on Section 12 of the draft proposal: we have a 
little difficulty in the conception of urban poor dwellers. 
I, therefore, propose an amendment to read UNDER- 
PRIVILEGED URBAN DWELLERS because when we 
speak of poor or poverty, it is generally conceived in 
terms of their financial capacity. But financial capacity 
alone is not the only consideration. There may be other 
factors to consider in classifying an underprivileged 
urban dweller. So, in heu of “urban poor dwellers” 
and to have a broader scope which will include the poor, 
I propose that we use the phrase UNDERPRIVILEGED 
URBAN DWELLERS to make it a little more encom- 
passing. 


MR. FOZ. The term “urban poor” is mentioned not 
only in the 1973 Constitution but in volumes and 
volumes of books on real estate development. It is an 
accepted term even among developers all over the world. 
So, I think we should stick to the term “urban poor.” 

MR. REGALADO. Provided, however, that it means 
not only the financial but also other aspects of life 
where they are underprivileged or at a disadvantage, 
and provided that the Committee will accept it. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. I will yield to the use of the words 
“urban poor.” 

MR. BENGZON. With that understanding. Madam 
President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. The Honorable Regalado did not read 
accepted amendment. It should read: 
URBAN AND RURAL POOR DWELLERS. 


^ after the change 
ot the word from “poor” to UNDERPRIVILEGED for 
e reasons I have given, and the word is more encom- 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I just be allowed to make a 
comment on the proposed amendment? When we speak 
o urban poor dwellers, we speak of those who are 
inancially poor and deprived of basic necessities. So, 

pptvtt cover the word “UNDER- 

• T u ’ ^i^ce “urban poor” has achieved a 
meanmg. t has been used for years, for decades. So, if 

“UNDERPRIVILEGED URBAN 
Fvpn tv>o ’ 'vould be creating confusion. 

present Constitution speaks of “urban poor.” 

speafoflnd*iri“ged ° T 

includes the poor. Now ,h, '' 

poor” is used in the 1973 ConsuStirf^'n “tban 

In OQV that it u j 'constitution does not mean 
to say that it has had an inflexible and rigid juris- 
prudential meanmg. I want it ^ \u 

• 4 . 4 .U f -1 II expanded to more than 

just the financial capacity of a person. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized 


MR. REGALADO. With regard to the third line 

which says, “EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW 
AND ALWAYS,” I propose the deletion of the word 
“ALWAYS” because it is redundant. The Ime 

already says “EXCEPT IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW 
AND IN A JUST AND HUMANE MANNER.” 

MS. NIEVA. We accept. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. We accept. 

MR. REGALADO. On the fifth line, I Propof® ^ 

insert THEM AND between the words “with” and tne 
and after “communities,” add WHERE THEY A so 
that the amended portion will now read : or 

dwellers shall take place without consultation wi 
THEM AND the communities WHERE THEY ARE 
to be relocated.” We will give the communities where 
they are going to be transferred a say on whether or no 
they should be placed in that particular commuriity. n 
other words, we provide a dual consultation wit e 
community and with the urban poor in their own 
munity. Also, this will provide a chance for the o er 
community to which they are going to be relocate o 
explain whether their resources or their situation wou 
accommodate so many in the resettlement areas. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, does “THEM” refer 
to entire communities, because here we have in mind 
entire communities that have to be relocated and 
resettled because of infrastructure projects like dams? 


MR. REGALADO. "No. The use of the pronoun 
“them” has for its antecedent the urban or rural 
dwellers. There must be prior consultation, of course, 
with the urban and rural dwellers. So the word “them” 
has reference to the urban or rural dwellers who are 
going to be relocated. The second addition is also a 
consultation with the community to which they are 
going to be relocated. So, it is not just the government 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


97 


saying, “We will transfer you here,” without giving that 
other community where they are intended to be relo- 
cated the opportunity also to say, “Well, this is our 
present situation. We have these problems ourselves.” 

They may not have enough arrangements for giving 
employment as has already been adopted in the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide. So, at least there should 
be a consultation with the community where the 
settlers are going to be.^relocated, aside from the con- 
sultation with those who are going to be recolated. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the proponent yield to one 
question? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, gladly. 

MR. DAVIDE. What if the community to which they 
will be relocated rejects? Would it mean the failure of 
the resettlement plan or program? 

MR. REGALADO. No. The word we used here is 
only “consultation.” They cannot reject or override a 
governmental policy, but at least that community can 
prepare to accept these people or to ventilate also the 
possible problems, because being members and resi- 
dents of that community, they are also in a position 
to inform the authorities why it would not be advisable. 
If, however, the authorities insist, then it is only a 
question of consultation. 

MR. DAVIDE. So just for the record, it is not really 
a right granted to the communities to where they will 
be relocated. 

MR. REGALADO. No. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the other community will reject, 
the government can still insist. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, because the word used here 
is “consultation” only. The government can also learn 
from those who have been living in those areas for years 
and who know what the possible situation would be, if 
these urban poor are transferred to those communities. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. BENGZON. Will the Commissioner read the 
proposal again? 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, this last sentence 
would be: “No resettlement of urban or rural dwellers 
shall take place without consultation with THEM AND 
the communities WHERE THEY ARE to be relocated.” 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just one more 
point. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In tlie original formulation, it is 
my understanding that the one to be consulted is the 
communities where the urban or rural dwellers are. With 
this amendment, tlie communities to be consulted are 
the communities where they are to be relocated. Is that 
correct? 

MR. REGALADO. No, there will be dual con- 
sultation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Both? 

MR. REGALADO. Both. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I ask the proponent one 
clarificatory question as to the meaning of “con- 
sultation”? I ask this because in our experience, the 
government makes claims to consultation but it merely 
goes through the motion of consultation. We would 
like to envision here a consultation that would provide 
tlie communities adequate information on who are the 
relocatees and where they will be going. 

MR REGALADO. The word “consultation” was 

oposed by the Committee, so it is for the Committee 
to ^ve its own interpretation as to the extent, the 
scope, the effect, the means and the modes of con- 
sultation. 

MR BENNAGEN. I mentioned that because we feel 
that consultation should be qualified in terms of making 
adequate information available to those who are con- 
cerned so that decisions are made on the basis of the 
best available information. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. 

MR BENNAGEN. That is the meaning we have here, 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, as the Committee originally 
intended the word “consultation” to mean. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Will the Gentleman read the amend- 
ment again, please? 


98 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. The last sentence of Section 12 
will read; “No resettlement of urban or rural dwellers 
shall take place without consultation with THEM 
AND /the communities WHERE THEY ARE to be 
relocated.” 

MS. NIEVA. We accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What happens to the last phrase? 

MS. NIEVA. The last phrase — “and their involve- 
ment in its planning and implementation” — was already 
eliminated. 

THE PRESIDENT. That was eliminated already. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Before we put the matter to a 
vote, will the proponent yield to an amendment as a 
consequence of the Davide amendment? So, the 
senteiKe will read: “No resettlement of urban AND 
mra R dwellers. . .” This is in consonance with line 

MR. REGALADO. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I just say something? 
nize^^ president. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we go back to 
the same problem because if we say SUCH, we are 
referring to “urban and rural poor dwellers.” So, I think 
we should retain “urban and rural dwellers.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. I agree. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President, we retain the original 
phraseology. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what we have now is the 
Regalado amendment. 

Is there any objection to the amendment of Com- 
missioner Regalado? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no rnore 
registered proponents of amendments to this provision, 
so may I ask that we take a vote on the whole provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Chairman now read 
Section 12. 


MS. NIEVA. Section 12 now reads as follows: ‘Ur- 
ban and rural poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor 
their dwellings demolished except in accordance with 
law and in a just and humane manner. No resettlement 
of urban and rural dwellers shall take place without 
adequate consultation with them and with the com- 
munities where they are to be relocated.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to tWs 
Section 1 2 as read by the honorable Chairman of the 
Committee on Social Justice? 


EENNAGEN. We may not have to qualify rural 
dwellers with the adjective “POOR” because in cases 

^ ^ massive relocation, like relocations 

ugh about by construction of dams, even those 
who are not really rural poor are included. 


MR. SARMIENTO. With that explanation, I with- 
draw my amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I heard the Committee Chairman 
reading “urban and rural dwellers.” It should be or- 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, just for ven- 
fication. Do the records show the words ‘‘without 
consultation” or “without adequate consultation”? 


reco^ized*^^^*^^^^' ^°"^"^issioner Maambong is THE PRESIDENT. “Without adequate consultation. 


MR. MAAMBONG. To avr.m 
word “urban” or “rural ” will r 5®Pehtion of tl 
accept an amendment to hi<! Regalai 

read; “No resettlement OF SUol^J 
eliminate the words “urban or rural” and' tasert SUC 

MR. REGALADO. That amendment is accepted i 
sofar as I am concerned but that is the wording of t 
Committee so I think they should be consulted. 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 34 votes in favor, 1 against and 
no abstention; Section 12 is approved. 


FRIDAY, AUGUSTS, 1986 


99 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized to amend Section 13 
which is now Section 1 2 under the subtitle “health.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Monsod? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MONSOD. We had deferred considering the last 
two paragraphs of the section on labor. Since Commis- 
sioner Aquino is back, may we go back there, with the 
indulgence of Commissioner Nolledo? 

Madam President, may we have a suspension of the 
session to organize ourselves? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:37 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:14 p.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Regalado Maambong presiding. 


It shall guarantee the rights of ALL workers to self- 
organization, collective bargaining and negotiations, 
peaceful and concerted activities including the right to 
strike in ACCORDANCE WITH LAW. THEY SHALL 
BE ENTITLED TO SECURITY OF TENURE, just and 
humane conditions of work, A LIVING WAGE, and TO 
PARTICIPATE IN the pohcy and decision-making 
PROCESSES affectmg their rights and benefits AS 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW. 

The State shall promote THE PRINCIPLE OF 
SHARED RESPONSIBILITY BETWEEN WORKERS 
AND EMPLOYERS IN settUng THEIR disputes 
THROUGH THE USE OF VOLUNTARY MODES, 
INCLUDING CONCILIATION, AND THE ENFORCE- 
MENT OF THEIR MUTUAL COMPLIANCE THERE- 
WITH. 

THE STATE shall regulate THE RELATIONS BE- 
TWEEN WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS, RECOG- 
NIZING, FOREMOST, the right of labor to its just 
share and the right of BUSINESS ENTERPRISES to 
reasonable returns on investments, EXPANSION AND 
GROWTH.” 

This reformulation took off basically from what we 
had voted upon in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of Section 
3, and we have incorporated the proposed amendments 
of Commissioners Azcuna, Foz, Colayco, Regalado and 
the Committee. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

Mr. Floor Leader, will you kindly indicate where we 
are now. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is a request 
from the Committee that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, by now the 
body should have been furnished with copies of the re- 
formulated section on labor, pertaining to Section 
3. May I be aUowed to read it while we are waiting for 
the xerox copies? 

the presiding officer (Mr. Maambong). The 

Commissioner may proceed. 


MS. AQUINO^ The reformulation would account fc 
a reformatting by way of completing the paragrapi 
instead of mere enumerations, and some transposition 
which would best define the concepts. 


Section 3 reads: “The State shall afford EVERY 
protection to labor and promote full employment and 
equality of employment opportunities FOR ALL. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Before the suspension of the ses- 
sion, I was on this last paragraph where I was supposed 
to introduce an amendment, but we had to wait for the 
reformulation. With respect to this last paragraph, on 
the third sentence thereof, I am proposing an amend- 
ment by insertion of the word EQUIVALENT between 
the words “the” and “right” to read; “share and the 
equivalent right of business enterprises to reasonable 
returns.” 

The reason for this is that the original draft stated 
the corresponding rights, which are very vague and 
ambiguous. Then I noticed that the word “correspond- 
ing” was eliminated and that the words “the right” 
were simply put. In the case of labor, it is stated that it 
must be “RECOGNIZING, FOREMOST, the right of 
labor to its just share. To put this on an equipoise, 
since all persons should be equal before the law, I pro- 
pose this amendment: “and the EQUIVALENT right 
of business enterprises to reasonable returns on invest- 
ments . . .” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Before the Committee responds, we would like to know 
from Commissioner Aquino if there is a reformulation 
of paragraphs (c) and (d) because I think Commissioner 
Regalado is now proposing to amend paragraph (d). 


100 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. There is a 
reformulation of the two paragraphs. 

MR. REGALADO. I am using the reformulated draft 
as furnished me. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is it 
the reformulated draft he is using now? 


REV. RIGOS. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Do I understand that the word 
“FOREMOST” here refers to the right of labor to its 
just share or also to the right of business enterprises? 


MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. But there 
are some minor corrections. The omission of the word 
“corresponding” was not intended; it must have been a 
typographical error. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we 
be furnished a copy? We are just guessing here. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Even 
the Chair is waiting for its copy. In the meantime, may 
we just proceed. Commissioner Regalado? 


MR. REGALADO. Yes. Since Commissioner Aquino 
said that the word ‘corresponding” should have been 
there,^ I am proposing the change to “EQUIVALENT 
right because corresponding right” is very vague; 
there can be no corresponding right of capital, shaU we 
^nim/A^T labor. So, I am proposing “the 

Si capital Lo to 

equal ^ growth potential. Equivalent does not mean 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Committee respond? 

MS. AQUINO. If the Gentleman would read the para- 
graph, when we say that the State shall regulate, the 
reference to the “FOREMOST” right means that the 
guiding or the polar star in the regulation of the State 
regarding the relationship between workers and em- 
ployers is the primacy of labor. 

REV. RIGOS. Probably a comma (, ) should be 
inserted after “share” to make it clear that “FORE- 
MOST” is intended to refer to the right of labor to its 
just share. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, we accept 
the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


presiding officer (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. The understanding then is that the 
meaning is not equal. We prefer the word “correspon- 
mg, I believe, because we do not wish to speak 
equality here nor we do not deny equality, 
it • ^ compare an orange to an apple, and say 

IS equal to an apple. As you can see, the terms are 
rioht^^^f etely parallel. We are vindicating almost the 
thp share and what is said regarding 

nn inx ^'^siness enterprises is to reasonable returns 
snpatin^ ments, expansion and growth. So we are not 

whv completely equivalent things. That is 

why we used the word “corresponding.” 

doM^of ^ “equivalent’' 

pertaining to diSenT^l^t equalize rights 

spending’^ is'amfieTol"^^^^^^^^^ 

“corresponding lights”? ^ 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER iMr lu u ^ i 

the Committee accepting th^Umen 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is anot er 
amendment to the same subsection. May I usk tha 
Commissioner Sarmiento be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Just 
a moment, Mr. Floor Leader. There is a pending ^O" 
posed amendment of Commissioner Regalado. i 
Commissioner Regalado rephrase the amendment so 
that the body will know? 

MR. REGALADO. The entire paragraph will read: 

“THE STATE shall regulate the RELAT^NS 
BETWEEN WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS, RECOG- 
NIZING, FOREMOST, the right of labor to its just 
share, and the EQUIVALENT right of BUSINESS 
ENTERPRISES to reasonable returns on investments, 
EXPANSION AND GROWTH.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
proposed amendment is to change the word “corre- 
sponding” to “EQUIVALENT”? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DA VIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS AQUINO^ Mr. Presiding Officer, we would rather 
submit it to the body for a decision. ' 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


101 


MR. DAVIDE. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to the proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the second line, instead of “labor” 
it should be WORKERS; that is, “the right of WORK- 
ERS,” then change “its” to THEIR. On the third line, 
change “business enterprises” to EMPLOYERS. So, the 
provision will now read: “THE STATE shall regulate 
THE RELATIONS BETWEEN WORKERS AND EM- 
PLOYERS, RECOGNIZING, FOREMOST, the right 
of WORKERS to 'THEIR just share and the right of 
EMPLOYERS to reasonable returns . . .” 

» 

MR. REGALADO. I accept the amendment, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
prefers the retention of the word “labor” because of its 
positive connotation of a capability for force. Besides, 
it is a generally accepted and settled usage in labor and 
management relations that you would refer to workers 
as “labor.” 

MR. DAVIDE. This is just to harmonize it with the 
first line. We speak of the relations between workers 
and employers. It did not speak of the relations between 
labor and capital. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr.* Presiding Officer, likewise in 
the preceding paragraph, it also speaks of workers and 
employers. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. There might be a problem of con- 
ceptual symmetry here. When we say “reasonable 
returns on investments, EXPANSION AND GROWTH,” 
we usually refer to business enterprises, not to em- 
ployers. 

MR. DAVIDE. What about, say, a single proprietor- 
ship? We do not consider it as a business enterprise; so, 
it is an individual employer. 

^ could be included, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. It may be a generic reference to all kinds of 
businesses. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the idea is to harmonize the con- 
cept, it should be relations between labor and capital. 
The first sentence should read: “THE STATE shall 


regulate THE RELATIONS BETWEEN LABOR AND 
CAPITAL, RECOGNIZING, FOREMOST, the right of 
labor to its just share and the right of BUSINESS 
ENTERPRISES to reasonable returns.” 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the Committee 
insists on the retention of the phrase “BUSINESS 
ENTERPRISES” because “employers” or “capital” has 
its connotation with reference to money and . . . 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. On the matter of using the term 
“business enterprises,” I am envisioning, for instance, 
the situation of a sectarian school like the school I 
am connected with. It is not considered a business 
enterprise because it is a corporation solely run by the 
Benedictine community. Yet, they are employers and, 
in determining the right of labor, do we not also have 
to take into account the reasonable returns on invest- 
ments, expansion and growth of that academic com- 
munity? Otherwise, they will be out of the concept 
of “business enterprises,” because they are not primarily 
designed for business. So, I think the generic terms of 
“employers” and “employees, as used in the opening 
line of that last paragraph and in the next preceding 
paragraph, do not make only for a symmetrical 
formulation; they are broad enough to cover the rela- 
tions between the so-called labor and the so-called 
capital. So, we use the word “employers” because they 
are not necessarily capital-or revenue-or profit-oriented. 

MR. AZCUNA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Azcuna is recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Would Commissioner Regalado 
accept PRIVATE ENTERPRISE instead of “employers” 
so that the provision will read; “AND THE CORRE- 
SPONDING OR EQUIVALENT RIGHT OF PRIVATE 
enterprise to reasonable returns on investments 
EXPANSION AND GROWTH.” 

MR. REGALADO. Firstly, that was a proposed 
amendment to my amendment by Commissioner 
Rodrigo. I think the question should be addressed to 
him. I just followed it up for purposes of symmetry. 

MR. AZCUNA. I see. What does Commissioner 
Davide say? 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Committee react now to this present formulation 
because there seems to be an acceptance of Commis- 


102 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


sioner Davide to the word suggested by Commissioner 
Azcuna? 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, if we use 
“PRIVATE ENTERPRISE,” how about government 
enterprises? Are they employers? 

MR. AZCUNA. The government has no right to a 
return on its investment for public service. So, it has 
no right. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Could we perhaps resolve this issue if both Commis- 
sioner Davide and Commissioner Regalado will approach 
the Committee and formulate whatever suggestions they 
have? They have been saying so many words and I think 
the body is now confused. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). For 
the benefit of the other Members of the Commission, 
let us take it up one by one. We are now on the fourth 
paragraph. The first line states: “THE STATE shall 
regulate THE RELATIONS BETWEEN WORKERS 
AND ...” Does the Gentleman have any amendment 
there? 


MR. REGALADO. None, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

The next line, “labor to its just share,” is all right. 

It is on the third line that I suggested the amendment 
to eliminate “BUSINESS” such that it will read: “and 
the EQUIVALENT right of ENTERPRISES to reason- 
able returns.” The reason I put “EQUIVALENT right of 
ENTERPRISES” is to put it as an equipoise with the 
word “FOREMOST” on the second line as insisted * 
upon by the Committee. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Committee now indicate what amendatory word has 
been accepted by the Committee and what amendatory 
word has not been accepted? 


MR. OPLE. I wanted to convey the concern that 
Commissioner Bacani had already stated that the use 
of the term “private enterprise” might prejudice the 
nght to the same protection under this section of 
vanous classes of workers and employees in govern- 
ment enterprises and in the public service itself. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Th. 
C an declares a suspension of the session. 

It was 5:30 p.nt. 


resumption of session 

At 5:35 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 




mi™nefR?gSs?rcS 


oodtL'^rf the*r°' Officer, I think 

phrase “the nghf^hS iVto “d 

right of ENTERPRISES to reasoSe tSmT” 

the word enterpnses,” taking away the word “I 
ness,” will cover all possible enterprises not necess 
for business. 


MS. AQUINO. The Committee has accepted the 
substitution of the word “LABOR” in place of the wor 
“WORKERS” and ENTERPRISES in place of the terrn 
“BUSINESS ENTERPRISES. However, the proposed 
amendment to substitute the word “EQUIVALENT 
for “corresponding” is not acceptable to the Commi - 
tee. We would submit it to the body for a vote. 

May the Committee be allowed to explain? It is the 
shared sentiment that the substitution of the word 
“corresponding” with “EQUIVALENT” would efftc; 
tively reduce the potency of the word “FOREMOSl- 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
Commissioner Regalado insisting on his amendment o 
adding the word “EQUIVALENT”? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, to be voted upon by the 
body, because of their insistence on putting the word 
“FOREMOST” insofar as labor is concerned. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER <Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is “EQUIVALENT” or “CORRE- 
SPONDING” the word to be inserted? 

MR. REGALADO. The amendment of the Commit- 
tee omitted the word “appropriate ”in the drafting. 

MS. AQUINO.“Corresponding.” 

MR. RODRIGO. “Corresponding.” 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


103 


MR. REGALADO. Lack of “corresponding.” 

MR. RODRIGO. I am asking whether the amendment 
of Commissioner Regalado is to insert the word 
“EQUIVALENT.” 

MR. REGALADO. “EQUIVALENT right” instead 
of “corresponding right.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). We 
will take this up one by one. Will the Committee now 
indicate again the amendatory word of Commissioner 
Regalado which has been accepted so that we do not 
have to put that to a vote? 

MS. AQUINO. The last paragraph, as amended, 
reads: “THE STATE shall regulate THE RELATIONS 
BETWEEN WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS, RECOG- 
NIZING, FOREMOST, the right of labor to its just 
share, and the corresponding right of ENTERPRISES 
to reasonable returns on investments, EXPANSION 
AND GROWTH.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). That 
is acceptable now to the Committee. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

We will go now to the word “EQUIVALENT.” Will 
the Committee indicate again where that word is 
supposed to be inserted? 

MS. AQUINO. On the penultimate line of the fourth 
paragraph, between the words “the” and “right,” there 
is supposed to be the word “corresponding.” The 
omission is a typographical error and now Commis- 
sioner Regalado seeks to delete this word and substitute 
the word “EQUIVALENT. 


VOTING 


the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair will now put it to a vote. 


As many as are in favor of the insertion of the word 
“EQUIVALENT between the words “the” and “right” 
on the third line of the last paragraph of this draft, 
please rarse then hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. There is another typographical error 
on the second line of paragraph 3. There was an omis- 
sion of the word PREFERENTIAL before the word 
“use.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that is a committee amendment, 
I would like to propose an amendment. Between the 
words “employers” and “and” on the third paragraph, 
insert the following: AND THE PREFERENTIAL USE 
OF VOLUNTARY MODES; then on the second line, 
add s to “dispute” and delete the words “through 
the.” On the third line, delete the words “use of volun- 
tary modes,” so that the entire paragraph will read: 
“The state shall promote the principle of shared res- 
ponsibility between workers and employers AND THE 
PREFERENTIAL USE OF VOLUNTARY MODES in 
settling their disputes, including conciliation, and 
enforcement of their mutual compliance therewith.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
amendment as proposed by Commissioner Davide has 
been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, my amend- 
ment is an amendment by addition. This is coauthored 
by Commissioner Foz. 

After the word “share,” add the words: IN THE 
FRUITS OF PRODUCTION. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Gentleman kindly indicate the paragraph. 


MR. SARMIENTO. On the fourth paragraph, add the 
words IN THE FRUITS OF PRODUCTION. May I 
briefly explain? 


As 3re against, please raise their hand. 

(Several Members raised their hand.) 


The results show 13 votes in favor and 20 against; 
the proposed amendment is lost. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The words “just share” seem 
incomplete; they could mean just share in the owner- 
ship, management and profit of enterprise. 


/ 


104 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. We accept the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento has 
been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. On lines 2 and 3 of paragraph 4, 

I suggest that we eliminate “foremost” and “corre- 
sponding.” There are some adjectives that are meaning- 
ful like “preferential.” The words “foremost” and 
“corresponding” do not seem to add any substance. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair does not understand the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Padilla. What specifically is the Gentle- 
man’s proposed amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. On Unes 2 and 3, eliminate “fore- 
most” and “corresponding.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Committee does not accept the proposed amendment. 
Does the Gentleman insist on a vote? 

MR. PADILLA. May I explain briefly my amend- 
ment and then I ask for a vote. The sharing of res- 
ponsibility and likewise the sharing of the benefits of 
industrial peace are rights not only of labor but also 
of the enterprise. Actually, if the enterprise does not 
earn or realize profits as reasonable returns on invest- 
ments, if there are no profits or net income, then there 
can hardly be any basis for the share of labor m the 
fruits of production. They are joint rights, concomitant, 
mutually dependent on each other. So, I feel that the 
adjectives or the words “foremost” and “correspond- 
ing” do not add to the real intent of more productivity, 
which we fervently expect from industrial peace. Both 
factors should derive enough earnings or profits for 
reasonable returns to capital and a just share to labor. 
When the word “just” justifies “share,” that is mean- 
ingful; but the adjectives “foremost” and “correspond- 
ing” do not add any substantial significance. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 


BISHOP BACANI. This has a psychological impact, 
I believe. In actual situations when, for example, the 
price of raw materials is raised, the enterprises easily 
accept that, but they would not so easily raise the price 
of labor or the salaries of workers. This is the last thing 
they will accept to raise. In other words, the primacy 
of the human component is in practice not actually 
recognized; that is why it is important to indicate that 
it is foremost. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is the 
Committee now prepared to submit the matter to a 
vote? 

MR. PADILLA Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. I cannot fuUy agree that this is only 
for psychological effect because we must be realistic. 

BISHOP BACANI. That is part of reality — the 
psychology of people: the way they react, the way they 
look at things. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Shall 
we now put the amendment to a vote? 

As many as are in favor of the amendment, please 
raise their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 8 votes in favor and 17 against; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner David e be 
recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

This is a very simple amendment. On Section 13, 
instead of “EVERY” before “protection,” use the word 
FULL. 

MS. AQUINO. We accept the amendment. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 


t 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


105 


MS. QUESADA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to propose an amend- 
ment to this. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, we did not 
understand the amendment of the Gentleman. We were 
looking at Section 13 but the proceedings were so fast. 
It does not matter to me anyway. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). For 
the information of Commissioner de Castro, on Section 
13, line 1, what was sought to be amended and what 
was accepted by the committee is the change of the 
word “every” to FULL. It was already approved. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. I think a little confusion arises 
here because of the fact that there is a typographical 
error — instead of Section 13, it should be Section 3. 
So, the other Commissioners are looking at the end 
of the Article while we are referring to Section 3. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair corrects itself; it should be Section 3. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. For the last amendment to Section 3, 
I ask that Commissioner Foz be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is an amend- 
ment that seeks to add a phrase after the word “there- 
with” on the third paragraph. The words to be inserted 
are: IN THE PROMOTION OF INDUSTRIAL PEACE. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. We accept the amendment, except 
that it might sound a bit awkward because the word 
“promote” appears already in the beginning of the 
sentence. But in principle, we accept the proposed 
amendment. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Would Commissioner Foz 
accept an amendment to his amendment? Instead of 
“PROMOTION,” how about the word ACHIEVEMENT 
so there will be no redundancy. So it will read: “IN 
THE ACHIEVEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL PEACE.” 

MR. FOZ. “IN THE REALIZATION OF INDUS- 
TRIAL PEACE.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). So, 
the word now is “REALIZATION.” What does the 
Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
proposed amendment is accepted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There are no more proponents of 
amendments to Section 3, so I ask that a vote be taken 
on the whole Section 3 after its reading. 

MR. ROMULO. May we ask the high-speed train to 
slow down a bit because the Committee has some 
suggestions. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to propose an amendment which has been accepted by 
the members of the Committee and that is, to bring 
back the original provision which reads: “The State 
shall afford FULL protection to labor, LOCAL AND 
OVERSEAS, ORGANIZED AND UNORGANIZED, 
and promote full employment and equality of em- 
ployment opportunities for all.” 

In the public hearing the problems of unorganized 
as well as of the overseas or migrant workers have 
often been mentioned. The reason we did not have any 
special section for this particular group is because of 
this one statement that would already cover the concern 
for these particular members of the labor sector. So, 
as we had already provided such protection to fisher- 
men and to farmworkers, I believe . . . 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. JAMIR. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Quesada was just about to finish her sentence; 
will the Commissioner continue. 


106 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. As I was saying, we have already 
provided a special provision for fishermen, and the 
inclusion of this particular provision would already put 
the stress that we are considering the plight of the 
unorganized and overseas workers. 

This was in the original provision but was deleted 
because of the demand for brevity. I have appealed 
and the Committee has reconsidered this particular 
provision. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. May I know whether that is a recon- 
sideration? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Floor Leader will respond to that because it is the 
recollection of the Chair that this first sentence has 
already been approved. Will the Floor Leader please 
respond to the parliamentary inquiry of Commissioner 
Jamir? 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:00 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

Is it the understanding of the Chair, Commissioner 
Foz, that in the approved amendment on paragraph 3 
which reads “in the realization of industrial peace,” the 
Commissioner would wish to amend the word “realiza- 
tion” to some other word? 

MR. FOZ. The amendment is to change the phrase 
“in the realization of industrial peace” to the following 
phrase: “TO FOSTER industrial peace.” 

May we know the reaction of the Committee? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair will now treat this as a primary amendment to an 
approved amendment. 

What does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. We accept the amendment. 


MR. RAMA. It seems that there needs to be a motion 
tor reconsideration. 

« 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we go into 
such a motion for reconsideration, I would like to go 
ac to a previous amendment which was accepted by 
the Committee regarding the phrase “in the realization 
peace.” I think the more proper word is 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
proposed amendment is accepted. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Just a 
moment, please. Let us put everything in order. The 
phrase in the realization of industrial peace” has been 
accepted by the Committee and since nobody objected, 
it was approved by the body. So, the Gentleman is now 
asking for a reconsideration of the approval of his 
amendment, “in the realization of industrial peace.” 


MR. JAMIR. I have a parliamentary inquiry, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Jamir is recognized. 

The Floor Leader will please respond once more to 
the parliamentary inquiry. 


MR. FOZ. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, and this has the 
clear^ce of the Committee. I would like to change the 
word realization” to “FURTHERANCE of industrial 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
does the Committee say? 


(Mr. Maambong). What 


MR. RAMA. What is the parliamentary inquiry? 

MR. JAMIR. My parliamentary inquiry is whether the 
statement of Commissioner Quesada is a motion for 
reconsideration. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS. AQUINO. For a while, 
on the alternative formula. 


we are trying to agree 


the presiding officer (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair declares a suspension of the session. 

It was 5:59 p.m. 


MS. AQUINO. The Committee volunteers to answer 
the question. If the Gentleman remembers, yesterday 
when we decided to vote on paragraphs (a) and (b) of 
Section 3, they were subject to the proposed recasting 
by Commissioner Colay co. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


107 


MR. JAMIR. So, this is not a reconsideration. 

MS. AQUINO. This is not a reconsideration. The 
Committee, on its own initiative, recasted the whole 
paragraphs in cooperation with some of the Com- 
missioners who have shown interest in this particular 
section, and the omission originally agreed upon is now 
being subjected to another amendment. 

MR. JAMIR. But I understand that we have already 
approved the first paragraph. 

MS. AQUINO. We did. But if I remember correctly, 
it was subject to recasting. 

MR. JAMIR. In that case, Mr. Presiding Officer, I am 
making it of record that I will file a motion for recon- 
sideration of the second sentence of Section 5. I voted 
in favor of this and tomorrow, at the opportune time, I 
will ask for a reconsideration so that I may be able to 
introduce my amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair takes note of that reservation. 

Commissioner Aquino is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. The particular reservation on the 
recasting by Justice Colayco pertained only to Section 
3. But the Gentleman filed a motion for reconsidera- 
tion. 

MR. JAMIR. But I am now making it of record my 
right to ask for a reconsideration of the second sentence 
of Section 5 because I voted in favor of that. 

MS. AQUINO. That is independent of the proceed- 
ings on Section 3 . 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, that is independent; that is dif- 
ferent. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, I was confused because the 
Gentleman mentioned it immediately after our delibera- 
tions on Section 3. 

MR. JAMIR. No, I am afraid that the hour is quite 
late, that is why I rushed to make of record my motion 
for reconsideration. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). That 
reservation. Commissioner Jamir, has already been 
noted by the Chair. We will now address ourselves to the 
proposed amendment on tlie first paragraph of Section 
3 to add, after the word “labor” on, the first line, 
“LOCAL AND OVERSEAS, ORGANIZED AND UN- 


ORGANIZED” and a comma (,). Is that the correct 
amendment. Commissioner Quesada? 

MS. QUESADA. “The State shall afford FULL 
protection to labor, LOCAL AND OVERSEAS, OR- 
GANIZED AND UNORGANIZED, and promote full 
employment and equality of employment opportunities 
for all.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, in support 
of Commissioner Quesada’s manifestation, I move for 
the reconsideration of Section 3 to incorporate all her 
amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). It has 
already been clarified by Commissioner Aquino that 
there was merely a recasting of the section; so, there is 
no need for a reconsideration. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Then I withdraw my motion, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
motion for reconsideration is withdrawn. 

What does the Committee say to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Quesada? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, we accept the proposed amend- 
ment. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Maambong). The 
proposed amendment is accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 

approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR- RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are no more 
registered amenders to this section and I do not think 
there are suggestions from the Committee; so, I ask that 
we take a vote on the whole Section 3 . 

MR. GASCON. I would like to make a clarification 
on the second paragraph of Section 3. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Gascon is recognized. 

MR- GASCON. Just for the record, as we approved it 
last Wednesday, on the third line of the second para- 
graph, after “wage,” the body approved a period (.) and 
the phrase “they shall also participate.” To make it 
clear, the last phrase of that sentence only refers to 
participation in policy- and decision-making and not to 
“the security of tenure, just and humane conditions. 


108 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


and the living wage.” This was approved by a vote of 35 
in favor and 2 against. This was the Bemas amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
anybody respond to that statement of Commissioner 
Gascon? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. It is a matter of restyling. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). We 
are now ready to put the whole Section 3 to a vote. For 
the benefit of all the Members, I would suggest that one 
of the Committee members, who is in complete posses- 
sion of all the amendments, read the whole Section 3. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. This is a minor point but it is important. 
On paragraph 2, line 3, after “activities,” there should 
be a comma (,). 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Gentleman is presenting a perfecting amendment by 
adding a comma (,)? 

MR. FOZ. There was an amendment in the previous 
draft. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


“The State shall promote the principle of shared 
responsibility between workers and employers and the 
preferential use of voluntary modes in settling disputes, 
including conciliation, and the enforcement of their 
mutual compliance therewith to foster industrial peace. 

“The State shall regulate the relations between 
workers and employers, recognizing the right of labor to 
its just share in the fruits of production and the right of 
enterprises to reasonable returns on investments, ex- 
pansion and growth.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). As 
many as are in favor of the whole Section 3, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 34 votes in favor and none against; 
the whole Section 3 is approved. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I explain my vote of 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Colay CO is recognized. 


COMMISSIONER COLAYCO 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. COLAYCO. I am constrained to vote ^ 
because I agree with the main thrust of this section. But 
I want to make it of record that I still believe we are too 
profligate and generous with words. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection to that perfecting amendment? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

Will the Committee please read the whole Section 3 

so that everybody will understand before we take a 
vote. 


to A afford full protect 

Ind nromn^ Overseas, organized and unorganh 
and promote ful employment and equaUty of empl 
ment opportunities for all. ^ ^ ^ 

It shall guarantee the rights of all workers to ' 
organ, zat, on collective bargaining and negotiatk 
peaceful and concerted acUvities, including the righ' 
stnke m accordance w„h law. They shall L enUtle, 
secunty of tenure, humane conditions of work an 
living wage. They shall also participate in poUcy 
decision-making processes affecting their rights 
benefits as may be provided by law. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We now move on to Section 13 as 
denominated under the subtitle “Health.” 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee requests a suspension 
of session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 

session is suspended. 

* 

It was 6:1 1 p.m. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


109 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is a con- 
sensus among the Commissioners tliat we jump to tlie 
section under the subtitle “Women.” 

May I ask that the foremost expert in women, Com- 
missioner Romulo, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Romulo, the expert in women, is recognized. 
(Laughter) 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

My amendment is to combme Sections 16 and 17 to 
read as follows: “The State shall PROTECT THE work- 
ing women by providing SAFE AND HEALTHFUL 
working conditions, PARTICULARLY RELATING to 
their maternal functions, AND SUCH facilities AS will 
RELEASE THEIR ENERGIES AND TALENTS FOR 
the service of the NATION.” 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee joyfully accepts the 
amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair would like a clarification first. On the fourth line 
of the draft, the Commissioner has “AND SUCH 
FACILITIES AS WILL LIBERATE”; the Gentleman 
changed it to another word. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, because Commissioners such as 
Commissioners Regalado, Ople and Azcuna have con- 
tributed to the metamorphosis of this paragraph. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). So, 
instead of “LIBERATE,” what is it now? 

MR. ROMULO. “RELEASE.” 

MR. OPLE. Will the proponent accept a minor 
amendment? 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. I will consider it. 

MR. OPLE. “The State shall PROVIDE FACILITIES 
TO RELEASE THE ENERGIES AND TALENTS.” Is it 
facilities or opportunities that release energies and 
talents? 


MR. ROMULO. I took it from the draft of the Com- 
mittee, and it said “facilities.” I myself am not sure 
what those facilities consist of. (Laughter) But the 
Committee has accepted my amendment, so may I refer 
it to the Committee? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I just make an amend- 
ment to tlie amendment and that is by including a 
phrase that will accommodate the disadvantaged 
women. Tliis provision is for working women and 
although many women are marginalized, there are some 
who are more marginalized than others; namely, the 
illiterates, particularly in terms of working conditions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Where 
does Commissioner Rosario Braid propose to insert the 
word “DISADVANTAGED”? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. “Working women” usually 
connotes working in the formal economy. There are 
illiterates. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Committee has accepted the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Romulo. But probably, we should first 
dispose of the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Rosario Braid. What does the Committee say to that? 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee believes that it is an 
unnecessary surplusage and we regret that we cannot 
accept it. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. “Working women” usually 
connotes working in the formal economy. There are 
many women who do not really work in the formal 
workplace. They are marginalized and we would like to 
include them. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
The Committee which has accepted the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Romulo does not seem 
to be in favor of accepting Commissioner Rosario 
Braid’s proposed amendment to the amendment. 

Will the Commissioner insist on her amendment? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I would not mind if we are 
able to come up with a provision that will really address 
itself to the marginalized women where the concern is 
more than just providing them safe and healthful 
conditions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
The Chair suggests that we first dispose of the primary 
amendment after which we can probably take up the 
amendment to the amendment. 


no 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


The parliamentary situation is that we have a pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I return to my previous remark 
which has the embryo of a proposed amendment. I 
thought that to complete the sense of the sentence, I 
could invite the Committee to consider adding AND 
OPPORTUNITIES after “facilities” so that it will read: 
“facilities AND OPPORTUNITIES AS will RELEASE 
THEIR ENERGIES AND TALENTS.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Committee respond to that? 


THE PRESIDENT. May I just offer a comment. 
I do not see why we will need these facilities to release 
our energies. Our energies are there but these facilities 
will enhance or, in other words, make our energies 
perhaps more productive. But “ENHANCE,” 1 believe, 
is a better word than “RELEASE.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Besides, Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
word “RELEASE” has a malicious connotation. 

THE PRESIDENT. I support that statement, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
parliamentary situation is that the proposed amendment 
to change the word “RELEASE” to “ENHANCE” has 
been presented by the Chair to the Committee but the 
Committee threw it back to the proponent. Com- 
missioner Romulo. So we will now hear from Commis- 
sioner Romulo who will give us the right interpretation. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the 
Committee responds, will Commissioner Ople yield to 
an aihendment to his amendment? 

Instead of using “RELEASE,” we use ENHANCE so 
that it will read: “ENHANCE THEIR ENERGIES AND 
TALENTS.” 


MR. OPLE. The enhancement is an additive in order 
to improve without changing. 


What about RELEASE AND EN- 


MR. OPLE. Yes, it will diminish the meaning of 

release.” (laug/zter) 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Per- 
aps we should present that formulation to the Commit- 
tee because this amendment has already been accepted 
by the Committee and it is actually in its jurisdiction. 

What does the Committee say to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento? 


MS. AQUINO. We would like the advice of the 

ongmal proponent, Commissioner Romulo, on this 
matter. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Cor 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized whUe Commission 
Romulo IS still busy with something else. 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS. NIEVA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I address a 
question to the proponent of the amendment? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Nieva may proceed. 

MS. NIEVA. Does the Commissioner prefer releasing 
whatever energies to promoting the welfare and well- 
being of women? 

MR. ROMULO. I was trying to compress the two 

ideas. Actually, my original wording was “LIBERA 1 . 

MS. NIEVA. But how about the welfare and well- 
being of women? Is it still encompassed? 

MR. ROMULO. How about “HARNESS THEIR 
ENERGIES AND TALENTS”? 

MS. NIEVA. I do not know. I am not so concerned 
about the energies and talents; I think the welfare an 
well-being of women is more important since this is a 
social justice provision. It is my personal feeling that vve 
placed this provision to protect the welfare and well- 
being of women and not so much to harness their 
talents and capabilities for nation-building. The protec- 
tion of the welfare and well-being of women, for me, is 
basic. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). May 
the Chair ask a clarification on that? The proponent 
does not accept the change of the word “RELEASE” to 
“ENHANCE.” 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
President is recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may we ask for 
a suspension of the session? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


in 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is suspended for one minute. 

It was 6:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:31 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
session is resumed. 

Has Commissioner Romulo conferred with the 
Committee? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. After 
having released our energies in combination with the 
Committee, we have agreed on a common amendment. 
Commissioner Aquino will now read it. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. The section will read: “The State shall 
PROTECT THE working women by providing SAFE 
AND HEALTHFUL working conditions, TAKING 
INTO ACCOUNT their maternal functions, AND SUCH 
facilities AND OPPORTUNITIES THAT will EN- 
HANCE THEIR WELFARE AND WELL-BEING TO 
REALIZE THEIR FULL POTENTIAL IN the service of 
the NATION.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Has 
the proponent heard the formulation? Is that what the 
Commissioner agreed on? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR- RAMA. There are no more proponents of any 
amendments to the section on women. So, I ask that we 
vote on the whole section. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). May 
the Chair know from Commissioner Romulo what 
would be the numbering of the section now, considering 
that this is proposed to be the combination of Sections 
16 and 17? 

MR. ROMULO. Section 17 is now deleted and com- 
bined with Section 16. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask the Committee to read the 
full text of Section 16. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Will 
the Committee now read the whole Section 16 for 
purposes of voting? 


MS. NIEVA. “The State shall PROTECT THE work- 
ing women by providing SAFE AND HEALTHFUL 
working conditions, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT their 
maternal functions, AND SUCH facilities AND OP- 
PORTUNITIES THAT will ENHANCE THEIR WEL- 
FARE AND WELL-BEING TO REALIZE THEIR 
FULL POTENTIAL IN the service of the NATION.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair is now putting Section 16, as read, to a vote. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; Section 16 is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Before we adjourn, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, there is only one proponent of amendments to 
all the three provisions under the subtitle “Minors.” 
May I ask that Commissioner Davide be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The second sentence on the section on 
“Minors” will read as follows: INFANTS, PARTICU- 
LARLY ORPHANS AND ABANDONED CHILDREN, 
ARE LIKEWISE ENTITLED TO THE PROTECTION 
OF THE STATE. 

MR. GASCON. Will Commissioner Davide accept an 
amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. May I hear it, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. GASCON. Delete the word “PARTICULARLY” 
because orphans and abandoned children may not 
necessarily be infants. 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment is gladly accepted. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
does the Committee say? 

MS. NIEVA. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com 
missioner Davide, as of the moment, that section will b( 
Section 18. Is that correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, it would be renumbered ac 
cordingly. But it will be a new sentence to what appear 
to be Section 1 8 under the heading “Minors.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Th( 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide has beei 
accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hear.- 
none; the amendment is approved. 


112 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MS. NIEVA. Are we to understand that that replaces • 
the whole section? 

MR. BENGZON. Was that an additional paragraph or 
a replacement of the existing provision? 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Why 
do we not just say “MINORS” and include working 
minors, nonworking minors and sick minors? 


MR. DAVIDE. It is an additional sentence. So, may Commmissioner Davide is recognized, 
we request a vote on the whole section. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is still a distinction between 

MS. NIEVA. So, how would the entire section read? “minors” and “infants.” 


MR. DAVIDE. The entire section will read; “THE 
STATE SHALL PROVIDE SPECIAL PROTECTION 
TO MINORS ESPECIALLY WORKING MINORS, AND 
SHALL PROHIBIT THEIR EXPLOITATION AND IN- 
SURE THEIR FULL DEVELOPMENT. INFANTS, 
ORPHANS AND ABANDONED CHILDREN ARE 
LIKEWISE ENTITLED TO THE SPECIAL PROTEC- 
TION OF THE STATE.” 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MONSOD. No, I am only suggesting that we 
delete the words “ESPECIALLY WORKING MINORS” 
because we are already stating “SPECIAL PROTEC- 
TION TO” and then enumerate. So, a minor is part of 
that phrase. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, when the 
Gentleman speaks of working minors, I suppose we are 
referring to minors allowed to work under the law. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

“cm^T j’^st combine 

provide special PROTECTION 
TO MINORS, INFANTS . . .” 


in Gentleman wants it insertei 

ooA T provision wiU read; “THE ST AT] 

nPxic provide SPECIAL PROTECTION TO Ih 
abandoned CHILDREN ANl 
WORKING MINORS, AN) 
iilPiPL prohibit their exploitation AN) 
INSURE THEIR FULL DEVELOPMENT.” That woul 
be only one sentence then. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Is that 
an acceptable formulation to the Committee? 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Not like an ordinary newsboy, for 
example, selling newspapers at street intersections. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer 
This would refer, for instance, to those allowed to work 
in apprenticeship. 

MR. SUAREZ. Like in McDonald’s, for example. 

MR. DAVIDE. We also have to consider minor young 
girls being abused by some enterprising businessmen m 
indecent acts or shows. These are the main concerns. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner would not be 
extending any kind of protection by the State to those 
newsboys whom we see every morning? 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

P^^^HING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Co 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 

th^'^iiMe^k^^^ ^ j^st inquire? It seems to i 
minors? ^ referring to work; 


MR. DAVIDE. They would be included because the 
phrase is “ESPECIALLY WORKING MINORS, 
meaning to say, that the protection would be to all but 
special emphasis should be given to working minors. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. TINGSON. May I please have an explanati< 

Philippines, we still class 
persons below 21 as minors, but above 14 or even ab 
13, they can already work. We would like to give spe 
protection to that age level. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). What 
is the parliamentary inquiry of Commissioner Sar- 
miento? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I understand, Mr. Presiding Of- 
ficer, that we have a provision on minors and children in 
the Declaration of Principles. Is this a repetition of that 
provision? May we be enlightened on this point? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


113 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). I am 
not particularly aware of that provision in the Declara- 
tion of Principles, but perhaps Commissioner Davide 
could respond to the parliamentary inquiry. 

MR. DAVIDE. I understand that if the proposed 
Declaration of Principles would only be a copy of the 
1973 provision that the State shall assist the youth in 
their social, physical and intellectual development, that 
would be completely an entirely different concept. It 
would cover the youth but it is a very broad mandate 
or principle. This is a specific one. 


Davide or is it a motion to transfer this provision to 
the Declaration of Principles? We will have to present 
that before the Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. As an amendment to the proposed 
section in the Declaration of Principles. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
This is properly Section 18; it is properly under the 
jurisdiction of the Committee. So, we have to ask the 
Committee about it. 


MR. SARMIENTO. I understand, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, from the member of the Committee on Declara- 
tion of Principles that we have a similar provision. May 
I ask Commissioner Tingson to enlighten us on this 
point. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). Com- 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. I have in my possession the reported 
section. It reads: 

The State recognizes the sanctity of family life and shall 
protect and strengthen the family as a basic social institu- 
tion. The State shall equally protect the life of the motlier 
and the life of the unborn from the moment of conception. 
The natural right and duty of parents in tlie rearing of the 
youth for civic efficiency in the development of moral 
character shall receive tlie aid and support of tlie govern- 
ment. 

The last paragraph of Section 10 reads: 

The State shall protect children from all forms of 
neglect, cruelty and exploitation particularly in conditions 
harmful to their physical, mental or moral well-being. 

So, that is covered in our Declaration of Principles. 


MS. NIEVA. Yes, we agree. 

MR. BENGZON. We agree that this be transferred 
to the Declaration of Principles. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
That solves the problem then. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There are only two more sections, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, apart from health. This is 
under the subtitle “Role and Rights of People s Or- 
ganization.” There is only one proponent and he has 
an amendment to these two sections. May I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Before the Chair recognizes Commissioner Davide, we 
have here the provision on Role and Rights of 
People’s Organization, Sections 19 and 20. Does the 
Committee have any formulation other than the one 
which I have? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. DAVIDE. My proposal then would be to 
delete this particular heading and to transfer it to the 
Declaration of Principles. In other words, we make 
reservations for possible amendments to the Declara- 
tion of Principles and State Policy. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Chair takes note of the mtention of Commissioner 
Davide. But before we present that to the Committee, 
we have to dispose of the parliamentary inquiry of 
Commissioner Sarmiento, considering the reading of 
the provision on minors in the Declaration of Princi- 
ples. What is now the pleasure of the Gentleman? 

MR. SARMIENTO. With that clarification, I 
withdraw my parliamentary inquiry. It has been 
completely satisfied. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
There is now a pending intention of Commissioner 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I am a member of the Committee 
but I would like to ask for a definition of “people’s 
organizations.” 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Commissioner Rosario Braid is recognized 


19 


on Sections 

and 20. Did we skip the provisions on health? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). We 
did not, we only deferred consideration of the pro- 
visions on health. 


114 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 8, 1986 


MS. NIEVA. Mr. Presiding Officer, some members 
of the Committee say that they are too tired to tackle 
these provisions tonight and they think there may be 
more changes than we have anticipated. We suggest 
to defer this until tomorrow. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I ask that we adjourn the session until 
tomorrow. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Maambong). 
Is there any objection to the motion to adjourn? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned 
until tomorrow at nine o’clock in the morning. 

It was 6:47 p.m. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


115 


R.C.C. NO. 52 
Saturday, August 9, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:25 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Crispino M. de Castro. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. DE CASTRO. Almighty God; We beseech Thee 
once again to guide our minds and our hearts so that the 
thoughts and feelings that may emanate from each of us 
will be those of the Filipmo people on whose behalf we 
seek to fashion a fundamental law that shall embody 
our collective ideals and aspirations. 

Enlighten us, O Lord. Open our eyes and minds. Give 
us the courage and the strength to see and understand 
those ideals and proposals that may differ from our 
own. 

Let the light of reason shine on our discussions and 
debates so that we may exchange ideas, thoughts and 
arguments with truth, clarity and sincerity towards 
democratic ideals. This, our people expect from us. 

Help us, O Lord, to finish this Constitution as early 
as possible because millions of Filipinos are awaiting the 
day when we shall live in peace and in glory. 

Thank you, O Lord, Amen. 

roll call 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Present* Aquino Present* 

Alonto Present* Azcuna Present 


Bacani 

. . Present 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. . Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present* 

Bernas 

, . Present 

Quesada . . . . 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Present 

Regalado . . . . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present* 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Absent 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Absent 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Tan 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present 

Uka 

. . Present 

Monsod 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. Absent 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 3 1 Members responded to the caU. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. I move that we approve the Journal of 
yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


116 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Radiogram from the Association of Philippine Phy- 
sicians in America, Inc., 1830 Mirmar Road, Munster, 
Indiana 46321, proposing an amendment to Section 7 
of Proposed Resolution No. 496 so as to enable a 
natural-bom Filipino citizen who lost his Philippine 
citizenship to acquire private lands. 

(Communication No. 500 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from the Philippine Union for Human 
Rights, 2215 Pedro Gil St., Sta. Ana, Metro Manila 
expressing its support for a draft proposal prohibiting 
the extension of the RP-US Military Bases Agreement 
beyond its expiry date in 1991. 

(Communication No. 501 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from the Board of Directors of the 
CEU Faculty and Allied Workers Union, expressing its 
solid support for the social justice program envisioned in 
the proposed Constitution and attaching thereto a copy 
of its proposal to convert CEU into a cooperative, 
hoping that the honorable Commissioners will find some 
pertinent and relevant information therein for the 
solution of the funding problem of the educational 
system in the private sector. 

(Communication No. 502 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from Mr. Roberto G. Plata of Grepalife 
and six hundred ninety-nine other petitioners seeking 
to include in the new Constitution a provision obliging 
the State to protect the life of the unborn from the 
moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 503 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Communication from Messrs. Emerito P. Nacpil and 
Emmanuel G. Cleto, both of the United Methodist 
Church in the Philippines, proposing an amendment by 
substitution to Section 10 of Proposed Resolution 
No. 531 (Committee Report No. 3 1 ) on the separation 
and mutual autonomy of the Church and State. 

(Communication No. 504 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Letter from Mr. Abraham Sarmiento for Nationalist 
Alliance for Justice, Freedom and Democracy, urging 
the inclusion of provisions banning foreign military 
bases, and nuclear weapons and facilities from Philip- 
pine territory. 

(Communication No. 505 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Miguel Resus of Diatagon, L.ianga, 
Surigao del Sur, suggesting, among others, that Filipino 
citizens abroad be allowed to vote; that every individual 
must be allowed to donate a portion of his tax obliga- 
tion to charitable, political, educational and sports 
purposes; and that dual citizenship may be allowed to 
Filipinos who have lost their Philippine citizenship. 

(Communication No. 506 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


Communication from the Philippine Association for the 
Advancement of Science, Inc. signed by Mr. Quin tin L. 
Kintanar, expressing its full support to Proposed Resol^ 
tion No. 222, entitled: “RESOLUTION ADOPTING 
PROVISIONS ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY 
FOR INCLUSION IN THE PROPOSED NEW CON- 
STITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIP- 
PINES.” 

(Communication No. 507 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Ms. Leticia L. de Leon of 7 Mother Ignacia 
Avenue, Quezon City, advocating the teaching of 
religion in both public and private schools, making this 
compulsory for Catholics to be taught the Catholic 
faith, the Protestants, the Protestant faith, and so forth. 

(Communication No. 508 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Amando R. Ortiz of M. H. del Pilar 
Street, Tabaco, AJbay, suggesting, among others, that 
coconut lands should not be covered by land reform and 


To the Committee on General Provisions. 


To the Steering Committee. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


117 


that P.D. No. 27 be amended to give the heirs of land- 
owners shares of the property. 

(Communication No. 509 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from the Philippine Institute of Civil 
Engineers, First Quezon City Chapter, Centroid Build- 
ing, 395 Quezon Avenue, Quezon City, signed by Ms. 
Vivian M. de los Reyes, transmitting a Resolution 
addressed to President Corazon C. Aquino, requesting 
the adoption of a national policy requiring the utiliza- 
tion of services of qualified Filipino professionals and 
experts in all government projects which are funded by 
the Philippine government or by foreign loans. 

(Communication No. 510 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Ms. Melba P. Maggay of the Institute for 
Studies in Asian Church and Culture, 4 Malinis Street, 
U.P. Village, Quezon City, endorsing the proposal of 
Konfes, a group of evangelical Christians, for the reten- 
tion of the text of Section 8, Article XV of the 1973 
Constitution regarding religious instruction in public 
elementary and high schools. 

(Communication No. 5 1 1 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Horacio V. Marasigan of the Concerned 
Citizens of San Juan, Batangas, submitting his proposal 
regarding “THE STRATEGY FOR DISTRIBUTING 
the PATRIMONY OF THE NATION” and “RESO- 
LUTION ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF LAND AND 
ITS FRUITS.” 

(Communication No. 512 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is an important information from 
the Muslim world which Commissioner Uka will an- 
nounce. I ask that Commissioner Uka be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, honorable Members of 
the Constitutional Commission: 


I have been requested by our other Commissioners, 
Honorable Alonto and Abubakar, that I inform the 
honorable Members of the Commission that one of the 
most important Muslim holidays, Hariraya Had], will be 
celebrated on Friday, August 15, 1986 by the 7 mUlion 
Muslims in the Philippines and about 1 bilLion Muslims 
all over the world. As a matter of fact, about 2,000 of 
our brother Muslims have left for the Holy City of 
Mecca. This is in celebration of the founding of the 
monotheistic faith in that part of the world by Father 
Abraham and his sacrifice of his son Ismael. And so, I 
just want to say that this is a very important occasion 
for us. 

Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the Chairman and 
some of tlie members of the Committee on Social 
Justice are not yet here. May I ask for a suspension of 
the session for five minutes? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 9:38 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:44 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. We are now in the period of amend- 
ments on the Article on Social Justice. The Committee 
has suggested that we take up the last two sections 
under the title: Role and Rights of People’s Organiza- 

tions.” 

I so move. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 


118 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

Before going into that, I understand that Commis- 
sioner Garcia has a proposed definition of people’s 
organization which needs to be incorporated into the 
proposed Section 19. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it Commissioner Garcia or 
Commissioner Monsod? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session for 
a few minutes. 

It was 9:4 7 a. m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 9:54 a.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. DAVIDE. Commissioners Garcia and Monsod; it 
was Commissioner Monsod who requested a definition. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we call this later when Com- 
missioner Monsod is around? 

How about the section on health? Last night, we sus- 
pended the discussion on the Article on Social Justice 
with respect to health. Are we ready? Commissioner 
Quesada is already here. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The Committee is now ready to discuss 
amendments to the provision under the section on 
health. So may I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are still some 
st^atements or explanations of Commissioner Quesada 
that are bemg mimeographed or xeroxed and she 


nized^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide 


IS recog- 


stamtoe^thy/^^ Madam President, if it is the under- 
mv u ‘^^^^ideration of the definition 

s^ntenr^nf ^ foUowing: In the opening 

“the- pna ^ deletion of the wordj 

Justice ^ will just read: “In the pursuit of Socia 

MR. BENNAGEN. It is accepted. 

^ introduce. 

amPi^H^ definition because I have somi 

amendments on it. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, 
nized ^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recoj 

MR. BENNAGEN x, 

the definition of “people’ro?/"— ^ ^°P^ ° 
gested to be Section 21 I 

shared by the Committee but le^my^-® whether this i 

sonally. I am not in favor of bcludin^ ? r 
“people’s organizations” in thTlmf® ^ definifion o 
did not even include even as we want ^ 

of “social justice.” I do not see whv it f ^ definitio: 

to define peoples organizations” rather th™ "och 
justice. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you, Madam President. 

The honorable Commissioners have a copy of the 
amended version of the section on health which would 
include some explanatory notes. It is necessary to 
explain some of the concepts so that when one makes 
an amendment it will be in the light of the term of 
reference that has been used in this provision. I would 
like to acknowledge the fact that this change in the 
formulation has been influenced to a great extent by 
the amendment of Commissioner Romulo. So, Section 
13 will now read: “The State shall protect and pro- 
mote the right to HEALTH. To this end, it shall adopt 
an integrated and comprehensive APPROACH TO 
HEALTH DEVELOPMENT . . 

The new concept introduced here is the ‘ inte- 
grated and comprehensive approach,” and if it is an 
approach, it cannot just be to health care but to health 
development which would be more encompassing than 
just the provision of health care. So to continue: 
“. . . WHICH shall make essential goods, HEALTH and 
OTHER social services available to all citizens at af- 
fordable cost, with priority for the needs of the 
UNDERPRIVILEGED, . . has been substituted for 
the word “disadvantaged” to be in keeping with the 
other terms used in the other sections such as those in 
the Urban Land Reform and Housing where instead of 
the word “disadvantaged” the term “underprivileged” 
was used. Then “. . . the sick, women and children, 
aged and disabled.” 

The explanatory notes would explain the important 
concepts which are something new in this Constitution, 
one of which is the right to health. Everybody agrees 
that this is the first time that this right would ever be 
written in the Constitution. Health development is 
another concept that some might ask a few questions 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


119 


on. This would refer to the overall improvement of the 
level of health of the people to a higher level where 
people can live economically productive and socially 
satisfying lives. Health development would not just be 
dependent on the giving of health care, but also on the 
level of health resources available in'our environment 
such as water, toilets, anti-pollution devices, and all 
other social services which are necessary to improve 
the level of health of the people. 

These main concepts would probably have to be 
explained because they would serve as the bases for 
future legislation. This Member has been very conscious 
of the criticism levelled against nonlawyers that they 
are too verbose and are working on legislation rather 
than on constitutional provisions, so I would like just 
to use these terms. The integrated and comprehensive 
approach here contains principles on the means to 
achieve people’s right to health that could be adopted 
by future legislation. Such an approach would require 
the integration of many sectors to become involved in 
addressing the health problems of the people. It would 
mean improvements in food, housing, education, in 
purchasing power and access to health services; higher 
allocation of resources to health; more active participa- 
tion of the people in health efforts; a reorientation of 
health development strategies and the political will to 
act on policies and plans. 

But more specifically on health, the concept of in- 
tegration would imply the following; 

As I explained earlier when Commissioner Romulo 
introduced the concept of integration and compre- 
hensive health care, integration implies the need to 
unify the country’s health delivery system along the 
primary health care approach which is a commitment of 
the Philippine government to the 134 nations that 
signed the Alma Declaration in 1978, which sought to 
meet the goal of health for all in the year 2000. The 
State has to work out a mechanism by which the dif- 
ferent agencies or instrumentalities thereof would unify 
their efforts in addressing or satisfying the health care 
needs of the country. These instrumentalities would 
include the Ministry of Labor and Employment, Minis- 
try of Health, Ministry of Education, Culture and 
Sports, Ministry of National Defense, the private sector 
or nongovernmental organizations. 

Those who wanted to introduce some concepts such 
as appropriate technology and people’s participation 
and self-reliance would actually be unified in this 
primary health care approach because this would now 
include the concepts of people’s participation and multi- 
sectoral linkages. Health interlinks with agricultural, 
social development and national economic programs-. 

Integration is likewise envisioned as maximizing 
existing health resources, both of the government and of 
the nongovernment or private sector in the spirit of 
cooperation and collaboration. The State, however, 
is tasked to take the initiative m strengthening “intra- 
sectoral” efforts because it is very hard to work without 


a mandate. There is the territoriality of one ministry 
over the other, but one ministry works on its own. It 
never really works holistically so that we can come out 
with a picture of health of the people. So, whenever we 
talk of the state of the nation’s health, most likely it is 
just a reflection of the statistics derived from one minis- 
try. It does not report the statistics of the health situa- 
tion of our country covering other sectors like those in 
education, labor, the private sector or even in the 
Ministry of National Defense. The latter would have its 
own statistics — how many people died in combat or in 
accidents; how many actually got sick or died from 
other causes. This is another concept which we hope 
future legislation will work out. It is not the responsibi- 
lity of the subcommittee to work out the details 
because that would then bog us down into details which 
everybody is wont not to go into. 

Integration also envisions the health care system to 
blend western medicine with traditional and oriental 
health care modalities or approaches so that we will not 
be purely dependent on the western model of health 
care. Integration would also direct the health care sys- 
tem towards prevention rather than cure; health rather 
than illness; and being community-based rather than 
being hospital-centered in the delivery of health care 
services. 

In essence these clarifications could guide future 
legislators on the concept of comprehensive and in- 
tegrated approach to health development. 

The main consideration in the concept of compre- 
hensive approach is health development. This would 
mean the following: 

Health services would include health promotion with 
emphasis on health education. Examples of health pro- 
motion are physical fitness, personal hygiene, and food 
and nutrition programs. We have disease prevention or 
specific protection, such as immunizations to protect 
persons against specific diseases and use of protective 
wears or gears to protect from injuries or illness result- 
ing from dangerous substances in the work environment. 
It also includes early diagnosis and treatment so that 
people will not discover that they have cancer, heart 
diseases and other conditions late in the game, like when 
Commissioner Guingona discovered that he has a pro- 
blem with his gall bladder. It is good that he is now 
undergoing treatment. Then there is rehabilitation of 
the disabled. So, these are the coverage of a truly 
comprehensive health care. It does not just provide 
treatment but goes into promotion. 

Then health development should also take into 
consideration the common health problems of the 
country especially those affecting the majority of our 
people, like communicable diseases. The number 1 
killers of the country are pneumonia and tuberculosis 
which can be prevented. Other problems are gastro- 
enteritis, malnutrition, drug abuse, poor environ- 
mental sanitation, maternal and child health problems. 


120 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


and endemic diseases like malaria, schistosomiasis and 
filariasis. 

We are catching up with the so-called problems of 
more developed countries which are the degenerative 
diseases like cancer, cardiovascular diseases and mental 
illness. So these are the problems that health services 
should address. That is why the approach should be 
comprehensive. Comprehensive coverage likewise 
addresses the problems of particular population. In the 
field of labor, health services attend to the problems of 
workers who are exposed to certain work conditions. In 
the school setting, health services address the population 
problem. 

So, I would like to stress that a truly comprehensive 
approach to health care would require the educational 
component of health programs to enable people to be 
actively involved in organizing and mobilizing these 
programs. I would like to emphasize that this program 
on drug abuse is one of those programs that a compre- 
hensive approach to health development would have to 
address itself to. 


The fourth concept which should be clarified also for 
the record and for future legislation would be the 
phr^e. make essential goods, health and other social 
services available to citizens at affordable cost.” This 
phrase is to highhght the fact that health as a human 
nght cannot be enjoyed by the people unless these 
goods and services are made available and affordable to 
em especially the underprivileged sectors of our 
society, n fact, I would agree to the proposition that 
ere should be free medical care to the paupers, 
because this is one aspect of a truly just and humane 
If tu delivery system — that people need not die. 
ey cannot really afford medical care, then the State 

those who are classified as paupers. This 
Should make Commissioner Nolledo happy. 

the fifth, the phrase “the underprivileged, the 
children, aged and disabled” singles 
ou hese groups as disadvantaged in terms of access to 
adequate health services and resources. This being the 
r 1 C e on Social Justice has to single them out because 
ey are denied the right to health and the right to life. 

So, these are basically the concepts and the rest 
would be self-explanatory . 


The second section. Section 14, states: “The St 

monitor 

Dower fW 1 appropriate health m 

THE research RESPONSIVE 

BL^S^Th needs and PE 

the propoS‘orcI„"Sio'„« ‘"f “f ' 

STOnTvE ““ *»’«he°ph“se ‘1 

I^TpToblems™ health nee 


I thmk that the succeeding explanatory notes would 
already enlighten the Commissioner on what would be 
covered by this provision, so I need not go into the 


other details. Section 13 is the one I wanted to highlight 
because this is where most of the proposals will be 
coming from. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, 1 ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Commissioner Quesada said that my proposed amend- 
ment is deemed included in this provision. But I do not 
believe so because of the use of the term “affordable 
cost,” which does not exist in the vocabulary of 
paupers. They simply have no money to pay for 
medicines or medical care. 

I would like to insist on my amendment, with due 
respect to Commissioner Quesada and with the kindest 
indulgence of the Members of this Commission. I must 
be very frank that I was hesitant in presenting this 
amendment. But my conscience bothered me and 
dictated to me that I should pursue it before this Com- 
mission. Madam President, it is a truism that I slept with 
my conscience. 

I would like to explain this before I propose the 
amendment. I would like to submit it to the body for 
voting. This is a very emphatic provision that was 
initially objected to by my friend. Sister Christine Tan, 
on the ground that it will promote mendicancy but the 
question of whether it will promote mendicancy is on 
the matter of implementation. I think Congress can 
adopt measures to see to it that this will not promote 
mendicancy. 

I am insisting on this amendment. Madam President, 
because just like Sister Tan, my sister, Nelia (now Sister 
Idmara, S.Sp.S.) is also a nun at the Holy Spirit Con- 
vent, and with her, I really saw with my own eyes 
paupers dying because they had no medicines. 

Paupers go to government hospitals and are given 
prescriptions. However, the doctor would tell them to 
buy the medicines they need. But they have no money; 
they just depend on the limited charity of other people 
while the government has all the resources at its 
command. 

The second objection to my proposal is based on the 
need for big funding. I am a teacher of taxation in dif- 
ferent schools. Madam President. Pardon me for saying 
that the procedure of tax collection in the Philippines is 
very defective. An example is the residence tax. I know 
many people who are rich and who own landholdings 
yet they pay only PI. Likewise, when they file income 
tax returns, they falsify the amounts paid as residence 
tax in said returns. I call the attention of Commissioner 
Bienvenido Tan, who is the present Commissioner of the 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


121 


BIR. The government can impose a one-peso additional 
residence tax which can be termed as Residence Tax E 
or D. The government can raise funds through the sale 
of postage stamps as was done under the Anti-TB Stamp 
Law. The Anti-TB Stamp Law generates millions of 
pesos every year. Also, the government can tap private 
resources and invite the help of socially conscious 
corporations, like the San Miguel Corporation, the 
Ayala Corporation and others. It can also impose special 
levies. Likewise, the government has many sources while 
we, private individuals who are willing to help the 
paupers, have limited resources. 

I remember Senator Diokno telling me: “Pepe, please 
do something about the poor. Your Constitution must 
not only be nationalistic and must not only be pro- 
people but must be pro-poor.” While we talk. Madam 
President, of fighting for the rights of people, we forget 
to talk of people fighting for their lives because of 
poverty brought about by maladministration, antipathy 
and indifference on the part of the government. So 1 ask 
that the members of the Committee and the Members of 
this Commission be magnanimous. In the words of Jose 
Maria Escriva: “Magnanimity connotes largeness of 

heart wherein many can find refuge.” Let us not forget 
the anguish of the poor. For the information of the 
body, Commissioner Tan has told me she will let her 
heart rule over her head by voting for this amendment. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I really sympa- 
thize with Commissioner Nolledo. As a matter of fact, it 
is a big struggle to actually put this in the provision. 
That would have a lot of implications and we would like 
to prevent the people being raised to a high level of 
aspiration only to be frustrated because of the inability 
of the present health care system to provide free 
medical care. That is why we settled for affordable or 
minimum cost. As a matter of fact, with the present 
administration, there are efforts to really address the 
problem of the paupers. In the City of Manila, the 
Ministry of Health is zeroing in on this particular 
problem. 

So, we are preparing a Constitution that is not just 
going to be relevant for this year or next but within this 
decade. We are preparing a Constitution that will be for 
the next generations. We hope that people will already 
learn how to be more conscious of health promotion 
and disease prevention. In addition, we really do not 
want to promote mendicancy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think Commissioner Colayco has 
something to say. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee be given a chance to reply so that there will be order. 
After the Committee gives its reply, then perhaps the 


proponent and others who may support him can also 
give their comments. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, what I have to 
say I think will help the Committee respond. I would 
like to give actual cases why this proposal of Com- 
missioner Nolledo can be considered an imperative. We 
have had occasions, particularly my wife, to bring poor 
people to the Philippine General Hospital in Manila, and 
the case is always that when medicines are needed, they 
are told to buy these at the drug stores outside the 
hospital. Now, these drug stores right in front of the 
Philippine General Hospital sell medicines at exorbitant 
prices. 

The poor people who go to the Philippine General 
Hospital need every help that our government can ex- 
tend. We know that the government allots a big sum of 
money for the purchase of medicines and drugs which 
are necessary. I do not see why this allotment cannot 
cover the medicines which are called for in most cases 
being attended to in government hospitals. To my sur- 
prise, it has always been the case that whatever the 
medicine may be, whatever the sickness may be — 
sometimes even simple fever - people are referred to 
commercial drug stores to buy their medicines. 

I, therefore, support 100 percent the proposal of 
Commissioner Nolledo. 

MS. QUESADA. Will Commissioner Nolledo please 
state his amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Since the word “paupers” has 
attained an established legal meaning, the amendment 
will read as follows: THE STATE SHALL EXTEND 
FREE MEDICAL CARE TO PAUPERS. Paupers are 
those who have no source of livelihood or their sources 
of income are just enough to make their body and soul 
together. They really have no money. We cannot talk of 
affordable cost with respect to paupers. The State must 
exercise its parens patriae role. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that an additional sentence? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, an additional sentence to 
Section 13. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I introduce an amendment to the 
proposal of Commissioner Nolledo. It will not be a new 
sentence but after the word “cost,” delete “with 
priority for the needs of the UNDERPRIVILEGED, the 
sick, women and children, aged and disabled” and in 
lieu thereof insert AND WHENEVER NECESSARY, 
FOR FREE ESPECIALLY TO THE UNDERPRIVI- 
LEGED AND THE DISADVANTAGED, so it will read: 


122 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


“affordable cost, AND WHENEVER NECESSARY, 
FOR FREE ESPECIALLY TO THE UNDERPRIVI- 
LEGED AND THE DISADVANTAGED.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, it seems to me 
that Commissioner Davide’s amendment will also 
destroy the essence of the Committee amendments. It 
will expand the scope. I am talking only of paupers — 
those who have no sources of livelihood. The term 
“underprivileged” may cover those who are underem- 
ployed who may be able to afford medicines. I regret 
I cannot accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo does not 
accept the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Davide. 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 


clear in the explanatory note on page 3, that there 
should be medical care to the paupers. 

So, that is the sense and the objective of the Com- 
mittee. However, we cannot put it in black and white in 
the Constitution, otherwise it becomes an absolute 
mandate. And if the State would be unable to give free 
medical care for millions of reasons, for which it should 
not be blamed, the people will be disappointed and 
frustrated, and this might complicate matters. 

So, suppose the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Bacani becomes unattainable, what will 
happen? After all, the term “affordable cost” does not 
necessarily have to mean cash. It could mean that these 
people could pay with their services. We have a lot oT 
self-help programs. So, if these paupers cannot afford to 
pay cash, perhaps their relatives can render services to 
various health clinics. 


BISHOP BACANI. May I propose a change in the 
wording of the clause which rriight not render necessary 
anymore the addition of a new sentence. It will read as 
follows: “. . . IT SHALL ADOPT an integrated and 
comprehensive APPROACH TO health DEVELOP- 

essential goods, HEALTH and 
OTHER social services WITHIN THE REACH OF all 
Hb citizens ...” Then we continue on with the others. 


These are details which could be left to the Ministry 
of Health or to the government to implement. But for 
us to specifically state in the Constitution that every- 
thing is going to be free is very dangerous. Anyway, 
the intent of this Commission and that of the Commit- 
tee, as articulated in the explanatory note, is as much 
as possible to give free medical services, particularly 
to the paupers. 


THE PRE^DENT. We still have to dispose of Com 
missioner Nolledo’s amendment first. 

wm President, if the Committe. 

that th? ni,* and with the understandinj 

L shouMT ™ ^EACH” would meai 

3ble to afford, the: 
thpn T medical care by the government 

Bacani the amendment of Commissione 

mitt^ President, may the Com 

e e given a chance to articulate its thoughts? 

welfL^ate^We' do‘‘r, ' 

mendicancv Wp a ^ constitutionaliZ( 

people onfy to be *let dow 

blamed for it. ^ because we will all b( 

would wish to give ^ow much the Stab 

paupers and to all the noor t services to all th( 
it could, it would. ^ so. But i 

Commissioner Ouesada h^c 
with respect to this section on he’Sth"* 
think that anybody here has reaUyl^e 
and the work, with aU the order that he has, the wt 
that Commissioner Quesada has done her job. It is ver 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Because of my sympathy to this 
particular cause, would Commissioner Nolledo be 
amenable to introducing the term PAUPERS after 
“the needs of the” so that it reads “with priority for 
the needs of the PAUPERS, the UNDERPRIVILEGED, 
the sick, women and children, aged and disabled, 
the understanding that the health care system shall 
provide free medical care services for these paupers who 
cannot afford such services that will entitle them to the 
right to health and the right to life. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I am deeply 
grateful to Commissioner Quesada, but because of the 
existence of the term “affordable cost,” I think there 
will really be complications. 

I recommend that we adopt the suggestion of Com- 
missioner Bernas, Madam President. We are not creating 
a welfare state here, that is why we are concentrating 
the privilege only to paupers. Instead of saying “THE 
STATE SHALL EXTEND,” we will put THE STATE 
SHALL ENDEAVOR TO EXTEND FREE MEDICAL 
CARE TO PAUPERS. 

The word “ENDEAVOR” as suggested by Com- 
missioner Bernas will water down a little bit the provi- 
sion in the sense that the State shall try its best to 
extend free medical care to paupers. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


123 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I think we would 
like this to be thrown to the body for a vote. The Com- 
mittee would not be united in its stand. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I will submit to the body. 

MS. QUESADA. I personally accept but I cannot 
speak for the entire Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank tlie Commissioner very 
much for her sympathy. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we vote on the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote first on Commissioner 
Nolledo’s proposed amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to include my friend. 
Reverend Father Benias, as a coauthor because the word 
“ENDEAVOR” changed the meaning substantially. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the Commissioner’s 
proposed amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It reads: THE STATE SHALL EN- 
DEAVOR TO EXTEND FREE MEDICAL CARE TO 
PAUPERS. I think that is reasonable enough. 

MS. QUESADA. The Commissioner has convhiced 
the Committee. I think the Committee accepts that 
reformulation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Commissioner very 
much and may God bless her. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Before anything else. Madam 
President, I move that this position paper prepared 
by Commissioner Quesada be integrated into the record 
in to to. * 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion of Commissioner 
Bengzon is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rosario Braid seeks recognition. I ask that she be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I find 
Commissioner Quesada’s paper enlightening and com- 


prehensive but I would like to put also on record that in 
an earlier conversation between Minister Pardo de 
Tavera and Minister Bengzon, both have indicated one 
problem that, although implied here, has not been 
stressed; that is, the services are available but the people 
are indifferent and passive in the acceptance of these 
services. As noted, in the immunization program, 
although immunization is available, one out of two 
acceptors does not continue the immunization program. 
Both Ministers have indicated that a refocusing of their 
program would put emphasis on education and at- 
titudinal transformation. That is why they have ex- 
pressed concern with the mass media and all types of 
information that would effect the transformation of 
attitudes and passivity. This is one. 

The other concern is that in this decade where 
voluntarism is the model and where there is an attempt 
to really move towards the self-reliant use of backyard 
farming, backyard gardening, indigenous health and 
indigenous medicines, I would like to highlight the need 
for indigenous health resources and self-reliance. While 
we accept that for many years there will be focus on 
delivery of services, we would also like to highlight the 
equal importance of developing self-reliance because 
the indigenous and local resources are there. 

The third pomt has to do with Section 14 which is 
the need for an even distribution or regional distribution 
of health personnel. As statistics would show and I am 
sure that Commissioner Quesada would bear me out, 
there are adequate rural health workers totalling more 
than 92,000 and there is a total national ratio of 1 : 70 in 
the population, but there is uneven regional distribution 
of health workers. 

MR. BENGZON. May we, therefore, have the Com- 
missioner’s proposed amendment. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. The proposed amend- 

ment to Section 13 would retain everything that Com- 
missioner Quesada has submitted, except that I have 
pruned it down to 40 words which says: The State 

shall promote the right to HEALTH AND SHALL 
adopt a comprehensive APPROACH to health DE- 
VELOPMENT, make essential social services available 
to aU citizens PARTICULARLY the UNDERPRIVIL- 
EGED, at affordable cost AND ENCOURAGE SELF- 
RELIANCE THROUGH USE OF INDIGENOUS 
HEALTH RESOURCES. This is for Section 13. 

MS. QUESADA. Can we respond for every section 
and for every proposed amendment? 

We would like to assure Commissioner Rosario Braid 
that the concept of self-reliance and the use of indi- 
genous health resources are already integrated in the 
term comprehensive and integrated approach.” We just 
did not want to single out all these components of such 
an integrated and comprehensive approach to health 
development. Otherwise, we will miss out some of the 
important principles undergirding this approach. 


*See Appendix 


124 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


So, self-reliance is an objective where a primary 
health care program addresses itself to make people take 
care of their own health or the country to become self- 
reliant. Actually, it is encompassed in the explanatory 
note as is the meaning of integrated and comprehen- 
sive approach. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

But using also the philosophy of the Committee in 
underscoring important concepts, I thought we could 
adopt this and use the word “underprivileged” to mean 
“the sick, women and children, aged and disabled,” so 
that instead of mentioning all the beneficiaries, we 
would only use the word UNDERPRIVILEGED. I 
would like to emphasize SELF-RELIANCE rather than 
mere delivery of social services. 

And so, I would appeal to the Commissioner to in- 
clude the concept of self-reliance because as we know, 
we are very rich in resources such as herbal medicines. 
I think there is a comprehensive documentation of 
herbal medicines and local indigenous foods and I would 
like to emphasize their utilization. 

So, if the Committee would not accept, I would like 
to throw this to the body. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session for 
two minutes to afford Commissioner Rosario Braid time 
to confer with the members of the Committee on the 
word SELF-RELIANCE.” 

It was 10:32 a.m. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. After the word “UNDER- 
PRIVILEGED,” Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner proposes to 
eliminate the rest? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, Madam President, but 
to insert instead the phrase “AND ENCOURAGE SELF- 
RELIANCE THROUGH USE OF INDIGENOUS 
HEALTH RESOURCES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bacani is 
recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask that if we should vote 
on this, we should vote first on the deletion o e 
words that the Commissioner proposes to delete. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the 
tee that we vote first on the proposed deletion o ^ e 
words “the sick, women and children and disable on 
Section 13? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, we will vote first on tha^ 
motion to delete before we can insert the propos 
amendment. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I just like to 
clarify the enumeration. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10.36 a.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session was resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized to restate her proposed amendment. Is it an 
entire substitution or just an insertion of certain words? 


braid. It will just be inse 
nhrasM nf ^ ^^uik I will go along and use i 

Sk wnm ^"""""'^lioner Quesada but eliminate 
sick women and children, aged and disabled” a 

would belong to the underprivileged, and thei 

the phrase AND ENCOURAGE SELF-RELL 
THROUGH USE OF INDIGENOUS HEALTF 
SOURCES.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please proceed. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to clarify ^ 

enumerated the underprivileged — “the sick, women a 
children, aged and disabled.” These are the groups we 
consider as the special groups with special health pr 
lems that have to be addressed to by the healt care 
system - the sick, particularly because if they 
addressed to, then they die; the women and children 
because of the nature of women, especially their mater- 
nal functions, their needs; and the children will have to 
be addressed too. The aged and the disabled are just as 
much disadvantaged because we do not have the special 
services and attention given to these special groups. In 
the health system, we already recognized these groups as 
those that would have special needs and singled them 
out to provide the basis for future legislations. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 

recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Where shall this be inserted after 
the word “disabled”? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I have no objection about 
mentioning all these beneficiaries, but in the spirit of 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


125 


brevity and in order that it could accommodate the 
phrase “PROMOTE SELF-RELIANCE THROUGH 
INDIGENOUS RESOURCES,” I thought the phrase 
could be deleted. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, it is not just a 
matter of giving in and accepting one concept or ano- 
ther. As I explained earlier, I took a lot of time explain- 
ing the intention of this provision so that we will not 
single out some of the concepts that are already in- 
herent in such an approach, otherwise we will miss out 
some of the other components, like when we talk of 
“self-reliance” and “indigenous.” These are parts of the 
comprehensive approach to the health development that 
we are addressing ourselves to. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we vote now. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. May I make a suggestion that the last 
two lines of Section 13 be simplified to read: “the needs 
of the UNDERPRIVILEGED SICK” and eliminate all 
the rest and then add the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid. In other words, we just say 
“the UNDERPRIVILEGED SICK,” instead of the 
“UNDERPRIVILEGED, the sick, women and chil- 
dren ...” 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like to 
respond to the suggestion or the proposal of Com- 
missioner Padilla to use just the term “underprivileged.” 
The reason why we put a comma (,) is that we did not 
want to give the impression that we are just interested 
in the people who are sick. Health care is also provided 
those people who are well, and we would like to provide 
a comprehensive health program that will address itself 
to the healthy population so that they will not get sick. 
By saying the “underprivileged sick,” we are really refer- 
ring only to the sick. So, we placed a comma (,) because 
we talk then about the people who need special protec- 
tion, special health promotion — the preventive aspects 
of the health care program. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that this has 
been sufficiently discussed. 

Those who are in favor of deleting the phrase “the 
sick, women and children, aged and disabled” from 
Section 13, please raise their hand. (Few Members raised 
their hand.) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (Sever- 
al Members raised their hand.) 


The results show 3 votes in favor and 16 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

The next amendment of Commissioner Rosario Braid 
is to add after the word “UNDERPRIVILEGED” the 
phrase “AND ENCOURAGE SELF-RELIANCE 
THROUGH THE USE OF INDIGENOUS HEALTH 
RESOURCES.” This has not been accepted by the 
Committee as explained by Commissioner Quesada. 

Those in favor of the second amendment of Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (Sever- 
al Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 15 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide, is this still 
on the same Section 13? 

MR. DAVIDE. The same section. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the first line, insert after 
“HEALTH” the words OF ALL THE PEOPLE, and 
then delete the words “right to,” so that the first line 
will read: “The State shall protect and promote the 
health OF ALL THE PEOPLE. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. We find that the word “right” 
should be expressly stated in this particular provision. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have read the 
report of the Committee on Preamble, National Terri- 
tory and Declaration of Principles. The same sentence 
relating to health is found in the Declaration of Princi- 
ples. So, to be consistent with the Declaration of 
Principles, I think the matter of the right to health is 
already included when we say that the State shall 
protect and promote the health of all the people. It is 
conceded that that is a right, but it will emphasize the 
fact that this obligation is to all the people. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. But still we would like to retain 
the word right ’ because this has a special meaning now 
to the direction of the provision of health care. We 
would like this expressed because there are many viola- 


126 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


tions of this human right. One might be a patient one 
day and discover that providers of services do not 
recognize his right to health care and may not provide 
him the tender loving care that he deserves because they 
do not understand fully and appreciate that this is 
already a right that has been enshrined in the Constitu- 
tion. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I will agree to the 
nondeletion of “right to” but I reserve my right to 
amend the corresponding provision in the Article on 
Declaration of Principles and State Policies. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, we would welcome that. 

MR. DAVIDE. But I insist on the inclusion after the 
word “HEALTH” of the phrase OF ALL THE PEOPLE. 

MS. QUESADA. We accept. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is the decision of Com- 
missioner Davide? 


“HE amendment is only to add aftei 

HEALTH the words OF ALL THE PEOPLE. 

MS. QUESADA. On second thought. Madam Pres 
ident, would that not contribute to more verbiage be 

^ mention here of making all th( 
services available to all citizens? 

President, I will have a subse 

sav here is, if we onb 

y right to health, whose right is it? 

QUESADA. Is it not understood that when w( 
citLns?”^ health, we refer to the right of al 


MR. DAVIDE. I suggested OF ALL THE PEOPLE 
ause in the succeeding sentence, only “to all citi- 
zens” IS mentioned. 

MR. BENGZON. Primarily, to every citizen here in 
IS country, to the Filipinos and, of course, to every- 

o y, regardless of race, creed or whatever. That is 
already understood. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, I will not insist on the amendment 
on the first line but instead on placing the words PEO- 
PLE in lieu of “citizens” on the third from the last line. 

MS. QUESADA. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Davide which has 
been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the same line where the substitu- 
tion is made, I seek for the deletion of the words “with 
priority for the needs of,” and in lieu thereof, we say, 
ESPECIALLY TO. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, Madam President, we accept. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by le 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amen 
ment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I sugpst a very 
simple amendment on line 3 after the word “shall, 

this is to place a comma (,) after “shall” and insert 
LAW then a comma (,). The amendment now rea s. 
“shall BY LAW, make essential goods ...” 

MS. QUESADA. I understand that there is a pro 
posal that would probably respond to this particu ar 
concern of inserting the words BY LAW by Com- 
missioner Ople. I' think the proposal is really to prevent 
the possibility of raising hopes. Would the Commissioner 
be amenable to the proposition of Commissioner Ople. 

MR. RODRIGO. I want to hear it. 


is silent- h t point is, in the first sentence 

7pns ” <5 second sentence it is “to all c 

countrv The classify certain persons in 

second sentence relates only to all citize 

Commissioner want 
amend the second sentence where the use of “all c 
zens could be changed to “ALL THE PEOPLE”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly. 

\ 

MS. QUESADA. We accept. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, would Commissioner 
Rodrigo at this point consider accepting an amendment 
to his amendment so that instead of “BY LAW,” the 
word ENDEAVOR TO is substituted for it. This is 
actually indicated in a proposed amendment that I had 
submitted earlier to the Committee, and the reason for 
saying ENDEAVOR TO is precisely to put the expecta- 
tions and hopes of the people who will read this provi- 
sion at a more realizable level and which also means that 
we eliminate the expectation that the government itself 
will provide all of these goods and services. The health 
development program will endeavor to make all of these 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


127 


goods and services available at affordable cost. With that 
change it becomes imminently implementable at once, 
without having to project to a long-run future when one 
has to wait for vast resources to be available to finance a 
national health insurance program of the kind which 
England, for example, is now reconsidering because of 
the unaffordable costs. 

MR. RODRIGO. The meaning of “BY LAW” is not 
exactly the same as the meaning of the words “EN- 
DEAVOR TO,” but between provincemates, I yield to 
Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, we accept the pro- 
posed amendment to insert “ENDEAVOR TO” after 
“SHALL” on the third line. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment's approved. 

MR. OPLE. I have just one more amendment. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. OPLE. On the same section, I suggest that we 
end the sentence at “affordable cost” which is on the 
third line from the bottom of the official text, and then 
follow it up with: “THERE SHALL BE PRIORITY 
for the needs of the underprivileged, the 
sick women and children, THE aged and THE disabled.” 
The' reason for suggesting this is that the priority for the 
needs of the underprivileged ought not to be read in the 
context alone of essential goods and services, but this 
should be a priority of the entire integrated and compre- 
hensive approach. I think that makes the meaning clear, 
there shall be special programs in the future to imple- 
ment this priority for the needs of the underprivileged, 
the sick, women and children and, may I say, let us use 
the standard term “THE aged and THE disabled,” in- 
stead of merely “aged and disabled.” 

When we cut that sentence and establish a new 
priority for the needs of the underprivileged, it is a 
mandate of Congress to devise a special program under 
an integrated and comprehensive health care system for 
these underprivileged classes. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, we have just 
approved the proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Davide cutting down on the words “with priority for.” 
But this means a restyling. Would the honorable Com- 
missioner be amenable to giving this to the Committee 
on Style to decide on whether it should be a separate 
sentence? 


MR. OPLE. This is not solely a question of style 
because with this we are limiting the priority for the 
underprivileged when we cut the sentence and reserve 
wholly a new sentence for the underprivileged. Then we 
are, as I said earlier, making their priority coextensive, 
not only with goods and services but with the entire 
range of the integrated and comprehensive health care. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the proposal of Com- 
missioner Ople? 

MR. OPLE. As I said, end the sentence with the 
words “affordable cost,” then add this new sentence 
instead: “THERE SHALL BE PRIORITY FOR THE 
NEEDS OF THE UNDERPRIVILEGED, the sick, 
women and children, THE aged and THE disabled.” 

MS. QUESADA. The Committee accepts. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
latest amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I should like to 
present an amendment. There is a health program which, 

I believe, is very important and might be emphasized in 
Section 13, and this is on preventive medicine. It is 
important because it could save the country millions or 
hundreds of millions of pesos; it could save millions of 
lives from sickness and death. I think it should be em- 
phasized, although it is contained in the explanation, 
that, as Commissioner Quesada has stated, many of the 
people who will read the Constitution would not have 
the time to research and find out the explanation of 
these provisions. 

May I just mention one example. Madam President. I 
have a friend who is one of the top doctors of the Lung 
Center of Imelda Marcos, and I asked him, “How much 
money was spent to build this Lung Center?” And he 
said, “A hundred and fifty million pesos.” And I said, 
“Is that money well-spent to cure lung diseases? ” He 
said, “It is foolish money because instead of building a 
hospital or stressing on cure, this money should have 
gone into inoculations of millions of Filipino infants, 
and saving the lives of these infants through the simple 
process of inoculating them with BCG” - I think Com- 
missioner Quesada knows about this. According to the 
statistics, the no. 3 killer in the country is tuberculosis. 
In other countries, tuberculosis has been wiped out 
because of inoculation. Were the Pi 50 million, which 
was spent for curative program, spent for preventive 
medicine, we could have saved untold sufferings, many 
lives and millions of pesos for the government. 

Madam President, another point more important than 
the phrase affordable to the people” is whether this 
program is affordable to the government. In other 


128 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


words, the question is whether the government has the 
money to be able to render the services and thereby save 
millions or hundreds of millions of pesos by emphasiz- 
ing preventive medicine. So, I wonder if it would be 
good to stress this by inserting the words STRESSING 
ON PREVENTIVE MEDICINE after the phrase 
“essential goods, HEALTH and OTHER social ser- 
vices.” 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I really appreciate 
the interest of Commissioner Rama on the preventive 
aspect of health care. As a matter of fact, I am a pro- 
ponent of preventive health care. But as I said earlier, 
and as I explained to Commissioner Rosario Braid, if we 
single out this element of a comprehensive approach to 
health development, it might bog us down in the details 
of what could very well be part of the thrust not even 
of legislation, but of health programs. But I think it is 
very useful that we put on record that the services 
should provide or should stress on health promotion, 
which I included as part of the explanatory note of 
comprehensive approach. Section 13 (4) states 

that health services provided should include health 
promotion (with emphasis on health education), disease 
prevention or specific protection, such as immunization. 
We did not single out TB because that is only one of 
the causes of mortality and morbidity. 

MR. RAMA. And so, it is the sense of the Committee 
that there must be special emphasis on preventive 
medicine. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, we would like to put on 
record that the future health delivery system should 

respond to the mandate for more prevention rather than 
for cure. 

Yes, I think that is a good suggestion, so 
I will withdraw the amendment. 


BISHOP BACANI. Would the Commissioner not 
deem it advisable to say instead “HEALTH SERVICES 
and OTHER social services available”? 

MS. QUESADA. The understanding is that health is 
part of the social services. There will be the social ser- 
vice of education, housing, employment, security. So, 
we just singled out “HEALTH” because we cannot have 
the state of health unless we provide health services, but 
which is not alone responsible for man or people attain- 
ing a state of health. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but what I mean is, the 
interest of clarity might make it necessary that we say 
instead “HEALTH SERVICES and OTHER social ser- 
vices available.” I have read this part twice, three times, 
and it was only later on that I realized the need to make 
this clear. So, may I suggest that we add the word SER- 
VICES after “HEALTH.” 

MS. QUESADA. I accept the amendment. Madam 
President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I submit that 
amendment which the Committee has accepted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Where are we going to insert the 
amendment? 

BISHOP BACANI. Insert the word SERVICES ^ 
between the words “HEALTH” and “and OTHER 
which appear on the fourth line. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the phrase will 
now read “health SERVICES and OTHER socia ser 
vices available.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. Perhaps the first amendm( 

^ ^ot have to be done at 

if I am clarified on certain points. 

h APPROACH ' 

. £¥y,^ir^^^ENT WHICH shall make essen 

goods, HEALTH and OTHER social services availabl 
does the word “HEALTH” qualify the word “services 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 


MR. SUAREZ. The Committee accepts. Madam 
President. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, the Committee has accepted, 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Bacani which has 
been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized . 

MR. PADILLA. On that same line 4, I was thinking 
to change the words “goods, health services and other 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


129 


social services” to ESSENTIAL MEDICINES, HEALTH 
DRUGS AND HOSPITAL SERVICES. Just a sugges- 
tion because when I read “goods,” I had the impression 
that it includes not only vegetables, fish, meat; these 
are all goods, but I think what we should make available 
are medicines and health drugs. 

The term “and OTHER social services” is also very 
vague. What we need are hospital services because when 
a person is seriously ill and he cannot be an outpatient, 
he has to have some hospital bed and hospital care. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. This particular statement of 
goods does not just refer to health goods, like medicines 
or the things that we find in the hospitals. This relates 
now to the understanding that the state of health can- 
not be achieved if there are other goods which are 
not made available and affordable. That is why the 
comprehensive and integrated nature of this approach to 
health development takes cognizance of the need to 
interrelate with other social services. Thus, we did not 
single out just food or drugs but it would mean also the 
other essential goods which man needs so that he can 
attain good health. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. But when one is not healthy — 
when he has a headache, heartache, other aches - what 
he needs is medicine. Of course, to have good physical 
and mental health one needs more than medicine, like 
good food and substantial proteins. But with regard to 
health care it is the people who go to the hospital or to 
a doctor, but the common complaint is that the medi- 
cines they prescribe are very costly. The immediate need 
of the patient is to be able to buy the medicines or the 
health drugs and, perhaps, a hospital accommodation. 

However, I will not insist if the Committee does not 
look with favor on this suggestion. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, health care is 
really much broader than just the state of illness. For 
example, when we talk about essential goods, it would 
refer to goods such as the building of bridges so that 
people will not get sick of schistosomiasis; it will be 
providing the other conditions that will enable people to 
maintain health. So, that is why it is the total health 
development, including prevention, the putting up of 
toilets, of water facilities, mosquito nets, and all those 
that would prevent diseases. It is really going into the 
details of health development. 

I suppose that with this understanding of the holism, 
the broadness of this concept of health, we realize that 
it is not just being sick or utilizing goods offered in a 
hospital, but also the goods which are offered in the 
communities that are considered. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, if Commissioner 
Padilla is no longer insisting, may I pursue a second 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


BISHOP BACANI. I do not know whether this is a 
matter of style, but there is some reason for the change 
I wish to propose. After saying “There shall be priority 
for the needs of the underprivileged, the sick, women 
and children, the aged and the disabled,” may I suggest 
that the order should be “There shall be priority for the 
needs of the underprivileged, the sick, THE AGED AND 
THE DISABLED, WOMEN AND CHILDREN.” May I 
explain the reason. All of the previous ones, except the 
last two, necessarily suffer from some disadvantage or 
infirmity; while the women and children, though they 
may have special needs, do not necessarily suffer from 
any infirmity or disadvantage. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, Madam President, we accept. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask Commissioner Bacani 
to read his amendment again. 

BISHOP BACANI. “There shall be priority for the 
needs of the underprivileged, the sick, THE AGED AND 
THE DISABLED, WOMEN AND CHILDREN.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we eliminate “women and 
children”? 

BISHOP BACANI. We put them at the last. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have a special predilection for 
women but it is precisely because of this that I find a 
jarring note in this enumeration. Why should we place 
women, in general, in the same class with the sick, the 
aged, the disabled, the underprivileged? Do women, in 
general, include the women who are healthy, wealthy 
and wise? 

I thought I could remedy this in the Committee on 
Style but I do not think I can because it is not just a 
matter of form. In the case of men, only the men who 
are sick come under this — only those who are disabled 
and underprivileged. But then we have placed women, 
in general, in the same class with the sick, the aged and 
the disabled. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, it may sound jarring 
and a bit inelegant but apparently women have the ex- 
clusive monopoly of maternal functions and for that 
reason, they need special health care services and atten- 
tion. 


130 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RODRIGO. If the women do not see anything ™E PRESIDENT. The session is suspended, 
jarring in it, I do not mean to be more popish than the It was 11:15 a.m. 

Pope. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I was just wondering if we can read 
this in connection with the Section on Women because I 
guess we are applying ourselves to working conditions 
and to working women. Is it possible to integrate this? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Quesada 
say? 

MS. QUESADA. The Section on Women refers to 
working women, but we are referring to women all over 
including those who may not be working in industries 
but whose health care needs have to be addressed to 

because of their biological reproductive maternal 
functions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:26 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Before we suspended the session, we were discussing 
the proposed amendment of Commissioner Bacani to 
transpose “women and children.” Am I correct? Was the 
amendment to place “women and children” at the end 
of the sentence after “disabled” accepted by the 
Committee? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

Is there any other pending amendment? 


PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog 

nized. 

Si^MIEOTO. This is just a clarification ad 
dressed to Commissioner Quesada. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it also about women? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The use of the word “women 
IS very road. It would cover working women, wome 
w 0 ^e rich, who are wealthy, who are poor. Since w 
ave t e suggestion from Commissioner Monsod to lin 
provision on working women, can we sa 
WUKKING women and children”? 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Monsod 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we read our 
proposed last sentence per the Ople amendment: “There 
shall be priority for the needs of the underprivileged 
sick, the ELDERLY AND DISABLED, AND WOMEN 
AND CHILDREN.” In other words, we are now de- 
fining sick women and children, elderly and disabled, 
who are entitled to special or priority attention because 
of the word “underprivileged.” 


MS. QUESADA. No. We are also referring to women 
w o stay at home, those who are the child bearers, or 
the women who are not found in industry. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
proponents of any amendmentdo Section 13, so I move 
that we take a vote on the whole section. 


intent in using the 
women is to cover all women? 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Quesada please 
read now the whole Section 1 3 as amended. 


MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. Madam Presiripnt 
proponents of amendments to Section 1?. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we have- 
one mmute to try to reconcile the different ideas t 
have been propounded? 


MS. QUESADA. “The State shall protect and pro- 
mote the right to HEALTH. To this end, IT SHALL 
adopt an integrated and comprehensive APPROACH 
to health DEVELOPMENT WHICH shall endeavor to 
make essential goods, HEALTH services and OTHER 
social services available to all THE PEOPLE at afford- 
able cost. There shall be priority for the needs of the 
underprivileged sick, the ELDERLY AND DISABLED, 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


131 


AND WOMEN AND CHILDREN. THE STATE SHALL 
ENDEAVOR TO PROVIDE FREE MEDICAL CARE 
TO THE PAUPERS.” 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may I just ask one 
question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Would it not be better if we put the term 
“women and children” ahead of all the others? 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a suggestion that we put 
“women and children” ahead. Is this acceptable to the 
Committee? 

MS. QUESADA. No, Madam President, we will retain 
the Bacani proposal which places “women and children” 
at the end of the enumeration. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those who are m favor of Section 
13 as read by the Chairman of the Committee, please 
raise their hand. (All Members raised their hand.) 

Those who are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 38 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 13, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized to present an amend- 
ment to Section 14. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, this is a very simple 
amendment. I suggest to insert the words AND CON- 
TROL between the words “monitoring” and “system.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are consolidat- 
ing Sections 14 and 15; perhaps, if we state our con- 
solidation, then the Gentleman can introduce his 
amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to defer consideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us hear from the Committee. 

MS. QUESADA. The reformulation would be as 
follows: “THE STATE SHALL MAINTAIN AN EF- 
FECTIVE FOOD AND DRUG MONITORING SYS- 
TEM, APPROPRIATE HEALTH MANPOWER DE- 
VELOPMENT AND RESEARCH, AND A SPECIAL 
BODY FOR DISABLED PERSONS TO ENABLE 
THEIR INTEGRATION TO THE MAINSTREAM OF 
SOCIETY.” So we have combined Sections 14 and 15. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear to the Commissioners? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we have copies of the reformula- 
tion? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Quesada please 
repeat slowly. 

MS. QUESADA. It still retains most of Section 14: 

“THE STATE SHALL MAINTAIN AN EFFECTIVE 
FOOD AND DRUG MONITORING SYSTEM, APPRO- 
PRIATE HEALTH MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT 
AND RESEARCH, AND A SPECIAL BODY FOR DIS- 
ABLED PERSONS TO ENABLE THEIR INTEGRA- 
TION TO THE MAINSTREAM OF SOCIETY.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I know the purpose of 
lumping together the provision on a special body for 
disabled persons and the provision on a food and drug 
monitoring system for which reason we deleted the im- 
portant words “for the rehabilitation, self-development 
and self-reliance of the disabled towards their total in- 
tegration to the mainstream of society”? I find that 
if we lump together this provision on disabled persons 
with the provision on food and drug monitoring system, 
we dilute , the special emphasis on the concern of the 
State for disabled persons and, therefore, while I would 
not mind lumping the two sections together, I would 
request that the provision on disabled persons be con- 
sidered another paragraph. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we request 
a suspension of the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:34 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:41 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Commissioner Quesada is recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Due to the strong reactions to the 
new formulations, the Committee has decided to retain 
the original sections. Section 14, however, will contain 
some insertions of new ideas, and this would now read: 
“SECTION 14. The State shall maintain an effective 
food and drug monitoring AND CONTROL system and 
UNDERTAKE appropriate health manpower develop- 


132 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1 986 


ment and research RESPONSIVE TO THE COUN- 
TRY’S HEALTH NEEDS AND PROBLEMS.” 

This idea was introduced by Commissioners Regalado 
and Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, the first amendment, the insertion 
of the words AND CONTROL after “monitoring,” is 
accepted by the Committee. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, if we look at 
the Explanatory Note prepared by Commissioner Quesa- 
da, the use of the words “monitoring system” would 
cover control and regulation. The sentence would read: 
“SUCH MONITORING SYSTEM WOULD ADDRESS 
ITSELF TO THE ADOPTION OF A NATIONAL ES- 
SENTIAL DRUG LIST, THE USE OF GENERIC 
NAMES, THE STRENGTHENING OF THE NATION- 
AL FOOD AND DRUG REGULATORY MECHAN- 
ISMS . . .” So I think the words “regulation” and 
“control” are contemplated by the use of the words 
“food and drug monitoring system.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I react? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will the proponent 
entertain an amendment to his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. May we hear the amendment? 

MR. OPLE. In Ueu of “AND CONTROL,” would 
Commissioner Davide consider REGULATORY? 

• davide. No, Madam President; CONTROL 
^ better because it will relate precisely to drug. 

bo. It IS not just regulation of drug but control also of 
drug. 


MR. OPLE. I was hoping to put this in the following 
context. For example, regulation would also include a 
rnandate to appropriate government authorities to con- 
sider, for example, the point raised earlier by Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid about the use of indigenous 
resources, say, the preference for generic drugs instead 
of these very costly foreign labels; and if we have to 
meet the standard of affordable cost, it may be necessa- 
ry for the regulatory function of the government to take 
vigorous steps, to overcome the resistance of the foreign 
drug companies to the use of generic drugs which pro- 
bably cuts down the cost immediately by one-half, if 
not more. And so, regulation, monitoring and regulatory 
system can actually have this context, instead of the 

controlling abuses, including 

mislabelling, I suppose. 


MR. DAVIDE. Can we combine the two concents 

“monitoring,- then add , 
words REGULATION OR CONTROL”? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President 
ment on regulation and control? ’ 


may I com- 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed, 
Sarmiento. 


Commissioner 


MR. DAVIDE. This is merely an explanation but 
it is not embodied in the text of the proposal. Inter- 
pretations may be made later to instances merely of 
monitoring but monitoring does not necessarily include 
regulation or control. So, the language must be made 
stronger to include regulation or control, especially that 
we are talking, among others, of food, and especially 
drugs. I really feel the necessity not only of the inser- 
tion of CONTROL but also of including “REGULA- 
TION” as explained by Commissioner Ople which I am 
willing to accept. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I am willing to accept 
the Davide amendment to my amendment provided it is 
also understood that “REGULATION” and “CON- 
TROL” include the power of the government to 
regulate cartelized pricing of drugs especially by foreign 
manufacturers. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be included. 

MR. OPLE. I understand they often resort to this, 
which will make it impossible for the promise made in 
this section of the Article on Social Justice to make 
available goods and services at affordable cost. If the 
foreign drug manufacturers which dominate the drug 
industry in the Philippines are allowed to resort to car- 
telized pricing, that is to say fixing the prices at higher 
levels behind the back of the government. . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
inclusion of the words “CONTROL AND REGULA- 
TION”? 

MS. QUESADA. I understand. Madam President, that 
the word “CONTROL” would now include the ideas of 
regulation as proposed by Commissioner Ople, so we 
will just use the word “CONTROL” to include regula- 
tory mechanisms. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will necessarily include regulation. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


133 


MR. OPLE. Regulation will necessarily include con- 
trol, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Ople insist on 
his proposal to include the word “REGULATION” 
aside from “CONTROL”? 

MR. OPLE. The Davide amendment contemplated 
the use of “REGULATION” and “CONTROL,” Madam 
President. 


tables would not be unhealthful because in vegetable- 
growing, chemicals which may be disastrous to health 
are already applied. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, even in situations hke that, the 
Gentleman contemplates that tlie government could 
exercise monitoring and control? 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, Madam President, because 
the idea is the promotion of total health. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
The Committee only says “monitoring AND CON- 
TROL.” 

MS. QUESADA. Before we make a comment on that. 
Commissioner Villacorta would like to clarify some 
possible consequence of this control. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, while we 
understand the contemplation of this phrase, “food and 
drug monitoring AND CONTROL,” we would like to 
put on record that this does not at all refer to the con- 
trol of food distribution, intake or production. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is also correct. Control here is to 
determine whether this food is nutritious enough or 
adequate or substandard. So, the government must con- 
trol not the manufacturing, although there should be 
some regulations in the manufacturing to see to it that it 
wUl contribute to the promotion of health. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, it seems that the intent 
of the Committee is better served by the more precise 
term “REGULATION” which is usually the object of 
monitoring. Monitoring is usually exercised on behalf of 
a regulatory power of a competent authority of the 
government; control can be susceptible to misinterpreta- 
tion; while regulation is completely immune from being 

misinterpreted. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. I thought the Gentleman was prin- 
cipally referring to processed food? 

MR. DAVIDE. No. 

MR. OPLE. I support the wider interpretation given 
by Commissioner Davide. He is correct. Does the 
Gentleman know that although American bases authori- 
ties are obligated by agreement or treaty to buy locally 
sourced vegetables especially from Baguio, almost in- 
evitably our vegetables are rejected at the gate of Clark 
Field and Subic because of the allegation that the DDT 
content is too high for their own health standards? 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, we would like to 
propose this compromise so we can cut down on the 
words and still achieve the same meanings that both 
Commissioners Davide and Ople have presented, and 
that is to use the word REGULATORY. “The State 
shall maintain an effective food and drug REGULA- 
TORY system, to include the idea of monitoring, 
control and regulation. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, “monitoring” will be deleted? 

MR. OPLE. That is acceptable to me. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Just one point of clarification from 
the Honorable Davide because the use of the word 
“food” may be misinterpreted in the future. Is the 
Gentleman referring to processed food? 

MR. DAVIDE. Among others. 

MR. SUAREZ. Not the raw food that we take like 
vegetables? 

MR. DAVIDE. The government may also impose 
certain rules and regulations to see to it that these vege- 


MR. OPLE. I have another amendment, if Com- 
missioner Davide has already used his turn. 


MR. DAVIDE. I have an amendment on the third 
line. My proposal is to delete the word ^‘COUNTRY’S” 
and after PROBLEMS,” insert the following' OF THE 
PEOPLE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COUN- 
TRY. 

THE PRESIDENT. How will it read then? 

MR. DAVIDE. It reads as follows: “RESPONSIVE 
TO THE HEALTH NEEDS AND PROBLEMS OF THE 
PEOPLE AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE COUN- 
TRY.” 


134 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The idea of the Committee here is 
not to bring in the development of the country, only 
health needs and problems. That belongs to the section 
on the national economy. 

MR. DAVIDE. Not only that, Madam President. In 
the proposed Article on Declaration of Principles, the 
principal thrust of the development and promotion of 
the health of the people is for socioeconomic de- 
velopment. So, this is only to dovetail that particular 
proposal. 


from representatives of Mindanao that there are millions 
in Mindanao, in the countryside, who live and die with- 
out ever seeing a single doctor or a nurse. Although this 
is probably an extreme example in the case of Minda- 
nao, the fact that many Filipinos Live and die without 
seeing a doctor reflects a nationwide reality outside of 
the cities. 

Therefore, I strongly urge the Committee, in the 
interest of social justice, for those deprived of medical 
care in the rural areas, to give a countervailing bias now 
in this section so that the redressing of this imbalance in 
health care for the rural areas, for the rural poor in par- 
ticular, will be part of the mandate of the health section 
of the Article on Social Justice. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. No, we do not have to repeat in each 
and every section social, political, economic and health 
development and everything else because the whole 
Constitution must be read in that context. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I will not insist on that par- 
ticular proposal. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. May the Committee react first to 
that amendment before any proposals are presented. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I propose an amendment at the very 
end of the consolidated section. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is not being consolidated any- 


MS. QUESADA. No, it has been separated. 

MR. OPLE. It has been separated again. Anyway, on 
ection 14, after the very end of the present sentence 
and research on health care problems,” please add the 
followmg: AND CORRECT THE HISTORIC IM- 

delivery of HEALTH CARE 
TO THE RURAL AREAS. 

May I explain briefly, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

interpellations on this sub 

of th^ ^ '^onld reflect the admis 

1 ^ k rS'® Commissioner Quesada 

tJip- hpalVh rarp disparity now existin 

the health care services avaUable to the urban areas 

She admi 

that although we have a glut of nursing graduates 
abroad, there are no takers among nurses and doc 
for vacancies existmg in the rural health units of 
country. The reason is that the countryside is too v 
tractive for doctors and nurses. That is why we 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, we have taken 
into consideration the rationale behind the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Ople. We have actually 
taken his proposed term - “TO UNDERTAKE APPRO- 
PRIATE HEALTH MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT” - 
which would now encompass the need of redirecting the 
health manpower development so that we can address 
these resources to the needs of the country particularly 
the rural poor. But we do not want to specify manpower 
development as it would be only one development. 

MR. OPLE. It is not only manpower development but 
the whole range of services under the integrated and 
comprehensive health care and development program. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, the concept of manpower de- 
velopment being from production to utilization and 
management, which includes the deployment and 
distribution of the health manpower resource. 

So, we are really addressing this redirection in the 
manpower training and education to meet the needs of 
our people, particularly the rural poor. 

MR. BENGZON. We cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. The Committee does admit that this is a 
very grave problem not only of health but also of social 
justice. If this is correct and it rises to that gravity, 
should it not deserve some explicit mention in this 
section? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


135 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, I concur with Com- 
missioner Ople. This is why I have an amendment to his 
amendment and perhaps we could put it together. 
After “research,” add the phrase AND ENSURE THE 
EVEN REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION OF HEALTH 
PERSONNEL. I concur with Commissioner Ople 
because statistics would show that only 30 percent of 
the entire force of physicians are in the rural areas serv- 
ing 70 percent of the population. I mentioned earlier 
that although there are 92,000 rural health workers, 
there is an uneven distribution in the country. So, with 
this amendment, I strongly urge this concept of re- 
dressing the imbalances through coming up with an 
amendment, like that of Commissioner Ople and my 
amendment, in the spirit of a more even regional dis- 
tribution of health care services. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may the Commit- 
tee reply? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MONSOD. I think the minutes of committee 
meetings and the minutes of these discussions as well as 
the explanation of Commissioner Quesada very clearly 
say that the words in Section 13 already include the 
concept that the Gentleman is stating. We are willing to 
have these interpretations read into the Record in order 
that the interpretation is not lost. However, we regret 
that we cannot add these words because they are 
already subsumed and included in the total concept of 
the Committee. I believe Commissioner Ople is a 
member of the Committee and he will recall that when 
we were discussing this, he suggested that this was all 
being considered already and we feel that it is not 
necessary to add these words anymore. 

MR. OPLE. If the intent is very clearly and empha- 
tically recorded, I will go along with the Committee, 
Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. My amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident, is a simple amendment. It is an amendment by 
addition on Section 14. After “shall,” add the words 


ESTABLISH AND so that it shall read: “The State shall 
ESTABLISH AND maintain an effective food and drug 
regulatory system.” 

This is a consequence of the amendment proposed by 
Commissioner Davide and adopted by the Committee. 

MS. QUESADA. We accept the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
proponents of amendments. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, there is indeed a pro- 
posed amendment which should immediately follow 
Section 14. With the indulgence of the Floor Leader, 
may I state this proposed amendment now, in asso- 
ciation with Commissioners Aquino, Sarmiento, Cal- 
deron, Tingson and Rodrigo. It merely says: SECTION 
15. THE CARE AND WELFARE OF THE ELDERLY 
SHALL ENJOY STATE SUPPORT AND PROTEC- 
TION. 

May I explain briefly. Madam President? 

The reason for this amendment is that throughout 
the Article on Social Justice and also the Article on 
Declaration of Principles, this Commission has already 
acknowledged the fundamental entitlement to the pro- 
tection of the State of various disadvantaged groups. 
These include, of course, workers and peasants, women 
at work, minors. That just about leaves out just one 
more very important and strategic segment of the work 
force that should be entitled to our protection. They are 
the ones that have withdrawn from the work force 
through retirement. There are eight million members of 
the Social Security System, many of whom are attain- 
ing the age of retirement. There are one million mem- 
bers of the GSIS, many of whom are also attaining the 
age of retirement. There is a nationwide clamor from all 
of these retirees for the government to set right the 
pension schemes for which they have contributed all of 
their working lives but out of which they now get a 
mere pittance. 

I was in San Miguel, Bulacan the other day and some 
of the government retirees spoke to me. They retired 
about 10 years ago. They said 10 years ago, this P200 
from the GSIS could still buy three sacks of rice. Today, 
they get the same amount and this can hardly buy 
a sack of rice. Of course, the retirees do not have 
champions unlike those still enrolled in the active labor 
force. Throughout the world, governments are now 
moved by the advancing social morality of the age. They 
are taking vigorous steps to redress the disadvantages for 
the elderly , those who will retire from the work force. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


136 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. Excuse me. May the Chair pro- 
pound one question, if I can be allowed to propound 
one question? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. It is a great honor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the veterans be included 
because we have been receiving so many communica- 
tions, hundreds of them, asking for the protection also 
of the rights of veterans? 


tradition of the family taking care of the elderly. We 
recognize that the practice of the State taking care of 
the elderly is a western tradition. But while the State 
and government agencies may be able to take care of the 
elderly, the elderly will die not from lack of care but 
from a broken heart. I do not know that this provision 
shall relate to that provision in the Article on Family 
Rights. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. The veterans are included to the extent 
that they are retirees of the government or of the 
private sector and, therefore, are enrolled in the SSS or 
in the GSIS. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I add a little 
word in support of this amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, those of us who 
^ this Constitutional Commission 

ou e to say that we cannot avoid growing old, but 
we can avoid growing cold. We read in a very well- 
known publication all over the world, entitled Daily 
Tea , at growing old has some definite advantages. If 
0 gave us full use of our mental faculties, the sunset 
years provide a wonderful opportunity of coming to 
eims with our past. So, the elderly should be protected 
in e sense that they should be supported. The care and 
welfare of the elderly shall enjoy the support and pro- 
tection of the State because the elderly are not afraid of 
tomorrow. They have seen yesterday and they are in 
love with today. A famous poet aptly said: 

The vain regrets of yesterday had vanished through 
God s pardoning grace. The guilty fear has passed away and 
joy has come to take its place. 


hecau^e"thnQP^^^f ^ ^ Strongly support this amen 

“Cnme ^^^ting old WOUld 

say. Come, grow old with me; the best is yet to 1 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner 

nized. 


Bennagen is recog- 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

We have in the section on family rights a provision 
which says that the State shall encourage the Filipino 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

Mention has been made by the President on the 
voluminous letters we receive from war veterans and 
government retirees. Commissioner Nolledo and I have 
filed Resolution No. 497 for these war veterans and 
government retirees, and this had been referred to the 
Committee on Declaration of Principles. So, I would 
not present it at this time in the Article on Social 
Justice because it is appropriately referred to the 
Committee on Declaration of Principles. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the Committee’s reaction 
to this Ople amendment? 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, we do sympathize 
with the concern of the Commissioners but we would 
like to state that Section 13, indeed, takes into con- 
sideration such concern for the elderly when this special 
group has been singled out as one of the underprivileged 
to which the State should afford protection because it 
includes not only the right to health but also the other 
essential social services which this particular disad- 
vantaged or underprivileged group would be able to 
obtain. So, we feel that providing another special sec- 
tion would open the floodgates to other sections that 
would include special care for the aged, the sick and 
women. 

MR. OPLE. May I call for a vote, Madam President. 
And in this respect, may I amend our own amendment 
so that it will include the veterans. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Before the amendment is put to a 
vote, I seek to introduce some amendments. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


137 


Both proponents took into account only the elderly; 
we have forgotten the orphans and the abandoned chil- 
dren. So, I seek to amend the second line by inserting 
before “ELDERLY” the following: “ORPHANS, 

ABANDONED CHILDREN, WAR VETERANS AND 
THE ELDERLY.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Yesterday, Madam President, there 
was a discussion here on the section for minors, in 
which the phrase “ORPHANS AND ABANDONED 
CHILDREN” was to be included. We believe that 
both the suggestions of Commissioner Ople and Com- 
missioner Davide are amply covered in Section 13 
because that section talks about the underprivileged, the 
elderly, women and children, and it is in the context of 
a total approach to health care. 

Secondly, the other aspect of taking care of the 
elderly will be provided for in the section on family- 
rights as mentioned by Commissioner Bennagen. 

So, we believe that this is amply covered in this 
section on social justice and health services. 

The veterans would be included in the elderly as well 
because veterans are approaching old age. 

If the proponents insist on their amendments, then 
we are willing to call for a vote and ask for the judgment 
of the body on whether their inclusion would not be 

redundant. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I reply briefly to 
the Committee before the amendment is voted upon? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I appreciate the intervention of other 
colleagues - Commissioners de Castro, Davide, Sar- 
miento, and above all. Monsod, on behalf of the Com- 
mittee - concerning this subject. However, I think they 
missed the jugular issue behind this proposed amend- 
ment. 

As I said in my remarks, we are not talking of family 
obligations to the elderly. They have earned their right 
in the Social Security System and in the Government 
Service Insurance System by paying to these funds all 
their working lives, only to be rewarded later with 
pittances, strictly disproportionate to the money they 
have paid out of their very low wages throughout their 
working lives. The veterans, of course, already have 
earned a niche for themselves in the Declaration of 
Principles. 

The de Castro amendment is actually taken from a 
provision already existing, I understand, in the Declara- 
tion of Principles. 


So, when we speak of State protection for the 
elderly, we are giving a mandate especially to the SSS, 
the GSIS and the Pension Funds of the Armed Forces of 
the Philippines, that they should not cheat their own 
members by denying them living retirement pay that 
they have already earned in this system by faithfully 
remitting their premium contributions all of their 
working lives. 

That is one very important significance of this pro- 
posed amendment. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just say that Section 13 
precisely begins with the phrase “The State shall protect 
and promote” and talks of a comprehensive integrated 
health care to all the people, with priority to the elderly 
and the aged, et cetera. So, we believe that this amply 
covers the elderly. However, we leave it to the vote of 
the body. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We have been talking about the 
elderly, war veterans and government retirees. I believe, 
and I made mention of my Resolution No. 497 co- 
authored with Commissioner Nolledo, it is timely that 
we read a provision of Resolution No. 497. It says: 

It shall be the responsibility of the State to provide 
adequate care and benefits for war veterans and government 
retirees as well as their dependents commensurate with 
their present conditions in hfe. Preference shall be given 
these war veterans and government retirees in the acquisi- 
tion of public lands and the development of natural 
resources. 

May I be allowed to explain this. 

THE PRESIDENT. But the point is that this parti- 
cular idea of the Gentleman is already in the Article on 
Declaration of Principles. That is what I understand; 
that is what was stated. What we have here now is just 
Commissioner Ople’s amendment on the welfare of the 
elderly. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I was thinking if the elderly can 
also be included in this resolution because they are also 
war veterans and government retirees. While this was 
referred by the Committee on the Accountability of 
Public Officers to the Committee on Declaration of 
Principles, it is not yet in the report of the Committee 
on Declaration of Principles because the reference was 
late. 


138 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Ople agreeable 
to the suggestion of Commissioner de Castro? Actually, 
the proposal of Commissioner de Castro is an amend- 
ment to the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I am a veteran of 
World War II but I am not retired. There are 600,000 
veterans in the country. Approximately half of these are 
retired and the others are not retired. However, there is 
no bar to providing for the veterans in our proposed 
amendment although the right place for veterans ... I 
would like to be associated with Commissioner de 
Castro in that proposal provided it is appropriately 
located in the Article on Declaration of Principles or in 
the General Provisions, perhaps immediately following 
the statement concerning the Armed Forces and the 
defense of the State. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, just to clarify from the Com- 
^ttee. The Committee does not accept the proposed 
amendment. It does not also accept the inclusion 
of the issue on veterans in this particular section of the 
Article on Social Justice. Is that correct? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 
ni^Tffi PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

sessiM 3sk for a suspension lof the 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:18 p.m. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Considering that there are several 
issues related to this, whether this particular amendment 
would be proper in the Article on Declaration of Prin- 
ciples, I would raise a privilege motion. The privilege 
motion is to consider the Ople proposal in the Article 
on Declaration of Principles. 

MR. OPLE. I oppose this motion. Madam President, 
and I would like a vote on it. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will put it to a vote then. 
Actually in the vote, we may already consider the pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Ople, whether this 
proposed section should be adopted in the section of 
the Article on Social Justice or not. Is that correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. So, the privilege motion is to take this 
up when we consider the Article on Declaration of 
Principles. 

THE PRESIDENT. That would be the effect of what- 
ever action is taken by the body. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of including this 
Ople amendment on the elderly in the Article on Social 
Justice, please raise their hand. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we restate the 
motion submitted by Honorable Davide? I think it is 
the other way around. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


resumption of SESSION 
At 12:23p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, the motion is not clear. Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. The motion is to consider this Ople 
proposal in the Article on Declaration of Principles. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 


MR. OPLE. I support the decision of the Chair, which 
was very deliberately arrived at, that the voting be on 
the amendment itself. 


to^he Ople^propoSi bee ^ 

* * ^ posai because I sincerplv HpHpvp 

provisions on war vett»rt.«o oeiieve 

p^perly belong to the Art4t D^SZ^of R 


THE PRESIDENT, niankyou. 

We will now proceed to vote on the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


RULING OF THE CHAIR 


THE PRESIDENT. While Commissioner Davide said 
that this motion is a privilege motion, I believe we 
should take this up directly to the point whether this 
proposed section properly belongs to the Article on 
Social Justice. If it is so decided by the body, then we 
will vote on whether it should be included. In other 
words, are we in favor of this particular section? It does 
not necessarily mean that if it is adopted, that if we 
agree that it be included here, the section itself on the 
elderly is meritorious. Should it be here or should it be 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9. 1986 


139 


in some other section? That is the point that we should 
first decide. Secondly, if it should be here, are we in 
favor? If it is properly here in the Article on Social 
Justice, are we in favor of having a separate section on 
the elderly or is it already included, as stated by the 
Committee, in Section 13 where the word “aged” is 
already stated? That is how the Chair sees it. 

MR. OPLE. Just to simplify, Madam President, are' 
we voting on the merits of this amendment first? 

THE PRESIDENT. Not yet because the Davide 
amendment proposes an alternative. Should it be here 
or should it be in some other section? So, let us first 
decide where it should belong — in the Article on Decla- 
ration of Principles, General Provisions or Family 
Rights, as stated by Commissioner Davide? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will it be possible for 
Commissioner Davide to agree to a voting on the merits? 
If it loses, then that will not bar anyone from taking this 
up again in connection with the report of the Commit- 
tee on the Declaration of Principles? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would prefer it that 
way. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Davide 
say? 

MR. DAVIDE. I really consider it a prejudicial 
question because there are proposals that it should be in 
the Declaration of Principles or anywhere else. There are 
proposals that it should be here. So, we should decide 
first whether it should be here or in the Declaration of 
Principles. 

THE PRESIDENT. Or somewhere else? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, if you vote yes, then you 
believe that this is a proper provision in the Article on 
Social Justice. If you vote no, then you believe it should 
be somewhere else, either in the Article on Family 
Rights, Declaration of Principles or General Provisions. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just say that the Committee’s 
position is that it is meritorious and it is already in- 
cluded in Section 13. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of con- 
sidering this proposed Ople amendment as part of the 
Article on Social Justice, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 15 votes in favor and 19 against; 
the Ople amendment would not be considered in the 
Article on Social Justice but may be considered in some 
other Article of the Constitution. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is stiU one 
anterior provision that has not been voted on as a com- 
plete text. May I ask that we vote on Section 14, as 
amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. WiU Commissioner Quesada please 
read Section 14, as amended? 

MS. QUESADA. “The State shall establish and main- 
tain an effective food and drug regulatory system and 
UNDERTAKE appropriate health manpower develop- 
ment and research RESPONSIVE TO THE COUN- 
TRY’S HEALTH NEEDS AND problems.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; Section 14, as amended, is ap- 
proved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no propo- 
nents of amendments to the last section which is 
Section 15. So, I ask that we vote on Section 15 as a 
whole. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Quesada please 
read Section 15? 

MS. QUESADA. “The State shall establish a special 
body for disabled persons for THEIR rehabilitation, 
self-development and self-reliance AND towards their 
total integration to the maiastream of society.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have a very minor amendment, and 
that is to delete “towards.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it will read: “self-reliance 
AND their total integration.” 

MS. QUESADA. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask the Committee a question? 
Does the term “disabled” in this context also include, 
let us say, ex-convicts, people who are in most ways 
psychologically wounded, and presumably in a certain 


/ 




140 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


narrow context also disabled, and in many ways, also MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Romulo 
legally and socially disabled because in a society like be recognized, 
ours, they are subject to continuing penalties of ostrac- 
ism? Are the ex-prisoners and ex-convicts included THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
within the compass of the disabled in this sense? nized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, excuse me. May the 

Committee be allowed to state its position regarding this 
THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- particular section, 
nized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Profitting from the extensive 
deliberations we had with the representatives of the 
disabled, my undertanding of a disabled is one who 
suffers from some kind of derangement, but not neces- 
sarily by virtue of his being an ex-convict because 
ex-convicts would be adequately rehabilitated. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Does the Gentleman consider them 
qualified for the rehabilitation services provided for in 
this section? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think they have to enter what we 
ca t e access agencies and should be properly categor- 
ize as such depending on their personal situations. 

the Committee adopt this position 
ot Commissioner Bennagen? 


MS. QUESADA. Yes, 
hearings with the disabled 


this was based on the public 
groups. 


mittPP th this will save me and the Cc 

not inf'll H proposing an amendment if thi 

ncluded within the definition of the disabled. 


orieinal ^lAGEN. Yes, as a matter of fact, the 

taliv only referred to those who are men- 

Prim P^y^^^^tly handicapped. Some members of the 
wni °^-i®^ted to that definition because that 

die KT ^ huge number of people who are 

3 e nientally, sensorially, psychologically, et cetera. 


m-++^ '■^^t understanding, since the Com- 

1 ee as adopted this, I will not press my amendment. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. May we vote now on Section 15? 


TlJph ^‘^i^SIDENT. Is there 
Ihe Chair hears none; Section 1 


any objection? (Silence) 
5 is approved. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President the onlv remain 
section under this Article is thP .III ^ 


MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we request the recognition of 
Honorable Garcia? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. First of all, we would like to read 
Sections 19 and 20, as revised, after having considered 
the amendments and suggestions of various Com- 
missioners, especially Commissioners Davide, Ople, 
Rosario Braid, Romulo and, of course, the members of 
the Committee. So, with you is the original draft ot tlie 
Committee plus a half page where we make an effort to 
give the definition of people’s organizations as part of 
Section 19. So, I will read the two sections and then 
give a very brief explanation. 

SEC. 19. In the pursuit of the ends of Social Justice, tlie 
State shall respect the independence and the role of 
people’s organizations as a means of empowering the people 
to pursue and protect througli peaceful means their legiti- 
mate and collective interests and aspirations. 

People’s organizations are bona fide associations of 
citizens' with identifiable leadership, membership and struc- 
ture and demonstrated capacity to promote the public 
interest. 

\ SEC. 20. The State shall respect the right of the people 
and their organizations to effective and reasonable par- 
ticipation at all levels of social, political and economic 
decision-making, and shall MAKE POSSIBLE adequate 
consultation mechanisms. 

I will present a very brief explanation for Sections 
19 and 20 and why we feel these are very important and 
integral parts of the entire Article on Social Justice. 

Empowering the people is a key to the attainment of 
the ends of social justice. So, in this new constitution, 
we feel we must recognize that people’s organizations 
can be one significant vehicle in this progressive and 
democratic tradition. The majority of no wealth nor 
political influence can empower themselves through 
people’s organizations that are popular and authentic 
expressions of their will. Indeed, it is argued here that 
people s power can find most permanent, organized and 
articulate expression through such organizations withhi 
the democratic framework. The new constitution must, 
therefore, recognize the role of people’s organizations 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


141 


as a principal means of empowering the people to 
pursue and protect, in a peaceful manner, popular and 
social reforms and mandate the State to respect their 
independence as autonomous checks to State power. 
Finally, the new constitution must also institutionalize 
people's participation and ensure consultation among 
the basic sectors at all levels of social, political and 
economic decision-making, guaranteeing that the people 
have access to information necessary to make informed 
and responsible decisions. Concretely, the State must be 
mandated to make possible proper and adequate con- 
sultation mechanisms with the people, and the formula- 
tion and implementation of local, regional and national 
priorities, plans, programs and projects that affect the 
people’s lives. Thus, in sum, empowennent of the 
people is the enabling mechanism in the cause of social 
justice and people’s power can find more permanent 
expression in people’s organizations and through the 
institutionalization of consultation mechanisms that 
insure people’s participation in decision-making. 

We would like now to ask if there are others who may 
wish to add or amend. * 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Romulo be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, this is a brief 
amendment. I would like the Committee to consider the 
deletion of the opening clause “In the pursuit of Social 
Justice” because it is really unnecessary. This whole 
Article is devoted to social justice and Sections 1 and 2 
lay down the basic premise and spell out the means of 
carrying it out. So, I really do not think the opening 
clause is necessary. 

MR. GARCIA. We thought it is important to place it 
because people’s organizations are precise vehicles and 
enabling mechanisms to achieve social justice. Of course, 
it is within the context of the whole Article. 

MR. ROMULO. So are the other provisions but we do 
not begin the other provisions with “In the pursuit of 
social justice, agrarian reform, urban reform, et cetera.” 

MR. GARCIA. That is true but in a sense, this is a 
summary of the different sections. We realize that we 
are going to draft an imperfect constitution and, there- 
fore, it will be up to many of the people’s movements 
and organizations advocating the protection and the in- 
terest of their specific sectors like the farmers in land 
reform and the urban poor to pursue and pressure 
Congress so that it can be responsive to enact the laws 
that will definitely meet their basic needs. So, it is a 
summary that for social justice to be pursued and per- 
fected, these people’s organizations will finish whatever 
we have accomplished. 


MR. ROMULO. Althougli it can have the meaning 
that the other sections are not in the pursuit of social 
justice. 

MR. GARCIA. It does not have that meaning, of 
course. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask a basic question. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, can we finish first 
the proposal of Commissioner Romulo? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am sorry. 

MR. ROMULO. If the Committee does not accept the 
amendment, I will not insist on that. May I ask what is 
the position of the Committee. 

MR. GARCIA. We would prefer to have this phrase 
m the section. 

MR. ROMULO. Is that the Committee’s response? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee does not accept 
the amendment. 

MR. GARCIA. The Committee is divided; there are 
some who feel that it can . . . 

MR. ROMULO. Then may I ask for a vote. 

MR. SUAREZ. How would the amendment read? 

MR. ROMULO. I would delete the phrase “In the 
pursuit of Social Justice” and start with “The State.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted now 
by the Committee? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. We ask for a vote, Madam President. 
VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 28 votes in favor and 9 against; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 


142 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. I have another amendment on the 
first line. It will be on the words “the independence 
and.” I believe that this may be misinterpreted to mean 
that other forms of organizations and associations which 
are guaranteed under the Bill of Rights are not entitled 
to independence because we are singling out for respect 
only the so-called people’s organizations. What about 
the other associations hke civic, religious unions, etc. 
which are guaranteed under the Bill of Rights? 

MR. GARCIA. In our understanding, many of these 
associations and organizations can be classified as 
people’s organizations. But the term “independence” is 
important because we want to ensure that these organi- 
zations are not simply or merely a creation of the State, 
that they are not manipulated in any way like what we 
had in the past. And so, it is important to maintain that 
independence so that they can be a check on the power 
of the State, that they are never instruments only of 
whatever group. 


MR. ROMULO. So, the Gentleman does not mean to 
imply that the other types of organizations and associa- 
tions which are guaranteed under the Bill of Rights do 
not deserve a respect of their independence? 


MR. GARCIA. Of course, they have a right to that 
independence too. But what is important is that very 
o en we have organizations that are created, like our 
wpenence with the Samahang Nayon, which are simply 
manipulations or instruments of the State. And we 
want to ensure that there are no labor unions, trade 

umons, or any other organizations that are used for that 
purpose. 


tv. ROMULO. The other implication is that since 
e Gentleman wants the State to respect their in- 
ependence, the State may pass laws or regulations 
ostensibly for the purpose of protecting their inde- 
pendence. Has the Committee considered that? This 
may have a reverse effect. 

MR. GARCIA. We do not beUeve so. Madam Pres- 
ident. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, would it solve 
ent ®man s anxiety over the interpretation if we tr< 
pose the word “independent” and say; “The State s: 
uS'^? independent people’s organ 


PFNDFNT Rm?" ^HE INDl 

PENDENT ROLE OF PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS 

•? ^ ^ "mdependence” is not necess 

rily to he organization but to the role which is tl 
principal point. 


MR. GARCIA. I am sorry. It is not simply the role 
but also their independence . . . We should not touch 
the autonomous and authentic character of those 
organizations. 

MR. ROMULO. But that is guaranteed under the Bill 
of Rights. That is my whole point. If we single out one 
type of organization whose independence must be re- 
spected by the State, by implication, we are vitiating the 
general protection provided under the Bill of Rights. 

MR. GARCIA. Anyway, the understanding 1 have is 
that the Gentleman is, in fact, underscoring the impor- 
tance of this thing. But if he wishes, the sentence which 
reads: “The State shall respect the role of INDE- 
PENDENT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS” would at 
least emphasize the importance. 

MR. ROMULO. Could the Gentleman read it again? 

MR. GARCIA. “The State shall respect the role of 
INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS.” 

MR. ROMULO. Fine; I accept. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rodrigo have 
any comment on this? 

MR. RODRIGO. No, I have another amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. How is it now. Commissioner 
Garcia? 

MR. GARCIA. The amendment will read: 
shall respect the role of INDEPENDENT PEO 
ORGANIZATIONS ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Romulo w i 
was accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The C ai 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Colay co is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. If we 
put the adjective “INDEPENDENT” before “PEOPLE’S 
ORGANIZATIONS ” which will be like this: “The State 
shall respect the role of INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S 
ORGANIZATIONS,” it would seem that there are 
people’s organizations which are not independent. I 
would just omit the adjective “INDEPENDENT,” and it 
will read: “The State shall respect the role of PEOPLE’S 
ORGANIZATIONS.” 


MR. BENGZON. Yes. “The State shall respect the THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Romulo 
INDEPENDENT ROLE ...” say? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


143 


MR. ROMULO. No, the implication is wrong. Pre- 
cisely, we want the State to respect only a bona fide 
independent people’s organization, not a company 
union. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, that is the idea. 

MR. GARCIA. Not just any group of individuals. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. 1 fail to see the difference there. I 
think that the word “INDEPENDENT” is a surplusage. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 

recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I do not mind if we do not have 
this. 

MR. BENNAGEN. On behalf of tlie Committee, I 
think the same issue was raised with respect to the ri^t 
of independent peasant organizations. We are saying 
here that there are all sorts of people’s organizations 
and some of these are really company unions and that 
they carry the government line. But we would like to 
encourage as a source of complementary structures the 
existence of independent organizations that can develop 
their development programs apart from those that are 
pursued by governmental structures. 

’ For instance, we can mention peasant organizations 
that are really only supportive of existing government 
programs, which need not really redound to the benefit 
of the peasant themselves. 

MR. COLAYCO. Company unions are not necessarily 
openly dependent. They become dependent when it is 
proven that they are company unions. I mean, prima 
facie, all organizations are independent. Even if we put 
“INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS,” 
company unions can always claim that. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is a manner of speaking. We 
can cite maybe a more specific example, the Kabataang 
Barangay, which in itself is a kind of youth organiza- 
tion which is also under the ambit of people’s organiza- 
tion. But they can be manipulated to carry on the party 
line as it were. That is what we want to avoid. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, but I mean, by simply putting 
“INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS” does 
not stamp any organization for that matter as inde- 
pendent. As I said, a company union can always claim 
to be an independent organization, which they always 
do anyway. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I cannot follow because by 
definition, when we speak of company union, it carries 
the thrust of the company which may become produc- 
tive to the interest of authentic labor unions. 

MR. COLAYCO. But they are not officially called 
company unions. I will not press my point on this. I 
think that saving the time of the Commission is more 
important than this. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Even ILO Convention 141, to 
which the Philippines is a signatory', assigns this role to 
independent organizations. 

MR. RAMA. The Commission is ready to vote, 
Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this clear: “The State shall 
respect the role of INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S OR- 
GANIZATIONS”? That is what is to be voted upon. 

m 

As many as are in favor of this particular amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand, (No- 
body raised his hand. ) 

MR. RODRIGO. I register my abstention. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just a minute, we will just an- 
nounce the results. 

The results show 28 votes in favor, no vote against 
and one abstention; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask that I 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a basic question. I have before 
me the text of the Bill of Rights which we have ap- 
proved already. Section 7 provides: 

The right of the people, including those employed in 
the public and private sectors, to form associations, unions 
or societies for purposes not contrary to law shall not be 
abridged. 

Section 9 reads: 

No law shall be passed abridging the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and petition the government for 
redress of grievances. 

I would like to ask: Do these provisions not cover the 
“people’s organizations’’ which are sought to be pro- 
tected again by the government under Sections 1 9 and 
20 ? 


144 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. GARCIA. Sections 19 and 20 have a very 
particular thrust: as an enabling mechanism precisely 
to make social justice real. The encouragement is given 
to the people that they organize themselves, that they 
protect their legitimate interests peacefully througli 
their collective efforts. That is the whole thrust. 


MR. DAVIDE. The proper reference to that would 
really be the people’s organization. So, it is to these 
organizations that the respect must be accorded to. 

MR. GARCIA. No, I am sorry. It is basic to the 
people. 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I understand. 

MR. GARCIA. Therefore, what does it do? It refines 
and it amplifies what we already have in the Bill of 
Rights, specifically, because of the whole vision that we 
have of social justice. If the Gentleman will remember, 
when we began the definition, we said “to redistribute 
wealth and power.” In other words, it is not simply the 
State later on which will ensure that all of these pro- 
tections and recognition of rights are given but the 
people also must have a legitimate share of pohtical 
power for them to participate. And so, this is the vehicle 
for them. 


MR. RODRIGO. I just want to be very brief. So is it 
my understanding now that even without these provi- 
^ons, the general provisions of Sections 7 and 9 of our 
ill of Rights would cover this, but for emphasis the 
Committee wants to particularize? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, that is the intent. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR RODRIGO. But this is already covered in 
general. 


f general rights are found in the Bill 

of Rights. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, this is only to particularize and 
for emphasis. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are three more 
speakers on the two sections. May I ask that Com- 
rnissioncr Davidc b6 recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


MR. DAVIDE. In effect, we will broaden the provi- 
sion, and it might become rather deceptive. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. “The State shall respect the role of 
INDEPENDENT PEOPLE’S ORGANIZATIONS as a 
means of empowering them to pursue and protect 
through peaceful means their legitimate. . .,” meaning, 
again, the organization. 


MR. GARCIA. No. Madam President; in fact, many 
people are unorganized while others are organizing, but 
some are already organized. In a sense, we are trying to 
say that only a citizenry that is organized and mobilized 
can really pursue this very difficult endeavor of the 
State. In fact, if the Gentleman will remember, in many 
of the previous interventions, when we spoke of the 
unfinished popular revolution of February, we said it 
was a political act and that the social changes which are 
unfinished still have to be pursued. It is not only the 
task of the State but also the people. We will still have 
to pursue this through their organizations. 


MR. DAVIDE. In other words, these organizations 
would be the vehicle of the people? , 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I will not insist. But after the 
word “protect,” I would seek certain transpositions^ 
Delete “through peaceful means” and in lieu ^hereo i^ 
sert the following: WITHIN THE DEMOCRA 

FRAMEWORK. And then, after “aspirations,” i«ser 
THROUGH PEACEFUL AND LAWFUL ^^ANS. So, 
will read: the people to pursue and protect, WITH 
THE DEMOCRATIC FRAMEWORK, their legitirna^ 
and collective interests and aspirations THROUGH 
PEACEFUL AND LAWFUL MEANS.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 
<lp<'tinn’L’^Li f®''' amendments. On line 

tute the wr^THEM 

MR. GARCIA. We accept, Madam President. 


MR. GARCIA. We accept. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment? 

MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. I am sorry. This is not 
simply to empower the organization but the people. It 
is a vehicle to empower the people. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


145 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I move to delete the 
phrase “as a means of empowering the people” on lines 
2 and 3 of Section 19. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Excuse me. Could Commissioner 
Aquino repeat the proposed amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. Delete the phrase “as a means of 
empowering the people.” I believe that it is an abstract 
diversion which conjures an image of an adversarial or 
conflict situation, and I would much rather that we 
focus clearly on the intent which is to pursue and 
protect within the democratic framework, after the 
Davide amendment, their legitimate and collective 
interests and aspirations. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. Madam President. May I 
answer? I believe tliat tlie phrase “empowering the 
people” is very important here. Our experience in the 
past, precisely, underlines the fact that unless our 
people are organized and mobilized to pursue their 
collective interests and their legitimate ends, they are 
powerless. Precisely, our purpose is to mention this. 

MR. AZCUNA. I would like to suggest only that 
instead of deleting it, why not just say “TO ENABLE 
the people,” because the phrase “empowering the 
people” is really objectionable. Power is supposed to 
reside in the people and the State should not empower 
the people because they already have the power. What 
we should do is to enable the people to exercise that 
power So, I believe it would be better if we say; “The 
State shall respect the role of independent people’s 
organizations TO ENABLE the people to pursue and 
protect,” because it is the people who really should do 

this. 

MS. AQUINO. I accept. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Aquino 
say? 

MS. AQUINO. I accept the amendment to the amend- 
ment. 

MR. GARCIA. I just want to make a clarification. 
Here, we are not saying that the State will empower the 
people — not at all. We are saying that the organizations 
are the means of empowering the people. It is an injunc- 
tion; in fact, it is almost an encouragement for them to 
get organized and to be involved. It is very difficult for 
people to be involved individually if they are going to 


protect their interests. They, therefore, must discover 
that vehicle which will empower them and these are the 
organizations we are referring to. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think the idea really is for 
people, in their organized numbers, to recover their 
power which has been lost by their being atomized into 
passive individuals; and for me, it may not really be 
necessary because it can lend a number of misinterpreta- 
tions. All we want to say is that the people, to recover 
their sense of strength, must come together to pursue 
their collective interests. I think that is the intent and 
not for anything. It is not for the State or an external 
agency to provide this power but the people themselves 
must recover and restore this to themselves. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. So, we reiterate our amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Azcuna satis- 
fied? 

MR. AZCUNA. No, Madam President. We would like 
to insist on the amendment to delete the phrase “as a 
principal means of empowering the people” and instead, 
insert the phrase “TO ENABLE the people.” So that it 
will read: “The State shall respect the role of inde- 
pendent people’s organizations TO ENABLE the people 
to pursue and protect ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Instead of “empowering,” it will 
be “TO ENABLE the people.” 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the situation calls for 
a vote now. 

VOTING 

the PRESIDENT. Yes. As many as are in favor of 
this proposed amendment of Commissioners Aquino 
and Azcuna, please raise their hand. ( Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor and 8 votes 
against; the ainendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no amend- 
ments- to Section 20, which is the last section; so 1 ask 
that a vote be taken on Section 20. 


146 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. We have not yet voted on Section MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

19 as a whole. Will Commissioner Garcia please read 

Section 19, as amended? THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. GARCIA. Section 19, as amended, will read: 
“The State shall respect the role of independent 
people’s organizations to enable the people to pursue 
and protect within the democratic framework, their 
legitimate and coUective interests and aspirations 
through peaceful and lawful means.” 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a second paragraph. 

MR. GARCIA. There are no amendments on the 
second paragraph. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I suggest that we 
limit the vote to the first sentence, because I would like 

to engage in a brief discussion later on concerning the 
second sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. MA^BONG. Madam President, just a very 
Z^apT ^ by the second 

I notice that we are about to vote on the paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is the first paragraph. 

President. When 

aoostrnnho • people’s organizations,” the 

letter £ while in the Committee 

u/h,Vh^ k"’ apostrophe is after the letter S. Which is 
Inch, because the meaning will vary? 

til GARCIA. People’s” is with an apostrophe after 
the letter it is just a typographical error. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

VOTING 

i^ariy as are in favor of the 
Commkti?^^ Section 19 which has been read by 

Members 

Mmb7^mtsShJhmT^^' 

The results show 38 vote^ in r 

against; the fust sentence of Action "V 

Ttan...<a Jo ^ootion 19 IS approved. 

There is a second naraoMnk u- . 
by Commissioner Garcia. ^ before 

MR. GARCIA. PEOPLE’S oor'AxtTo, 

BONA FIDE associations OF 

IDENTIFIABLE LEADER <ihtd CITIZENS WITH 

STRUCTURE AND DEMONSTiUTEDC^^TarY TO 
PROMOTE THE PUBLIC INTEREST 


MR. OPLE. Will the Committee yield to some ques- 
tions concerning the second paragraph? 

First of all, do I understand it right that this is a con- 
solidation of several proposed amendments which were 
earlier brought to the attention of the Committee by 
Commissioners Christian Monsod, Ricardo Romulo, 
Hilario Davide, Jr. and myself? 

This definition of people’s organization is acceptable 
to me, being one of the proponents of the amendments 
which are now considered subsumed in this definition. 
But I thought I would make the observation that, 
indeed, this draft Constitution, not only in the Article 
on Social Justice but in other Articles, will probably 
stand out among contemporary constitutions once it is 
ratified in one respect: there is a fairly ubiquitous 
reference to people’s power in several forms as one of 
the guiding principles for a new social order that is, in 
effect, ordained by this Constitution. Thus, people s 
organizations may initiate amendments to the Constitu- 
tion and the laws through the power of initiative and 
referendum already vested in them elsewhere. They rnay 
even overthrow a government that will become a traitor 
to the people and their Constitution. This is found in 
the Declaration of Principles. They shall participate m 
carrying out the mandates on social justice, especially in 
the fields of labor and agrarian reform. And under this 
new section that we are considering, they are constitu- 
tionalized for purposes of participating in all levels ot 
decision-making of the government and they initiate the 
socioeconomic structures that will best conform to the 
standards of social justice. 

So, with all the powers and duties vested in these 
organizations, I am glad the Committee has agreed to 
incorporate a definition of these organizations. How- 
ever, I would like to call the attention of the Cornmit- 
tee, or I should put this as a question to the Committee. 
I suppose that people’s organizations do embrace m 
groups of citizens that band together voluntarily for the 
pursuit of public interest. Would that be correct? 


MR. GARCIA. That is correct. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Therefore, this would include both labor 
and peasant organizations? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, including professional, neighbor- 
hood and civic associations, ethnic and cultural groups, 
and so on. 

MR. OPLE. And presumably, because of the tripartite 
character of negotiations for industrial peace, these 
should also include associations of landowners and 
associations of business and industry. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


147 


MR. GARCIA. Yes, because they also pursue the 
public interest. 

MR. OPLE. May I call the attention of the Commit- 
tee to the fact that in the case of bona fide labor and 
peasant organizations, they do write their own constitu- 
tions and bylaws embodying their principles as well as 
their rules of internal life. And in the case of labor 
organizations, tliese are deposited in the competent 
authority of the government; that is, the Ministry of 
Labor and Employment. Of course, when one deter- 
mines the most representative workers’ organization for 
the purpose of appointing delegates to international 
labor conferences, these reports also serve as a basis for 
determining who should be chosen. The Committee had 
earlier considered, as part of my proposed amendment, 
a minor requirement where, just in the case of bona fide 
labor organizations, the people’s organizations which 
were given these powers in the Constitution would be 
asked to submit their constitutions and bylaws, together 
with the list of their elected and appointive officers, and 
these are deposited in the office of the government with 
competent authority. 

Since labor organizations are already covered by these 
laws, then the rigor of the qualifications to be con- 
sidered bona fide and independent people’s organization 
would be higlrer in the case of labor than in the case of 
other organizations, including civic associations. Would 
that be correct? 

MR. GARCIA. We are not trying to establish a 
hierarchy of one being more important than the other. 
We are saying that they have an equal rule. In as far as 
they can protect the public interests, in a far more effec- 
tive and better way . . . 

MR. OPLE. I am describing an existing situation 
where by virtue of the existing law, there is indeed a 
higher standard of rigor for labor organizatioiis than in 
the case of nonlabor organizations, except those that 
register with the Securities and Exchange Commission. 

Would the Committee not consider equalizing this 
standard of rigor for all by also requiring the other 
people’s organizations to deposit their constitufions 
and bylaws in an appropriate office of the government? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, there are also 
different levels of organizations and their nature vary. 
Therefore there are some who may not even have 
constitutions and bylaws. They may just simply have a 
declaration of principles and a program of action. 
Therefore, we also have to respect that level of political 
maturity or that level of organization which those 
groups have. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. I am not going to insist on that. 

MR. GARCIA. We would not want to impose simply 
one standard. 


MR. OPLE. I am not going to insist on that because 
I already yielded to the Committee’s request earlier. 
But would Commissioner Garcia, for purposes of record- 
ing the intent of the Committee, not agree that in the 
future, all the independent people’s organizations, 
considering the powers and duties vested in them in this 
Constitution, including the possibility of participating 
in regional development councils and the planning work 
of the National Economic and Development Authority, 
should be encouraged to rise to a level of maturity and 
responsibility where they will write their own constitu- 
tions and bylaws for their own internal guidance and for 
the guidance of those who support them? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. According to their capability and 
capacity, of course, we would like to encourage their 
political development and maturity. 

MR. OPLE. If that is admitted as an objective under 
this paragraph, then I will not insist on reviving that 
amendment. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, we can now take a 
vote on the second paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Garcia read 
again the second paragraph? 

MR. DAVIDE. I have a very minor amendment, 
Madam President, on the second paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. # 

MR. DAVIDE. Before “people’s,” insert the word 
“independent”; and then between the letters “e” and 
“s” in “peoples,” insert an apostrophe (’). 

THE PRESIDENT. Where will the word “indepen- 
dent” be? 


MR. DAVIDE. Before the word “peoples,” place the 
word “independent,” then place an apostrophe (’) be- 
tween “e” and “s” in “peoples.” 

MR. GARCIA. Accepted, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I propose an amendment by 
substituting the word “identifiable” with IDENTIFIED, 
unless the Committee intentionally used the word 
“identifiable.” 


MR. GARCIA. It is “identifiable.” 


148 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. Because “IDENTIFIED” would 
mean that there is no other action to be taken because 
they are already identified. In the case of “identifiable,” 
I would take it to mean that some effort has to be done 
and there is the capability of identifying them. Why do 
we have to hide the identities? Why do we just say 
“IDENTIFIED leadership”? 


MR. DAVIDE. I understand that Commissioner 
Garcia accepted it earlier. If Commissioner Garcia would 
agree to the proposal of Commissioner Monsod, I am 
not insisting on that particular amendment. 

MR. GARCIA. I concur with the opinion of Com- 
missioner Monsod. 


MR. GARCIA. I do not think there is a need for that. 
THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept? 

MR. GARCIA. We do not accept. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, the only amendment is the apos- 
trophe (’). 

MR. RAMA. So, we are now ready to vote on the 
amendment on the second paragraph. Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I will not press the amendment. 

MR. RAMA. The amendment has been withdrawn. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote on the Davide amend- 
ment first. 


MR. RAMA. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. We would like to request Com- 

inserting the word “IN- 
li NDENT because what we are defining here are 
people s organizations,” not independent people’s 
organizations. The word “INDEPENDENT” is already 

m the first section and perhaps it is not necessary to put 
this here. 


MR. DAVIDE. I think it is necessary because by 
virtue of the amendments earlier introduced, the open- 
ing sentence of Section 19 will read: “The State shall 
respect the role of independent people’s organizations 
to enable the people to pursue and protect ...” 

MR. MON SOD. Madam President, there is nothing in 
the definition that is relevant to the word “INDEPEN- 
DENT. The definition that is here is to “people’s or- 
ganizations. I am just wondering whether it is still 
necessary to put that. Are we saying that to make the 
distinction here may not be necessary? 


MR. RAMA. So what is the position of the Commit- 
tee so we can vote? 


MR. MONSOD. We would rather not have the word 
“INDEPENDENT.” If the Commissioner insists, we may 
have to go to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide insist? 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
second paragraph of Section 19, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 39 votes in favor and no vote 
against; the second paragraph of Section 19 is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is a minor 
amendment to Section 20 by Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I propose a minor amendment on 
Section 20 by adding the words AS DETERMINED BY 
LAW. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where? 

MR. MAAMBONG. In' the last sentence after the 
word “mechanisms.” I feel. Madam President, that the 
phrase “AS DETERMINED BY LAW” is necessary 
in order that we could provide the mechanics and 
the process of consultation; otherwise, the consultation 
mechanism would be meaningless. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
May we have the reaction of the Committee? 

MR. GARCIA. The understanding is that whether 
there is a law or not, this basic right must be respected 
and they should be consulted. The consultation mechan- 
ism itself could be threshed out and discussed, and later 
on, we need not have a law for that right. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee believes that the 
phrase “within the democratic framework” might 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


149 


already be sufficient that we do not need to put the 
phrase “AS DETERMINED BY LAW.” 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, there are already 
mechanisms in place now that did not need legislation. 


MR. REGALADO. I proposed the same amendment 
before because even in Section 3 (b), we stated that 
with respect to labor, they shall also participate in 
policy- and decision-making processes affecting their 
rights and interests as may be provided by law. Is there 
a difference insofar as the participation of labor is 
concerned? 


MR. GARCIA. Yes, that is correct. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Maambong 
insist? 

MR. MAAMBONG. My only point, Madam President, 
is that we make possible adequate consultation mechan- 
isms but if we do not operationalize this consultation 
mechanism by some law or some process, how could we 
make it effective? 


MR. GARCIA. It appears in other people’s organiza- 
tions as we already mentioned. In fact, the executive 
department or the different ministries can create these 
mechanisms where the people can be consulted and 
their ideas be incorporated for a better decision-making 
process. In other cases, the people themselves can create 
these mechanisms and structures and invite all officials 
involved so tlrat the decision-making process can be 
made better. 


MR. GARCIA. In fact, we have discussed that earlier. 
This is happening in some of the ministries. In the Of- 
fice of the President, tliere are already consultations 
going on, but the mechanism itself will be refined by 
practice. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I agree with the comments of 
Commissioners Monsod and Garcia as to the spon- 
taneous but rather effective and dynamic people’s 
organizations and consultations with government. I 
think the problem with including that phrase “AS 
DETERMINED BY LAW” is for the law to delimit the 
possibilities of people’s organizations consulting with 
government. We are saying that the full potential of 
people’s organizations consulting with government can- 
not be accommodated by law. Therefore, to put that is 
already to provide some limitations to the fuller 
expression of people’s organizatioins. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, this is not 
really the intention of the proponent but if the Com- 
mittee feels that way, we do not have to put it to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Maambong 
insist? 


MR. REGALADO. In the discussion that took place 
earlier, it was said 'that Section 20 also encompasses the 
matter of labor unions. But here, the proponents do not 
want to have that phrase AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY 
LAW whereas, under the subparagraph on labor, that 
phrase appears. So, if it is a labor union on one hand 
under Section 3 (b), they will be subjected to the provi- 
sions of the law. However, in applying Section 20, the 
Committee does not want to have that same regulatory 
provision. 

MR. GARCIA. No, excuse me. I just want to clarify. 
What the Commissioner intends is not to wait for the 
legislature to enact a law before consultation mechanism 
can take place. In fact, we are saying it is already taking 
place. A public hearing is a very clear example of how 
an interaction between those who are supposed to enact 
laws and the people for whom the laws are supposed 
to be made should be for a better process of lawmaking. 

MR. REGALADO. So, it is a question of time. Why 
do we not say “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW”? 

MR. GARCIA. It is not merely a question of time. 
Very often those who govern do not, in a sense, recog- 
nize the people’s right of participation and consultation. 
And we feel that it is important to establish this 
principle here. 


MR. REGALADO. Is it the apprehension of Com- 
missioner Garcia that if we put the phrase “AS MAY 

BE PROVIDED BY LAW,” the law may stifle their 
nghts? 


MR. MAAMBONG. We will submit. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GARCIA. It can be a constraining factor. In 
other words, the people will feel that there might be a 
need tor legislative action as a precondition before they 
can exercise their right to participate using the proper 
consultation mechanisms or before they, in fact, can 
organize. 


150 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. So, we go back to that original The results show 21 votes in favor and 16 votes 
question we asked on labor where he agreed that it against; the amendment is approved, 
should be a consultative process and their participation 

therein may be as provided by law because it might . MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
conflict with the other existing laws. In effect, it is amendments to Section 20, so I ask that it be voted 
actually just a regulatory implementation. on as a whole. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in the case of 
Section 3, on labor, it is not only a question between 
organizations and the government; it is also a question 
of a third party, which is the enterprise. That is why it 
might be necessary to have the law define the respective 
rights of these two — the employer and the employee. 

In this case, we are referring to organizations of 
people themselves and, secondly, these consultative 
mechanisms are already placed in many sections of the 
government. It might impair that right, if we have to 
say that it has to be formalized in a law. 

This section does not say that a law may not be 
passed. It is possible that it will be passed. We are just 
saying that we do not want it to look like a precondi- 
tion for the exercise of consultation. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Garcia please 
read the section. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the exact wording of the amend- 
ment “AS DETERMINED BY LAW” or “AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW”? 

MR. REGALADO. “AS DETERMINED BY LAW” 
was the amendment of Commissioner Maambong who 
withdrew the same. Mine was “AS MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Regalado intro- 
ducing another amendment which has been withdrawn 
by Commissioner Maambong? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President, I would 

n here, because in the first 

onimissioner Monsod says that there is nothing 
mat will prevent the enactment of such a law. So, why 
not make it specific‘s 


THE PRESIDENT. So, let us put it to a vote ther 

^®ndment is to add the phrase “A 
MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

^ many as are in favor of this proposed amendmer 
ot Commissioner Regalado, please raise their hand. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


MR. BROCKA. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Just two little comments. 


caiTspeak^W^f ^ ^ 

can speak. We finish the voting first. 


VOTING 


“™ciently discusse< 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we just have a 
clarification. I believe Commissioner Regalado already 
said that this does not mean that a law is a precondition 
for consultation to take place. Is that a correct inter- 
pretation? 

MR. REGALADO. That is precisely why the phrase 
used is “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” There 
may be no law, or the present situation will just be as i 
is. But if Congress sees it fit to make some qualifications 
later on, then this will not preempt Congress. Congre^ 
may even strengthen this consultative process an 
require adequate mechanisms for such a consultation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this clear now with the Com- 
mittee? Can we now read the whole Section 20? 

MR. GARCIA. Section 20, as amended, will read: 
“The State shall respect the right of the people and their 
organizations to effective and reasonable participation 
at all levels of social, political and economic decision- 
making, and shall make possible adequate consultation 
mechanisms AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


VOTING 


“AS maT be proviSIy I ^ 

hand. ( Several Members raised their hand ) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
20, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


151 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I would like to 
abstain. I would simply like to put on record that the 
phrase “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” substan- 
tially weakens the provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I just announce the result of 
the voting. 

The results show 30 votes m favor, 6 votes against 
and 1 abstention; Section 20 is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may 1 just ask 
Commissioner Regalado one clariflcatory question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As I understand it, “AS MAY BE 
PROVIDED BY LAW” should refer only to the mechan- 
isms. 

MR. REGALADO. No, it refers to the entire partici- 
pation process. The law will provide how it will be done 
or how the participation will be. 

THE PRESIDENT. But it is not a precondition. In 
other words, it is not a requirement that there must be a 
law to provide for this. Is that clear, Commissioner 
Regalado? 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, Madam President. That is 
why I used “AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW” as 
distinguished from “AS DETERMINED BY LAW, 
because the latter is a precondition while the former is 
not. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, Congress cannot set 
forth limitations on the right. 

MR. REGALADO. Again? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, Congress cannot set 
forth limitations. 

MR. REGALADO. Congress can stand there; it cah 
strengthen, make more effective, amplify, supplement 
or qualify. 

MR. NOLLEDO. But not limit. 

MR. REGALADO. Why should we preempt Congress 
in its decision-making? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo, it says 
here “and shall make possible.” So, how can it retract 
or reduce? It shall make possible as may be provided by 
law. In other woras, the law will just provide the corre- 
sponding mechanism but it has to make possible all that 
has been stated here in this body. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Chair. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Ople 
has graciously withdrawn his last amendment. So, there 
are no more provisions or sections here to be voted on. 
But before I ask for the termination of the period of 
amendments, may I ask that we insert in the Record a 
speech of Commissioner Tingson, entitled; “Land Re- 
fonn. Pillar of Economic Recovery,” which is a com- 
ment and an observation on the section that we have. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved.* 

Please furnish a copy to the Secretariat. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, I will. Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, are we through now with the 
Article on Social Justice? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, before I move to ter- 
minate the period of amendments, I would like to 
register the reservation of Commissioner Jamir to amend 
Section 5 and Commissioner Foz’ to amend Section 1 1. 

With those reservations. Madam President, I move 
that we close the period of amendments on the Article 
on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would also like to reserve an amend- 
ment on Section 20. That is the very last one. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Bemas would like to 
make a reservation on Section 20. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, just a small point. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to make the manifestation 
that Commissioner de los Reyes was consulted in the 
drafting of the section on the rights of fish workers 
which included the phrase “service workers and other 


*See Appendix 


152 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 9, 1986 


forms of contractual relationship.” That is just for 
purposes of drafting it, the styling. 

MR. RAMA. With those reservations, Madam Pres- 
ident, I move that we close the period of amendments 
on the Article on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Qiair hears none; the motion is approved. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
adjourn until Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 1:36 p.m. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


153 


R.C.C. NO. 53 
Monday, August 11, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:43 a.m.f the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Muhoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing , 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 


Chamber, O Lord, there are no foes, only colleagues in 
the common endeavor to structure the foundation of 
this nation. 

Guide us, Almighty God, in these, the final days, to 
make the Constitution we are drafting one that is ac- 
ceptable to our people but, more importantly, one that 
is deserving of Your blessing and benediction. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 


THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Jose D. Calderon. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. CALDERON. Let us pray. 

Almighty God, we are entering the final phase of our 
task to draft what will become the fundamental law of 
the Filipino people. 

The last two months had been hectic but the days 
ahead will be even more demanding. 

Even now, strenuous and sustained effort has taken 
its toll among those of us who are not in excellent 
health nor of robust physical attributes. 

But, Almighty God, the few of us who had been 
stricken ill are, by Your Grace, holding on tenaciously 
to the job at hand, pushed on by a determination and a 
purpose single to the completion of this endeavor, toge- 
ther with our more physically able colleagues. 

As our work mtensifies, as the demands on our 
efforts grow heavier, give us, O Lord, the strength to 
carry on. Reenergize our bodies; give more light to our 
minds; put more love in our hearts; and grant us more 
understanding and sympathy for those views that con- 
tradict our own. 

As crucial issues are submitted to a vote, fortify us. 
Almighty God, with humility in victory, with grace in 
defeat, and with the wisdom to understand that every 
vote cast in this Chamber is a vote of conscience in- 
tended to achieve the common weal and certainly not a 
partisan stand designed to defeat a foe, for in this 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. . Present* 

Azcuna 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. . Present 

Bengzon . ^. . . 

. . Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Calderon 

. Present 

Castro de . . . • 

. Present* 

Colayco 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present* 

Davide 

. Present* 

Foz 

. Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Gascon 

. Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Absent 

Jamir 

. Present 

Laurel 

. Present* 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Monsod 

. Present* 


Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Nieva 


Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Ople 


Padilla . / . . . 


Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Rigos 


Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 


Rosales 


Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Suarez 


Sumulong . . . 


Tadeo 


Tan 


Tingson .... 


Trefias 


Uka 


Villacorta . . . 


Villegas 



The President is present. 

The roll call shows 29 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 


‘Appeared after the roll call 


154 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary -General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

^tter from Mr. Teodoro Pascua of Konsiyensiya ng 
Febrero &ete (KONFES), 4 Malinis St.^ UP Village, 
1 man, Quezon City, submitting its proposal for the 
text of Section 8, Article XV of the 
Constitution regarding religious instruction in 
public elementary and high schools. 

~ Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

letter from Mr. Satumino C. Aro of 12-A Camp 
angwa. La Trinidad, Benguet, requesting inclusion of 
provisions on social security to make small member- 
employers beneficiaries by way of benefit payments in 
times of sickness, disability, retirement and death. 

514 - Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

Agencie^^”^”^'^^^^ Constitutional Commissions and 


utter from Mr. Jaime A. Tabang of 216 M.L. Quezt 
St, Maglhw, Mabalacat, Pampanga, seeking a cons 
tutional provismn that would, in effect, make the b 
exarnmees w,th borderline marks become members > 
the bar provided they have proven to be competent 
fields directly related to the legal profession 


(Communication No. 515 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 


To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Jaime A. Tabang of 216 M.L. Quezon 
St., Magiliw, Mabalacat, Pampanga, saying that civilian 
employees of the AFP remain “casuals” in spite of their 
civil service eligibilities and length of service and suggest- 
ing the inclusion of provisions providing equal treatment 
of all government employees regardless of the agency 
hiring them. 

(Communication No. 516 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commmissions and 
Agencies. 

Letter from Mr. Jose C. de Venecia, Jr., President of the 
Petroleum Association of the Philippines, Inc., 6th 
Floor Basic Petroleum Bldg., Alvarado St., Legaspi 
Village, Makati, Metro Manila, containing the position 
of the association on the exploration and development 
of petroleum resources of the Philippines. 
(Communication No. 5 1 7 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Twenty-seven letters from John Gerard R. de Dios, 
Edwin F. Sarmiento, Eric S. Javier, Anmiel P. Galvo, 
Joselito Ledesma, Terry A. Lafigura, Rosario Torr^, 
William Intalco, Rojiel S. Lacanienta, Clifford 
Pesalbon, Joselito S. Agbayani, Romeo V. Paragas, 
Marlyn Sarmiento, Aurora R. Guiang, Francis G. Bais, 
Ramil T. Bruces, Ricky Paglicawan, Luis S. Salaz^, 
Margarita R. Mangaliman, Victor Maricad, Rolando . 
Nepomuceno, Jesus M. Pinlac, Marita Malpaya, Zenai a 
B. Viray, Reynaldo N. Regresado, Anselmo V. Contre- 
ras, and Ernesto C. Esteban, Jr. with their respective 
addresses, all seeking to include in the Constitution a 
provision obliging the State to protect the life of the 
unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 518 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Resolution No. 6 of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan of 
Pampanga, requesting the Commission to respect the 
six-year term given by the people to the incumbent 
President and Vice-President. 

(Communication No. 519 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Communication from the Philippine Social Science 
Council, Inc., Don Mariano Marcos Avenue, UP 
Diliman, Quezon City, signed by its Chairman, Dr. Caro- 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


155 


lina G. Hernandez, submitting four recommendations, 
to wit: (1) federal form of government composed of 12 
autonomous regions; (2) equal rights of women with 
men and protection of working women in relation to 
their maternal functions; (3) deletion of the second 
sentence in the Article on Bill of Rights, Section 1 (the 
right to life extends to the fertilized ovum); (4) addition 
of a ninth ray to the sun of the Philippine flag to 
represent the Muslim and cultural communities. 

(Communication No. 520 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Wilfredo C. Asuncion of Batac, Ilocos 
Norte, proposing, among others, a presidential form of 
government with a bicameral legislature, a six-year term 
for the President with no reelection, creation of a Com- 
mission on Appointments, and a four-year tenure for 
the Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. 

(Communication No. 521 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Ricaredo G. Sodusta of Loreto, Agusan 
del Sur, transmitting Resolution No. 06, S. 1986 of the 
Sangguniang Bayan of Loreto, requesting the Constitu- 
tional Commission to create a Ministry for Tribal Fili- 
pinos that will cover all cultural minority tribes of the 
country. 

(Communication No. 522 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Imelda S. Dasalla of No. 1 1 7 
Block 2, New Matina, Davao City, and 84 others urging 
the Constitutional Commission to draft a Constitution 
for a Federal Republic of Pilipinas. 

(Communication No. 523 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is a request for a privilege speech 
for two minutes on the occasion of the birthday of 
former Senator Lorenzo Tanada. May I ask that Com-' 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

„ QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 

OF COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, as we are 
about to approve the Article on Social Justice, the signi- 


ficance of the conferment of the highest government 
award, the Legion of Honor, Rank of Commander, to 
former Senator Lorenzo Martinez Tanada, should not 
pass unnoticed by the Constitutional Commission. 

Former Senator Tanada as we all know, is one of the 
greatest Filipinos of our time. Since the start of liis 
public career, he has fought for the small people of our 
society. Always championing basic human rights and 
national sovereignty, he has battled the forces of 
tyranny and foreign domination. 

Even as he has advanced to the age of 88, he has been 
unwavering in his social consciousness, his incorrupti- 
bility and his commitment to freedom and nationalism. 
Instead of stagnating in the premises and biases of his 
generation, he has always been attuned and responsive 
to the dynamic demands of changing times. 

Senator Tanada has often said, “Life is too short, we 
have to do our best for our people before we are sum- 
moned by our Creator and are made to account for our 
actions in our lifetime.” We are fortunate that in this 
Constitutional Commission, we can benefit from the 
parallel wisdom of his contemporaries in lawmaking: 
Senators Sumulong, Alonto, Rodrigo, Padilla and 
Rosales, and Speaker Laurel - statesmen of an era when 
the values of delicadeza and selflessness in public life 
prevailed. 

In our work in this Commission, we have endeavored 
to provide for the prevention of tyranny’s resurgence 
in our country. We have also striven to enshrine people’s 
power throu^ the institutionalization of sectoral rep- 
resentation and people’s organizations, and have sought 
to protect and guarantee the rights of laborers, farmers, 
fishermen, women, youth, the middle class, the sick and 
the disabled in our Article on Social Justice. Soon we 
shall deliberate on the matter of giving local govern- 
ments the importance that they deserve, and on articles 
that will set our people free from foreign economic, 
cultural and political encroachment. Let us draw our 
inspiration from the exemplary example of our great 
nationalist, Senator Lorenzo Tanada, who yesterday 
said that his only birthday wish is “to see our country 
truly liberated from foreign domination before I die.” 

Madam President, I would like, therefore, to exhort 
our colleagues in the Commission to support a resolu- 
tion that this Representation will submit, congratulat- 
ing Senator Taiiada for the highest state honor that he 
has just received. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take up for considera- 
tion Committee Report Nos. 21 and 25 on the Article 
on Local Governments, submitted by the Committee on 
Local Governments. 


156 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to consider the reports of the Committee on 
Local Governments? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. After the phrase “all agricultural lands,” 
I move to insert the words: EXCEPT COMMERCIAL, 
INDUSTRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, before the clause 
“subject to such priorities.” 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I thought we 
would proceed to finish the amendments to the report 
of the Committee on Social Justice before we take 
up Committee Report Nos. 21 and 25 because Com- 
missioner Ople, who is one of the sponsors, has not yet 
arrived. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 9:59 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:09 a.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 
Continuation 


period of amendments 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the Committee on 
ocia Justice is now ready to entertain the motion for 
reconsideration. I ask that Commissioner Jamir be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. Thank you. Madam President. 

I move to reconsider the approval of the secon 
sentence of Section 5, appearing on page 2 of the drafi 

CTAT EXCEPT COMMEF 

RESIDENTIAL after th 
phrase all agncultural lands.” 

objection? (Silence 

The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 
Commissioner Suarez is recognized 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we hear the 
proposed amendment again from the distinguished 
Gentleman? 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, we realize the merit 
of the proposal, but this has been repeatedly stated in 
the explanation given by the members of the Commit- 
tee, so we would rather that we leave this matter to the 
floor for appreciation. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished proponent yield 
to some clarificatory questions so we can vote intelli- 
gently? 

MR. JAMIR. Willingly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposed Article on the 
National Economy and Patrimony, land should be classi- 
fied into timber, mineral, national park, and agricul- 
tural. If this particular proposal is adopted, all lands 
may further be classified into residential, commercial, 
agricultural and so on. 

MR. JAMIR. The term “COMMERCIAL, INDUS- 
TRIAL AND RESIDENTIAL LANDS” is merely part of 
the broader term “agricultural lands.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Consequently, Congress now may 
classify “all agricultural lands” as residential, commer- 
cial and so on, or the bigger portion of the agricultural 
land as commercial or residential, to defeat the pur- 
pose of the concept of agrarian land reform. 


MR. JAMIR. No, Madam President. This is preceded 
by the word EXCEPT. That means to say that with 
regard to the broad term “agricultural lands,” these are 
the only exceptions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. But Congress may now classify 
what are agricultural, residential and commercial lands, 
thus reducing the area or the coverage of agricultural 
lands and what may be available for land reform. 

MR. JAMIR. I do not really think so. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


157 


MR. DAVIDE. We submit that it might dilute further 
the concept ofland reform. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Will the proponent entertain a few 
questions? 

MR. JAMIR. Willingly. 

FR. BERNAS. In proposing to exempt agricultural, 
commercial and residential lands, would that not affect 
the intent of the fonner Section 11, which is now 
Section 10, on urban land use? In the course of our 
deliberations on this section on urban land reform 
and housing, we deliberately used the word “reform” 
and not “use” so that it would involve not merely 
zoning. It was very clear that the intent was to make 
possible the expropriation of urban land, residential 
land and even commercial land for purposes of distribu- 
tion and resale. If we exempt commercial and residential 
lands from distribution under Section 5, in effect, we 
negate the possibility of urban land reform. 

MR. JAMIR. My purpose in introducing that amend- 
ment is merely to clarify that, under existing laws and 
our jurisprudence, these three kinds of agricultural lands 
really form part of the agricultural lands but they are 
considered an exception to that broader term. 

FR. BERNAS. But, precisely, the intention of the 
Article on Social Justice is to go beyond existing law. 
And now, the purpose of the Gentleman’s amendment is 
to fossilize the existing law, and thereby render impossi- 
ble the fulfillment of the goals of urban land reform. 

MR. JAMIR. That was not the intention. In fact, if I 
remember correctly, during the interpellation, when I 
was attempting to insert the word “ARABLE” between 
the words “all” and “agriculture,” the Committee stated 
that commercial, industrial and residential lands are not 
really included. I would like to clarify that. 

FR. BERNAS. That, of course, is correct. But then 
subsequent to that we considered urban land reform. 
The proper consideration of commercial and residential 
lands should be perhaps under urban land reform and 
housing. 

MR. JAMIR. It is far beyond my intention to limit 
the coverage of agrarian land reform. 

FR. BERNAS. It may not be the intention, Madam 
President, but it is the effect. 


MR. JAMIR. I really do not think so, because at any 
rate, our laws and jurisprudence already have instituted 
these as parts merely of agricultural lands. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, it is still my conten- 
tion that the introduction of that amendment will 
seriously impair, if not negate, the possibility of urban 
land reform and housing reform. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, I suggest that we 
submit it to a vote. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, this Com- 
mission has been castigated by various farmer groups for 
instituting a weak agrarian reform program. The Federa- 
tion of Free Farmers and other nationwide peasant 
groups have issued statements criticizing this Com- 
mission for instituting a weak and flabby agrarian 
reform program. Madam President, now we are in- 
troducing another amendment to further weaken the 
agrarian reform. A few days ago, we instituted amend- 
ments that tend to weaken agrarian reform with pro- 
visions like “the State shall by law”; “subject to such 
priorities and reasonable retention limits as Congress 
may prescribe”; the proviso “taking into account eco- 
logical, developmental or equity consideration”; and 
“just compensation.” 

Madam President, to me this is another attempt to 
weaken agrarian reform. We will be increasing the 
sorrow and the sadness of our farmers, of our people, 
if we accept this amendment. With due respect to 
Commissioner Jamir, I object to the introduction of 
that amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The proposed amendment submitted 
by Commissioner Jamir has reference to Section 5 under 
agrarian land reform. The proposed amendment does 
not refer to Section 10 or 11 under Urban Land Use 
and Housing Program, so they are two distinct sections. 
For Commissioner Bernas to say that Commissioner 
Jamir’s insertion in Section 5 will affect the provision 
on urban land use and housing is not exactly accurate 
because the proposed amendment is on Section 5 and 
not on Section 10 or 11. With regard to the provi- 
sion that says “encourage and undertake the just dis- 
tribution of all agricultural lands,” I recall that I 
suggested the elimination of the word “all” and Com- 


158 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


missioner Jamir suggested to make it applicable to 
“ARABLE” agricultural lands. These proposals were 
unfortunately not approved. But definitely this sub- 
classification of agricultural land to residential, com- 
mercial and industrial is not or should not be covered 
by agrarian land reform. 

So I am in favor of the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Jamir. 


allowed to remain commercial for commercial pur- 
poses, industrial for industrial purposes, and residential 
for residential purposes. That is my contention. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I just inform the honor- 
able Commission that under Article XIV, Section 10 of 
the 1973 Constitution, lands of the public domain are 
clarified into agricultural, industrial or commercial, 
residential, resettlement, mineral, timber or forest and 
grazing lands, and such other classes as may be pro- 
vided by law. Unless the intention of the Committee 
on the Nation^ Economy and Patrimony is to do away 
with this classification which I think is a good classifica- 
tion, then there should be no question about the 
^endment being proposed by Commissioner Jamir 
because it is so classified under the 1973 Constitution. 

Tffi PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President. 
Will the proponent yield to some questions? 

MR. JAMIR. Willingly. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, there is settled 
junsprudence on the definition of “agricultural land” 
in the case of Krivenco vs. the Register of Deeds that 
would define agricultural land to include commercial, 
industrial and residential lands. My concern is in the 
absence of settled jurisprudence delimiting the para- 
meters of what are commercial, industrial and 
residential lands which, in effect, would get in the way 
of the effective implementation of Sections 5 and 1 1 . 


For the enlightenment of the Committee, what d 
Commissioner Jamir intend to cover by reference 
commercial, industrial and residential lands, if only 
se e parameters of these concepts and classificati 
would be, in effect, granting to Congi 

^ statutory authority to set tl 

own clysification m the absence of guidance fr 
junsprudence and the law 


MR. JAMIR. I know that commercial, industrial and 
residentid lands are included in the broad term “agri- 
cultural lands, but considering the particular character 
of these parcels of land, they should not be included in 
the land subject to agrarian reform. They should be 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, in answer to the 
question asked by Commissioner de los Reyes, it is the 
intent of the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony to remove many of the categories that were 
mentioned in the 1973 Constitution. As I reported on 
another occasion, our recommendation in the commit- 
tee report is to have only four classifications; namely, 
mineral, timber, agricultural, and if the body approves 
it, the new classification of national parks. The back- 
ground behind this recommendation is that in the last 
regime, the government was very free in reclassifying 
all types of agricultural lands into residential and 
resettlement, and we felt that we should limit that 
ability of Congress or the executive. I would really be 
hesitant to introduce that exception because there are 
a lot of rural areas right now where we can actually have 
industrial and residential and commercial activities. I 
think we should just depend on the wisdom of Confess 
to consider “developmental or equity considerations” so 
that we need not completely tie the hands of the 
government in considering some rural areas that can be 
subject to land reform even if some people may want to 
introduce land reform in specific rural sites. 

I do object to the amendment. I think it will unduly 
limit the ability of the government to introduce land 
reform in specific rural sites. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, 
missioner Bengzon be recognized. 


I ask that Com- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I am a member of 
the Committee and I would like to state here what the 
intent of the Committee was when it proposed the 
urban land reform and housing and agrarian land 
reform. When we discussed this provision on urban land 
reform and housing, what we had in mind were the 
urban poor - people who have no houses, who are land- 
less, who are not professional squatters, but are squat- 
ting on idle lands in the city, who have been there for 
many years, and people who have gotten into these idle 
lands, paying certain nominal amounts to the land- 
owners. We were not thinking of the office spaces, for 
example, in Makati. 

I appreciate the concern of Commissioner Jamir and I 
understand that what he has in mind and his apprehen- 
sion is that this might cover lands which are definitely 
and publicly known to be office spaces or commercial 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


159 


spaces. However, that apprehension is already eased by 
the last portion of Section 5 which has given Congress 
the prerogative to prescribe certain terms, taking into 
account the ecological, developmental and equity con- 
siderations when it passes laws on agrarian reform and 
urban reform. And, therefore, in order not to comph- 
cate the matter further, considering that the appre- 
hension of Commissioner Jamir is taken care of by the 
last portion of Section 5, and reading into the record 
the intent of the Committee when it proposed the 
section on urban land refonn and housing to the effect 
that it was really the intention not to cover these office 
spaces and industrial sites but those lands which are in 
the cities and in the urban areas which are idle, which 
could properly be expropriated by the government for 
tenement housing, then we believe. Madam President, 
that there is no need for that amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there has been suffi- 
cient debate and discussion of the proposed amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know from Commissioner 
Jamir if he insists on his amendment so that we can 
determine, if he will submit it to a vote. 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. I wish to submit 
it to a vote. 

Mr. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we vote 
on the issue, may I just ask the Committee one clarifica- 
tory question. 

the PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. A few seconds ago. Commissioner 
Bengzon stated that industrial sites are exempted from 
the scope of urban land reform. May I know if it is the 
intention of the Committee for the urban land reform 
to cover only idle lands in the city? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

Jt was 10:30 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:36 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Colay- 
co would like to have the last say on the proposed 
amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

According to Commissioner Bengzon, the Committee 
understands or agrees that areas devoted to commercial 
or industrial purposes are not to be included in the 
agrarian and urban reform. Am I correct? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. Areas which are already being 
used for commercial and industrial sites are not included 
in this definition because the intent of the Committee 
was to. take care of the urban poor, the homeless. For 
example, if there is a specific area already devoted to 
industrial purposes and with factories all around, but 
within that cluster of factories there is a vacant land, it 
is up to Congress now to determine whether for the 
interest of the community that land should be expro- 
priated wherein a tenement housing will be built for the 
workers around. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. 

So, what is wrong with clarifying that point? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, we will get into 
a lot of complications because there will be a million 
and one situations like that. 

MR. COLAYCO. There will be more complications, if 
we do not clarify this point. 

MR. BENGZON. Congress has the right to reclassify 
those lands as the circumstances would warrant. We 
cannot put all of those restrictions here. 

MR COLAYCO. There is just this problem - there 
may be a situation where an industrial or commercial 
area is not being used at the moment. This can be a big 
problem if Congress now declares such an area as 
residential or for urban housing. 

MR. bengzon. Then if Congress declares so, that 
means that it is for the best interest of everybody con- 
cerned, and it is not for us here to tell them what to do. 

MR. COLAYCO. I have another question. There are 
many vacant residential areas around the elite enclaves, 
the subdivisions in Metro Manila. Take the case of the 
Ortigas property which is supposed to have been taken 
over by the Marcoses. There was a time when there were 
many squatters in that area. Does the Committee envi- 
sion the expropriation of similar areas for housing for 
the poor? 

MR. bengzon. We do not envision any situation of 
that sort. We are leaving it precisely to Congress to 
determine whether or not, given that particular situa- 
tion, it would enhance the value of that land or the 


160 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


interest of the squatters to stay in that particular area. 
That is why I am saying that we leave the discretion to 
Congress to decide what is best for the community as a 
whole, both for the people who would want to squat 
there and cut up that piece of land into small pieces for 
themselves, and for the people who are already living 
around that community. It is not up for us to dictate to 
them what to do nor to envision every single situation. 
That is why we “are leaving the matter to Congress.” 
We feel that if we do include all the proposals of Com- 
missioner Jamir here, we are complicating the situation 
further. The more we define, the more we limit, and 
the more we tie the hands of Congress. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you for the Gentleman’s 
view. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the body is ready to 
vote on the proposed amendment. 


Committee feels that there is no necessity for tlic in- 
clusion of the three items mentioned by the proponent. 
However, if the Gentleman insists, we will leave it to the 
body to appreciate and evaluate the situation. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, may 1 say one word? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. In view of the statement of Com- 
missioner Suarez, may I just ask him, if I withdraw this 
amendment, whether his explanation given during the 
interpellation the other time on my proposal to add the 
word “arable” is the Committee’s stand on the matter? 
If the Gentleman would like to recall, he stated that the 
term “commercial, industrial and residential lands” is 
not included under agricultural lands. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Villegas want 
to seek recognition? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I just wanted to add some informa- 
tion that would allay the fears expressed by Com- 
missioner Colayco. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. SUAREZ. Essentially, the characteristic of arabi- 
lity is the controlling factor, insofar as the classification 
of agrarian reform on agricultural lands is concerned. 

MR. JAMIR. So, that explanation of the Gentleman 
will stand; in that event, Madam President, I withdraw 
the motion. 


^^LLEGAS. Let us take, for example, that ver> 
specific case of the Ortigas land. It would be highl> 
niikely for Congress to consider the area for urban lane 

S nno price of that land is more thar 

’ .f. square meter. And because we have a ver\ 
about just compensation, it woulc 
rioht • government to choose a property 

hflv ^ rniddle of the Ortigas area. I think we wil 
e o put all these provisions in the context of wha 
7h' V ^PP^cd — just compensation. So, I do no 
in ere is reason to be apprehensive, assuming tha 
»^ongress really represents the people. We should havi 
enough confidence in our government officials. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are ready to vote now. 

MR. RAMA. The Committee would like to state it 
position. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, 
nized^ Pf^ESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

In view of the many explanations given on recor 
■"‘''Pretation ot the word “agricultun 
lands m relation to commercial, industrial and res 
dentia lands and, further, i„ relation to the imph 
mentation of the urban land reform program of th 
government together with the agrarian reform, th 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is with- 
drawn. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Foz be recognized for another amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, before I actually state 
my proposed amendment, I would like to make some 
statements in response to certain statements expressed 
in some quarters. I wish to respond to the statements 
expressing fears and misgivings over the consequences of 
our provision on urban land reform which we have 
approved as part of the Article on Social Justice and 
which the government is called upon to carry out when 
the new Constitution is approved. These fears and ap- 
prehensions, I submit, arise from a lack of appreciation 
of the proper role of an urban land reform program. 

The objectives of an urban land program, as I have 
mentioned them before, are to liberate our human 
communities from blight, congestion and hazard, and to 
promote their development and modernization to bring 
about the optimum use of land as a rational resource for 
public welfare, rather than as a commodity of trade 
subject to price speculation and indiscriminate use; and 
to acquire lands necessary to prevent the speculative 
buying of land for public welfare; and to enlist the sup- 
port of the private sector in responding to community 
requirements in the use and development of urban lands 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


161 


and in providing housing for the people. The foremost 
concern then is the problem of blighted, congested 
urban areas or communities. Our provision precisely 
states that it is a program of urban land reform and 
housing, aimed at making available affordable housing 
and basic services to the underprivileged and homeless 
citizens. 

The fear has been expressed by small landowners 
or small property owners, who have two-door or more 
apartments being rented out to tenants, that the govern- 
ment would take over their property. This concern is 
not new because time and again, small apartment 
owners who, by the way, are numerous have been 
voicing the same fear but I say that there is no ground 
for such fear. The government will certainly be con- 
cerned with the big estates and properties in urban 
centers; and under well-developed jurispmdence, the 
State is to be limited to this type of land insofar as 
government expropriation of land is concerned. 

If we have provided in the provision on agrarian 
reform an assurance to the srhall landowners that the 
State shall respect their rights in determining the reten- 
tion limits of agricultural lands, should we not likewise 
provide even a short provision in the case of small urban 
landowners that their rights shall also be respected and 
protected by the State? These small landowners or 
property owners may be said to belong to the middle 
class of our urban centers. They are retirees, veterans, 
teachers, employees, who have used their lifetime 
savings or have borrowed from banks small loans to 
build houses or even small apartments, a portion of 
which they have rented out to some other people so 
that they can derive some income when they retire 
or even during their retirement. 

Therefore, Madam President, I propose that we add 
to Section 1 1 , which we have already approved, a new 
sentence to read as follows: THE STATE SHALL 
respect THE RIGHTS OF SMALL PROPERTY 
OWNERS. This amendment is coauthored by Com- 
missioners Monsod and Trenas. By the way, this has 
. already been cleared with the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we just clarify 
two points: When the Gentleman mentioned property 
owners, was he referring to owners of lots and houses or 
only to lots? 

MR. FOZ. Both. 

MR. SUAREZ. And would the Gentleman leave to 
Congress, as we did in applying the provisions on 
agrarian reform, the determination of what would 
constitute a small property owner? 


The Committee accepts the proposed amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee accepts. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Could I just propose an amendment 
to the amendment. Since property is too general, could 
we introduce an adjective and say: “REAL ESTATE 
PROPERTY OWNERS”? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Foz or 
the Committee say? 

MR. FOZ. I think there is no difference. Actually, it 
is a little redundant to say “SMALL REAL ESTATE 
PROPERTY OWNERS” here. 

MPv. SUAREZ. Would Commissioner Villegas state 
the proposed amendment to the amendment? 


MR. VILLEGAS. “THE STATE SHALL RESPECT 
THE RIGHTS OF SMALL REAL ESTATE PROPERTY 
OWNERS.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Would the word “PROPERTY” not 
be included in the words “REAL ESTATE”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. 


MR. SUAREZ. It is the other way around. 
MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


MR. MONSOD. This sentence is proposed to be in- 
cluded in the same section defining the rights of fanners 
to urban land reform and housing. So in that context 
it would only refer to real property. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I will not insist on the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman now restate 
the proposed amendment so that we can proceed to 
vote. 


sentence: “THE STATE 
SHALL RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF SMALL PRO- 
PERTY OWNERS ” 


MR. FOZ. That is right. 
MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 


MR. SUAREZ. We reiterate the Committee accepts 
the proposed amendment. 


162 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the 
Committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we take a 
vote on the entire Section 1 1 . 


After consultation with the Committee and also with 
Commissioner Regalado who sponsored the last amend- 
ment, we agreed that this formulation reflects the 
intention of everyone. 

MR. GASCON. Commissioner Bemas, is it not “THE 
STATE SHALL, BY LAW, FACILITATE”? 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Are we through with aU the 
reservations? Have we taken up aU the reserved amend- 
ments? 

MR. SUAREZ. One more reservation. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we take that up now? 

MR. RAMA. We can take it up now. May I ask that 
Commissioner Bemas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I call the attentioi 
of the Commission to the third paragraph, page 38 o: 
e oumal last Saturday. The amendment I am abou 
o propose is in effect cosponsored by Commissioner; 

’ Garcia and also Commissioner Regalado whc 
gave the last amendment to this provision last Saturday 

j amendment, let me just give th( 

nou of what I am about to propose. In the inter 

it uf ^^de by Commissioner Rodrigo last Saturday 
thic ^ ^ was not the intention o; 

dilute or diminish the right; 
Wtir.^ ^aranteed in the Bill of Rights, particularly 
DPoni f Section 9, which guarantee the right: o 
rnnf ^ ^®^®ci3tions and unions for purposes no 

nr> 1 the guarantee which says tha 

^ passed abridging the right of the peoph 

roa f assemble and petition the government fo: 
redress of gnevances. 

thieve object of my proposal is precisely to rephras< 
alrpnHw diminishing what w( 

DToiert same time it will more clearly 

a we hope to add in this provision. 

sp^tin^TthT^*^^ parts. The first involves i 

of both Darts “ito two, and then a rewordini 

this way: THE RIGHT OF THE^^^ 4Nn thf» 
BLE PARtIci'patION AND REASONA 

TR PATTON OF FACILITATE THl 

CREATION OF ADEQUATE CONSUI TATTOT' 
MECHANISMS. DN8ULTATIOI 


FR. BERNAS. “THE STATE SHALL, BY LAW, 
FACILITATE THE CREATION OF ADEQUATE 
CONSULTATION MECHANISMS.” 

We would like to avoid the use of the words “make 
possible” because it gives the impression that these 
consultation mechanisms are not possible unless the 
State takes action by law. As a matter of fact, these 
consultation mechanisms are already in existence, and 
the role we are giving to the State is mere facilitation, 
not necessarily creation of these consultation mechan- 
isms. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Since the proposed amendments 
would be reflective of the thinking of the Committee, 
the Committee decides to accept the proposals. Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to have some clarifica- 
tions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The emphasis of my question will be 
on “THEIR ORGANIZATIONS” - “THEIR ORGANI- 
ZATIONS” would refer specifically to independent 
people’s organizations as defined in the preceding sen- 
tence. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would the Gentleman agree to using 
the word ESTABLISHMENT instead of “CREATION”? 

FR. BERNAS. That is with respect to the second 

sentence. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, to the second sentence. 

FR. BERNAS. The sense is the same; I would have no 
difficulty with that. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11,1 986 


163 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. But for me the more important word 
is FACILITATE. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is Commissioner Bemas accepting the 
amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. May I just ask a question of the 
proponent, Madam President. 

Would it change the sense of the sentence if we 
simply say, “THE STATE SHALL FACILITATE 
ADEQUATE CONSULTATION MECHANISMS” with- 
out having to say “CREATION OR ESTABLISH- 
MENT”? 

FR. BERNAS. First of all, the phrase is “THE 
STATE SHALL, BY LAW.” 

MR. MONSOD. “THE STATE SHALL, BY LAW, 
FACILITATE ADEQUATE CQNSULTATIQN ME- 
CHANISMS.” Do we need the word “CREATION” 
there? 

FR. BERNAS. There are really two steps. First, we 
have the creation of the consultation mechanisms, and 
then the facilitation of the functioning of those me- 
chanisms. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this a new section or substitu- 
tion for a section? 

FR. BERNAS. A substitution for Section 20, Madam 
President. So, the first sentence will read: THE RIGHT 
OF THE PEOPLE AND THEIR ORGANIZATIONS TO 
effective AND REASONABLE PARTICIPATION 
at ALL LEVELS OF SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND 
economic DECISION-MAKING SHALL NOT BE 

abridged. 

Could we take action on that? 

THE PRESIDENT. There are two sentences. 

FR. BERNAS. There is a second sentence. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this clear to all the Com- 
missioners? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I am for this amendment which I think better reflects 
the intent of the entire Commission, if I may say so. But 
for purposes of the records, we should clarify the mean- 
ing of the word ‘PEOPLE.” Do we refer to the people as 


the source of sovereignty from which all sovereignty 
emanates? 

FR. BERNAS. Precisely, yes. 

MR. OPLE. I think in the usual construction, the 
people in this case constitute themselves into an elec- 
torate for the purpose of electing a government to pass 
policy questions through their representatives in, let us 
say, the legislature. But in this case we refer to people 
and their organizations. Is there no distinction at all 
between the “people” contemplated in the earlier 
definition that I gave from which all sovereignty 
emanates and the people here as, let us say, the 
“people” as a great public? 

FR. BERNAS. The people are larger than just merely 
the electorate because the electorate consists of those 
who are qualified to vote. The broader word PEOPLE 
would include even those who are under age, and the 
guarantee in the Bill of Rights covers all people. 

MR. OPLE. We are speaking, therefore, of people in 
the more generic sense. Perhaps, the classic formulation 
of that was what Walter Lippman put forth as a “nation- 
al society” consisting of generations present, past and 
future, as well. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes; and that adequately defines the 
section on the declaration of principles when we speak 
of sovereignty residing in the people. 

MR. OPLE. In empowering people’s organizations to 
participate in all levels of decision-making, this pre- 
sumably rises vertically from, let us say, the barangay 
level to the regional level and to the national level. 

FR. BERNAS. We are not putting any limitation. 

MR. OPLE. I just wanted to make this clarification. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, before we vote, 
I would like to ask the Committee a question. 

the president. Please proceed. 

MR. ROMULO. Since this now has been reformulated, 
I would like to ask, in the event the people’s organiza- 
tion is not consulted, what the effect of that noncon- 
sultation with regard to either the decision made by the 
bureaucrats or the law passed by Congress would be. 

MR. GARCIA. The Committee feels that in any 
decision-making that will be relevant, the thoughts, the 
aspirations and the participation of people are essential 
for the decision-making to be in the right direction. 


164 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Granted, but suppose they are not 
consulted? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, we always say that consultation 
mechanisms be reasonable because one cannot consult 
every single individual on a specific question. But the 
effort of decision-makers or of government leaders 
should be to consult the people, whenever it is possible. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. Assuming that they do not, I 
just want to know what is the effect of nonconsultation. 

MR. GARCIA. Then they must suffer the conse- 
quences. When the people later on believe that the 
decisions made without proper consultation are con- 
trary to their interests, then they may be voted out of 
office. 

MR. ROMULO. So, it does not nullify the law or it 
does not make the decision nonenforceable. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, this section does 
not say that any group who claims to be a people’s 
organization must be consulted for a law or decision to 
be valid or implemented. As I think Commissioner 
Garcia said, there is the criteria of practicability as well. 
Furthermore, in our Constitution, we also gave the 
people the right of initiative and referendum., 

MR. ROMULO. Precisely. 

MR. MONSOD. So, this is another way by which they 
can express their disapproval of any decision or law. 

MR. ROMULO. So, what the Gentleman is saying is 
that this is a desired objective and if it is not fulfilled 
then the people must go to those mechanisms provided 
in our Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, the operative phrase is “WITHIN 
THE DEMOCRATIC FRAMEWORK.” 


MR. GARCIA. Exactly. There are many levels on the 
^enas of participation. It can be electoral. It can be, as 
m the past when we saw street manifestations, in the 
orm of demonstrations. And right now, in many parts 
u ij ® especially during the public hearings, we 

• + people. In fact, such has been 

instituted m the different ministries as I informed you 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a few 
questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


soe^if second question is, since we 

nni*f* 1 u levels of participation, not only 

economic and so on, to what extent 
is apply in the ladder of decision-making? 

The desired objective is for people on 
ai ton, ^ level, regional level and nation- 

. ^ ® consulted so that there will be an effective 

we can check whether the decisions 
needs are relevant and responsive to people’s 

ROMULO. So, if we take an agency of the 
g emment, let us say a ministry on the national level, 
require that the people be consulted from the 
om o top of that ladder of decision-making? 

for example, national 
pxatTmiA Tu^ XM- ■ ''^ouid hke to give a very concrete 

ducted a consuSuolTwith 
tions composed of healTh 1 c 

and so on on th« !• 'workers, consumers, doctors, 
decisions to hp • ^^/^onal level. And later on, for the 

further and refmeT ttMe'"There‘''° Ministry discussed 
fte local and municipal 

The level may be vertical on that score - geographical 
or horizontal when it involves different sectors of 
society, multisectoral or sectoral. 


MR. RODRIGO. The phrase “WITHIN THE DE- 
MOCRATIC-FRAMEWORK” is a little too general. In 
our Declaration of Principles, we state that our govern- 
ment is a republican government, which means a rep- 
resentative government wherein sovereignty resides in 
the people; but then the people elect their representa- 
tives to the legislature, to the executive department, 
and these representatives are the ones who perform the 
functions of government. We would like the people to 
have some reserve powers as was stated by Com- 
missioner Monsod. We are providing for initiative, for 
referendum, even for recall. And now, we are providing 
in this proposed section another direct participation of 
the people. What is the meaning of this “participation”? 
It seems that this “participation” should not be initiated 
by the government, but by the people themselves or by 
organizations. If the organizations want to participate, 
they should not wait for the government, let us say, for 
the legislature, to invite them or to consult them. 

MR. GARCIA. We agree. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, the legislative department does 
not have the duty to call them and say, “please come, 
we want to consult you.” If the people do not go there 
and express their views . . . 

MR. GARCIA. Precisely, when we were explaining 
the role and rights of people’s organizations, we are say- 
ing that it will be the people, their organizations, which 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


165 


are involved. They should not see their participation in 
government stopping when they cast their vote; it goes 
beyond electoral politics. The only thing we are asking 
for in this section is to facilitate a consultation mechan- 
ism so that there is a more recognized effort, a more 
visible and viable effort, so that this consultation 
mechanism is institutionalized. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, it is very, very clear that we do 
not want to depart from a republican form of govern- 
ment, which means a representative form of govern- 
ment. We want more people participation and the 
participation should come from the people. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. In fact, it strengthens the 
democratic exercise. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would like to strengthen the 
position of Commissioner Garcia and Commissioner 
Monsod with respect to the framework within which 
people’s organizations participate. In addition to the 
democratic framework, we are saying that it is in the 
pursuit of social justice. That is why we were insistent on 
the original formulation that the provision on people’s 
organizations should start with the introduction, “In the 
pursuit of Social Justice within the democratic frame- 
work,” so that we get out of the framework of party 
politics. It is not just within the framework of party 
politics that people’s organizations can participate. We 
have had a number of experiences where people’s or- 
ganizations have already been participating at various 
levels. A concrete example would be the construction 
of huge infrastructure projects like dams. It has been 
the case that some form of consultation takes place but 
in the final implementation of these programs, the con- 
sultations are not conducted. We are saying that the 
people should be able to initiate from the lowest, as it 
were, up to the highest level, if necessary, so their 
voices will be heard effectively. 

Again based on our experiences, in a number of cases, 
there is lack of adequate information. Information is 
never provided for the people on which to base their 
judgment on these infrastructure projects. We are also 
saying, therefore, that given this framework, social 
justice and the democratic values could be pursued, 
people s participation could be more effective, and the 
role of government here would be to facilitate that form 
of consultation outside of party politics. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Bernas 
would like to have his last say on this. 


FR. BERNAS. No, I was asking for a vote. But if the 
Chair wishes, I can restate the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 

MR. RAMA. Tlie body is ready to vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Committe please read the 
section now? 

MR. SUAREZ. We yield to Commissioner Bernas, 
Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. The section will read: “THE RIGHT 
OF THE PEOPLE AND THEIR ORGANIZATIONS TO 
EFFECTIVE AND REASONABLE PARTICIPATION 
AT ALL LEVELS OF SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND 
ECONOMIC DECISION-MAKING SHALL NOT BE 
ABRIDGED. THE STATE SHALL, BY LAW, FACILI- 
TATE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ADEQUATE 
CONSULTATION MECHANISMS.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
amendment, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on the whole Article on Social Justice, as suggested by 
one of the committee members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Floor Leader, have all those 
reserved amendments been submitted already? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. There are no 
more reserved amendments. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May we request that we first dis- 
tribute to the Commissioners a clean copy of the 
Article before we vote on Second Reading? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we wiU vote on it later as soon 
as we have a clean copy of the entire Article on Social 
Justice with all the amendments that have been ap- 
proved. 


166 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


Meanwhile, the Giair suspends the session for a few 
minutes. 

It was 11:15 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 11:50 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS, 

and Proposed Resolution No. 511, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE ARTICLE 
ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 


(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolutions 
per C.R. Nos. 21 and 25.) 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 21 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move that we suspend the session until 
two o’clock this afternoon to listen to the sponsorship 
of the Committee on Local Governments. 


The Committee on Local Governments to which were referred 
Proposed Resolution No. 182, introduced by Honorable Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
PROVISION ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS, 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the session is suspended until two 
o’clock in the afternoon. 

It was 11:51 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 2:16 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NOS. 470 AND 511 
(Article on Local Governments and 
Additional Provisions Thereto) 


PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

^ ^ove that we consider Commitb 
anH 1 Proposed Resolution Nos. 41 

Govemm ^^t Committee on Loc 


ThlaafSs^nml^theM^^^ objection? (SUence) 
me motion is approved 

R'“'“«on Nos. 470 and 
.act tn order. With the permission of the body 
the Secretary-General wUl read only the title of the 
proposed resolutrons without prejudice to inserting in 
the Record the whole text thereof. ^ 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 

No. 470, entitled: 


Proposed Resolution No. 329, introduced by Honorable Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION GRANTING AUTHORITY TO THE BARAN- 
GAYS TO RETAIN A PORTION OF TAXES AND 
OTHER REVENUES FOR INFRASTRUCTURE PUR- 
POSES, 


Proposed Resolution No. 361, introduced by Honorable Trefias, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A NEW PROVISION EMPOWERING LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS TO LEVY AND COLLECT TAXES 
UNIQUE, DISTINCT AND EXCLUSIVE TO THEM AND 
TO SPEND THE REVENUES RAISED THEREFROM IN 
ORDER TO MAKE LOCAL AUTONOMY REALLY 
MEANINGFUL AND EFFECTIVE , 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that attached Proposed Resolution No. 470, prepared by the 
Committee, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 182, 
329 and 361 with Honorable Nolledo, Calderon, Tingson, 
Rosales, Alonto, de Castro, Bennagen, Rigos, Regalado, Jamir and 
Ople as authors. 


Respectfully submitted: 


(Sgd.) Jose N. Nolledo 
Chairman 

Committee on Local Governments 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


167 


PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 470 

* 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCORPORATE IN THE 
NEW CONSTITUTION AN ARTICLE ON LOCAL GOV- 
ERNMENTS, 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled, to incorporate the following Article 
on Local Governments: 

ARTICLE 

LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

SECTION 1 . The provinces, cities, municipalities, barrios and 
the autonomous regions are the territorial and political subdivi- 
sions of the Republic of the Philippines. 

SEC. 2. Legislative bodies of local governments shall have 
sectoral representation as may be prescribed by law. 

SEC. 3. No autonomous region, province, city, municipality, 
or barrio may be created, divided, merged, abolished, or its 
boundary substantially altered, except in accordance with criteria 
established by law, and subject to approval by a majority of the 
votes cast in a plebiscite called for the purpose in the unit or units 
directly affected. 

SEC. 4. The President of tire Phihppines shall exercise general 
supervision over local governments to ensure that laws are faith- 
fully executed. 

SEC. 5. Local goveriunent units may group themselves, con- 
solidate or coordinate their efforts, services, and resources for 
purposes commonly beneficial to them. 

SEC. 6. Each government unit shall have the power to create 
its own sources of revenue and to levy taxes, fees and charges 
subject to such guidelines as may be fixed by law. 

SEC. 7. Local governments shall have the power to levy and 
collect charges or contributions unique, distinct and exclusive to 
them. 

SEC. 8. Local taxes shall belong exclusively to local govern- 
ments and they shall likewise be entitled to share in the proceeds 
of the exploitation and development of the national wealth with- 
in their respective areas. The share of local governments in the 
national taxes shall be released to them automatically. 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 25 

The Committee on Local Governments to which were referred 
Proposed Resolution No. 15, introduced by Honorable de los 
Reyes, Jr. and Maambong, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING FOR A CONSTITUTIONAL 
PROVISION WHICH WILL ASSURE RECOGNITION 
OF THE CORDILLERA REGION, PREVENT ITS 
FUTURE DISMEMBERMENT AND FOR OTHER PUR- 
POSES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 17, introduced by Honorable Azcuna, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR REGIONAL GOVERN- 
MENTS, 


Proposed Resolution No. 138, introduced by Honorable Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INSERT IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
PROVISIONS ON MEANINGFUL AND AUTHENTIC 
DECENTRALIZATION OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BY 
ADOPTING WITH MODIFICATIONS THE PROPOSED 
PROVISIONS BY THE UP LAW CONSTITUTION 
PROJECT, 

Proposed Resolution No. 176, introduced by Honorable Ben- 
nagen and Rosario Braid, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION REQUIRING THE STATE TO 
ESTABLISH A GENUINE AUTONOMOUS GOVERN- 
MENT IN THE CORDILLERA REGION WITHIN A DE- 
MOCRATIC AND SOVEREIGN FILIPINO NATION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 178, introduced by Honorable Rosario 
Braid, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THE AUTONOMY OF 
REGIONAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AS 
THE BASIC FRAMEWORK OF THE POLITICAL STRUC- 
TURE OF THE STATE, 

Proposed Resolution No. 247, introduced by Honorable Maam- 
bong, Natividad, de los Reyes and Ople, entitled: 

RESOLUTION GRANTING FULL AUTONOMY TO LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 394, introduced by Honorable Sarmien- 
to, entitled: 

RESOLUTION INCORPORATING IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE RECOGNIZING AND DEFINING 
THE RIGHTS OF POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS TO 
LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT, 

Proposed I^esolution No. 409, introduced by Honorable Ople, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION CREATING AUTONOMOUS REGIONS FOR 
THE MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO AND THE PEOPLE OF 
THE CORDILLERA HIGHLANDS AND PROVIDING 
FOR OTHER AREAS OF AUTONOMY WITHIN 
LARGER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 414, introduced by Honorable Rama, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO RESTORE THE PRE-MARTIAL LAW 
POLICY OF ALLOWING VOTERS IN HIGHLY URBAN- 
IZED CITIES TO VOTE FOR PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that attached Proposed Resolution No. 5 1 1, prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE ARTICLE 
ON LOCAL governments. 


168 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11 , 1 986 


be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 15, 17, 
138, 176, 178, 247, 394, 409 and 414 with Honorable Nolledo, 
Calderon, Tingson, Rosales, Alonto, de Castro, Bennagen, Rigos, 
Regalado, Jamir, Ople, de los Reyes, Jr., Maambong, Azcuna, 
Rosario Braid, Natividad,Sarmiento and Rama as authors thereof. 

Respectfully submitted: 

(Sgd.) Jose N. Nolledo 
Chairman 

Committee on Local Governments 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 5 1 1 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONST!- 
TUTION ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS IN THE ARTICLE 
ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional Com- 
mission in session assembled, to incorporate the following 
sections in the Article on Local Governments, in addition to those 
proposed in Resolution No. 470 (Committee Report No. 21): 




LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

SEC. 9. The legislature shall create autonomous region 
sisting o provuices and cities with common historical, gee 
I ^ tural, linguistic, ethnic, communal, economic or othe 
cteacte„«s wiftta ttie Wwork of and respecting th 

rSpXr"'’’ ““ “ 

SEC. 10. The legislature shaU enact an Organic Act for th 
nomous region in consultation with elective officials of th 
p ovmces and cities within the region. This Organic Act shal 
e asic structure of government for the autonomou 
gion consisting of the regional executive department am 
giona egislative assembly both of which shall be elective an< 
representative of the constituent political units. The Organic Ac 
niay ewise provide for a judicial system consisting of Courts o 
jurisdiction within the autonomous region consisten 
wi t e provisions of this Constitution on Judicial Power. 

SEC. 1 1 . The President of the Philippines shall exercise genera 
supervision over autonomous regions to ensure that laws are fait! 
fully executed. 

its territorial jurisdiction, the autonomou 
region shall have authority over the following: 

(1) Administrative organization; 

Regional taxation as provided for by law; 
egional urban and rural planning and development; 
e ion economic, social and cultural developmer 
K ^^onomic development to policies lai 
y e National Economic Development Authoi 

'*’y j 

Establishment, maintenance and administration c 
schools m the autonomous region- 

Promotion and regulation of tourism within the regior 
Establishment, operation and maintenance of region: 
health, welfare and other social services; 


( 2 ) 

(3) 

(4) 


(5) 

( 6 ) 
(7) 


(8) Protection of the environment in accordance with stand- 
ards and regulations of the national government; 

(9) Preservation of customs and traditions and culture 
indigenous to the autonomous region; 

(10) Such other matters as may be authorized by law for the 
promotion of the general welfare of the people of the 
autonomous region. 

SEC. 13. Without prejudice to the above provisions, and 
except in areas of legislation exclusively belonging to the national 
government such as foreign relations, the national defense cus- 
toms, tariff, post and telecommunications, the autonomous 
regions shall, by its regional assemblies, be authorized to legislate 
on all other matters which concern the local administration of 
such autonomous regions. 

SEC. 14. The maintenance of peace and order within the 
region shall remain the responsibility of the local chief executive 
of each constituent unit who shall exercise supervision over local 
police forces within the region. The defense of the region shall be 
the responsibility of the national police or army. When circum- 
stances so warrant, the regional government may establish its own 
special forces subject to supervision by the national armed forces 
and under such provisions as the law may provide. Such special 
forces shall be under the command of the President of the 
Philippines. 

SEC. 15. All powers, functions, and responsibilities not 
granted by this Constitution or by law to the autonomous regions 
are vested in the National Government. 

SEC. 16. The first legislature under this constitution shall, 
within one year from election of its Members, pass the Organic 
Acts for the autonomous regions of Mindanao and the Cor- 
dillera. The said legislature shall, within a period of not more 
than six (6) months after the organization thereof, immediately 
define the territorial jurisdiction of autonomous regions that may 
be granted Organic Acts. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee Chairman, Com- 
missioner Nolledo, is recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER NOLLEDO 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I proceed to deliver my brief 
sponsorship remarks, I would like to state here that our 
Committee made two reports. Committee Report 
No. 21 covers, among others, the kinds of local govern- 
ment units, their taxing powers and the provision on 
coordination of different political units for their com- 
mon benefits; while Committee Report No. 25 contains 
the provisions on autonomous regions. After my brief 
remarks. Madam President, the other members of the 
Committee, namely, Commissioners Alonto and Ben- 
nagen, will also give their own remarks to be concluded 
by Commissioner Ople. 

Before I proceed further, I would like to express the 
Committee’s most profound gratitude to the governors 
and city mayors of the League of Governors and City 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


169 


Mayors whom I met at Quezon City and with whom I 
had a two-hour dialogue. We would like to express our 
gratitude to Mr. Rene Santiago of the Philippine Insti- 
tute of Environmental Planners, Mr. Michael Mastura, 
the Philippine Social Science Council, the Office of 
Muslim Affairs and Cultural Communities, especially 
Minister Candu Muarip and Atty. Fausto Lingating. 

Madam President, the cry for meaningful, effective 
and forceful autonomy has been loud and clear all over 
the country. That cry will no longer be a voice in the 
wilderness. Let this 1986 Constitutional Commission 
give a bold and unequivocal answer to that cry. The 
report of the Committee on Local Governments is an 
indictment against the status quo of a unitary system 
that, to my mind, has ineluctably tied the hands of 
progress in our country. It is claimed. Madam President, 
that our linguistic and ethnic diversities are weaknesses 
that can be strengthened by the unitary system; but I 
say our varying regional characteristics are factors to 
capitalize on to attain national strength througli decen- 
tralization. 

As stated by Mr. Rene Santiago of tlie Philippine 
Institute of Environmental Planners, who appeared 
several times before our Committee, a structure of socie- 
tal organization must adopt to the people and not the 
people to a preconceived model of organization. He 
stated: 

Filipinos are said to be highly individualistic, fractious, 
ungovernable, and heir to numerous persuasions. A pluralist 
society like ours would behave incongruously under the 
unitary setup as many social scientists have observed to the 
point of schizophrenia. It should be at home in a “federal- 
ized environment.” 

Decentralization gives hope to the poor. It disperses 
political power and responsibility, just as wealth must 
be equitably diffused. As Somacher, an economist, said: 
“Centralization is mainly an idea of order while decen- 
tralization, one of freedom.” As Rene Santiago ob- 
served, centralization emphasizes the maintenance of 
status quo for society to sustain itself, while decentrali- 
zation promotes entrepreneurship and innovation. 

Our unitary structure, indeed, gravitates toward 
order that progress — national and local — becomes a 
casualty. Because of our enormous and hardheaded 
adherence to the unitary system foisted upon us by 
the colonial powers in a span of several centuries, 
Filipinos have found the idea of dictatorship appeal- 
ing. That is why we always hear, and we seem to believe, 
that we Filipinos respond better to a strong leader and 
we find ourselves wittingly rammed through a situation 
where our rights are despicably trampled upon and 
where freedom becomes illusory and our dreams remain 
empty and unfulfilled. Thus, despite our vast natural 
resources and our great intellectual endowments, the 
Philippines has lagged behind her Asian neighbors. 

In our report, we have widened the taxing powers of 
local governments. Thus, under our report, they can 
impose taxes, fees and charges, with right of retention 


and disbursements without undue interference from the 
national government. They shall likewise be entitled to 
share in the proceeds of exploitation and development 
of the national wealth within their respective areas. We 
also provided in the report that the share of local 
governments in the national taxes be released to them 
automatically. Our Committee did not adopt any provi- 
sion authorizing the establishment of a metropolitan 
government because we wanted to avoid overlapping of 
functions. Moreover, putting together highly urbanized 
cities infringes upon the principles of local autonomy 
and decentralization. I, for one, believe that the Metro 
Manila Commission, created under P.D. No. 824, was 
truly a self-centered creation of the deposed dictator 
Ferdinand Marcos who wanted to consolidate political 
power over areas within Metro Manila as a gift to his 
wife and inspired by the historical imperative that the 
fall of the capital region will mean the end of their 
imperial rule. The geopolitical area of Metro Manila, 
however, may be maintained under a coordinating 
agency as authorized by the provision of our committee 
report that local government units may coordinate and 
consolidate their efforts and services for purposes 
beneficial to them. 

Madam President, for the first time in the Philippine 
Constitution, in favorable reaction to the needs of the 
times and in recognition of the realities of Philippine 
situation, we are mandating the legislature to create 
autonomous regions within the framework of, and 
respecting the, national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Republic of the Philippines. 

Our Committee was tom between the question of 
setting a fully federal form of government and the 
question of merely establishing autonomous regions. 
We decided to make our provisions flexible in the sense 
that while we are mandating the creation of auto- 
nomous regions, particularly of Muslim Mindanao and 
the Cordilleras, we are opening an avenue towards full 
federalization of the Republic of the Philippines by way 
of creating several autonomous regions should Congress 
decide to do so in the future. Commissioners Alonto, 
Bennagen and Ople will explain further the need to set 
up autonomous regions. 

Madam President, the challenge of this generation is 
brought forth before this august body. I fervently hope 
and pray that this Commission will prove equal to the 
challenge. 

Thank you very much. 

Madam President, may I request that Commissioner 
Alonto be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER ALONTO 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, there is nothing 
more that I could add to the brilliant exposition of the 


170 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


distinguished Chairman of our Committee. I only want 
to add some historical experience I encountered when I 
had the privilege of being honored as one of those that 
have contributed to nation-building. 


Madam President, the idea of a regional development 
plan started in Congress in the year 1954. It was in that 
year that the members of Congress of which I was a 
humble member started to promote the idea of a 
regional economic development in this country in the 
course of our nation-budding. That experiment of 
Congress developed the idea that a regional economic 
development of our country is much more effective 
than a centralized idea coming from the central 
government. 


It was in that period when the establishment of 
different development authorities, starting with the 
Mindanao Development Authority, was passed and 
made into law by Congress. This also started the idea of 
presenting before the nation builders of this country 
that idea of the sociopolitical development of our 
country based upon the concept of regional authority 
or regional concept. Such concept started the idea that a 
federal form of government would be more acceptable 
m our country, taking into account the geographical 
situation the composition of the society, and the 
histoncal background of the Filipino society. 

Based on a paper I read before one of the seminars 
organized before the start of the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention enhUed The Political Problems of the 
u ura Minorities, Mao’s effective way of solving 
tne problem of uniting and consolidating the multi- 
anous sectors of our society would be some sort of a 

tederal form of government. In this document, I stated 
the following: 

I can surmise this early that the strongest single factor 
at prompted the call for this charter revision is the sense 
of urgency felt by the different sectors that comprise the 
society to find a solution to the state of disintegration 
taking place in our midst. 


It is then a must that in re-framing the same law, it 
would be the highest sense of patriotism for every member 
privileged to participate to analyze all the basic problems 
t at confront our society, not the least important of which 
IS t e problem of Philippine unity. Together, let us recon- 
s met our political thoughts in order to reconstitute the 
same to conform to the basic phUosophy of all the dif- 
eren e ements that make up our society. Let us not hesi- 

our governmental structure if 
necessary, to make it conform to the basic ideals of the 

“«tr t ? composmg our society. Let us abandon the 
ai jacket to which we were plunged by our erstwhile 
masters as a condition precedent to the grant of a political 
freedom and which became the basic cause of our failure tc 
imbue the society with the desirable sense of oneness anc 
common destiny. For, unless we can imbue our people wit! 
a sense of oneness and common destiny, there seems to bi 
no possible avenue of containing the process of disintegra 


tion that is going on in our very midst involving not only 
the cultural minorities but the whole fabric of our society. 

I daresay that if to achieve unity, it is necessary to divide 
the country into several autonomous states bound together 
by a common goal and sense of oneness, we should not 
hesitate to do so. If unity cannot be achieved in a strictly 
unitary system as experience has taught us, then by all 
means let us revert to the only option left open for us — 
UNITY IN DIVERSITY — which seems to be the goal fixed 
for us by Divine Wisdom when our ancestors, belonging to a 
common racial strain but speaking different tongues, 
ventured through unchartered seas guided by the same 
Divine Providence to these different islands separated by 
natural barriers yet belonging to the same geographical 
region. For the sake of the hundreds of thousands, perhaps 
millions, of precious lives of our kith and kin that were 
sacrificed in the fields of battles to defend their newfound 
paradise, for us, their progeny, let us forge that unity of the 
anvil of necessity, perchance God Almighty, whose Provi- 
dence controls the destiny of man and nation, grants that 
we can preserve these beautiful Isles for the generations yet 
to come. 

In other words. Madam President, my very rationale 
for standing on the principle that we must take into 
account and into consideration the multifarious sectors 
of our society, the multiplicity of ideology, the multi- 
plicity of principles in our society to be able to struc- 
ture our government is for each sector of the society to 
make a basis of their cooperation in nation-building the 
ideals that they preciously consider for themselves. 

This is why in the different proposals to this Consti- 
tutional Commission, I am most appreciative of those 
proposals that will at least give autonomous freedom to 
the different sections of, if not all over, the country, 
but at least to start with, with those that in the course 
of our nation-building have shown some disparate and 
unrefusing and a highly Unitarian centralized authority 
in this country. 

I refer. Madam President, to the Muslims of Mindanao 
and to some of our brothers in Northern Luzon who 
adhere to the principle that in order to have real free- 
dom, real justice and real democracy, each section of 
our society must be given the chance and freedom to 
develop the ideals they prize so much in life. 

Madam President, I would like to lengthen my 
remarks in support of the remarks of our distinguished 
Chairman. However, I would just submit as part of the 
Record some documents which are very pertinent to the 
discussion we are now about to do. One of these is a 
document entitled Position Paper No. 2, which discusses 
the political problems of the cultural minorities in this 
country.* 

Another document is on the need for a national 
community which was the essence of a speech that this 
humble Representation delivered before the 1971 
Constitutional Convention.* 


♦See Appendix 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1, 1986 


171 


Another document I would like to submit as part of 
the Record of this Constitutional Commission and as 
part of my remarks is a document entitled Structure of 
Government by Rev. Francisco Araneta, former Pres- 
ident of the Ateneo de Manila.* This was submitted 
before the 1971 Constitutional Convention, proposing a 
federal form of government for the country. 

The last document I would like to present is a speech 
of a divine — some of the last prono'uncements of the 
late Senator Benigno Aquino.* In that document, he 
proposed a solution to the very perplexing problem 
caused by the Muslims in this country which resulted 
in the conclusion of the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 by 
President Marcos and the Moro National Liberation 
Front. This document clearly and articulately states that 
the solution to the problem of the Muslims in this 
country is spelled in the implementation of the Tripoli 
Agreement, and suggests means and ways by which that 
Tripoli Agreement would be implemented by the 
government. These, I submit to this body, as part of my 
short remarks and as part of the Record of this Consti- 
tutional Commission. 

Thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity 
for delivering my short remarks. I hope that the report 
of this Committee would be acceptable to the Members 
of this Constitutional Commission as a basic solution to 
our problem of establishing real unity in Philippine 
society. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Senator Alonto. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let those documents referred to 
by Commissioner Alonto be made part of the proceed- 
ings. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Abubakar 
desire to be recognized? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, because I would like to 
strengthen the argument and the observation of both 
speakers on local autonomy, that local autonomy has 
been implemented in Mindanao and it has succeeded. 
The Southern Autonomous Government in Mindanao, 
composed of Cotabato, Sulu, Zamboanga and part of 
Northern Zamboanga, has now a seat in Zamboanga, 
with a legislative and executive chairman. It has solved 
many of the agitations and problems of Southern Min- 
danao. My remark is simply to supplement and to add 
to the argument and presentation of the Chairman that 
this is a working reality. Local autonomy is no longer 
a theoretical concept in Southern Mindanao. There is 
local autonomy whose seat is in Zamboanga; there is a 
chairman of the executive council, and there is also a 
legislative council. Each province in Southern Mindanao 
is represented in the legislative seat in Zamboanga and 
the representatives meet to enact measures for the good 
of the region. So, as far as local autonomy is concerned. 


it is a success in Mindanao and there is no reason why 
we should not move forward to embrace further 
provinces under the same aggrupation, powers and 
delegation, so that in the end, the autonomous region 
will take care of its own problems as we are now taking 
care of our problem in Zamboanga, Sulu and Cotabato. 
This would, in turn, spread the concept which will 
ultimately be the force in forging the national unity that 
the Filipinos have dreamed of and have achieved to a 
certain extent. So, regional autonomy is now working in 
Southern Mindanao. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The next speaker. Madam President, 
is the honorable Commissioner Bennagen. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. 

Actually, we have a number of arguments for creating 
the autonomous regions. Many of these have to do with 
efficiency and manageability, but we will discuss them 
during the period of interpellations and period of 
amendments. 

Given the little time that I have, I will just read a 
paper arguing for the granting of autonomous region 
status to both the Cordilleras and the Bangsa Moro. 

For the last several weeks, we have been deliberating 
on matters that touch the life of every Filipino, bom 
and unborn. Now, we will be deliberating on matters 
which shall determine the fate and destiny of the Bangsa 
Moro and the Cordillera people — a fate intertwined 
with our own, and for the entire country, a future 
which could spell war and fragmentation or a future of 
peace and Justice for all. Away from the harsh realities 
of the neglected and underdeveloped conditions of the 
Cordilleras and of Mindanao, it is easy for us in the 
comfort of this hall not to see how our decisions could 
affect the lives of millions of people whom we do not 
know. But I do know and have felt the overwhelming 
passion of the Bangsa Moro to achieve recognition of 
their right to self-determination. I have been witness to 
the courage and perseverance of the CordUlera peoples 
in their struggle for peace and justice. They see regional 
autonomy as the answer to their centuries of struggle 
against oppression and exploitation. For so long, their 
names and identities have been debased. Their ancestral 
lands have been ransacked for their treasures, for their 
wealth. Their cultures have been defiled, their very lives 
threatened, and worse, extinguished, all in the name of 
national development; all in the name of pubhc interest; 
all in the name of the common good; all in the name of 
the right to property; all in the name of the Regalian 
doctrine; all in the name of national security. These 


*See Appendix 


172 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1, 1986 


phrases have meant nothing to our indigenous communi- 
ties, except for the violation of their human rights. 

I can recite a litany of their grievances which spans 
centuries-poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition and death 
rates. But I will simply quote an old man from the 
Cordilleras who said: “We asked the government for a 
teacher, it did not give us one. We asked for some help 
in fixing our roads, it did not send us any. We asked for 
a doctor, it did not send us one. Instead, government 
men came to build a dam and sent in the Philippine 
Constabulary and the army. These, we did not ask for.” 

There are statistics on the thousands of indigenous 
communities displaced by plantations, hydroelectric 
dams, mining and logging operations by virtue of state 
laws, presidential decrees and letters of instructions. But 
it will suffice to quote the eloquent voices of Bontoc 
and Kalinga warriors. They say: “Long experience has 
shown us that the outsiders’ law is not able to under- 
stand us, our customs, and our ways. Always, the state 
laws make just what is unjust, and make right what is 
not right. We are planted here, rooted in sacred land. 
All our dead are buried here. Now we are asked by the 
government to allow our dead to be covered by the 
waters of the Chico Dam Project. This is an impossible 
request. The pvemment assures us that it will spare no 
e ort to disinter the dead, to remove the remains to 
new and better sites. It does not understand. The very 
soil we tread on is the dust of our fathers. What kind of 
9 tf agree to our annihilation as a 

S K ■ the government, it 

, ® ^ ^ doubted that we belong to the land 

or mat we question our ancient law. If we are forcibly 

rnn ^ that we will no longer 

consider ourselves under the law.” 

th forget that among the Bangsa Moro and 

cof people were people who were massacred, 

^^®®ted and imprisoned, tortured and raped, 
th name of national security, law and order. For 
e en ^e history of the Bangsa Moro and the Cordillera 
peop e IS a history of oppression and discrimination; but 
eirs too is a history of heroic resistance against sub- 
jugation, tutelage and assimilation by the Spaniards, the 
Filipirms'^^ Japanese, and even against uncaring 

We should not, therefore, be., surprised if they con- 
inue o practice their ancient traditions of tribal 
h ^3w, if they persevere in their 

right to 

kind^^of^hia^rtm ^^hout meaning this to be some 
dillpra nponip Bangsa Moro and the Cor- 

rifP fhe willpower and determina- 

sharp spears in demolishing 
any obstacle in their quest for justice, peace and self- 
determination. Listen to the fiery words of a Muslim: 
If we act in a cmhzed way which is the way of Islam, 
they do not listen to us. Pero huramentado o jihad, 
iyon ang pakikinggan nila.” 


Honorable Commissioners, we wish to impress upon 
you the gravity of the decision to be made by every 
single one of us in this Commission. We have the over- 
whelming support of the Bangsa Moro and the Cordillera 
people to grant them regional autonomy in the new 
Constitution. By this we mean meaningful and autlientic 
regional autonomy. We propose that we have a separate 
Article on the autonomous regions for the Bangsa Moro 
and Cordillera people clearly spelled out in this Consti- 
tution, instead of prolonging the agony of their vigil and 
their struggle. This, too, is a plea for national peace. Let 
us not pass the buck to the Congress to decide on this. 
Let us not wash our hands of our responsibility to attain 
national unity and peace and to settle this problem and 
rectify past injustices, once and for all. 

For once, let us think of our indigenous communities 
even as we think of the whole nation. For once, let us 
help pave the way for a future of prosperity based on 
the equality of all people. For once, let us courageously 
decide on issues based on their internal merits and not 
to be clouded in our reasoning by the tyranny of emo- 
tionally loaded words, as often indicated by statements 
like “The only good Moro is a dead Moro.” 

Let me repeat the poignant words of Senator Diokno 
who wrote to Marcos years ago, during the height of the 
Bontoc-Kalinga struggle against the Chico Dam Project: 

Our indigenous communities are part and parcel of us. 
They are living links to our yesteryears, perfect exemplars 
in fact of the barangay democracy you seek to promote. 

In their culture they may well be a lamp on our past, to our 
tomorrow. To destroy them is to destroy a vital part of our 
past, our present and our future. Their death as a people, 
and we do not hesitate to call it “genocide,” will be ours, 
too, as a nation. Whether justice or injustice, peace or 
violence, life or death shall prevail, is entirely in your 
hands. 

Finally, let me echo the wise words of the Muslirns 
whom we met during the public hearings: “You in this 
Commission have a rare opportunity to write a docu- 
ment of peace and justice.” 

Let us not miss that opportunity. 

Marami pong salamat. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Bennagen. 
The last but not the least speaker is the Honorable Bias 
F. Ople. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

SPONSORSHIP SPEECH OF COMMISSIONER OPLE 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

I think the Commission is dealing with two reports 
from the Committee on Local Governments. Committee 
Report No. 2 1 deals with local autonomy for the 
government as a whole, particularly the local units, 
which I think is very important. It is said that this is a 
colonial legacy, the overcentralized system of govern- 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


173 


ment that denies the role of initiative at the local levels. 
It is, of course, understandable that a colonial power 
would first of all annihilate the autonomy of local units 
in order to ensure a foolproof security against potential 
rebellions or disturbances. But at the same time Com- 
mittee Report No. 25 deals with a more specialized kind 
of autonomy, that is to say, autonomous regions, on the 
premise that certain regions with unique cultural, his- 
toric, social and even religious bonds where they have 
been placed in a position of inferiority relative to the 
dominant groups in society have the right to demand 
autonomy, a measure of self-determination within the 
larger political framework of the nation-state. I am 
addressing my remarks in the next two or three minutes 
precisely to the purposes of Committee Report No. 25. 
Within this draft Article, therefore, there is a major 
provision for the creation of autonomous regions. It is 
an authority for Congress to provide by law for such 
regions of autonomy as may be determined to be 
necessary. 

Throughout modern history, Madam President, auto- 
nomy for certain regions within the framework of the 
nation-state has meant a constructive alternative to 
secessionist aspirations. May I quote briefly from the 
Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences the following 
words, and I quote: 

Autonomy on a territorial basis would easily conflict 
with the State but the two are not irreconcilable. If a State 
fails to induce interest in the continued maintenance of the 
State union on the part of frontier outlying or racially alien 
regions, it incurs the danger of their being annexed or of 
their gaining independence. As a remedy, the State may 
grant to such regions a certain measure of self-government 
within the larger political framework. 

The Muslim-Filipinos in Mindanao have fought for 
hundreds of years to preserve their independence and 
their identity from the colonial power. More recently, 
they precipitated a civil war in Mindanao which has 
already caused an estimated 100,000 lives, including the 
lives of noncombatant women and children. The hostili- 
ties fortunately were suspended in 1976 as a result of 
the Tripoli Ceasefire Agreement. But this dormant war 
may act up all over again with all its renewed fury if no 
understanding is reached between the Moro National 
Liberation Front and the Aquino government. I under- 
stand that by next month the negotiations will resume 
in Jeddah where also the organization of the Islamic 
Confermice will be meeting. And that is the whole 
point. This agreement for peace between Filipinos has 
been mediated by a 42-nation international organization 
of the Islamic Conference as though our Muslim 
brothers have to look beyond our own shores and 
beyond the capabilities of our own government, across 
the seas, for justice in the association of their fellow 
legionists called the Islamic Conference of 42 states. 

In the Cordillera region, we all know that there is 
still an ongoing armed rebellion as well as continuous 
militant but peaceful agitation for autonomy. 


The Constitutional Commission is, therefore, 
presented with one of those rare opportunities, perhaps 
unrepeatable, to seal the permanent unity of these two 
regions with the rest of us, with the rest of the republic 
by granting them autonomous status as proposed in this 
draft Article within the larger sovereignty of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines. The draft Article prepared by 
the Committee on Local Governments under the dis- 
tinguished chairmanship of Commissioner Nolledo 
defines the criteria for autonomous regions and their 
spheres of jurisdiction. It reserves very clearly certain 
powers that only the national government may exercise 
including those dealing with foreign affairs, national 
defense, post, telegraph and communication and even 
the guidelines of economic policy, and where there is a 
security force, the supervision of the Armed Forces of 
the Philippines, and the control of the President of the 
Philippines. 

It calls on Congress to enact the organic acts for two 
regions - Mindanao and the Cordillera - within one 
year from the election of its members. So, this is an 
assignment with a deadline to insure that there will be 
results. The approval of this provision will immediately 
raise the hopes, morale and faith in the nation of the 
millions of our brother Filipinos involved in these 
regions and will be a major contribution to peace in our 
land, in our time. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Ople. 

Madam President, we are now ready to entertain 
questions from the honorable Members of the Com- 
mission. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Trenas be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, may 1 ask the 
Committee or its Chairman a few questions for clarifica- 
tion? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. TREl^AS. I am referring to Committee Report 
No. 21. Section 1 made reference to the different 
political subdivisions and among them, the barrios. I 
notice that in the 1973 Constitution, the barrio was also 
referred to as the smallest political subdivision. 

In the rneantime, we have the barangay as the 
smallest political subdivision. May I ask the Committee 
if this provision of the 1973 Constitution referring to 
the barrios has been amended and instead the barangay 
was used? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has decided to 
revert to the original name of barrio instead of barangay. 


174 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


Mr. Marcos issued some decrees changing the barrio 
to barangay and those decrees should be declared 
unconstitutional because there was no corresponding 
amendment in the 1973 Constitution. The 1973 Consti- 
tution uses up to now, as also embodied in the Freedom 
Constitution, the word “barrio.” Besides, we received a 
lot of communications from all over the country asking 
us to revert to the name “barrio” because most of the 
ancient and even legal documents including titles still 
use the word “barrio.” The term “barrio schools” is 
still found in the different parts of the country. I 
think another reason is that the barangay is indicative 
of the dictatorial regime of Mr. Marcos. It is also the 
unanimous sense of the members of the League of 
Governors and City Mayors that we revert to the term 
“barrio.” 

MR. TRE5JAS. So, from the time of the adoption of 
the present Constitution we are drafting, we shall refer 
to barrios. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. TRENAS. Insofar as Section 3 of the Article on 
Local Governments is concerned, in case of province or 
city or municipality is divided or merged, the approval 
of the majority of the votes in a plebiscite called for the 
^rpose in the unit or units directly affected is needed, 
j recent case of Negros del Norte which was 
ivi e rom Negros Occidental. The plebiscite referred 
iirhabitants of the proposed municipality 
an t e Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional. 
1 ne Committee adheres to the ruling of the Supreme 
inhabitants to be consulted should not 
on y e the inhabitants of the new province or city or 
town but the whole province. Am I right? 


^ ^Sree with the Gentleman fully, 
mink the Committee will fully agree because of th 
words directly affected.” Those people are als 
directly affected by division. 


MR. TRENAS. Just one more question. Section 6 of 

e same Article made reference to the right of local 

governments to create their own sources of revenue 

an axes. However, Section 7 also gave the same right 

o oca governments to levy and collect charges of con- 

tv! unique, distinct and exclusive to them. Will 

wti o explain the difference between 

Section 6 and Section 7? 


IS 


a direr! rr. f with respect to Section 6, this 

eovernment i!* Constitution on each local 

of revenue and^ Power to impose its own sources 

mav he fiv H K t^xes Subject to such guidelines 

•n read nf iis’^ c!!- Gentleman will notice that 

instead of using limitations as may be fixed by law,” 

we used guidelmes as recommended by the League of 

Governors and City Mayors. So, there is a need for an 

authority like this constitutional authority for each 

local government unit to impose such taxes, fees and 


charges. With respect to Section 7 this section recog- 
nizes some customary rules authorizing the levy of 
unique, distinct and exclusive taxes in accordance with 
the customs of each particular place. There is no need of 
any law, constitutional or statutory, for local govern- 
ment units to impose these taxes. In other words, we 
recognize the existence of customs and, in effect, we 
give validity to such customs. 

MR. TREfsJAS. Precisely, I notice the significance of 
the fact that while in Section 6 the Committee placed 
“subject to such guidelines as may be fixed by law,” the 
same is not found in Section 7. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because there is an intent on 
the part of the Constitutional Commission, it seems to 
me, to preserve the customs and traditions of members 
of the indigenous communities. And this is one way ot 
preserving their customs and traditions. When these 
levies are imposed by customs, I think we assume that 
the members of the indigenous communities consider 
them reasonable enough and they are willing and able 
to pay them. 

MR. TREnAS. Therefore, 1 am to understand that 
Congress cannot, insofar as Section 7 is concerned, pass 
a law subjecting the levy and charges mentioned therein 
to any guideline. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We do not necessarily preclude that 
possibility. Congress may, after all, impose such guide- 
lines as when the people crave for such guidelines. 

MR. TRENAS. However, the effect of Section 7 is 
that local governments may spend the levy and charges 
for its own use. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is true. 

MR. TRENAS. Exclusively? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TRENAS. Finally, I notice in the Article on 
Local Governments that highly urbanized cities, which 
were mentioned in the 1973 Constitution, are not men- 
tioned anymore. The effect of that is, as I recall, highly 
urbanized cities were not allowed to vote for provincial 
officials. Since we have done away with them, inhabi- 
tants of the cities can now vote for provincial officials. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. I think that 
was a clear intent on the part of the Committee. The 
Gentleman will notice that in Section 4 (1), Article XI 
of the 1973 Constitution, this sentence appears; 

Highly urbanized cities, as determined by standards 

established in the local government code, shall be in- 
dependent of the province. 

We deleted that; we did not place that in our report 
because we believe that voters of highly urbanized cities 
should be allowed to participate in provincial elections. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


175 


MR. TRE5IAS. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I would like to ask a 
few questions of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. RAMA. One reading Articles XXI and XXV will 
learn a lot of things about what are the autonomous 
units, who will form the autonomous units, what the 
main features of the autonomous units are, who is going 
to supervise them, et cetera, but it seems that one would 
not learn this basic question. What is the purpose of 
these autonomous units? Why are we creating or intro- 
ducing them? Why do we need these autonomous units? 
Why do we create them? Does the Gentleman not think 
that we should have some kind of a statement on the 
purpose, considering that this is a new feature in our 
Constitution whereby the citizen could understand and 
know the justification and the reason for such auto- 
nomous units by giving a center to all these Articles like, 
for instance, stating that the purpose is to speed up the 
economic and social development of the regions and the 
people therein? Would the Gentleman consider a state- 
ment to that effect later in the period of amendments? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. That ques- 
tion of the Gentleman, I think, is very vital because the 
members of the Committee are deeply concerned about 
the formation of autonomous regions. Based on my 
sponsorship speech, I believe that the purely unitary 
system has been a failure in the Republic of the Philip- 
pines. This country will never progress if we do not 
create autonomous regions. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, I agree with the Gentleman com- 
pletely but I just want that information for the people. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. I would like to furthermore 
state, if the Chair does not mind, that even in the 
Constitutional Commission, we decided to fragmentize 
Q-m*g0jyg§ into forming various committees towards a 
common end to draft the Constitution as early as 
possible. You will notice that Committees function 
effectively, and so we talk of some sort of a division of 
labor in the same manner that we talk of division of 
power. 

For purposes of posterity, we would like to give some 
advantages in support of regional autonomous regions. 

Rapid growth could be better attained with a more 
efficient and effective management of the country. By 
limiting matters to be decided by the central govern- 
ment to those of national importance, the central 
government will not be unduly distracted by localized 
problems. Moreover, programs should be designed ac- 
cording to regional priorities and potentials rather than 
on the national yardstick of least common denominator. 
A genuine autonomy is inhospitable to the rise of 


another Marcos; it will be more difficult for foreign 
powers to influence or dominate the country because 
it may happen that foreigners may influence one region 
but another region may resist, and it is not easy to con- 
trol all these regions. Also, by reason of the archipelagic 
geography of our country, central governance is ineffi- 
cient and unresponsive. A regionalized structure will 
make the government more accessible to the people. 
That we are regionalistic as a people is beyond dispute. 
The reasons for these are, besides our island geography, 
the existing linguistic and ethnic diversities. The State 
can achieve equitable distribution of income through 
the decentralization of political and economic power. In 
addition, the exercise of these powers through local 
autonomy is also the key to modernization of our rural 
areas. You will notice that the following countries have 
autonomous regions: Spain, Italy, Argentina, Switzer- 
land, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Austria, 
among others. China is also one of them. In fact, in the 
Constitution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 

I understand, even the names of the regions are men- 
tioned. You will also notice that Switzerland, because it 
has different ethnic idiosyncracies — it has 22 cantons 
and two are semicantons — despite the fact that its 
people have different persuasions, remains united. There 
are Etruscans, Cretans, Celts, Romans, and Germans. 
They have also a variety of languages. Two-thirds speak 
German, one-fifth French, one-tenth Italian, and one 
percent Rhaeto-Romanic. Despite the diversity in 
religion as well as diversity in customs and traditions, 
there is unity in Switzerland. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I notice that the basis for unifying components to 
form into an autonomous unit as stated in Section 9 
should be: 

. . . common historical, geographic, cultural, linguistic, 

ethnic, communal, economic or other characteristics within 

the framework of and respecting the national sovereignty. 

On the other hand, in Section 16, it seems that the only 
basis for forming Mindanao and Cordillera into auto- 
nomous regions is the ethnic and cultural reason; is that 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman will notice that that 
is not the only basis. That provision that he cited - I am 
very happy that he cited that provision - opens the 
avenue towards full federalization of the Republic of 
the Philippines. That is why we enumerated several 
factors to be considered. The Gentleman can add other 
factors if he wishes but ethnic consideration is not the 
only 'factor to be considered in the grant of autonomy 
to Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras 

MR. I pant that ethnic consideration should 

be considered with respect to these unique regions. But 
does not the Gentleman think that we should be a little 
flexible in the sense that when we try to unite certain 


176 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


areas, we also take into consideration the economic Sections 1 to 8 general principles which would be 
basis? applicable also to autonomous regions? 


MR. NOLLEDO. We really consider the economic 
factor as material in the formation of an autonomous 
region. 

MR. RAMA. For instance, there is a site where a dam 
can be constructed that will benefit a lot of areas 
around it. Instead of just looking into the ethnic or 
cultural components of that area, would we not consider 
from the economic pcjint of view that the whole area 
would be served by that dam and, therefore, would 
boost the economy of that region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is perfectly correct, 
Madam President. In fact, the word “communal” can 
be a basis to form an autonomous region. For example, 
we can have Bicolandia as another autonomous region. 

^ creating an autonomous region 
for Mindanao, the Gentleman would consider going 
beyond areas where the Muslims do not reside if it 
would be for the benefit of that area as a region or as 
an autonomous unit? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, they are interre- 
lated with each other because even in Committee 
Report No. 21, we mentioned the term “autonomous 
regions.” Based on basic rules of statutory construction. 
Committee Report No. 21 may be qualified by the 
pertinent provisions of Committee Report No. 25 in 
appropriate cases. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

Going to Section 3, my understanding of Section 3 is 
as follows: That an autonomous region or a province for 
that matter cannot be created without first having a 
plebiscite among the inhabitants affected. Is that 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Gentleman, Madam 
President. 

MR. ROMULO. A plebiscite is a precondition to the 
creation of an autonomous region or a province or a 
subdivision of an existing unit; is that correct? 


Pre^denf^Th^f^r ' ^ possibility. Madam 

Q Gentleman will also notice that in 

wantpH t ’ added “or other characteristics.” We 
f wider leeway to the Congress in the 

he uratit ri Whether the regional autonomy should 
be granted to a particular region. 

By the same token, for instance, there is 
anH a ^ proviucc that produces certain products 
hpraiicp^f P*‘°'^bice that consumes that product 
not hp hn produce that product. Could they 

that econnn?- ^ ^°§®ther in one region on the basis of 

that economic consideration? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is also a possibility. 

MR. RAMA. I thank the distinguished Commissioner. 
MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

be reco^^fd"^' Commissioner Romulo 

THE PRESIDENT • • 
j^j 2 ed. ‘ '“^^rnissioner Romulo is recog- 


MR. ROMULO. Just a few 

ident. 


questions. Madam* Pres- 


tee^Lp^rt^No'^?" tt Smitt^^ 

Sections 1 to 8 general proS^^^^^ 


Uons 1 to 8 general 

unit versus the sections contained in Committ 
No. 25 which refer only to autonomous regio 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President, that is why 
we did not provide for that anymore in Committee 
Report No. 25. 

MR. ROMULO. So, how does the Gentleman recon- 
cile the need for a plebiscite prior to the creation of an 
autonomous region with Section 16 which already 
mandates, upon the acceptance of this Constitution, the 
Congress to pass an organic act for the autonomous 
regions of Mindanao and Cordillera? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The conflict is more apparent than 
real because the moment an organic act is granted by 
the Congress, it is understood that the organic act rnust 
find acceptance among a majority of the votes cast in a 
plebiscite called for the purpose. If there should be no 
such support, then the organic act would be ineffective. 

MR. ROMULO. Does the Gentleman not think he is 
putting the cart before the horse? Why should Congress 
not first determine whether the people or the inha- 
bitants affected desire an autonomous region before 
Congress enacts a law to that effect? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Even adopting that opinion, I think 
there would be no inconsistency. Congress may do that, 
if Congress should decide to do it. 


MR. ROMULO. But there is, because Congress is left 
no choice. Under Section 16, it is not only mandated to 
create the organic act; it is given a timetable. It is given 
no leeway whatsoever and it does not say that this 
organic act should be presented to the people in a 
plebiscite. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


177 


On the contrary, under Section 10, the legislature 
consults only the elective officials of the provinces and 
the cities. So, to me, the construction is clear that prior 
to a plebiscite. Congress must create these autonomous 
regions and they may or may not submit it to a plebi- 
scite because the Gentleman seems to be carving an 
exception to Section 3 right in this Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. Section 3, 
because it mentions no autonomous region, should like- 
wise apply to an autonomous region. If the Gentleman 
thinks it is necessary to make the provision clearer, then 
we will entertain the corresponding amendments. 

MR. ROMULO. That is right. 

In the Gentleman’s' answer to Commissioner Trenas 
with regard to Sections 6 and 7, he seems to imply that 
in Section 7, the legislature may nevertheless intervene. 
However, by the wording of the Gentleman, he is 
subjecting to legislative authority only the taxes created 
under Section 6. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, if the Gentleman does not 
mind it, the implication that he is talking about was 
qualified later on. I said there is possibility that 
Congress may, after all, set forth certain guidelines to be 
followed with respect to Section 7, if the circumstances 
should warrant because the wordings in Section 7 do 
not indicate subject to such guidelines as are expressly 
indicated in Section 6. 

MR. ROMULO. Therefore, statutory construction 
may dictate later that the authority of Congress is 
limited only to Section 6; so I think we have to clarify 
that. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As far as I am concerned, there is no 
need to clarify the same because I feel that the intent is 
to respect the customs and traditions of the indigenous 
communities. 

MR. ROMULO. But this talks about contributions 
unique, distinct and exclusive to them; meaning, that 
these are a unique type of taxes. This is a different type 
of tax which, I take it, is already accepted in the indi- 
genous communities. So, if the wordings do not make it 
clear that Congress may enact laws with regard to these 
unique, distinct and exclusive charges, one may be 
depriving Congress of that right. My other question 
precisely is: What are these unique, distinct and 
exclusive levies? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That may create some judicial 
questions or cases which our courts may decide ac- 
cordingly. 

MR. ROMULO. That is not so if I read the rest of this 
provision. Such things will be decided by the judicial 
system which will be created within each region. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that judicial system itself will 
come into operation when questions of this nature as 
may be arising from Section 7 may be presented to the 
courts. 

MR. ROMULO. So, the national government, 
whether it is the legislature or the executive, will be 
completely left out of this question. My point is that I 
do not know what is referred to. What kind of taxes are 
these? Will the Gentleman give me an example? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We discussed this in the Committee 
and Commissioner Alonto made some examples because 
there are areas where some contributions are traditional. 
For example, they may arise from relationship of mar- 
riage or relationship between parents and children even 
if they are already emancipated. We did not give specific 
examples, but customs and traditions can be proved 
according to the Civil Code by the generally accepted 
rules of evidence. When someone questions the validity 
of the imposition, tlien, as I said, a judicial question 
may crop up. But in the meantime, these are voluntary 
acts on the part of the members of the indigenous com- 
munities and we do not expect cases to arise therefrom. 

MR. ROMULO. In Section 8, local taxes referred to 
relate, I would take it, to what is provided in Section 6. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon. 

MR. ROMULO. Local taxes referred to in Section 8, 

I would assume, are those taxes which are allowed under 
Section 6. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Therefore, they have been previously 
subjected to guidelines from the legislature, 

MR. NOLLEDO. Should the legislature decide to do 
so. 

MR. ROMULO. On the other hand, it would not refer 
merely to local taxes which are collected locally such as 
real estate tax. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It depends on the provisions of the 
law involved because in the case of real estate taxes, 
local government units are entitled to a share. That may 
possibly fall under the last sentence. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, as provided by law, under 
present law. However, when we talk of a share in the 
proceeds of exploitation and development of the 
national wealth within their respective areas 

MR. NOLLEDO. That was adopted from the Ople 
resolution. I would prefer that Commissioner Ople 
answer that question. 


178 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, then let me pose my question. 
That is neither referred to in Section 6 nor in the first 
part of Section 8; therefore, how is this to be decided 
or implemented and by whom? Is this now going to be 
decided exclusively by the legislature of the auto- 
nomous region? 


MR. ROMULO. Yes, thank you. I am not really 
arguing the share. All I wanted to know is who will 
decide and the Gentleman seems to say that it is 
Congress. 

MR. OPLE. Congress will decide. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, the issue has to do 
with Section 8 on page 2 of Committee Report No. 2 1 : 

Local taxes shall belong exclusively to local governments 
and they shall likewise be entitled to share in the proceeds 
of the exploitation and development of the national wealth 
within their respective areas. 


Just to cite specific examples, in the case of timber- 
land within the area of jurisdiction of the Province of 
Quirino or the Province of Aurora, we feel that the local 
governments ought to share in whatever revenues are 
generated from this particular natural resource which is 
dso considered a national resource in a proportion to be 
determined by Congress. This may mean sharing not 
with the local government but with the local popula- 
hon. The geothermal plant in the Macban, Makiling- 
Banahaw area in Laguna, the Tiwi Geothermal Plant in 
Albay, there is a sense in which the people in these 
areas, hosting the physical facility based on the re- 
sources ound under the ground in their area which are 
considered national wealth, should participate in terms 
re^onable rebates on the cost of power that they 
^y. his is true of the Maria Cristina area in Central 
Mindanao, for example. May I point out that in the 
revious government, this has always been a very 
• ^ subject of Cabinet debates. Are the people 

n the locality, where God chose to locate His bounty, 

, reasonable modest sharing of this 

with the national government? Why should the national 
government claim all the revenues arising from them? 
tvTf '^sual reply of the technocrats at that time is 
a ere must be uniform treatment of all citizens 
regar ess of where God’s gifts are located, whether 
e ow the ground or above the ground. This, of course, 
as led to popular disenchantment. In Albay, for 
example, the government then promised a 20-percent 
rebate m power because of the contributions of the 
iwi plant to the Luzon grid. Although this was 
ordered, I remember that the Ministry of Finance, toge- 
t er with the National Power Corporation, refused to 
There is a bigger economic principle be- 
hind this the pnnciple of equity. If God chose to locate 

sources of hydroelectric power in 

Cordillera, 

fuel adiuQtmpnt t ° national government impose 

rative advatitage ^ven“Io°the'' 

through these resources" So It"” “ ^ 'ocalUKS 
8 .U , in that sense that 

under Section 8. the local populations, if not the local 

governments should have a share of whatever national 
proceeds may be realized from this natural wealth of the 
nation located withm their jurisdictions. 


MR. ROMULO. That is my whole point, not the local 
legislative assembly but the national Congress. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, this will require a national policy 
that only Congress can establish. 

MR. ROMULO. As to Section 9, in view of the Chair- 
man’s answers to Commissioner Rama, I would assume 
that not only are the seeds of federalism implanted in 
Section 9 but other regions are actually encouraged to 
become autonomous; is that correct? Is that the sense of 
the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. That is why 
we mentioned here specifically Muslim Mindanao and 
the Cordilleras because we feel that these will serve as 
models should Congress decide to fully federalize the 
Republic of the Philippines. I believe that we must do 
so, if we are to go far and if we are to progress. 

MR. ROMULO. So, Section 9 really authorizes 
Congress to federate the Philippines if it so wishes? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, we give discretion to the 
Congress. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I have a slight disagree- 
ment with the Chairman of the Committee. I would like 
to accept this as a statement of aspiration, but I do not 
think the committee report is sending a definitive signal 
to the future that we ought to federalize. If that is the 
extent of our aspiration, in the proper course, I would 
invite the Chairman to develop a more explicit provi- 
sion. That, however, will take us to another domain of 
public policy which may result in an overhaul of this 
Constitution and I just wanted to call attention to that. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, in my opinion, that is a very 
serious question and it would involve momentous 
decisions. If that is what we are being called upon to 
decide by Section 9, I think it better be made clear to 
all of us. We are, in fact, implanting through Section 9 
the possibility of federating this country. 

MR. OPLE. I do not know if the Chairman agrees. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If that is the intent of the Commit- 
tee or perhaps the possible intent of the Commission, I 
do not think it is expressly necessary to say so. We are 
only opening the avenue to the possibility because. . . 

MR. OPLE. I think what we want to establish is a 
kind of maximum decentralization, short of federaliza- 
tion, at this moment in history. 


MONDAY, AUGUST n, 1986 


179 


MR. ROMULO. Thdt sounds like someone being half 
pregnant. 

MR. OPLE. No, that is what local autonomy ought to 
mean. 

MR. ROMULO. That is what I am trying to say. Is 
the Gentleman talking of local autonomy or is he 
talking of federalism? 

MR. OPLE. Local autonomy, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

Section 12 enumerates a great many powers which 
will be granted to the autonomous region and these are: 
powers of taxation, development, health, school, pro- 
tection of the environment, et cetera. All these require 
financial and economic resources. Has the Committee in 
its study determined whether these regions are econo- 
mically viable by themselves? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, we are leaving it to 
Congress to determine whether or not it is viable to 
create autonomous regions out of the particular 
provinces and cities applying for regional autonomy. 

MR. ROMULO. And I take it, because of the man- 
date, whether viable or not, one will expect the rest of 
the country to contribute to the viability of these 
autonomous regions through their taxes. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily, because whether it 
is viable or not, I think that is a relative question. 
Congress may provide the necessary incentives or the 
necessary support when it complies with the mandate 
set forth in this Constitution. 

Commissioner Bennagen would like to talk on this. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Let me ask then the other question: 
Therefore, is Congress free to determine whether the 
applicant for regional autonomy is viable economically, 
and if it is not, then Congress may refuse to grant 
autonomy? Is that the application? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Congress may delay the grant. 

MR. ROMULO. Delay? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It may delay, in the meantime, and 
it may not grant immediately until viability is proven. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in connection with 
that, right now the existing law on local governments 
provides that one of the standards to be met for creating 
a new local government unit such as a municipality or a 
province is the economic viability which is often quanti- 
fiable and is so quantified. 


MR. ROMULO. Exactly. 

MR. OPLE. And, therefore, in enacting the organic 
act, as mandated here for an autonomous region, the 
capacity for self-reliance, including financial self- 
reliance, will be one of the standards that will pre- 
sumably be laid down by Congress on the basis of 
existing law. 

MR. ROMULO. Although it is conspicuously absent 
in Section 9. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

I 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. For the information of 
Commissioner Romulo, at least, in the case of both the 
Cordillera and the Bangsa Moro, we have statistics to 
show their economic viability based on the investigation 
of existing natural resources in the area as well as the 
human resources. 

MR. ROMULO. And thus, they do not need the 
support of the national government? 

MR. BENNAGEN. That has to be taken care of again 
in relation to other existing provisions as already 
pointed out by Commissioners Ople and Nolledo. We do 
not see here a complete separation from the central 
government, but rather an efficient working relationship 
between the autonomous region and the central govern- 
ment. We see this as an effective partnership, not a 
separation. 

MR. ROMULO. Therefore, complete autonomy is not 
really thought of as complete independence. 

MR. OPLE. We define it as a measure of self- 
government within the larger political framework of the 
nation. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. And, therefore, relations of 
dependency when it comes to economic and financial 
matters may be taken into account. 

MR. OPLE. To the extent of its political subordina- 
tion to the larger sovereignty and especially keeping in 
mind the very depressed conditions of these regions, I 
would not foreclose the possibility of Congress desiring 
to extend national support, especially in the beginning 
years, to regions with autonomy. 

MR. ALONTO. And besides that. Madam President, 
we would like to inform the honorable Commissioner 
that even in a real and strictly federal system of govern- 


180 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


ment like the United States, economic relation between 
the central government and the state has never been 
removed. 


MR. ROMULO. That is correct. 

MR. ALONTO. There is no complete independence 
or autonomy, as the honorable Commissioner has 
mentioned. 


MR. ROMULO. And, therefore, it allows the federal 
government to intervene and to regulate the states when 
their rights begin to disappear. I just want to make that 
point. 

Section 12 (5) talks of establishment, maintenance 
and administration of schools in the autonomous 
region. Basically, I have the same question. I assume 
again that the cost of maintenance will be borne by the 
autonomous region. If not, and even if these are main- 
tained, to what extent may this educational system be 
subordinated or coordinated with the policies of the 
national government with regard to education? 


MR. BENNAGEN. There could be a number of varia 
om on this in relation to financial responsibility. Ii 
cou end up to a secondary or tertiary level. But we ar( 
more concerned with curricular content, with what i: 
emg aught, that is, an educational program should bf 
responave to the particularities of the region and the 
peop e s aspirations. So that in recognition of the cul 

chill diversity, the central govemmeni 

snau not impose a uniform educational system. 

chi^ mechanics, some form of working relation- 
on Jtif^ established between the central govemmeni 

and the regional governments. 


not^^ I ®ut not to the exclusion 

national government’s educational poUcies. 


MR. BENNAGEN. No, definitely not. 


the Madrasah system where Islamic traditions are 
taught. 

MR. ROMULO. There are other speakers; so, 
although I have some more questions, I will reserve my 
right to ask them if they are not covered by the other 
speakers. I have only two questions. 

I heard one of the Commissioners say that local 
autonomy already exists in the Muslim region; it is 
working very well; it has, in fact, diminished a great deal 
of the problems. So, my question is: since that already 

exists, why do we have to go into something new? 

• 

MR. OPLE. May I answer that on behalf of Chairman 
Nolledo. Commissioner Yusup Abubakar is right that 
certain definite steps have been taken to implement the 
provisions of the Tripoli Agreement with respect to an 
autonomous region in Mindanao. This is a good first 
step, but there is no question that this is merely a partial 
response to the Tripoli Agreement itself and to the 
fuller standard of regional autonomy contemplated in 
that agreement, and now by state policy. 

For example, most of the functions listed here are 
not yet being exercised by the regional autonomous 
government in Mindanao, and that is the reason for the 
continuing negotiation between the Philippine govern- 
ment and the Moro National Liberation Front and its 
allied organizations in order to insure that the stand- 
ards of autonomy and its effectiveness will rise to that 
level contemplated in the Tripoli Agreement. 

MR. ROMULO. For my final question. Madam 
President, because I think it is a serious one and I do not 
wish to have it misunderstood. It seems to have been 
implied that the choice of the Commission is either to 
accept these provisions and have peace or we reject 
these provisions and have war. Is that really the dilemma 
of the Committee in presenting this to us? 


MR. ROMULO. Because I suppose that while we 
want to preserve indigenous culture, et cetera, there is 
another value that we wish to promote, and that is 
national umty. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is right. 

•A ^^^ULO. And integration to some extent and 
identity. 


nrinciDlev Vh'.r*'"- i" •l'« ^tateme 

pnnaples, that we recognize diversity within the fi 
work of national unity. This holds tiie in many sp 

1 educatior 

also of health and even of infrastructure. 

MR. OPLE In the case of Muslim Mindanao, Mi 
President, schools here can refer more specifical 


MR. OPLE. It is not the Committee but it is history 
that presents this choice to our people. I do not think 
it can be denied that more than 100,000 lives have 
already been lost. There would have been many more 
thousands of lives lost, if there was no ceasefire in 1976 
and 1977. That Agreement, of course, has suspended 
hostilities for a time. 

But I think we have heard from our colleagues from 
Mindanao about the new gravity of the situation there. 
This explains the urgency with which a local ceasefire in 
Sulu was concluded the other day, and the general 
sense of relief that greeted it on the part of the national 
government. But that is merely a partial settlement. The 
bigger settlement will be negotiated next month in 
Jeddah, when the President of the Philippines sends a 
delegation to negotiate with the MNLF within the 
purview of the next meeting of the Organization of the 
Islamic Conference. 


MONDAY, AUGUST n, 1986 


181 


So, in a sense, we are still threatened with war. 
Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. So, it is the Commissioner’s 
position that we really have no choice with regard to 
this provision. 

MR. OPLE. We do not want to appear as though this 
Committee is intimidating anyone about his choice. 
But what we are saying is that indeed a stark choice. . . 

MR. ROMULO. That is the logical conclusion of the 
statement that I have heard. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. That if local autonomy will not be 
agreed upon as stipulated in this committee report, our 
choice will be war. If that is so, the Committee is, there- 
fore, not giving anybody a choice. 

MR. OPLE. We are not adducing our opinion, but the 
facts bring themselves forward in terms of this new 
situation. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. There are threats from the Moro National 
Liberation Front which cannot be lightly dismissed. 
They are prepared to resume full hostilities, and on the 
part of our government, it is becoming a fraternal 
response. 

MR. ROMULO. In the end, the bottom line, which I 
think I am hearing from the Committee individually 
or collectively, is that we have a very small thin choice 
with regard to autonomy as expressed here or we will 
have war. 

MR. OPLE. I am afraid the Gentleman has described 
the stark truth of the situation. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would like to supplement the 
statement already made by Commissioner Ople. The 
choice is not something that we, in our own subjective 
wishes, would like to present in the provisions; it is a 
choice that is presented to us by the dynamics of social 
change and the dynamics of history which tell us at this 
particular point in time that such a decision has to be 
made. And we only wish that it could be made within 
the framework of national unity and democratic pro- 
cesses because there are other options that are open to 
the people beyond which we will have no domain. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Bemas 
wishes to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, the questions I have 
are fundamentally follow-up questions on some of the 
questions raised by Commissioners Trenas and Romulo. 

I would like to begin from the recently decided case 
of Negros del Norte. The Gentleman said that the 
principles enunciated in that Negros decision are still 
applicable under this provision. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, Madam President. 

'^R. BERNAS. However, I notice that the word 
“directly” was added in this committee report whereas 
under the 1973 Constitution, it said: “In a plebiscite 
called for the purpose in the unit or units affected.” 
Does the word “directly” add anything or modify the 
principles in the Negros decision? 

MR. NOLLEDO. To my mind, the word “directly” 
does not change the substance of the ruling. 

FR. BERNAS. So, it was not the intention of the 
Committee to change the substance of the ruling. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. To go into greater detail, for pur- 
poses, for instance, of the creation of a barrio or the 
abolition of a barrio, would we need a plebiscite of the 
entire municipality? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because the barrio will be 
taken out of the municipality. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. And for the purpose of the 
creation of a city or a municipality within a province, 
would we have a plebiscite in the province? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is the implication. 

FR. BERNAS. And if it is a question of the creation 
of a province, it would involve a plebiscite within the 
province or provinces from which that is being cut off? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman must be implying an 
existence of a regional government. 

FR. BERNAS. Or if it is part of a region, then the 
plebiscite would involve the entire region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think so. 


182 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. But if it comes to the creation of an 
autonomous region, how widespread will the plebiscite 
be? Would it be national? 


the legislature nor the elected local officials but a more 
representative cross-section of the population should be 
involved. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good question. In that 
case, it should only be the people within the units that 
will form the region itself. That is my opinion. 

FR. BERNAS. But that departs from the principle of f 
the Negros case because in the Negros case, it is not just 
the people that were included in the new territory but 
the people from which the territory is being carved out, 
as it were. If we are creating an autonomous region 
within the nation, in effect, we reaUy are carving out a 
territory from the entire nation, so it would seem that 
logically the entire nation should be involved in a 
plebiscite. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President, that is the 
consequence, but it would be unwieldy if we will ask 
the entire country to participate. We are not taking out 
the region from the country; we are forming an auto- 
nomous independent region. And I think the people 
who are directly affected are those actually residing 
within that region. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, that is the reason I am bringing 
this up. This thing involves some rather far-reaching 
consequences also in relation to the issue raised by 
Commissioner Romulo with respect to federalism. Are 
we, in effect, creating new categories of laws? Generally, 
we have statutes and constitutional provisions. Is this 
organic act something in between the two or is it some- 
thing equivalent to a constitutional provision? If it is 
going to be equivalent to a constitutional provision, it 
would seem to me that the formulation of the provisions 
of the organic act will have to be done by the legisla- 
ture, acting as a constituent assembly, and, therefore, 
subject to the provisions of the Article on Amend- 
ments. That is the point that I am tr>'ing to bring up. In 
effect, if we opt for federalism, it would really involve 
an act of the National Assembly or Congress acting 
as a constituent assembly and present amendments 
to this Constitution, and the end product itself would 
be a constitutional provision which would only be 
amendable according to the processes indicated in the 
Constitution. 


■ ERNAS. But the rest of the nation is alsi 

a ec e m the same way that when we create a provinc 

ou 0 M existing province, it is the entire province tha 

frrftn portion that is being cut of 
irom that province. 


We can remedy that by an amend- 
t n It seems that there is a direct contradiction. 

FR. BERNAS. The reason I am asking this is not to 
ave a quarrel with the Committee or anybody but just 
or the sake of clarity. Is the Committee talking about 
the creation of an organic act? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are talking about the passing of 
an organic act. 


R. BERNAS. Correct. When the legislature creates 
IS organic act, will it be acting as a constituent as- 
sembly or as a legislative body? 


• NOLLEDO. In relation to that, there is a pr 
se amendment that the Committee will present : 
ue ime. o, if the Commissioner will not mind, I w: 
reserve my answer to that question. 


FR. BERNAS. Can the 
answer? 


sponsor give us a hint as to his 


MR. BENNAGEN. Since the question of autonomy is 
a matter of exchanging importance to the occupants of 
the autonomous region, we would suggest that all 
sectors of that autonomous region be involved, not only 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I express my 
personal opinion in this respect. 

I think to require Congress to act as a constituent 
body before enacting an organic act would be to raise an 
autonomous region to the same level as the sovereign 
people of the whole country. And I think the powers of 
Congress should be quite sufficient in enacting a law, 
even if it is now exalted to the level of an organic act 
for the purpose of providing a basic law for an auto- 
nomous region without having to transform itself into a 
constituent assembly. We are dealing still with one 
subordinate subdivision of the State even if it is now 
. vested with certain autonomous powers on which its 
own legislature can pass laws. 

FR. BERNAS. So, the questions I have raised so far 
with respect to this organic act are; What segment of 
the population will participate in the plebiscite? In what 
capacity would the legislature be acting when it passes 
this? Will it be as a constituent assembly or merely a 
legislative body? What is the nature, therefore, of this 
organic act in relation to ordinary statutes and the 
Constitution? Finally, if we are going to amend this 
organic act, what process will be followed? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I answer that, please, in the 
light of what is now appearing in our report. 

First, only the people who are residing in the units 
y' composing the region should be allowed to participate 
in the plebiscite. Second, the organic act has the charac- 
ter of a charter passed by Congress, not as a constituent 
assembly, but as an ordinary legislature and, therefore, 
the organic act will still be subject to amendments in the 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


183 


ordinary legislative process as now constituted, unless 
the Gentleman has another purpose. 

FR. BERNAS. But with plebiscite again. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Those who will participate in the 
plebiscite are those who are directly affected, the in- 
habitants of the units constitutive of the region. 

FR. BERNAS. So, what I gather from that is that as 
far as the creation of the autonomous region is con- 
cerned, the Committee is really departing from the 
principle established in the Negros del Norte case. 


citizens of the Philippines, they continue to be treated as 
second class citizens. 

In spite of the Bangsa Moro’s history of struggle against 
exploitation by the Christian majority, they still have con- 
fidence in the new government under President Aquino, in 
whom they repose their high hopes for justice and recogni- 
tion of their legitimate status and rights. This positive out- 
look springs from the knowledge that even the late Ninoy 
Aquino had openly stood in support of the Bangsa Moro 
autonomy. It is their hope that President Corazon Aquino 
shall also stand by her late husband’s conviction and 
commitment to the cause of the Bangsa Moro. 

Thank you. 


MR. OPLE. To that extent. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Truly to that extent. 


MR. RAMA. I ask. Madam President, that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized. 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam PresideijL-'^ 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Uka be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President and members of the 
Committee, permit me to read a portion of a paper sent 
to me on the subject of the Bangsa Moro autonomy, and 
I quote: 

Autonomy is an expression of the Bangsa Moro’s convic- 
tion of its being a viable alternative to separation, and 
reposes their hope in the new Charter now being drafted as 
one which shall grant recognition to their historical status, 
inherent rights, and aspirations. 

The fundamental premises urging a constitutional grant 
of autonomy to the Bangsa Moro are; The Bangsa Moro is a 
historically and culturally distinct and separate nation from 
the Christian majority and deserves this status under the uni- 
versal principle of self-determination; and Islam is the 
religion and way of life of the Bangsa Moro which requires 
a separate political and administrative framework from the 
Western concept and principle of separation of church and 
state. The latter is similarly important because the Bangsa 
Moro embraces Islam as the central theme, not only of his 
religious practices, but all other aspects of life including the 
government and the economy. Hence, a political fusion 
with the Christian majority is workable only under a frame- 
work of political autonomy which shall allow tlie full 
flowering of the genius of the Bangsa Moro in the context 
of his Islamic culture. 

Why does the Bangsa Moro insist on autonomy? Because 
it is theirs by legal and historical right. Before the coming 
of the Spaniards in 1521, they were already a sovereign and 
independent nation. However, they were forced into joining 
the Philippine Republic after they were promised justice, 
equality and fairness. But after more than 51 years as 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I would 
like to differ from Commissioner Bemas’ view that 
there is a deviation from the doctrine in the Negros 
del Norte case when it comes to the creation of an 
autonomy. I think there is no deviation because we 
are only creating another form of local government 
and there is no portion of the territory of the nation 
that is being divided or separated. Therefore, only the 
people affected will vote. While in the Negros del 
Norte case, a new province is being carved out of an 
existing province, which means a diminution of that 
existing province and for which reason the whole 
province will vote. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to support that theory, 
but it seems that the difference is very minimal. And I 
think Commissioner Bemas has a point there. However, 
as fsr as I am concerned, I would like to support the 
Gentleman s theory because it really supports our 
report. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. In answer to the questions 
of Commissioner Trenas where he stated that the old 
provision in the 1973 Constitution, which makes 
highly urbanized cities independent of the province 
is already being repealed because it is his intention 
again to make highly urbanized cities part of the 
province. 


highly urbanized cities are citip? • • 

1 +;^., wies with a minimun 

population of 150,000, as certified by the Nationa 

Census and Statistics Office and with the latest annua 

income of at least P30 milhon f u 

. f T'- uiiiiion, as certified by th( 

Minister of Finance; whereas the other city is knoln a 
he coniponent city which does not have that qualifica 

nnn has a population of less thai 

50,000 and Its annual earning is less than P30 million. 

Gentleman to know that these highl) 
urbanized cities are better off as independent citie; 


184 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


rather than being made part of the province. They are 
independent; they earn a lot; they even earn more than 
the province; and, moreover, they do not contribute 
anything to the province. For this reason, would the 
Gentleman like to reassess or rethink his stand on the 
matter? I think the present setup where highly urban- 
ized cities are separate from the province should be 
maintained. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the question of Com- 
missioner Trenas is predicated on the principle of 
whether or not the population of the highly urbanized 
cities can participate in the election of officials of the 
province. In all other cases, the provisions cited by the 
Gentleman; namely, Section 166 of the Local Govern- 
ment Code, which is Batas Pambansa Big. 337, may still 
stand. I know as a fact that there is a future amendment 
to be presented possibly by Commissioner Napoleon 
Rama where inhabitants of highly urbanized cities 
should be allowed to vote for elective provincial offi- 
cials because there was a claim that this was done by 
Mr. Marcos in order that the highly urbanized cities 
composed mostly of intellectuals who are fighting him 
should not participate in the election of provincial 
officials because of the intent to control elective 
provincial officials. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, under the Gentleman’s 

eory, we will revert to a situation where the Cities of 
rasay and Caloocan and, I think, even Quezon City will 

^e o vote for the Governor of Rizal. Is that the 
mtention? 


NOLLEDO. I think Commissioner Rama would 
like to comment on that. 

REYES. Commissioner Rama’s situa- 
tion IS different because that is Cebu City. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, I would like to give my opinion 
after him. 


MR. RAMA. I would like to explain why I filed t 
resolution. Traditionally, since time immemorial, C( 
. voting for its provincial officials. It r 

e ditterent here in Manila because for a long time 
greater Manila area was not voting for governorship. 

JUS w^t to have that practice because there 
gerrymandenng in the case of Cebu. 


Rama wiS^h^^^ t- answer of Commissic 

be^ a Manila area 

length of ttae. for a consider; 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, in Section 1 , 
the^ Gentleman stated that the different local units and 
political subdivisions are provinces, cities, municipals 
ties, barrios and autonomous regions. Does this mean 


that Congress cannot create another form of political 
subdivision, for example, a metro government, like the 
present Metro Manila government? Does the report of 
the Gentleman’s Committee mean that we are doing 
away with the Metro Manila government and that we are 
prohibiting future Congress from creating such a form 
of local government unit forever? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to answer the last 
question because it is more specific. That was the intent 
of the Committee. Because of overlapping of functions, 
we feel that highly urbanized cities can stand alone 
wihout the need of forming a supergovernment, like the 
Metro Manila Commission. Besides, we provided in 
Section 5 of Committee Report No. 21 that local 
government units may group themselves, consolidate or 
coordinate their efforts, services and resources for pur- 
poses commonly beneficial to them. That, to my mind, 
is enough basis to form a coordinating agency, for 
example, to coordinate the basic services and efforts of 
areas that are covered within the metropolitan area of 
Manila. In other words, we are doing away with the 
metropolitan governments even if the draft of the 
University of the Philippines recommended such kind of 
government. We did not adopt the provisions on metro- 
politan government, and this is in accord with the 
suggestion of the League of Governors and City Mayors. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, upon the approval of ratifi- 
cation of this new Constitution, assuming that the 
committee report will be adopted, the Metro Manila 
Commission and the Metro Manila government shall be 
deemed abolished. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily because there is a 
provision in the Transitory Provisions that existing laws 
may still continue until changed or repealed by the 
forthcoming Congress. 

But to my mind — I am speaking individually, not on 
behalf of the Committee — P.D. No. 824 that created 
the Metro Manila government was really contrary to the 
Constitution, as I stated in my sponsorship speech. But 
because the Supreme Court of the Philippines, in the 
case of Lopez vs. COMELEC and Lopez vs. Metro 
Manila Commission ruled that P.D. No. 824 is constitu- 
tional in view of the 1984 Amendment to the Constitu- 
tion where the National Capital Region was considered 
as a separate region by itself. In fact, I think the 
Supreme Court found difficulty in justifying the consti- 
tutionality of P.D. No. 824. 

In view of that ruling and our belief adhering to the 
rule of law that the Supreme Court, whether right or 
wrong, is still correct, then P.D. No. 824 still exists until 
repealed by the Congress of the Philippines. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for a suspen- 
sion of the session for a few minutes. 


MONDAY, AUGUST n, 1986 


185 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:16 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the next inter- 
pellator is Commissioner Rodrigo. May he be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I have a few 
questions for clarification. Section 16 provides that the 
legislature within a limited period of time shall pass 
organic acts for the autonomous regions of Mindanao 
and Cordillera. My question is: Are these organic acts 
uniform for the two regions or may the legislature pass 
one organic act for the Cordillera and a different organic 
act for Mindanao? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, Section 16 says that 
the legislature will pass the organic acts for the auto- 
nomous regions of Mindanao and the Cordilleras; by 
that, I suppose that there will be separate organic acts. 

MR. RODRIGO. Separate? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, for the two autonomous regions. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, it is possible for the legislature 
to give more autonomy to the Cordillera than to Min- 
danao and vice-versa. 

MR. OPLE. Within the framework of the constitu- 
tional provisions. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. This section mentions autonomous 
region of Mindanao. Does that refer to the whole of 
Mindanao? 

MR. OPLE. It refers to the so-called Muslim Minda- 
nao in the context of the' Moro homeland mentioned in 
the Tripoli Agreement; but in saying this, I do not want 
it understood that we are limiting the power of Congress 
to determine the autonomous areas. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Tripoli Agreement, if I remem- 
ber right, comprises not only Mindanao but Palawan 
and Sulu, am I right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. The original Moro 
homeland consists of 13 provinces which, however, in 


the late 1970s had been reduced to about 10 with 
Davao, Cotabato and Palawan being taken out of the 
original area. 

MR. RODRIGO. But under Section 1 6 the legislature 
has the power to determine which areas wiU comprise 
this region. It might specify only a few provinces in the 
Island of Mindanao plus a few cities, is that right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. By these provi- 
sions, we do not want to limit the power of Congress 
in determining the areas of the autonomous regions. 

MR. RODRIGO. After enacting the organic acts for 
Mindanao and the Cordillera, the legislature may then 
enact other organic acts for different regions in the 
Philippines. I heard Commissioner NoUedo mention a 
possible autonomous region in Ilocos and Bicol. 

My question is: Will the organic act for Ilocos and 
Bicol be uniform? Or can they again be different from 
each other? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I may have a slight 
disagreement with my colleagues in the Committee 
concerning the entitlement of the Ilocos and Bicol 
regions to the same terms of regional autonomy which 
are proposed to be conferred upon Muslim Mindanao 
and the Cordillera on the basis that the Ilocos, the Bicol, 
the Tagalog provinces, the Visayan provinces and some 
Mindanao provinces constitute the so-called “dominant 
groups” in the Philippine social and territorial structure 
and, therefore, autonomy given to one region among 
these “dominant groups,” the so-called traditional 
Christian Filipino groups, should be accessible to every 
other such region. The reason why Muslim Mindanao 
and the Cordillera are claiming autonomy is that 
they have a certain uniqueness and what they con- 
sider an inferior relationship with the dominant 
groups in society which are the Christian lowland 
groups, including the Tagalogs, the Ilocanos, the 
Visayans, the Pangasinenses, the Pampanguenos and 
those in the Christian provinces in Mindanao. And so, 
I think the specific context for the quanta of autonomy 
for these dominant groups should be uniform. Commit- 
tee Report No. 21 refers principally to the nonautono- 
mous regions which constitute the entire infrastructure 
of our local governments. 

MR. RODRIGO. But may regions populated by 
Filipinos whom the Gentleman calls 'dominant groups*’ 
be also converted into autonomous regions? 

MR. OPLE. According to Chairman Nolledo, they 
may invoke the rights of autonomy. 

MR. RODRIGO. Since Commissioner Nolledo is the 
Chairman, is this then the official stand of the Commit- 
tee? 


186 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


MR. OPLE. I think the Committee would like to play 
it safe. If Chairman Nolledo agrees, we will say that in 
the case of the dominant groups — meaning, most of the 
nation, except for the historically disadvantaged groups 
with their own unique cultures and traditions — what 
should apply is Committee Report No. 2 1 . 

MR. RODRIGO. So, they may not be converted into 
autonomous regions? 

MR. OPLE. Not in the immediate future, not within 
the immediate provisions of this Constitution, unless 
there is a constitutional amendment later that would 
make available certain federal features or powers of 
government to all the regions other than the auto- 
nomous regions. 


from one another? May the organic act for Ilocos grant 
more autonomy to Docos than to Bicol and vice-versa? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In certain areas, they may be 
uniform. For example, the setting up of a regional legis- 
lature and an executive department, but taking into 
account the particular characteristics of the region 
because there may be some differences. 

We will notice the analogy that several banks, for 
example, \vere granted congressional charters like the 
charters of the PNB and the DBP. Most of the provi- 
sions are uniform, but there are certain provisions where 
uniformity could not possibly be attained. 

MR. RODRIGO. Autonomous regions are, I think, 
very different from banks. 


MR. RODRIGO. We have on record the statement of 
Chairman Nolledo that under this provision, if the 
Ilocos region and the Bicol region want to have auto- 
nomy, they may do so. 

MR. OPLE. I thmk he said this in the context of a 
statement of aspirations which later on may follow. 

MR RODRIGO. This is very important so I want a 
definite answer. 

Under these constitutional provisions, if they are 
there be autonomous regions outside 
of Mindanao and the Cordillera? This is very important. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President, under 
action 9. That is why it will be noticed that in the 
comment of Commissioner Rama, he was recommend- 
mg that ethnic considerations be not the sole considera- 
lon m the formation of autonomous regions. That is 
w y we mcluded economic and communal factors, 

et cetera, instead of concentrating on ethnic character- 
istics. 


MR. RODRIGO. So, this is not a mere declaration of 
aspiration. This is actually authorized by this proposed 
provision. 


MR. NOLLEDO. No, I am just giving an example, by 
analogy, that when Congress grants several charters, we 
cannot bind Congress by saying that the rule of uni- 
formity should be followed in all cases. 

MR. RODRIGO. Let me then pursue this point. May 
Samar and Leyte later on also be declared autonomous 
regions, aside from Ilocos and Bicol? And after that 
may Southern Tagalog be declared an autonomous 
region also? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I did not get the question. 

MR. RODRIGO. The Gentleman said that under this 
provision, Ilocos can be declared an autonomous re^on 
with its organic act enacted by the legislature; the Bicol 
region can be an autonomous region, with its organic act 
enacted by the legislature. So, I want to pursue this 
further. 

Let us say that Samar and Leyte want to be an auto- 
nomous region. Is it within the power of the legislature 
to declare them an autonomous region and enact its 
organic act? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is up to the legislature because 
the question is somewhat vague in the latter part. 


MR. NOLLEDO. It can be interpreted as aspirations 
ecause later on certain regions can aspire for an appro- 

rpoir>n<f ^ declare themselves autonomous 

regions. 

to ^onv^r?^Wn^ legislature then, if it wants 

will enact the re ^ Bicol into autonomous regions. 
Will enact the requisite organic act*^ 


MR. RODRIGO. I will come back to my question. 
Do the two organic acts, one for Ilocos and the other 
for Bicol, have to be uniform or may they be different 


MR. RODRIGO. Is it within the power? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is talking of the 
organic act and also whether or not Congress can declare 
Samar and Layte, whose people are all Warays, an auto- 
nomous region. Should Congress so decide, why not? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, the two are inseparable, based 
on the proposed provisions that an autonomous region 
is created by enacting an organic act for that purpose. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And subject to the holding of the 
plebiscite. 

MR. RODRIGO. All right. How about Central 
Luzon? May we convert it into an autonomous region? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


187 


MR. NOLLEDO. Why not? 

MR. RODRIGO. Southern Tagalog? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Why not? 

MR. RODRIGO. Central Visayas . . . and each of 
these will have its own different organic act. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. If one will read the Constitu- 
tions of Switzerland, Spain and other countries — I 
mentioned these some few hours ago — one will notice 
that these regions were autonomous and granted 
separate legislatures and executive departments. 

MR. RODRIGO. Are they granted different auto- 
nomous powers, such that some cantons have more 
autonomous powers than other cantons? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Generally, they have the same 
powers. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is it. Why should we not also 
make it uniform in the Philippines, if we are going to 
have a semifederal system of government? Why should 
we favor one region, giving it more autonomy than 
another region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why we are giving much 
leeway to Congress to determine in which provisions 
there must be uniformity, taking into account certain 
factors, like economic factors, ethnic characteristics and 
other idiosyncrasies of people living in different regions. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, there might come a time when 
half of the Philippines is composed of autonomous 
regions and the other half not autonomous. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is possible, Madam President, and 
I dream for complete autonomy to different regions in 
the country. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, we will have a country which is 
half semifederal and half-unitary, is that it? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because of the provision that before 
an autonomous region may exercise its powers there 
should be a charter to be enacted by the Congress, it is 
up for Congress to create such an alleged anomalous 
situation. If Congress so decides that only one-half of 
the country should be regionalized in the meantime, 
then I think there is no constitutional inhibition to do 
so. We should consider the fact that there is a need for a 
plebiscite and there is also a need for a charter or an 
organic act to be passed by Congress. Those factors 
indicate that possibility. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, half semifederal and half- 
unitary, depending on Congress. 


MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, I think the tendency 
on the part of the other regions, if other autonomous 
regions have succeeded in their autonomy, would be to 
apply for their respective charters. 

MR. RODRIGO. If we want to make our country 
semifederal, why not make it obligatory for the whole 
country to be divided into autonomous regions so that 
we will have uniformity? In that way, there will be no 
favoritism and we will not be fragmented. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Constitutional Commission so 
decides, I will be the happiest man on earth. (Laughter) 

MR. RODRIGO. I am asking the Gentleman those 
questions to underscore the defects in their proposal. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I take this 
opportunity to mention some things that are happening 
in the unitaiy' system. Please permit me, if the Gentle- 
man does not mind. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am through with my questions 
because there are others who want to interpellate. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In the meantime, as a continuing 
answer to the Gentleman’s questions . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. I will listen. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I talked to several governors and 
city mayors. They told me, “Mr. Nolledo, you know, 
when we go to the national government, we cannot 
find the Minister of Local Governments. Whether he is 
hiding or not, we do not know. We go to Malacanang; 
we do not find the President. The President is away or 
they talk to us and we tell them our local problems. 
They listen to us with sympathy but it seems that there 
are no solutions to our problems. We invoke certain 
implementing statutes; they tell us to wait. So, what 
happens is that we go back to our provinces and cities 
completely disgruntled and we entertain ill-feelings 
against the national government. We become helpless; 
we do not know what to do.” 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to state that I am in 
favor of local autonomy. But if we will have local 
autonomy, let it be uniform all over the Philippines. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Let me just recall what transpired 
during the first meeting of the Committee on Local 
Governments, when the idea of autonomous region was 
first mentioned. 


188 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


I remember General de Castro reacting in the same 
manner that many of us are now reacting. And he said 
something Uke: What will prevent the other regions 
from asking for autonomy? I think my immediate 
answer was something like this: “Just because we have 
a law on divorce does not mean that everyone will seek 
divorce. It depends on whether or not the relationship 
will be so maintained, so that it is mutually beneficial.” 
And we are saying that the grant of regional autonomy 
here corrects an extremely uneven development across 
regions. We feel that the creation of regional autonomy 
will create a sufficient tension between regions, on one 
hand, and central government, on the other. That some 
kind of evening of the development process will take 
place. 

We are saying that the regional autonomy structure 
will facilitate that catching up with the development 
process in the more developed regions, because the 
regional autonomy structure will be more responsive to 
the particularities of the region, both culturally and 
geographically, which is to say ecologically. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

Would the Committee clarify certain matters? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. DAVIDE. When the Committee speaks of auto- 
nomous region, could a region be any of the 13 regions 
now? Could it also be the traditional regions — Luzon, 
Visayas and Mindanao? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is possible. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. It could also be possible that a region 
which may be constituted under this is only a portion of 
any of the 1 3 regions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is possible. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since it could be possible that a region 
which was contemplated here may be a portion of any 
ot the existing region, it could only be a province. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a possibility. 

MR. DAVIDE. In short, Cebu can apply as an auto- 
nomous region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman will notice that the 
provisions state: “The legislature shall create auto- 
nomous regions consisting of provinces and cities with 
common historical . . .” It will be noticed also that in 


the statutory construction, the plural includes the 
singular and/or vice-versa. So I would consider that 
there is a possibility. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the possibility. There is also a 
rule in statutory construction that the plural can include 
the singular. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I agree. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, under this proposal, Negros can 
also apply as a distinct autonomous region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Any province can apply, as a matter 
of fact. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In fact, I heard from many eco- 
nomists that they would like each province to be 
considered an autonomous region. In our Committee, 
we received several letters to that effect. 

MR. DAVIDE. As a matter of fact, any of the islands 
belonging to a subprovince in Leyte, like the island of 
Maripeti, which is a part of the subprovince of Biliran, 
can also apply as an autonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I answer that, it will be 
noticed that in ' Switzerland we also have the cantons 
which are very small, and within the canton there is eco- 
nomic progress. We also have the so-called semi-canton 
in answer to the question of Commissioner Rodrigo. So, 
there are so many ramifications involved in an auto- 
nomous government. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, under the proposal 
semiautonomous regions may be created. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That seems to be discretionary with 
Congress. 

MR. DAVIDE. But Congress is not prohibited. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. 

MR. DAVIDE. It is not. In other words, Congress can 
expand the territorial and political subdivisions as pro- 
vided for in the Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Subject to the plebiscite as required 
by the provisions of Section 3 of Committee Report 
No. 21. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, is it the position of the Gentleman 
that an ordinary law can be enacted by Congress, esta- 
blishing other forms of political and territorial subdi- 
visions like a semiautonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a possibility. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


189 


MR. DAVIDE. By ordinary legislations? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, by ordinary legislation and in 
answer to the question of Commissioner Bemas, a 
charter is an ordinary legislation by Congress. 

MR. DAVIDE. Correct. Is it the position of the Com- 
mittee that an ordinary legislation can estabhsh a new 
political unit not included in the definition of political 
and territorial subdivisions in a Constitution? 

MR. NOLLEDO. When we enumerated the provinces, 
cities, municipalities, barrios and autonomous regions 
as the territorial and political subdivisions of the Repub- 
lic of the Philippines, we took into account the present 
existing local government units and the formation of 
future autonomous regions. The provisions do not 
prevent Congress in creating other political units. 

MR. DAVIDE. What is added are only the words 
“autonomous region.” But I doubt very much if this 
possibility can be carried out by ordinary legislation 
without amending the Constitution. 

Anyway, I will go to another point. Under the 
proposal, there are many organic acts as there are 
regions aspiring for autonomy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is the clear implication 
of Section 9. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the concept of the 
Committee by an organic act is not a general organic 
act applicable to all who might apply to become an 
autonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because of the possibility of 
nonuniformity as already explained in answer to the 
questions of Commissioner Rodrigo. Otherwise, we 
would have adopted the draft of the University of the 
Philippines recommending a general enabling act. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, because of possible 
nonuniformity, it is also possible that each of these 
organic acts may differ from the other? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but not substantially because, 
as I said, there are provisions that must necessarily be 
uniform. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since each of these organic acts may 
differ from the other, each may also not comply strictly 
with the requirements provided for in the proposed 
section on autonomous regions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What requirements is the Gentleman 
referring to? 

MR. DAVIDE. We have certain rights, prerogatives 
and restrictions. These are the standards for the esta- 
blishment of an autonomous region. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman must be referring to 
Section 1 2 which provides: “Within its territorial juris- 
diction, the autonomous region shall have authority 
over the following.” In that case, generally, the charter 
or the organic act to be granted should substantially 
set forth provisions covering these instances set forth in 
Section 12. 

MR. DAVIDE. Is it not just possible that the Consti- 
tution mandates Congress to enact a general regional 
autonomy code under which regions wanting to become 
autonomous would merely apply? Like in the Local 
Government Code now, if a municipality wants to 
become a highly urbanized city, it can apply after 
meeting the requirements? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, I think in the realm of 
possibility, that can be done in terms of the general 
principles subject, of course, to some kind of provi- 
sion that there would be variations to respond to the 
particularities of the ecology and culture of the area. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under this particular proposal, when 
will an autonomous region begin to have a distinct 
juridical personality? 

MR. NOLLEDO. To my mind, juridical personality 
will begin when all the conditions required by the 
Constitution are complied with; namely, when there is 
an organic act and when majority of the voters in the 
region have opted to operate under the autonomous 
government. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since this is an organic act, it may 
also be subject to the principles of initiative and refer- 
endum as provided for in the Article on the Legislative 
and, therefore, the law may be rejected or disapproved 
through a referendum all over the country. A refer- 
endum and initiative operate all over the country 
because we require a certain percentage of the total 
number of votets at any given time from all over the 
country. So, an organic act creating an autonomous 
region for a certain particular area may be rejected by 
the votes of all the people of the Philippines by way of a 
referendum. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Gentleman for asking 
that question because, as far as I am concerned, then 
should be an amendment, if necessary, to make th 
creation of an autonomous region an exception to tha 
rule. We did not foresee that situation. We are grateful 
to the Gentleman for calling our attention to it. 

MR. DAVIDE. And similarly it can be amended also 
through initiative by a vote of a certain percentage of 
the qualified electors all over the Philippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That would be the inevitable con- 
clusion, if we consider the charter or the organic act 
as mere legislation. 


190 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11,1 986 


MR. DAVIDE. But is it really an ordinary legislation? 
MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. It is not really a part or a supplement 
of the Constitution which can be repealed or superseded 
by an amendment. But even granting that it is a part of 
the Constitution, rather it is supplementary and could 
only be repealed or modified by an amendment, the 
initiative under the Article on Amendments can also 
repeal the same. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. May a portion or a component unit 
of an autonomous region secede from the mother unit? 
For instance, we have an autonomous region in Central 
Visayas, can Cebu secede from the autonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 3 can apply to it. Section 3 
of Committee Report No. 21 provides: 

No autonomous region, province, city, municipality, or 
banio may be created, divided, merged, abolished, or its 
boundary substantially altered, except in accordance with 
criteria established by law. 

It seems to me it is subject to the plebiscite as I 
already mentioned and that the questions should fall 
under this section. 


MR. DAVIDE. Under that particular section? 

a ^ complying with the criteria 

s a ished by law, now the Lx)cal Government Code, 
and subject to the holding of the plebiscite. 


MR. DAVIDE. So, that particular rule will be made 
apphcable to the autonomous regions. 


plebiscite that establishes the commencement of the 
juridical personality of an autonomous region — suppose 
in a particular area, which is supposed to be included 
in the autonomous region, the people rejected the 
proposal of the autonomy, can that particular area now 
be compelled to join the autonomous region? A specific 
example is Central Visayas. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I know that because we considered 
that possibility. It seems to me that presents a complica- 
tion, but as far as we are concerned, we believe that we 
decide on whether or not the plebiscite is in favor of the 
creation of an autonomous region by taking into 
account the entire voting within the region. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but that would be imposing the 
will of others on the will of the people in a particular 
component unit. In this specific example, there is a 
move to establish an autonomous region in Central 
Visayas, composed merely of four provinces — Siquijor, 
Negros Oriental, Bohol and Cebu. But almost one-half 
of the total voting population of the entire regiori 
comes from Cebu and Cebu rejects the proposal or it 
does not want to join. Would the Gentleman now con- 
sider Cebu, bound by the entire votes of the other 
provinces, and compel Cebu to become a member of 
that autonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good question. 
Madam President, but I will tell the Gentleman my own 
opinion without binding the Committee. Because of the 
democratic process of being bound by the majority, 
then Cebu must comply. However, Congress itself may 
lay down certain conditions that if any province or any 
unit so decides not to join the autonomous region, that 
decision should be respected. It is possible that Congress 
may lay down the condition in the organic act. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

So, secession by a component unit is 

still possible. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Of the autonomous regions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Subject to the 
stated therein. 


conditions already 


MR. DAVIDE. But there 


is no specific proposal now 


» — oir 

to autonomous regions? 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you for that information 
because at the appropriate time, there is a need for an 
amendment in that respect. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. We will go to the regular local govern- 
mental units. Upon the effectivity of this Constitution, 
the existing Local Government Code shall govern the 
local government units because, under the proposal, 
there is no mandate to Congress to enact a local 
government code. So, necessarily, the existing Local 
Government Code shall continue to govern all these 
local government units, except the autonomous 
region. 


MR. NOLLEDO. There is none. 

MR. DAVIDE Anyway, since there is a piebiscite to 
be conducted before an autonomous region can come 
into being - meanmg to say, it is the approval in the 


MR. NOLLEDO. Except if inconsistent with the 
provisions of the Constitution that we may approve. 

MR. DAVIDE. When the Gentleman says “except 
when inconsistent,” would it mean, therefore, that there 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


191 


is a need to amend the Local Government Code to a 
certain extent? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think it is not necessary. Any 
provision of the Local Government Code that is in- 
consistent with the newly approved or ratified Consti- 
tution should necessarily be revoked. 

MR. DAVIDE. What about the initiative as presently 
provided for in the Local Government Code? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I ask the Gentleman in return, is 
that inconsistent with the provisions on initiative of the 
legislative department? 

MR. DAVIDE. I am asking the Committee about this. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because if there is no inconsistency, 
then the initiative may continue. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, we will leave it to the Supreme 
Court to determine? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Should there be a controversy. 

MR. DAVIDE. What about on referendum? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The same answer holds true. Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Recall? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We did not have any provision on 
recall because in the 1973 Constitution that provision 
was authorized to be included in the Local Government 
Code. But I understand that there are some Com- 
missioners who would like to present amendments 
substantially the same as the provision of the 1973 
Constitution, mandating Congress to enact a new local 
government code. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Otherwise, the provision on recall 
may no longer be available even if it is already provided 
for in the Local Government Code. 

MR- NOLLEDO. Yes, based on our report but we are 
expecting an amendment to reinstate the principle of 
recall. 

MR. DAVIDE. Another point is this Metropolitan 
Manila Commission of the metropolitan government. I 
understand that the position of the Committee is that 
the creation ot this government is unconslitutional. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is my personal opinion. I 
cannot bind the Committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. What is the stand of the Committee so 
we could be guided accordmgly in the presentation of 
amendments or in voting on this particular proposal? 


MR. NOLLEDO. As far as the members of the Com- 
mittee are concerned, it is not necessary to make a stand 
because we did not adopt the provisions on metropo- 
litan government anyway. 

MR. DAVIDE. By not adopting a provision on 
metropolitan government, it would necessarily follow 
that once approved, this proposal would, in effect, put 
an end or abolish the existing metropohtan government? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that would be the necessary 
effect. 

MR. DAVIDE. The necessary further effect would be 
that municipalities which were included under the 
Metropolitan Manila Commission would then be con- 
sidered returned to their mother units? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is also my personal opinion. 
But the Commissioner knows that the mayors of Metro 
Manila came to see both of us and they are in favor of 
maintaining the geopolitical unit, which opinion I share 
with. Their existence can still be justified by Section 5 
of our committee report which provides that local 
government units may group themselves, consolidate or 
coordinate their efforts, services and resources for pur- 
poses commonly beneficial to them. And I would like 
the Constitutional Commission to know that the mayors 
of Metropolitan Manila are in favor of dismantling the 
Metro Manila Commission but that they would like to 
set up a coordinating agency in lieu of the Metro Manila 
Commission under this Section 5 of Committee Report 
No. 21. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under that particular section that the 
Commissioner has cited, allowing local governmental 
units to group together in pursuit of common objectives 
for their mutual benefit, would it require a plebiscite? 
Or is it only the act of the executives of these local 
government units? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good question. I do 
not think it requires a plebiscite. 

MR. DAVIDE. In effect there is a confederacy but a 
ygj-y loose confederacy? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Commissioner. 

MR. DAVIDE. But in such a particular case the lives 
or the future of the people will be affected. Why do we 
not require a plebiscite? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We could not require a plebiscite 
because the powers of the coordinating agency involved 
here are very limited. They refer only to essential 
services like garbage, cleaning of streets, et cetera. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President, and I 
also thank the sponsor. 


192 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11,1 986 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I just would 
ike to direct some questions to the Committee. First of 
ill, I would like to say that I am sympathetic to the idea 
of regional autonomy particularly for the Muslims and 
he Cordillera regions. I would like to raise the questions 
isked by the UP Local Government Center in relation to 
local autonomy in general. For the information of the 
body, the Local Government Center of the UP has con- 
ducted research and training courses for local govern- 
ment officials for several decades throughout the 
country and has been in close touch with the local 
governments at all levels. The staff of this Center 
studied very carefully the committee report on local 
governments and the first question that they asked had 
to do with local autonomy in general, and I quote: 

To ensure that local autonomy would help rather than 
hinder the promotion of democracy and efficiency at the 
local, as well as national levels, the State should undertake 
political and administrative reforms in local governments 
to accompany the promotion of autonomy; otherwise, 
t e grant of substantial local autonomy would be a disaster 
at both levels since it would exacerbate the problems of 
oc oligarchy, corruption and incompetence while making 
e national policy more vulnerable to centrifugal forces. 

There should be separate constitutional provisions 
against t e maintenance and operation of local political 
ynasties. For example, an absolute ceiling on reelection 
0 e same individuals and rules against close relatives 
teaming up or alternating in political positions at different 
eve s o government. There should also be constitutional 
an statutory provisions for more effective community con- 
0 to insure that their local governments are both re- 
sponsive and responsible in the broader segments of the 
community, for example, popular initiatives in local 
legislation and recall of errant officials. 

The national government should complement these 
measures by establishing clear and coordinated policies 
an standards by guiding and gauging local government 


would like to know is whether 
nthTr P^o^^ding for these areas of concern in 

Elections that^ Would contemplate on adding i 
^ of these areas of appreli 


MR. NOLLEDO. We aeree u/uu + 1 , u ..u 

Commissioner has just ^^^/^servations the 

there are two safeguardTrSom le 7 "h k 

the Constitutiona, t/ec^ f th"e 

policy on recall, we wUl welcome any proposal to 
amend our committee report. I think the observations 
are well-taken. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. This is just an example. There are 
many provisions now embodied in the report of the 
Committee on Accountability of Public Officers de- 
signed to eradicate or eliminate graft and corruption in 
all levels of government. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you. 

I have just one more question. Section 9 starts with 
the sentence “The legislature shall create autonomous 
regions . . . et cetera.” Commissioner Nolledo always 
mentions the Constitution of Spain. If we will notice in 
Chapter 3, Article 143 entitled: “Concerning the Auto- 
nomous Communities,” the auxiliary verb used is 
“may.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. In what section is that? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I am talking about Section 9. 
Does the Commissioner mean the Spanish Constitution 
or his own provision? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have here Sections 135 upwards of 
the Spanish Constitution on autonomous communities. 
What article is the Commissioner referring to? 

MR. VILLACORTA. I am referring to Article 143. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Article 143 in Chapter 3, and it 
entitled: “Concerning the Autonomous Communities. 

MR. VILLACORTA. That is right. 

The Committee is giving the initiative to the legisla- 
ture, but I notice that in the Spanish Constitution, the 
initiative is given to the communities themselves thereby 
preventing a situation where to suit the politica 
interests of legislators, artificial autonomous regions 
may be set up. 

Paragraph 1 of Article 143 states: 

In the exercise of the right of autonomy recognized in 
Article II of the Constitution, bordering provinces with 
common historical, cultural and economic characteristics, 
the island territories and the provinces with a historical, 
regional entity may accede to self-government and consti- 
tute themselves into autonomous communities in ac- 
cordance with the provisions of that title and the respective 
statutes. 

Paragraph 2 states: 

The initiatj^ for the autonomous process belongs to all 
the interested deputations or to the pertinent inter-island 
body, et cetera. 

Moreover, I would like to emphasize that the Spanish 
Constitution does not use “shall” but “may.” There is 
merit in the usage of “may” over “shall,” I think it says 
“The legislature may create” rather than “shall create.” 
This does not make the creation of autonomous regions 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


193 


mandatory inasmuch as there were reservations raised 
by Commissioners Ople, Rodrigo and others about 
regions other than the Cordillera and the MusUm regions 
wanting to be autonomous. The use of this auxiliary 
verb would probably make the intention of the Com- 
mittee more flexibly implemented. It may not be wise 
to mandate the creation of autonomous regions for we 
are either not ready for it or it is simply not suited for 
some regions. Autonomy may be suited to those regions 
wherein the provinces or cities have sufficient local 
government levels. To mandate the creation of another 
intervening layer of local government between the 
province and the national government without necessa- 
rily taking into account the specific or special needs of 
the area may just result in more bureaucracy not to 
mention the waste of resources since the autonomous 
regions will necessarily mean tlie creation of more 
administrative structures. Lastly, the second hne of 
Section 9. . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Commissioner please permit 
me to give my answer to his first question because he is 
already proceeding to another question? 

I suggest that the Commissioner analyze Article 143, 
Chapter 3 of the Constitution of Spain concernmg the 
autonomous communities. The word “may” refers to 
the provinces, bordering provinces, to the island terri- 
tories and to the people applying for autonomy. So the 
word “may” is on the part of the provinces and the 
people. Here in our provision, it is on the part of 
Congress, assuming that there is a corresponding apphca- 
tion to create autonomous regions. The moment there is 
an application to the Congress of the Philippines to 
create autonomous regions, we are mandating the legis- 
lature to so create as long as the conditions required by 
the Constitution are complied with. So, the word 
“may” refers to the people themselves. They may or 
they may not create autonomous communities. So there 
is a great world of difference between Section 9 of our 
Committee Report No. 21 and Article 143 of the 
Spanish Constitution adverted to by the Gentleman. 

MR. VILLACORTA. On the contrary. Article 144, if 
I may proceed, says: 

. The Cortes Generales, by means of an organic law, may 

for reasons of national interest: a) Authorize the establish- 
ment of an autonomous community, et cetera 

Again, the word “may” is used here, not “shall.” Hence, 
there is always the use of the word “may” in order to 
counter any possible danger of all communities at all 
levels demanding that they be considered autonomous. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In relation to that, pardon me if I 
am defending Section 9, while we use the word “shall,” 
in effect, if the autonomous region is not viable as 
stated in answer to the question of Commissioner 
Romulo, Congress may deny the grant of an organic 
act. So there is some discretion left to Congress. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Lastly, line 8 of Section 9 of 
Resolution No. 5 1 1 says: “consisting of provinces and 
cities with common historical, geographic, et cetera.” 
Did the Committee really want to use the word “com- 
mon” or would it had been clearer if the term “dis- 
tinctive” was used? I think any group in the Philip- 
pines can invoke this because we do have so much 
commonality as far as historical, geographic, cultural, 
linguistic, ethnic, communal, economic and other 
characteristics are concerned. What the Commissioner 
is referring to are actually those communal groups or 
communities that have distinctive historical, geographic, 
and other characteristics. 

1 

MR. NOLLEDO. We will consider any amendment to 
that effect. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, first of all, I 
would hke to express my support to the proposed 
amendment. I feel very strongly that we must respond 
to the people who have expressed such aspiration like 
the Bangsa Moro people and the people of the Cor- 
dilleras. While it is true that the details on how this will 
be operational would still be worked out, I suppose that 
the brilliant minds of this Commission would be a great 
help as the Committee crystallizes some of those areas 
which are not anticipated. Such areas may cause 
possible confusion, but basically these are the concerns 
that we hope we should be able to respond to. 

There are some questions I would like to raise and 
one would be on Section 2 in relation to the sectoral 
representation which would be prescribed by law. At 
this point, does not the Commission think that there 
should already be some kind of a guideline by the Com- 
mission on the definition of these broad categories of 
sectors to be represented in legislative bodies of local 
governments? Just for the record, has the Commissioner 
expressed the intendment of the Commission on such 
sectoral representation? 

MR. NOLLEDO. At the time this was formulated, 
the Constitutional Commission has not yet passed even 
on First Reading the provisions on sectoral representa- 
tion, but we will be guided accordingly in the 
determination of what sectoral representation should 
mean. 

We will notice that in the Local Government Code, 
sectoral representation is also provided for, but it seems 
to me that the members representing the sectors are 
appointed by the President. 


194 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. Would the Commissioner consider 
the classification that we had in the Legislative which 
consisted of the peasants, farmers, youth, urban poor, 
women and indigenous communities? 

MR. BENNAGEN. That can serve as a broad guide- 
line, but it may not be valid in certain cases because 
some regions may not be sufficiently differentiated as 
to allow this kind of representation. I think we will be 
guided by the comprehensive investigation of the area 
with respect to existing sectors. 


ing. So the provisions on health as we have already 
approved should bind the regional and other loc^ 
governments. 

MS. QUESADA. So, the Commissioner would be 
amenable to qualifying this paragraph 7 of Section 12 
to correspond to what he has placed here which says: 
“Protection of the environment in accordance with 
standards and regulations of the national government”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MS. QUESADA. So, the Commissioner will leave this 
to Congress to prescribe what sectors to be included and 
excluded? 


MR. BENNAGEN. Again, in consideration of the 
existing realities in the regions, there should be some 
systematic consultation with the regions. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Renato V. Sarmiento. 

MS. QUESADA. The second point I want to ask 
concerns the broad exercise of general supervision over 
local governments by the President of the Philippines. 

The Committee mentioned here in Section 12 - and 
is w^ clearly defined for the autonomous region but 
won er if this would also hold true for local govern- 
men s ~ on line 19, paragraph 7 : “Establishment, opera- 
ion and maintenance of regional health, welfare and 
other social services.” Is the intendment of the Commit- 
autonomous region formulate its own 
standards and regulations insofar as health, welfare and 
o er social services are concerned, or would they be 

covered by the general standards of health at the 
national level? 


• NNAGEN. In general, we can say that there 
mus e some general principles which should guide the 
implementation of social services at the various levels. 
At the same time, we are saying that the program should 
SO respond to the characteristics at the local level; for 
instance, the use of traditional medicine or, I think 
more importantly with respect to the capability of the 
oca regions, there must be some form of sharing with 
respect to taxes to enable the local governments or the 
regions to maintain a self-reliant social service program. 


Hptprminin would be in the area c 

aiitrmnmni^ ® Pnoilty or the program thrust in th 

Hnwpvpr / ^ govemmeni 

Howe er, I ani thmkmg of certain standards of tha 

reduce the level of communicable diseases, would th 
local governments be able to respond to tkat nation, 
mandate for improving the level of health? 


MS. QUESADA. Then the third point I would like to 
reinforce is the item expressed by the Committee on 
Section 8 which deals with local taxes and the sharing of 
the proceeds of the exploitation and development of the 
national wealth. I would just like to put on record that 
there was a resolution also submitted to this Member by 
the Province of Negros Oriental in relation to their geo- 
thermal resources in the area of Palimpinon, Municipal- 
ity of Valencia, which they felt did not really improve 
the development of the province, although they were 
hosting such resources. So, this is really to add on to 
what Commissioner Ople already mentioned that a host 
community does not really profit from such wealth 
because it becomes part of the national wealth. I think 
the people of Negros have already expressed this con- 
cern — that local government should really partake of 
the wealth and natural resource that they have in their 
place. 

These are all the questions I want to raise and I hope 
that this body will be able to really iron out these 
matters and to consider not to eliminate the concept of 
autonomy for the people who have so loudly and clearly 
expressed this desire to us. 

Basically, this is the people’s cry for self-determina- 
tion that we must respect, not for those who have not 
yet expressed such will or aspiration but for those who 
have already done so like the people of the Cordilleras 
and the Bangsa Moro people. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to express my thanks to Commissioner. Quesada for her 
sympathetic understanding. Instead of showing indif- 
ference, she set forth a wonderful rule, that we should 
find ways and means by which we can serve our people 
well because we, the members of the Committee, tried 
our very best and il any of the Commissioners disagrees 
with us, then he can suggest to us amendments and we 
will subject ourselves to the will of the majority in this 
Commission. The attitude of Commissioner Quesada is 
overwhelming and I feel grateful to her. I think that that 
should be the attitude of every Commissioner. Com- 
missioner Quesada has manifested broad-mindedness 
and generosity, as well as magnanimity. 


the national mandate MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask that 
set lorth m the Constitution should be considered bind- Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11, 1986 


195 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Before 
Commissioner Suarez interpellates the members of the 
Committee, I think Commissioner Bennagen would like 
to say something. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. I think we have moved away 
a great deal from the rather innocuous provision on 
regional autonomy to the rather threatening concept of 
federalism. I think when we were discussing this in the 
Committee, we had in mind nothing more than the 
concrete elaboration of the 1973 Constitution, Section 
1 1 of the General Provisions thereof, which says: 

The State shall consider the customs, traditions, beliefs, 

and interests of national cultural communities in the for- 
mulation and implementation of State policies. 

While sympathetic in its intent to the very concrete 
concerns of cultural minorities, this provision was 
honored more in the breach. As a matter of fact, 
the commentary on this was put in a bronze plate along 
the Chico River. What we are saying now is that we 
trace historically the evolution of these various in- 
digenous cultural communities. We begin to find out 
that since the Spanish period, these cultural communi- 
ties have been integrated into the national mainstream 
as collectivities in contrast to the effort of the national 
government to integrate Filipinos as individuals. Note 
that since the Americans got in, they carried over the 
distinctions already made by the Spanish government in 
terms of Muslims, non-Christians, Christians, Indios, 
and Fieles. 

This was further elaborated on by the American 
government and expressed administratively in the 
creation of a number of organizations that deal speci- 
fically with these cultural communities as collectivities, 
not as individuals so much so that we have had even 
after political independence organizations such as the 
Bureau of Non-Christian Tribes and others which again 
separated these groups from the larger Christian lowland 
population. In other words, this has been long in 
coming. These groups have retained distinctive charac- 
teristics to warrant the proposed amendment expressed 
earlier by Commissioner Villacorta. 

The popular definitions of cultural minorities all 
encompass the fact that they have been the least 
westernized. This is a commentary on the degree of 
westernization that has taken place amongst the low- 
land Filipino Christians. 

We are saying, therefore, that these groups - the 
people of the Cordillera; the Bangsa Moro; the Lumad 
(which is a generic term for the various cultural com- 
munities in Mindanao, as well as the scattered tribes in 
Mindoro and Sierra Madre); and the Ati or Negritoes of 
the Visayas — have arrived at a self-definition which 
separates them from the overwhelming majority of 
lowland Filipino Christians. It is in recognition of this 
self-assertion of their peoplehood that we have this 
regional autonomy provision apart from those other 
considerations that have already been discussed such as 


efficiency, manageability and all others that could very 
well apply to local government. However, regional 
autonomy specifically responds to these distinctive 
features that have separated them from lowland 
majorities for so long. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
lionorable Commissioner from Pampanga is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I would like to follow the thrust that was presented 
by Commissioner Quesada and confirmed by Com- 
missioner Nolledo that we should be contributive to 
this particular Article. Indeed, it is susceptible to many 
interpretations. I take it that the main thrust of this 
Article is to decentralize the government. 

Is my understanding correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is the Commissioner referring to 
Section 9? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, practically to Section 9. And the 
Commissioner would like to get away from the central- 
ized government initiated by Spain and the United 
States even under the 1935 Constitution? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes; I made the statement here and 
I know many may disagree that the unitary system is 
the cause of all the ills in the country. We will never go 
far if we stick to the unitary system, if we do not keep 
out of the maverick shell of conservatism and obso- 
lescence. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Your Committee has been bombarded with questions 
regarding the possible proliferation of autonomous 
regions in our country. But I notice that under Section 
9, the Committee provided for the common character- 
istics which would serve as basis for our legislature to 
create autonomous regions. Is that not correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but we added the words “eco- 
nomic characteristics.” We did not concentrate on the 
historical, linguistic or ethnic idiosyncracies. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, can we clarify this point? When 
we speak of common historical, geographic, cultural, 
linguistic, ethnic, communal and economic character- 
istics within a proposed autonomous region, do we 
intend all of these characteristics to coexist, to concur 
and to coincide together in a substantial degree? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily, because some of 
them may not concur. 

MR. SUAREZ. I see. So it is possible that an auto- 
nomous region could be created and established even if 
it has only geographic characteristics? 


196 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible but if I were the 
Congress I woiild go far when I grant the organic act. 

MR. SUAREZ. The same is true with respect to the 
other characteristics, like historical, cultural, linguistic, 
ethnic, communal and economic. They could exist 
independently of each other; nonetheless, they could 
serve as the bases for the creation of an autonomous 
region. Is that understanding correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bennagen would like 
to answer. 

• 

MR. BENNAGEN. In the history of autonomous 
regions, there are these substantial characteristics so 
enumerated, and to distinguish autonomy from the 
concept of a federal state, we in the Committee say that 
autonomy refers to regions that really show distinctive- 
ness with respect to culture and ecology. 

MR. SUAI^Z. So, the Commissioner would say that 
in a substantial degree, all of these characteristics must 
be common in that autonomous region? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Under Section 1 5, the Committee is referring to two 
proposed autonomous regions - Mindanao and the 
LordiUera. I heard Commissioner Ople mention the fact 

a e Provinces of Davao, Cotabato and Palawan are 
not mcluded or may not be included within the auto- 
nomous regions of Mindanao. Is my understanding in 
this regard correct? 


. ALONTO. Under the Tripoli Agreement those 
proi^cw that the Commissioner mentioned which were 
onginaUy part of the supposed autonomous regions to 
be established were eliminated by the last regime when 
it st^ed to put up these two autonomous regions in 
Mmdanao; namely. Regions IX and XII. But as far as 
this committee report is concerned, these autonomous 
r^ons existing now in Mindanao are considered points 
o reference only because as we notice. Section 1 6 
states th^ the first legislature under this Constitution 
shall, witlM one year from election of its Merifbers, pass 
nan autonomous regions of Minda- 

Kv fhf. r ^ And in passing the organic acts 

Slirds refers back to Section 9. In other 

^tSiom^s specifically refer to the 

cinwL wm ^ existence. Under Section 9, 

wouU justify tSe " V ” 

ha»ineconunonhistoncal.geog4hL;cuSta^^^^^ 

other cSSS 

to foim one autonomous region. In other words, 
Congress is not reaUy bound by the existing auto^ 
.nomous regions m Mmdanao when the organic acts will 
be enacted in the future. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I just want to clear up this point because geograph- 
ically speaking, Mindanao is composed of many 
provinces. However, for purposes of this committee 
report, is the Committee envisioning the inclusion or the 
exclusion of Davao, Cotabato and Palawan so that this 
would be on record for future legislation? 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I answer that, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

The issue here is not the existing political boundaries 
but the claim to ancestral land. At the bottom of the 
struggles of the people of the Cordillera, the Mangyans 
of Mindanao, the Dumagats of Tanay, and much more 
so in the case of the Bangsa Moro people is the claim to 
their ancestral land. Having said that, we wish to 
emphasize that the claim to ancestral land is the claim 
to their peoplehood because their peoplehood is based 
on the land, in contrast to the western claim to the land 
by means of a piece of paper. That has to be recon- 
sidered apart from existing political boundaries. 

MR. SUAREZ. So what is the final answer? Are these 
three provinces going to be excluded for purposes of 
creating regional autonomous regions in Mindanao? 

MR. ALONTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, if we read very 
well these different sections, we could immediately 
imagine and conceive that it is Congress that is actually 
going to choose the cities and provinces that will corn- 
pose the autonomous regions. Likewise, Congress is 
bound to enact the organic acts after the majority 
of the people would have been brought together in a 
referendum. 

* 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In other words, we do not like to 
mention any statement that certain provinces are not 
included or should be excluded because we would like 
to give Congress a leeway to determine what shall 
compose a particular autonomous region. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, probably, the correct interpreta- 
tion is “regions in Mindanao” instead of “regions of 
Mindanao.” 

Is that the meaning sought to be conveyed? I ask 
so because when we speak of regions of Mindanao and 
the Cordillera, we are referring only to two regions. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, that is correct. Incidentally, 
we wish to declare that when the period of amendments 
comes, we would like to amend Section 9 to change 
“provinces and cities,” which are existing political cate- 
gories, into AREAS AND POPULATIONS so that we 
will not be delimited by existing concepts of provinces. 
We feel that the existing boundaries do not represent 
cultural and ecological realities, rather they were re- 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


197 


sponses to some political needs and administrative 
requirements. We wish to correct that. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you; and I suppose the rule in 
the case of Mindanao would apply also to the case of 
the Cordillera. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will not have to mention the 
provinces composing the probable autonomous region 
of the Cordillera . . . 

MR. BENNAGEN. . . . where it does not reflect the 
ecological and cultural realities. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May we now go to Section 8 referring to “proceeds of 
the exploitation and development of the national wealth 
within their respective areas.” I take it that the word 
“proceeds” refers to royalties from the exploitation of 
the natural resources in that area. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, that would include also 
special charges and schedule of fees. 

MR. SUAREZ. When we speak of the creation of an 
autonomous region by virtue of an organic act that is 
going to be passed by the legislature , are we thinking in 
terms of holding a plebiscite before or after the passage 
of the organic act? In other words, in addition to the 
prior consultations with the local elective officials, I 
take it that the people have to be consulted about the 
possible establishment of an autonomous region. Will 
that consultation be made before or after? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Obviously, the consultation should 
be made before. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is it going to take the form of a plebi- 
scite called for the purpose? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible, should Congress 
so decide. I have answered a similar question like this 
before. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, before Congress would initiate the 
legislation which would amount to the passage of an 
organic act , there must first be a plebiscite called for 
the purpose and that plebiscite would have to be con- 
ducted in that particular autonomous region. Is that 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would recommend that it be so. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. I think some exceptions have 
to be made particularly in the case of the Cordilleras 
and the Bangsa Moro because of their historical parti- 
cularities. In other words, in practice, they have been 


having some kind of self-determination, whatever their 
government’s name is, except that we now call it region- 
al autonomy, and that they have so expressed this desire 
in so many ways. I feel that this proposal is even going 
beyond the spirit of consultation and initiative. Over the 
centuries, they have expressed this initiative or this 
assertion of right to self-determination to choose their 
path of economic, political and cultural development. 
They have to be considered as exemptions; but in the 
future, I would imagine there will be cases of applica- 
tion for regional autonomy. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, in that particular case of the 
Cordillera and the Bangsa Moro, the Commissioner will 
advance the proposition that there is no need anymore 
to call a plebiscite. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is my view. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, Congress can immediately enact 
those contemplated organic acts. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would even plead that this Com- 
mission should declare both the Cordillera and Bangsa 
Moro as autonomous regions. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner including the 
Bangsa Moro in that proposition? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I intend to do that. 

MR. SUAREZ. And for all the other regions that may 
have to be established and declared as autonomous re- 
gions, the Commissioner will require, as a condition 
sine qua non, the holding of a plebiscite? 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think that is the intent of 
Section 9. 

MR. NOLLEDO. When the Commissioner said that 
the people of the Cordilleras have continuously ex- 
pressed their desire to set up an autonomous region, he 
only expressed his personal opinion? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think a plebiscite would still be 
necessary. Congress may require such plebiscite to make 
the sentiments of the people of the Cordillera official. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

My last question has something to do with Section 
14. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 14 is on page 3 of Commit- 
tee Report No. 25. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. The second sentence 
disturbs me a little. It states: 


198 


MONDAY, AUGUST 11 , 1 986 


When circumstances so warrant, the regional government 
may establish its own special forces subject to supervision 
by the national armed forces and under such provisions as 
the law may provide. 

Does not the Commissioner see any danger lying 
behind this provision? We might be setting up regional 
warlords. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner will notice that 
this was taken from the Tripoli Agreement but with 
several conditions set forth therein. In the Tripoli 
Agreement there is no qualification whatsoever, but 
here we have the words “when circumstances so war- 
rant, . . . subject to supervision by the national armed 
forces and under such provisions as the law may 
provide.” 

In the Tripoli Agreement, there is a statement to the 
effect that the regional government shall be authorized 
to establish its own special forces. In order that we may 
temper the fear expressed from different quarters on the 
setting up of such special forces, we laid down the 
following conditions: (1) when circumstances so war- 
rant, (2) that they must be subject to supervision or 
even control by the national armed forces; (3) that 
they shall be subject to provisions of law that may be 
provided by Congress. 

And the Commissioner will notice that the last 
sentence also states: “Such special forces shall be under 
the command of the President of the Philippines.” 

I know that there are many who are objecting to this; 
so we will entertain amendments at the proper time. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

th ^ respect to the chairman and members c 
e ommittee, I beg to disagree with the establishmei 
o specml forces knowing fully well that in the Commi 
Provisions of which I am a member, tl 
HDF, categorized as a paramilitary unit, has bee 
dismantled and the provision therefor has been tran 
erre to the Article on Transitory Provisions. Tl 
these special forces have led to many thinj 
w ^ ave been the subject of so many complaints i 

thl human rights people, resulting j 

ons 1 u lonalization of a human rights organizatio; 

haw^whnt^’ Article on General Provisions, w 

hp nraaniy'n^ Citizens’ armed force which ma 

be organized m accordance with law. These are tl 

trainees or the reserve offirerc • t v 

j <Jiucers m the region who may 1 

1 given certain allov 

ances, and the law wiU so provide for their use in tl 
campaign against insurgency. 

Also, when we talk of local poUce agencies here, tl 
provision in the Article on General Provisions - and th 


is sponsored by Commissioner Natividad — states that 
there shall be a national police force which should be 
supervised and controlled by the National Police Com- 
mission. However, Congress may provide for whatever 
control there may be for the local chief executive. 

The reason here is the professionalization of police 
agencies. We know that the police force has the main 
duty of maintaining peace and order and protecting life 
and property. When we talk of that duty, we are talking 
of the lives of the 54 million people and their property. 

And so. Commissioner Natividad and I felt that there 
is a need to professionalize our police forces if we want 
our lives and property to be protected by the police and 
if we want peace and order in our country. 

If the Committee will permit. Commissioner Nativi- 
dad and I will propose certain amendments on this 
provision at the proper time. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner saying that he is 
with us in expressing fear and apprehension about the 
establishment of special forces, the functions of which 
are not defined definitely? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. I had had very bad ex- 
periences about these special forces from the time I was 
still a major up to the time I became a general. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. In connection with the issue on 
special forces, mention was made of the possibility of 
resurgence or even the emergence of warlordism in 
certain areas. I think we should look at warlordism from 
a sociological and historical perspective. It is not some- 
thing that is easily given in any particular region, and 
apropos of this, I would like to read what Rene Santiago 
of the Philippine Institute of Environmental Planning 
manifested in our deliberations: 

Warlordism is really a creature of our patronage politics. 
Whether federalism will encourage it, more or less, can only 
be speculated upon. What is clear, however, is that a 
centralized form of government forces a President or any 
national leader, for that matter, to rely on ward leaders 
whose main strengths, in turn, lie in their access to the 
national levers of powers; that is, their ability to lobby for 
largesse from above. This unholy alliance perpetuates the 
underdevelopment of the countryside on two counts: 

(1) it destroys self-reliance as it fosters dependence on 
external funding to develop; and (2) it does not put a 
premium on performance and on viability. 

In addition, I would like to say that the emergence of 
people’s organizations, the increasing political awareness 
and maturity of the people would be a strong antidote 


MONDAY, AUGUST n, 1986 


199 


to the resurgence of warlordism where it originally 
existed, and its prevention in areas where no such 
phenomenon has still taken place. 

MR. SUAREZ. So the ultimate resolution of this 
problem will be whether it benefits the people or not. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. 1 am referring to the possible creation 
of special forces. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. I think we should have that 
foremost in our minds, that the provisions for auto- 
nomous regions should be directed towards the benefit 
of the people in the autonomous region and, of course, 
not to mention, maintaining always the complementa- 
rity of the autonomous region with the national society. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
make one short statement? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Padilla is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. This is on special forces. I heard the 
distinguished chairman state that the Tripoli Agreement 
authorizes the creation or establishment of special 
forces. That is not exactly accurate. 

The Tripoli Agreement has several items. Among 
them is the special regional security forces subject to 
discussion later on. The Tripoli Agreement does not 
provide or stipulate . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. I understand that the conditions 
under which special forces may be formed should be 
subject to discussion. That was made clear to our Com- 
mittee by some Muslims who appeared before us. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, because when I wrote an article 
on the Tripoli Agreement of 1976 I had occasion to 
read and analyze it. -There are many provisions therein 
subject to discussion later on. Among them is the right 
to set up schools. Also, the Muslims shall have their 
own administrative system, financial and economic 
system, special regional security forces, and others 
under Section 14. But these are not so stipulated. They 
are only to be discussed or considered later. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Padilla for 
the enlightenment, because we were made to under- 
stand that the principle was approved but the conditions 
were subject to discussion. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Abubakar is recognized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. There is an apprehension in 
connection with this organization of special local 
forces. The Committee, probably, saw the need as it 
applies to a particular situation. In many provinces, 
we have the Philippine Constabulary-INP, but its police 
force is drawn from outside the province. Therefore, 
while members are there to maintain peace and order, 
they are not able to appreciate the local reaction — the 
temperament or the attitudes of the people. This could 
only promote misunderstanding between those who 
are there to maintain peace and order and the citizens 
who are supposed to be protected by them. 

That is why in many places, in case this situation 
arises, many local or provincial officials would ask the 
national government if they can organize in their own 
particular province or municipality a force that would 
understand the situation there and the people who 
might be in opposition. This action will enable the 
people to reach an understanding with this special force 
so as not to create a situation of actual military clashes. 
This is in the interest of the people. We refer to a special 
force that is not to be used for a special purpose but one 
who understands the people because its members are 
from the same place and they know very well the 
situation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. To allay the fears of Com- 
missioner Abubakar, when the General Provisions will 
be discussed, particularly the provision on citizens’ 
armed force and local police, it will be well- explained 
that when we talk of such citizens’ armed force, we 
would refer to the reservists in the area. 

The reserve officers in the area will be called to active 
duty pursuant to law, be given training and will serve 
their respective areas against insurgency. Also, there will 
be a national police force which shall be under the 
National Police Commission. 

However, when we talk of the local police forces, the 
members would be people from the same region or from 
the same municipality because it is the intent that the 
police must be civilian in nature and in character. So, if 
Commissioner Abubakar has a son or a grandson who 
likes to be a member of the police force, he can be 
enlisted in the police force in the Commissioner’s 
region. It will not be possible under our proposal that a 
man from Ilocos will go to Sulu to be a policeman there. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. That is correct. 

MR. DE CASTRO. In this proposal, a man from Sulu, 
a reservist, will be recruited as a policeman or as a mem- 


200 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 1 , 1 986 


her of the citizens’ armed force to be trained and used 
against insurgency in that area. It will be the officer 
from Sulu who will lead the citizens’ armed force. That 
is our concept when we talk of citizens’ armed forces 
and a national police force under the direction of the 
National Police Commission. Of course, when one is 
designated or appointed as a policeman in his own area, 
the first thing he will do is to first pass an examination, 
more particularly an aptitude test. Next he has to go to 
the National Police Academy to train since this is really 
a requirement for professionalization. Moreover, all 
officers from an area shall be graduates of the National 
Police Academy in Tagaytay. Hence when someone goes 
to his respective municipality to serve as a policeman, he 
is already trained and professionalized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). May 
we ask Commissioner Suarez to ask his last question? 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer; I 
will yield to the others after this. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I have 
the floor because this is very material. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Com- 
missioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With the kind indulgence of Com- 
missioner Suarez, I have found the Tripoli Agreement 
provision which states: 

Special, regional security forces are to be set up in the 

area of the autonomy for the Muslims in the South of the 

Philippines. The relationship between these forces and the 

central security forces shall be fixed later. 

That is the provision of the Tripoli Agreement as 
presented to us by the Bangsa Moro for the Philippine 
Constitution of 1986. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


saying earlier is that we would like to state explicitly in 
the Constitution that the Cordillera region, minus the 
details of its definition and its charter, and the Bangsa 
Moro, minus its territorial boundaries and all that, 
should be considered autonomous regions, without 
saying that the charter of the organic acts will not be 
submitted to a plebiscite or a referendum. This will have 
to be approved by the people themselves. 

MR. SUAREZ. Will there be no need to call a plebi- 
scite for those regions or political units which may be 
affected by the establishment of these autonomous 
regions? 

MR. BENNAGEN. For the specification of the 
region? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. There will be a need, but the con- 
cept should be there. That is why we are saying m 
Section 9: “all areas and populations that have dis- 
tinctive,” et cetera. 

MR. SUAREZ. In the case of Mindanao, if we are 
going to exclude the three provinces mentioned by 
Commissioner Ople, are we not going to consult the 
people therein by way of a plebiscite? 

MR. BENNAGEN. In the process of defining the 
boundaries? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. There will be a consultation. 

MR. SUAREZ. And these consultations will take the 
form of a plebiscite? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Whatever is appropriate. 

MR. SUAREZ. Would this be before or after the 
promulgation of the organic act? 


MR. SUAREZ. May I now go to my last question 
Under Section 16, there are certain periods stipulatec 
within which the first legislature is under obligation t( 
p^s t e organic acts for the autonomous regions ii 
Mindanao and the Cordillera. Do I take it that per th( 
exp anation of Commissioner Bennagen there is n< 
need for a plebiscite before or after the promulgation o 

insofar as the autonomous regions o 
Mindanao and Cordillera are concerned? 


MR. BENNAGEN. In the process it should be before, 
and there is that terminal act, which would then make 
the region acquire its juridical personality. 

MR. SUAREZ. Suppose the three provinces would 
object, but the rest of the Mindanao areas would agree, 
what would be the result of the plebiscite? How would 
it affect the establishment or creation of the auto- 
nomous region? 


MR. BENNAGEN. May I answer that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. There is a need for a plebiscite 
within the region to approve the charter. What 1 was 


MR. NOLLEDO. An identical question was asked 
by Commissioner Davide a few hours ago, and my 
answer was that, personally, without binding the Com- 
mittee, it should be considered as a whole, but there is 
an amendment on how to resolve such problem to be 
presented later on. As far as I am concerned and follow- 


MONDAY, AUGUST n, 1986 


201 


ing the democratic process, the entire region should 
be bound by the majority rule. 

MR. SUAREZ. That means if the electorate in the 
three provinces would be more than the electorate in 
the autonomous region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Then .the organic act cannot be 
granted because as a whole the voters from the three 
provinces will defeat the need for a majority of all the 
voters within the region. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is that the official position of the 
Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is my interpretation now, but I 
understand that there will be an amendment to be 
presented later on. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, in view of the 
time and the fact that we still have many registered 
interpellators, may I move to adjourn until tomorrow 
at nine-thirty in the moming. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Sarmiento). Is 
there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
moming. 

It was 6:32 p.m. 





*. 1 

4 

i 

i 

I 

I 


f 

I 

( 


1 


A 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


203 


R.C.C. NO. 54 
Tuesday, August 12, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:44 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, called the session to order. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Ahmad Domocao Alonto. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. ALONTO. Wa qaala Rabbukum ud-’uuniii 
‘astafib lakum. And your Lord hath said: Call to Me that 
I may answer your call . . . 

Bismillaahir-Rahmaanir-Rahilim. — In the name of 
Allah, Most Benevolent and Most Merciful. 

We begin in Thy Holy Name, O God, to firm our 
hope for Thy Eternal Grace. 

‘Al-Hamdu LVllaahi RabbVl-halamin; - All Praise 
be to Allah, Lord of all the Worlds; 

Verily none is worthy of praise save Thou, O God, 
as Thou, and only Thou, is the Creator, Protector, 
Preserver and Sustainer of the Universe. 

‘Ar-Rahmaanin—Rahiim; — Most Beneficent, Ever- 
Merciful; 

Thy ever-watchful and inexhaustible grace, O God, 
is what we need most to guide us in this period of 
crises and revolution, of restlessness and anguish, of 
anxiety and frustrations, to light our way amidst our 
nascent but sincere effort of nation-building. 

Maaliki Yawmid-Diin! King of the Day of Judgment; 

We, who are Thy obedient servants in this tiny 
corner of Thy Universe, O God, are fully aware and 
do firmly believe that one day everyone will have to 
render account of all his acts to Thee. 


‘lyyaaka na’-budu wa ’iyyaaka nasta-’iin. — You alone 
we worship; and to You alone we turn for help. 

We affirm that none is worthy of worship and 
devotion, submission and obedience, and subjection 
and servitude, except Thou, O God, and we affirm 
that we are Thy worshippers. Thy subjects and Thy 
slaves; keeping these relations with Thee and Thee 
alone; and so we ask Thy help as Thou art the Lord 
of the whole Universe and Thou hast all powers and 
Thou art the Master of everything; and verily, only 
Thee can give us help for the fulfillment of our cry 
for justice, freedom and democracy. 

‘IhdinasSiraatal-Mustaqiim — Guide us to the straight 
path. 

We confess, O God, that events in this country in 
the past few years have confused our vision and made 
us lose sight of the right way - the way that can lead 
us aright in every walk of life and can keep us free 
from errors and evil consequences and bring success 
in the end, so “Thine Will be done.” 

Siraatal-laziina 'an-amta ‘alay-him — The path of 
those whom Thou hast favoured; 

We affirm our commitment, O God, to the ways of 
those excellent exemplars of human behavior who 
have not deviated a jot away from Thy blessed way 
throughout the whole course of human history — the 
Anbiyya or the Prophets, the Siddiqin or the Faith- 
ful, the Shuhada or the Martyrs, and the Salihin or 
the Righteous - 

Gayril-magzuubi ‘alay-him wa laz-zaaallUin. — Not 
(the path) of those who earn Thine anger nor of those 
who go astray . 

Rabbanaa las tuzig quluubanaa ba’-da ‘iz hadaytanaa 
wa hablanaa milladunka rahmattan ’innaka ’Antal- 
Wahhaab. 

Our Lord! Cause not our hearts to stray after Thou 
hast guided us, and bestow upon us mercy from Thy 
Presence. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Bestower! 

Our Lord! We pray for Thy guidance in framing the 
fundamental law of the land and grant that by it, we 
can establish Urrimattun yadu’una ila’l khayr wa ya’ 
muruuna bil ma’ruuf wa yanha’una ani’l Munkar. . 
a nation that invites to goodness, enjoins what is right 
and forbids what is evil. AMEEN. YA RABBAL’ALA- 
MIIN. 


204 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 1 2, 1 986 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . ; . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Absent 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present* 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

PadiUa 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada . . . . . 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bemas 

. Present 

Regalado 

. . Absent 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . . 

. . Present 

Brocka 


Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 


Rodrigo 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 


Romulo 

. . Present 

Colayco 


Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . , 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . . 

. . Present* 

Davide 

. . Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Foz 


Sumulong . . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 


Tadeo 

. . Present 

Gascon 


Tan 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 


Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 


Treflas 

. . Present 

Laurel . . . 


Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum .... 


Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

ViUegas 

. . Present 

Monsod . 



The President 

is present. 




The roll call shows 36 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Proposed 
Resolution on First Reading, Petition and Communica- 
tions, the President making the corresponding refer- 
ences: 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION ON FIRST READING 

Proposed Resolution No. 538, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 
TO CONGRATULATE SENATOR TANADA. 

Introduced by Hon. Villacorta, Munoz Palma, Bemas, 
Tan, Abubakar, Alonto, Aquino, Azcuna, Bacani, 
Bengzon, Jr., Bennagen, Rosario Braid, Brocka, 
Calderon, de Castro, Colayco, Concepcion, 
Davide, Jr., Foz, Garcia, Gascon, Guingona, Jamir, 
Laurel, Jr., Lerum, Maambong, Monsod, Natividad, 
Nieva, Nolledo, Ople, Padilla, Quesada, Rama, 
Regalado, de los Reyes, Jr., Rigos, Rodrigo, 
Romulo, Rosales, Sarmiento, Suarez, Sumulong, 
Tadeo, Tingson, Trenas, Uka and Villegas. 

To the Steering Committee. 

PETITION 

Petition of the Honorable Commissioners Decoroso R. 
Rosales, Jose D. Calderon, Teodoro C. Bacani, Eulogio 
R. Lerum, Hilario G. Davide, Jr., Adolfo S. Azcuna, 
Teodulo C. Natividad and Jose B. Laurel, Jr., expressing 
support of the Petition of the Honorable Commissioners 
Lugum L. Uka, Napoleon G. Rama, Florenz D. Regala- 
do, Regalado E. Maambong, Jose N. Nolledo, Ma. Teresa 
F. Nieva, Yusup R. Abubakar and Hilario G. Davide, Jr., 
asking the Committee on Human Resources to submi 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 a con- 
solidated committee report. 

(Petition No. 2 — Constitutional Commission of 1986) 
To the Committee on Human Resources. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 

session. (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


Is there any objection? (Silen 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Dorentino Z. Floresta of the 
Knights of Columbus, Council 3722, Olongapo City, 
saying that if the Filipino people thru its President, 
Corazon C. Aquino, decides to extend the US military 
bases in the Philippines, he strongly recommends that 
the compensation given to the Philippine government by 
the U.S. government for the use of the bases be con- 
sidered rental and the same shall be increased in accord- 
ance with the prevailing rentals paid by the United 
States to Spain, Korea, Japan, Turkey, and Germany; 
that the Labor Code of the Philippines shall be applied 
to the labor-management relationship inside the bases; 
that criminal offenses committed by American service- 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


205 


men must be tried by the Philippine courts; and that the 
Philippine government shall have effective control over 
the bases including the operation of business establish- 
ments. 

(Communication No. 524 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Thirty-seven letters with eleven thousand seventy-nine 
(1 1,079) signatories with their respective addresses, all 
seeking to include in the Constitution a provision 
obliging the State to protect the life of the unborn from 
the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 525 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory , and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Jaime Z. Bermudez of Agbannawag, 
Rizal, Nueva Ecya, urging the Constitutional Com- 
mission to include provisions on land reform that would 
enable small landowners to recover their lands from 
their tenants. 

(Communication No. 526 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Communication from the Council of the Lmty of the 
Philippines, CAP Bldg., 372 Cabildo Street, totrmuros, 
Manila, signed by its President, Henrietta Tambun mg 
de Villa, seeking inclusion in the Constitution t e ngh 
to life from conception” and the integration of reli- 
gious instruction” into the primary and secondary 
educational system. 

(Communication No. 527 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR RAMA I move that we continue consideration 
of Committee ’ Report Nos. 21 and 25 on Proposed 
Resolution No. 51 1, the Article on Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The honorable Chairman and members of the Com- 
mittee on Local Governments are requested to occupy 
the front table. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLACORTA. In the Reference of Business, 
there was a petition submitted by the honorable Com- 
missioner Decoroso Rosales, et al, requesting the 
Committee on Human Resources to submit to the 
Constitutional Commission a consolidated committee 
report. This puzzles the members of the Human Re- 
sources Committee because we had already a long time 
ago submitted a consolidated report. This gives a wrong 
impression to the public about the efficiency of our 
Committee. We do not fuUy understand the intention 
of this petition. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes to check with the Secretariat. 

It was 9:58 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:13 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is 
recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA.* Madam President, given the 
stature of our Commission, I shall try to be as restrained 
and as respectful as possible. But I would like to be just 
and fair to the members of our Committee on Human 
Resources who worked very hard in coming out with a 
report, which we submitted to the Commission as 
scheduled last July 15, 1986. 

Because of the aggressive efforts of one lobbyist, Don 
Miguel Cuenco, some Commissioners signed two peti- 
tions which came as a surprise to us because we feel that 
after a committee has submitted its report, whatever 
additional recommendations Members of the Commis- 
sion as well as lobbyists may have should be presented 
on the floor. Nonetheless, because we feel that we 
should be courteous to our colleagues in the Com- 
mission, we responded immediately to the first petition 
of some Members of the Commission. 

This first petition basically requested that the teach- 
ing of Philippine geography and folk songs as well as 
making Spanish an official language be incorporated in 
the Constitution. We patiently listened last week in this 
meeting we had with Don Miguel Cuenco which I had to 
adjourn prematurely because there was endless talk 
from this resource person who was not even a Member 
of the Constitutional Commission. We are now con- 
fronted with a second petition asking the Committee on 
Human Resources to submit to the Constitutional 


206 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


Commission of 1986 a consolidated committee report. 
This further puzzles us. As we read this petition which 
was signed by Commissioners Rosales, Calderon, Bacani, 
Lerum, Davide, Azcuna, Natividad and Laurel, there is a 
statement here that “with the exception of the Honor- 
able Wilfrido Villacorta, Chairman of the Committee 
who is Dean of the College of Liberal Arts of De La 
Salle University and the Honorable Serafin V. C. Guin- 
gona, Chancellor of Araneta University, to our know- 
ledge there is no educator in the Committee.” Actually, 
there are competent educators among the supporters of 
making English, Spanish and Filipino continue as the 
official languages of our country. 

This is a very erroneous and unjust statement because 
aside from Commissioner Guingona and myself, there 
are six other educators in the Committee, namely: Com- 
missioner Quesada who has been teaching for 16 years; 
Commissioner Rosario Braid, for 30 years; Commis- 
sioner Bennagen, for 17 years; Commissioner Uka, for 
30 years; Commissioner Trenas, Dean of the College of 
Law of Iloilo University; and Commissioner Rigos. 

I would like to give our fellow Commissioners who 
signed the petition the benefit of the doubt. But this is 
just my plea to our colleagues in the Commission: Let 
us not allow one lobbyist to create internal dissension 
in this Commission. It is an affront to the integrity of 
t IS Commission, and we would like an explanation 
from our coUeagues about the background of this 
second petition. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

• Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? > j b 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog 
mzed. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you very much. Madam Pres 
ident. 

addition to what Commissioner Villacorta said, 

u signed this petitio 

w ether they read what they were signing before the 
signe . get the feeling that when they signed this, it 
m eference to the old man who happens to be thei 
eac er m (^bu. As Commissioner Villacorta said, w 

Request of the lobbyist last week and 
was short of bemg absurd. 

the CnmmicB- ^ Would like to question whethe 

thev were signed this petition read wh£ 

in this nartieni^^ because some of the things that wei 

innk like iHint ^ ^ Just SO absurd they make i 
look like idiots. It says here: 

THE COMMIT- 
TEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES HAS RESOLVED TO 

INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION WITH 
THE SECTIONS THAT THE AUTHORS OF RESOLU- 
TION NO. 141 SEEK TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW 


CONSTITUTION, WE RESPECTFULLY SUBMIT THAT 
THEY ARE NOT CONFLICTING. Therefore, we, the 
undersigned Commissioners, respectfully ask the Commit- 
tee on Human Resources to approve the following Articles 
which we beg leave to discuss one by one. 

1. Section 6 . The television owned, controlled and/or 
supervised by the Government shall accord prime time to 
Spanish programs. 

The Philippine Government shall also have radio broad- 
casts in Spanish addressed to Latin America . . . 

2. Section 7 . For the preservation and propagation of 
the Spanish language, the Government shall provide for the 
teaching of courses on journalism in Spanish at the Univer- 
sity of the Philippines, University of Sto. Tomas, and Uni- 
versity of San Agustin in Iloilo. The Minister of Culture, 
Education and Sports shall make representations to the 
Spanish Government, through the Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, to open courses on Spanish journalism at the 
Centro Cultural de Espaha in Makati, which is a very good 
school for the teaching of Spanish . . . 

3. Section 19 of Resolution 451 reads: 

A sum of one-half million pesos has to be appropriated 
for the teaching of our native songs in the elementary and 
high school levels . . . 

4. Section 13. The President of the Philippines shall 
create a Board on Textbooks on Philippine and World 
Geography to be composed of the Minister of Education, 
Culture and Sports, the Director of Coast and Geodetic 
Survey, the Director of the Bureau of National Census and 
a representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . . . 

5. “Section 14. The President of the Philippines shall 
create an office to be named as Deputy Minister of Educa- 
tion, Culture and Sports for the Spanish language and the 
educational systems of Spain, the Spanish-speaking coun- 
tries, including the educational system for the Hispanic 
Americans in U.S.A.”. . . 

6. The Authors of Resolution No. 451 hereby amend 
SECTION 5 thereof to read as follows: 

“SECTION 5. A new Ministry entitled ‘Ministry for the 
Conservation and Promotion of the Cebuano, Tausug and 
the Cebuano in Indonesia’ is created. The President of the 
Philippines shall appoint the Minister, who shall be a 
Moslem Tausug, to represent the Tausugs in the City of 
Jolo and in the six hundred islands of the Sulu Archipe- 
lago . . . 

7. “SECTION 9. The teaching of Spanish shall be com- 
pulsory in the fourth, third, second and first years in high 
school, public as well as private. 

Discursos de Malolos y Poesias Filipinas, . . . Spanish 
grammar . . . shall be taught compulsory in the second and 
first years in the high school, public as well as private . . . 

I stood up mainly because while it is the prerogative 
of private citizens to petition, I wish that they would 
think first before signing their names. Otherwise, what 
happens is that we do take time out to listen and go 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


207 


through meetings that are just so absurd they make us 
look like idiots. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I do not want 
to go into further explanations of this. I would like to 
move that the petition be withdrawn. I do not want to 
go into further explanations not because I have not read 
the petition; I have read it but I signed it for it to be 
heard. And I think it is right that we should ask the peti- 
tion to be heard. However, I ask that it be withdrawn so 
that it will not cause trouble anymore. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Calderon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Calderon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I do not deny 
the right of Commissioner Villacorta or of any of my 
colleagues in this Commission to pinpoint a lobbyist but 
I certainly deem it unethical and unkind to mention 
names, especially if the person mentioned had an out 
standing record as a parliamentarian and as a patnot. 
That is all. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

Is this still on the same subject matter? 

MR MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. I do not 
mind saying in reply to the query of Commissioner 
Brocka that I was one of those who signed the first peti- 
tion not the one under consideration. As a matter of 
fact’ in compliance with the invitation of the Commit- 
tee ’on Human Resources in the last meeting convened 
because of that petition and for some other matters in 
the agenda, I appeared before the Committee and I 
would like to confirm that one of the issues taken up by 
that Committee in relation to this petition was the 
possibility of constitutionalizing the teaching of geo- 
graphy and folk songs at the insistence of Don Miguel 
Cuenco. When he was heard by the Committee, he 
insisted that Spanish be used as one of the national 


languages. Those were the issues taken. Madam 
President. 

I had a particular reason for signing the petition 
because aside from the issues raised by Don Miguel 
Cuenco, I was very much interested in the evolution of 
the national language. As a matter of fact, upon my 
representations and through the kindness of the Chair- 
man, Commissioner Villacorta, and with the help of 
Commissioners Brocka and Rigos, I was able to con- 
vince the Committee to insert as a last sentence on 
Section 22 of their report. Committee Report No. 29, 
the following provision: IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
THE NATIONAL LANGUAGE, DUE CONSIDERA- 
TION SHOULD BE GIVEN TO THE DIALECT AND 
LANGUAGES OF THE FILIPINOS or a statement to 
that effect. This was approved by the Committee, after 
which I felt that my job was finished. But since Don 
Miguel Cuenco was still there and he was insisting on 
other points, I suggested to the Committee — and this 
is on record — that the teaching of geography was 
already covered by Section 3 of the committee report 
which provides that all educational institutions should 
instill political consciousness. I felt that if one wants to 
be politically conscious, he should know what is around 
him and that involves the teaching of geography. 

Regarding the teaching of folk songs, I also made it of 
record that it is, in fact, covered by Section 29 of the 
report which provides that the State shall support and 
encourage the development of a Filipino national 
culture. 

Regarding the Spanish language, the Committee was 
very emphatic in telling Don Miguel Cuenco that the 
Committee had already decided that the national 
language would not be included in the committee 
report. So at that moment, I felt I had done my job. We 
heard Don Miguel Cuenco and I thought the issue was 
closed. It is unfortunate that a second petition had been 
filed here, but I do not think we should begrude the 
other Commissioners for it. Probably the other Com- 
missioners also have a point to share with the Commit- 
tee in much the same way that I did which I shared with 
the Committee and which the Committee kindly 
acceded to. 

• That is all I wanted to say. Madam President. I do not 
think there was any affront on the part of some Mem- 
bers of the Commission in signing this petition. 

Thank you very much. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to express, in behalf of 
the Committee, a desire to delete or scrap out this 
second petition because it puts the members of the 
Committee in a very disparaging light. It is in that par- 
ticular kind of tone that we responded or reacted to this 


208 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


early reading of a resolution that has been officially 
entered into the Journal. So, I think it is also but fair to 
react because we are very reactive human beings and we 
feel that this kind of unjust accusation of being incom- 
petent would have to be corrected immediately. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. There is still a motion pending 
before us, the motion of Commissioner Bacani to with- 
draw this petition on the ground that it seeks to require 
the Committee on Human Resources to submit a con- 
solidated report, which report, according to Com- 
missioner Villacorta, has already been submitted since 
July 12 and this has been verified by the Secretariat. 

Therefore, the Chair finds the motion to withdraw in 
order. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 511 
(Article on Local Governments) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the Committee on 
is now ready to continue the 
^hberation of Committee Report Nos. 21 and 25 on 
Proposed Resolution No. 51 1. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) 
t Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Colayco be 
recognized. 


niz^^^ Colayco is recog- 


MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. I 
nave a question or two to ask the Committee. During 
one o the meetings of this Committee where I was 
present, I remember that a big group of representatives 
rom e Cordillera region was present. I heard the 

^ group against the position 
tho r j group for the granting of autonomy 
nuitr. Z group impressed me as 

and when ^ Suppose that the same can be said if 
Sid becaiKsp^ autonomous region in Mindanao is organ- 

«/;ii Ka •* icreiore, it is to be expected that there 

Under Sectional 2 ^ autonomous region. 

aiitnnnmniiG o ’ ^ Ilr® areas where the 

aiithoritv would have exclusive 

Y- g the items mentioned here are com- 
mund or commumty centers which would be intended 
for the bMefit of the people living in the autonomous 
regions. They would include appointments to the 


administrative government; the erection or construction 
of schools in the barrios, health centers and other 
community improvements. 

There is a strong possibility that these minorities may 
be discriminated against in the apportionment of these 
benefits, and the Northern Ireland experience shows us 
that the main problem there is not religion but the 
treatment of the Catholic minority in the Northern Irish 
government. We may have a mini-Northern Ireland 
situation here. So, has the Committee any safeguards in 
mind that would prevent this situation to take place 
here? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman will remember that 
in our report, it is provided that even if we establish 
the autonomous regions through congressional action, 
the President of the Philippines shall exercise general 
supervision over autonomous regions to insure that laws 
are faithfully executed; so if there should be discrimina- 
tion on various economic, social and political matters 
covered by existing laws, discrimination can be done 
away with by effective exercise of general supervision 
by the President. 

Commissioner Bennagen would like to give further 
comments on the question of the Gentleman. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

Let me comment first on the observation in one of 
the hearings we had. The record will bear me out that 
the group being referred to by Commissioner Colayco is 
not a big group. They were only seven, and in the 
deliberations, we did inquire into the distinction 
between that group and a similar group actually bearing 
the same name. Tie answer was that there are indeed 
two groups bearing the same name with different sets of 
officers; one is headed by an anthropologist from 
Bicol — that was the group which was present there — 
and another headed by no less than a Kalinga himself. 
Recently, we received a joint statement of a Katinga-led 
organization, which calls itself the Kalmga-Isneg Self- 
Rule Self-Determination Movement, and the Cordillera 
People’s Alliance dated August 5, 1986. To lay this issue 
down to rest, please allow me to read the joint state- 
ment. It states: 

The Kalinga-Isneg Self-Rule Self-Determination Move- 
ment (KISSM) and the Cordillera People’s Alliance (CPA) 
express our common position of support for the establish- 
ment of a regional autonomous government in the Cor- 
dillera. We believe that by uniting the Cordillera people into 
one self-governing region, our rights as indigenous people 
can be protected and recognized. 

We dissociate ourselves from Ms. Mariflor Parpan (this is 
the lady who was in that meeting— “who claims to represent 
KISSM which is the acronym of the organization). Ms. 
Parpan is not a true Kalinga and though she claims to hold 
our interests at heart, her actions merely serve to undermine 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


209 


interests at heart, her actions merely serve to undermine 
the unity we have built up through the years. Her words 
are her own and she cannot speak for the 2,000 members 
ofKISSM. 

We further urge all Igorots to rally behind the cause of 
self-determination for the indigenous people and, in his or 
her own way, to contribute towards the building of ajust, 
free and democratic society in the Cordillera and in the 
country. 

For the Kalinga-Isneg Self-Rule Self-Determination 
Movement this was signed by Mr. Max Garming who is 
the Chairman and is connected with the College of 
Public Administration of the University of the Philip- 
pines; he is from Bangad, Kalinga. The other signatory 
was Mr. Candido Basbasen who is the Secretary-General 
of the same organization and also comes from Kalinga. 

For the Cordillera People’s Alliance, the signatories 
are: Fr. Patricio Guyguyon who is the Vice-Chairman of 
the Cordillera People’s Alliance; Ms. Joanna K. Carino 
who is the Secretary-Treasurer of the Cordillera People’s 
Alliance; and Fr. Eduardo Solang, Secretary -General of 
the Cordillera People’s Alliance. 

As to the question of certain seemingly antagonistic 
relations amongst members of the Cordillera people 
across “ili,” meaning, “village,” and across groups, we 
can look at this as nothing more than quarrels across 
villages akin to quarrels that exist even amongst the best 
of families. It is in the nature of social relations that 
there will always be disagreements, that there will 
always be some kind of struggle. But given the history 
of the peoples of the Cordillera, this can be resolved 
given their extremely viable customary laws. Then, as 
supporting statement, the one offered by Commissioner 
Nolledo, we should see to it that claims of this sort 
should also be supervised not only at the local level but 
also at the national level. 

MR. COLAYCO. This thought occurred to me 
because we have seen it happen even under the present 
system of government — provinces which are known to 
have voted for the losing party generally do not get 
goodies from the government. For many years, Batangas 
had to do with very bad roads for the simple reason that 
Batangas voted against the President. And this can 
always happen under the new setup where people of 
barrios or cities which may have voted against the 
autonomous form of government may suffer the same 

thing. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is in the nature of social life. 
It is not unique to Batangas or to Cordillera, or to the 
Bangsa Moro. It is a matter of its being a general pheno- 
menon. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is correct, but what I want to 
know is, has the Committee provided for safeguards 
against this particular danger? This is very important; we 
may be solving one problem but creating others and 


these problems may be avoided if the Committee would 
think of some system introduced into the form of the 
government or into the organic laws to prevent the 
happening of this danger. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Alonto would like to make his comments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

The question raised by the Gentleman, who is a 
distinguished member of this Committee, is a very 
important one because discrimination is exactly the 
cause of bringing into the mind of those discriminated 
upon to raise this question of autonomy. 

For historical purposes, the first sector of the Filipino 
society that raised the question of local autonomy was 
the Muslims of Mindanao because they were victims of a 
very serious discrimination, not only by the colonialists 
who were our masters in the past but even the great 
majority of the Filipino people to which they belong. 
So, this question that the Gentleman raised is a very, 
very vital one and should really be eliminated from our 
society — meaning, the Filipino society — to achieve 
unity of the different sectors of the Filipino society so 
that we can progress faster in our nation-building. 

So, for purposes of the record, I would like to refer 
to a document prepared and submitted to a government 
conference called by President Marcos in 1976, which 
was actually the first document submitted for the pur- 
pose of structuring an autonomous government for the 
Muslims of Mindanao. This is a manifesto which, with 
your permission, I would like to read and be made part 
of the Record of the Constitutional Commission be- 
cause this is the one that started the idea of organizing 
autonomous regions in this country in order to solve the 
problem of disunity among the different sectors of the 
society.* This is a manifesto presented before the 
Muslim Conference on Government Policies and Pro- 
grams for Muslim Mindanao, called by President Ferdi- 
nand E. Marcos and was held on June 4-6, 1974, more 
than ten years ago. This is an organization of Muslims, 
whose membership throughout the country was over 
500,000 at that time. The Manifesto states that the 
Ansar El Islam, a movement of Muslims: 

(1) AGREES to the holding of this Conference as it 
affords the Movement a chance to declare its stand, along 
with those of the other sectors of the Muslim communities. 

(2) STATES that since its founding five years ago, the 
Movement has been concerned with the search for a solu- 
tion to the cancerous problems facing our country; and 

(3) DECLARES that the only workable solution to the 
national crisis in relation with the Muslim communities, 
short of complete independence for them, is the granting 
to them of a complete local autonomy, the following basic 
features, among others, to be guaranteed; 


*See Appendix 


210 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


a. A defined and guaranteed territorial jurisdiction, and 

b. A legislative power to adopt local laws based on the 
Holy Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet 
(peace be upon him). 

This has been signed by over 20,000 members of the 
Ansar El Islam. 

Another document was also presented or petitioned 
to the former President from the citizens of Mindanao, 
Sulu, Palawan, Basdah and Tawi-Tawi, which includes 
not only Muslims, not only non-Qiristian tribes, but 
also Christians who may be subjected to discrimination 
as commonly feared if we form, for example, an autono- 
mous region in Mindanao, majority of whom are Mus- 
lims. This letter or petition to President Marcos endorses 
that Manifesto. This, I also submit, as part of our 
record.* 

MR. COLAYCO. I want the Gentleman to know that 
in principle, I personally favor the proposal of the 
Committee. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes. 

MR. COLAYCO. But the discrimination I am warning 
against, at least in Regions IX and XII, can go both ways 
where, for instance, if the provincial government is in 
the hands of Christians, the Muslims may suffer and 
vice-versa. 

MR. ALONTO. That is right. 

MR. COLAYCO. So, I think this is a very important 
ma ter that should be looked into by the Committee. 


against the minority who happens to be in the region, 
who in this case are the Christians. But I think this 
Constitutional Commission had already approved several 
provisions in the Constitution which are a prevention to 
any discrimination by any sector of the society. 

Aside from that, the report on local governments has 
a guarantee on no discrimination against anyone, 
whether in any city, province, barrio or region having 
autonomy. 

For the information of the body, one would expect 
the least Muslim to discriminate against his co-being 
within the area which he occupies because, according 
to Islam, the basic idea of an autonomy or the value 
or principle that God wants us to practice in our life is 
stated in the Qur’an which runs like this: “La-Kum 
dinna hum walya Dinn. ” This means the way you want 
to live life should be completely within your right, but 
also give me my way. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Colayco already 
satisfied with the answer? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. ALONTO. With the permission of the Chair, and 
this means live and let live, if you discriminate against 
anyone of your community, that is a violation of the 
law of God as far as the Muslim is concerned. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 


tvi ALONTO. Yes, and I agree with the Gentleman 
ere. recisely, that is why I am historically tracing 
vpJf came about. It was this discrimination — I am 
~ placed in the minds of 

e us ims in Mindanao the idea to secede from this 
country. And this discrimination — I am again sorry to 
say — came from the majority communities of our 
couii ry, which are mostly Christians coming from the 
northern and central parts of the PhUippines. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
Colayco questions to the Honorable Jose C. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 
MR. NOLLEDO. All right. 


MR. ALONTO. It is the fear of many that if we have 
this autonomous region for the Muslims in Mindanao, 
the majority comm unity in that region ^iU discriminate 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I give way to 
Commissioner Bennagen. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The issue is of utmost importance 
to me and I would like to add a few comments. 

We share the apprehension of Commissioner Colayco. 
I think these apprehensions anticipate two possibili- 
ties; (1) a kind of inversion of the existing dominant- 
dominated relationship; and (2) the possibility of the 
explosion of internal antagonisms within Cordillera 
society and within Bangsa Moro. 

I think these are legitimate concerns because history 
tells us that these are indeed concrete possibilities. But 
it is good that this is discussed because in due time, we 
will be able to accept amendments towards the end of 
arriving at some provisions that seek to manage, as it 
were, the level of conflict. At the same time, we wish to 
point out that since we argued for regional autonomy in 
the name of peace, we cannot reduce social conflict to 
zero. What we can do — this is what we hope to receive 
in due time during the period of amendments — is to 


See Appendix 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


211 


provide the mechanisms to reduce the possibility of 
conflict to manageable levels. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am glad to hear that. One last 
question, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Article gives each autonomous 
government the right or the power to create its own 
sources of revenue and to levy taxes, et cetera. Under 
present jurisprudential doctrine, there are certain areas 
where local governments cannot impose taxes. 

Are we to understand that this will give them a free 
hand? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. However, tliere should be 
guidelines that may reproduce some lunitations that are 
now existing in P.D. No. 231, as amended by P.D. 
No. 426, which is the Local Tax Code. 

The taxes that cannot be levied by local governments 
are enumerated in Section 15. The governors and the 
city mayors in a dialogue told me that the right to levy 
taxes on the part of local governments is practically 
negated by many limitations. 

So, I would like Congress to fix only certain guide- 
lines;’ I do not like the word “limitations,” subject, of 
course, to the approval of this Commission. 

Thank you for that question. 

MR. COLAYCO. I thank the Commissioner, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

MR RAMA. Commissioner Rosario Braid, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Let me state. Madam 
President and members of the Committee, that I am 
supportive of the concept of local autonomy and the 
concept of federalism. We might, however, have to look 
for another term since, according to political scientists, 
we can never really use the concept of federalism to 
describe our kind of decentralization unlike Germany, 
the United States and Malaysia which started out as 
independent states. We never did, so we may have to 
seek another terminology. 

I support autonomy because we can never attain 
people power in a pure form of unitary government. But 
towards this end, we should agree on a devolution of 
power towards self-management. I would like to see 
that these concerns are really linked with the concerns 
in human resource development, particularly nonformal 
education; the broadening of educational resources and 


media resources; the movement towards greater political 
awareness, and towards a new political culture because 
if we must have self-management, we should move away 
from the present authoritarian culture. 

I, therefore, hope that 'the Committee support the 
need for this horizontal and vertical mechanisms which 
will develop political awareness. We, therefore, need 
more two-way communication between the center and 
the region. We regret to say, however, that in the in- 
ventory of communication and educational resources, 
we find that they are very heavily centralized. Those 
that are decentralized are not tailored to the needs of 
the region. Many of the existing mass media in the 
region are either relay, replay stations and carry news 
that are produced in big cities like Manila and Cebu. A 
priority prerequisite would be to restructure these 
information infrastructures as they are important 
resources to utilize when we would like to see a 
devolution of power. 

We are aware that even in rural telecommunications, 
which are essential necessary infrastructures, we have 
very poor systems. In San Carlos, Negros del Norte, we 
have to call Cebu to be able to be connected to Duma- 
guete which is just two hours away by land travel. This 
is the state all over the country. If we have to work 
towards more autonomy, I think we should not forget 
to emphasize the need for these social services which are 
often left out. 

Looking at the checklist of the areas to be attended 
to in the attainment of regional autonomy, nonformal 
education and information structures are often left out. 

Lastly, I would like to ask the Committee what they 
would consider as prerequisites in the reorganization of 
political areas into ecological provinces. This means 
nullifying the old provincial divisions which were mainly 
based on the “gerrymandering policies” of the ol^J elite 
and restructuring political divisions based on ecology 
and culture and managed according to what we call the 
physical or biological environment. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, incidentally, 
Commissioner Rosario Braid is an author of a resolution 
advocating autonomy of local governments, and I fully 
support her desire to increase social services in line with 
the statement of Commissioner Rama yesterday that 
regional economy is a must for economic development. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Azcuna be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to ask some clarifications from the 
Committee. First of all, I would like to congratulate 


212 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


the Committee for a very splendid committee report need for them to petition Congress for an organic act. 
which I really support. I just would like to ask some 

clarifications. MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, the Gentleman is right. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Azcuna, a 
distinguished son of Mindanao. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

With respect to local governments, I believe that the 
local government units are those mentioned in Section 1 
of the Article; is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. And the President of the Philippines 
is given general supervision over all those local govern- 
ment units? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 

MR. AZCUNA. Including the autonomous regions. 


MR. AZCUNA. However, as mentioned yesterday by 
the honorable Chairman of the Committee, the comple- 
tion of the creation of the autonomous regions of the 
Cordilleras and Mindanao would still need approval by 
way of a plebiscite of all the local units directly 
involved; is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. AZCUNA. With respect to this provision on the 
definition of the “territorial jurisdiction” of the autono- 
mous regions of Mindanao and the Cordilleras men- 
tioned in Section 16 to be done in not more than six 
months after the organization thereof, does that mean 
that the autonomous regions will be organized first and 
then their territorial jurisdiction defined later, or is that 
with reference to Congress? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is right. 

“ ^ 1 ^’ However, \ notice that the phrase 

s exercise general supervision over local govem- 
repeated in Section 4 as well as in Section 1 1 . 

• 1 ^ ^ duplication since local government 

me u es autonomous regions or is it just for emphasis? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think it is for emphasis because 
autonomous regions constitute some sort of special 
ocal government units. In fact, there is a move to 
separate autonomous regions in this Article from local 
governments. 


. AZCUNA. I see. With respect to the creation of 
au onomous regions, is my understanding correct that 
e procedure is for a region to obtain a charter, other- 
wise called an “organic act” from Congress? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 


MR. AZCUNA. With respect to two particular pro- 
posed autonomous regions, the Cordilleras and Minda- 
® committee report mandates Congress to create 
frnm giving them organic acts within one yeai 

coTect?^ Members of Congress, is that 


ex^^t President, because 

from MinH f Cordilleras and the peo 

from Mindanao to immediately ask Congress to gr 
them regional autonomy. 


MR. AZCUNA. In short, at least with respect to the 
proposed autonomous regions of the Cordilleras and 
Mindanao, there is already a finding that they would 
like to become autonomous regions; but there is no 


MR. NOLLEDO. I would like Commissioner Alonto 
to answer that question, considering that he is the 
author of this provision. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you. 

MR. ALONTO. Thank you. 

In Section 10, there is a period of consultation 
between Congress and the elective officials of the 
provinces and cities within the region; meaning, one of 
the implications of this is that those within the region 
who do not desire to be included within the region may , 
in this consultation, be excluded from the autonomous 
region. To give a specific example, Zamboanga del Norte 
from which this distinguished Commissioner comes 
from is included as of now in Region IX. Majority of the 
the people of Zamboanga del Norte are Christians. As a 
matter of fact, the socioeconomic leadership is in the 
hands of the Christians. 

There is a possibility that people in this area, majority 
of whom will turn out to be Muslims, would not like to 
join the autonomous region. So, in that consultation, it 
could be excluded from the area that is to be deter- 
mined by Congress because, in accordance with Section 
10 of the report, even the area is to be determined by 
Congress. The area to be determined by Congress is to 
be asked later on, after the organic act is passed by 
Congress for a plebiscite, whether they will accept that 
organic act or not. 

Those are steps which will guarantee that any autono- 
mous region could not exercise discrimination against 
any of these members or inhabitants of the region based 
on the ideological beliefs. So, I think that has been 
expressed in Section 10. 

MR. AZCUNA. I thank the Commissioner. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


213 


One final question. With respect to the powers given 
to an autonomous region in Section 12, will these 
powers be uniform for all autonomous regions so that 
there will at least be some common elements in autono- 
mous regions? 

MR. ALONTO. That is correct. 

MR. AZCUNA. This is the purpose so as not to have 
diverse power structures in autonomous regions while 
allowing for flexibility in subsection 1 0 thereof. 

For instance, under preservation of customs and 
traditions, and the cultures of the indigenous communi- 
ties of the autonomous regions, suppose one of their 
customs is to prohibit the liberty of abode or of chang- 
ing the same and, therefore, it would conflict with the 
Bill of Rights, which one would prevail? Would a 
member of a tribal community who seeks to change his 
abode against a custom compel the courts to allow him 
to change his abode? 

MR. ALONTO. The Bill of Rights is general to all. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, so it will prevail over customs. 

MR. ALONTO. That is a fundamental of law. 

MR. AZCUNA. I thank the Gentleman. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will the Committee yield to a few questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. MONSOD. Yesterday, the Chairman of the 
Committee enumerated the advantages of decentraliza- 
tion and the creation of autonomous units and ad- 
dressed quite convincingly the problems attendant to a 
unitary form of government. I did not hear the Gentle- 
man mention any disadvantages. Just for the record, are 
there any disadvantages to the creation of an autono- 
mous unit? Would there be any? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As far as we are concerned, if there 
should be disadvantages, they are insignificant in the 
light of the Philippine conditions. So, we emphasized 
the advantages. Perhaps, the disadvantages would be on 
funding and adjustments. That is the reason we are 
merely opening the avenue towards federalization, but 
I do not exactly mean federal government like that in 
the United States. I mean autonomous regions like in 
Switzerland, Federation of Malaysia, Indonesia, etc. 


That is why when we say that one-half may be federal- 
ized and the other half may not be federalized, then I 
think that is normal. It is not exactly anomalous 
because that stage will always be reached if the aim at 
full autonomy is carried gradually. That is the desire of 
the Committee because really we do not have the 
necessary funding and, perhaps, expertise; we need 
some more experience. We mentioned the Cordilleras 
and Muslim Mindanao merely as models. Later on. 
Congress may decide to create autonomous regions in 
other parts of the country should these models prove to 
be successful. 

MR. MONSOD. I am quite convinced of the sponsor’s 
arguments that autonomy has much more, if not all, the 
advantages and, therefore, it seems to me that aU the 
areas in the Philippines will want the kind of autonomy 
that the Committee seems to think should be appro- 
priate for the Cordillera and certain parts of Mindanao. 
My question is, if indeed one of the disadvantages is the 
sharing of the costs or the question of funds and aU the 
regions become autonomous, then we are not only 
talking about a relationship between an autonomous 
region and the national government; we are also talking 
about relationships between or among autonomous 
regions. 

Yesterday, one member of the Committee — I believe 
it was Commissioner Ople — mentioned that one of the 
benefits that can be accorded to an autonomous region 
is, for example, a rebate on power costs for areas that 
have a natural resource in waterfalls. Does the Gentle- 
man envisage a situation as well? Let us say that the 
Tagalog region of Southern Luzon and Metro Manila 
decide to form themselves into a region and decide to 
impose countervailing duties on the products of the 
Cordilleras that move to the ports and international 
airport of Manila, which would compensate or offset the 
higher cost of power of the Manila residents, would that 
be an acceptable relationship among autonomous 
regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In Section 1 2 of the second part of 
the report, which is Committee Report No. 25, when we 
authorized the autonomous region to adopt regional 
taxation, I think it would be the duty of Congress to 
study the fiscal effects of provisions on taxation as con- 
templated by the Gentleman’s question. To my mind 
that might impede the smooth flow of commerce. If J 
were a Member of that Congress, I would recommend 
that such imposition of countervailing duty be dis- 
couraged and this case can be the subject of the guide- 
lines that may be set forth by the Congress in authoriz- 
ing regional taxation to the regional government Such a 
matter can be considered by the Congress in the grant 
of the organic act to the particular autonomous region. 

MR. MONSOD. But it is possible when the entire 
country is divided into autonomous regions that there 
will be countervailing levies and duties with this autono- 


214 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


mous region invoking its natural advantages of port or 
water or mineral or forest resources. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. My next question is the question of 
reversibility. In this section, the Committee talks about 
autonomous regions being created after a plebiscite with 
the people. As economic development continues, there 
will be greater mobility of people. There will be people 
moving in and out of regions, migrating and emigrating 
into regions. And it is possible over time, for example, 
that, say, the Cordillera region will have an inflow of 
people from other parts of the Philippines such that 
the majority may no longer be the cultural or the in- 
digenous minorities in that area. Is the autonomy of a 
region reversible? Can they then vote that they do not 
want anymore to be an autonomous region if the 
pattern or the profile of the voting population changes 
over time? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Under the statement that I gave 
yesterday that the charter is an ordinary legislation, that 
is possible. Madam President. That can happen but it 
may appen after several years, perhaps even 100 years, 

rom e ime the organic act is granted to the autono- 
mous region. 

monsod. In the case of, say, our brothers in 
acir . example, yesterday Commissioner Davide 

tn f ‘P^^stions about the right of a city within a region 
flnc ^ remember correctly, the Gentleman’s 

wer was that in his opinion it should be a vote of the 
u’ determines the regional boundaries? 
ose the present regional boundaries now in, say, 
e^ons IX and XII, or are those still to be determined 
y Congress and to find out which? 

Mr. NOLLEDO. They should be determined by Con- 
gress. 

^ precondition for Section 
with respect to the formulation or the enactment of 
an organic law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is right. 


MR. MONSOD. And in that instance, would the 
regions then abide to the customary law of our Muslim 
brothers or would the civil laws supposed to apply side 
by side and which would be the predominant customary 
or civil law in that area? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a very good question. The 
personal laws of the Muslims should particularly apply 
to them. The Christians will not be bound. They will be 
bound by the new Civil Code. Incidentally, we still have 
Presidential Decree No. 1083 ordaining and recognizing 
a code of personal Muslim laws. 

MR. MONSOD. In other words, the principle of 
universal and equal suffrage will be applicable within the 
autonomous area. There will be no reserve seat system 
to protect the rights of the cultural minorities. Is that 
correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In our report, there is no such kind 
of system although two or three Commissioners have 
told me that they are going to present the necessary 
amendment to see to it that there will be some sort of 
equal representation between Christians and Muslims. 

MR. MONSOD. So in Section 2 of the Article, when 
we talk about sectoral representatives — I believe this 
was raised by Commissioner Quesada yesterday — this is 
interpreted to be within the context of the sectoral 
representatives in our Article on the Legislative or does 
this go beyond that to include other minorities or 
rehgious within the autonomous area? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bennagen would like 
to answer that question. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Madam President. 

We did say yesterday that we cannot go by the 
national categories of sectors because we will have to 
take a look into the existing social differentiation in the 
region, although I understand that there is a proposed 
amendment coming from one of our colleagues regard- 
ing this aspect of representation. 


of th^ aut^n!!^^^^ question is within that area n^ 

‘o be an tapli 

Commissioner Monto'SJe'a^' ™ ’ *"i 

mnrnino _ tho+ already answered it partly t 

cultural M r of the region will be 

our cultural Muslim brothers in that area. Supp( 

under a principle of universal and equal suffrage 1 
elective offwe of the government of the area is won 
Christians. This is also possible, is it not? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is possible. 


MR. MONSOD. My final question is: Yesterday 
during the interpellation of Commissioner Suarez, I 
believe there was a question regarding the need for a 
plebiscite in all cases and — please correct me if I am 
wrong — if I remember, the answer of Commissioner 
Bennagen was that there would be a plebiscite. But it 
seems to me the answer was that the plebiscite would 
only be for purposes of determining the boundaries 
rather than asking people if they want to be part of the 
region. I do not know if I got that correctly or incor- 
rectly, Madam President. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


215 


MR. BENNAGEN. The answer was a plebiscite with 
respect to the organic act or charter or whatever it is 
to be called, but at least in relation to the two regions 
that are mentioned, not in terms of whether we should 
enshrine it in the Constitution or not. 

MR. MONSOD. But can I just ask if, with respect 
even to the two regions named in Section 16, the pre- 
condition of a plebiscite must be complied with on 
whether they want to be part of the autonomous region 
or not? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Is that the understanding of the 
Committee? 

MR. ALONTO. With the permission of the Chairman, 
Section 16 refers to everything that is fundamental in 
the organization of the autonomous region and the 
population should be consulted on any phase of the 
autonomous region. And, as I said, in answer to Com- 
missioner Azcuna, those who do not want to get into 
the autonomous region have every right to do so; that is 
a personal right, and I think that should be the case in 
organizing and restructuring the different governmental 
units that constitute the Filipino nation. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I am asking the 
question because there seems to be some inconsistencies 
between the answer of the Chairman yesterday when he 
said that it should be the vote of the entire region. For 
example, in the case of Iligan City in Region XII, 
suppose the residents of Iligan City decided that they do 
not want to be a part of the autonomous region and, for 
that matter, we may have municipalities, what would 
happen to those municipalities? Would they be allowed 
to secede or, as the Gentleman said, would their senti- 
ments of not wanting to be a part of the autonomous 
region be respected? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to clarify that. It is 
really true that I said it should be the entire electorate’s 
will that should be considered because I was not bind- 
ing the Committee. It was my personal opinion, but I 
believe that there is really a need for an amendment to 
make that question clearer. That is why when that was 
asked of me by Commissioner Bemas, I said that, to my 
mind, there should be an amendment to make it 
specific. We welcome such an amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. But an amendment to the effect that 
the total vote of the region should be . . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, no, not to that effect because 
I emphasized that it could be interpreted that way 
without binding the Committee and that is why I said 
that we are receptive to an amendment to make it 
clearer; that if a particular local government unit does 
not decide to join the region, I think the will of the 
people in that unit should be respected. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. ALONTO. Besides that, one must have noticed 
that when this autonomous region is to be established. 
Congress is to have a consultation with the elective offi- 
cers within the area that is supposed to be constituted 
within the autonomous region. And in this consulta- 
tion — for example, if Iligan City would not like to 
join — the people would be able to express their ideas 
and their wishes, and so Congress, in delimiting the 
territory of the autonomous region, would exclude 
Digan City. 

MR. MONSOD. I do not want to belabor the point, 
but in designing the organic law, there would already 
be preconsultations to find out which people want to be 
part of the region, and after the organic law, there will 
now be a general plebiscite to be approved by those 
people who said that they are willing to be inside. But I 
guess my problem is that I do not know if there is an 
exact correspondence between the opinions of the 
officials and the people in the region. And, therefore, it 
is possible that in the initial design they would be in- 
cluded, but the city that is included in the final organic 
law may, by vote, say that it is not included. Now, 
what happens to them? 

I think that is my problem in understanding the 
process. Madam President, but maybe this can be solved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, if in the final vote they did not 
express their desire to be included. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In which case, their will must be 
respected. 

MR. MONSOD. And within that now predetermined 
area, on the basis of consultations, will it be decided on 
the basis of majority votes for the entire area or of 
province or cities within those areas? 

MR. ALONTO. The majority vote in the different 
units will be included. 

MR. MONSOD. I see. 

One final question. In the case of the Cordilleras, do I 
get ^Jhe answer of Commissioner Bennagen that there 
will be a plebiscite as well as a precondition for the 
setting up of an autonomous region? 

MR. BENNAGEN. As a precondition for membership 
in the autonomous region. 

MR. MONSOD. As a precondition for membership? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, and for defining the extent of 
the autonomous region. 


216 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, excuse me, before 
the Floor Leader calls the next interpellator, I would 
like to clarify my answer to the question of the Gentle- 
man about countervailing duty, because his question 
was premised on the existence of autonomous regions 
all over the country, assuming that the entire country 
has autonomous regions. 

So, I would like to caU his attention to Section 13 
of Committee Report No. 25 which says: 

Without prejudice to the above provisions, and except in 
areas of legislation exclusively belonging to the national 
government such as foreign relations, the national defense, 
customs, tariff . . . 

These things should pertain not to the autonomous 
region but to the national government. Therefore, in 
that case, the countervailing levy which can be classified 
as an additional customs duty under the present Tariff 
and Customs Code can be limited by the national 
government because that function really pertains to the 
national government. 


THE PRESIDENT. Before we do so, may I just 
acknowledge the presence of students from St. Scholas- 
tica’s College and also a delegation from the Cordillera 
region who are here with us this morning. 

Commissioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, will the Gentle- 
man of the Committee yield to a few questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The history of local governments 
shows that the usual weaknesses of local governments 
are: 1) fiscal inability to support itself; 2) lack of suffi- 
cient authority to carry out its duties; and 3) lack of 
authority to appoint key officials. 

Under this Article, are these three traditional weak- 
nesses of local governments addressed to? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. The first question is on fiscal 
inability to support itself. It will be noticed that we 
widened the taxing powers of local governments. I ex- 
plained that exhaustively yesterday unless the Gentle- 
man wants me to explain again. 


MR. MONSOD. With the Chair’s indulgence, may I 
just make one more point. 

I was just wondering, while reading through the entire 
sec ion, why there was no provision for regional de- 
ve opment or regional councils even if they are not 
autonomous governments. It seems that the structure of 
e entire Article is unitary in form with some local 
government rights. 

And then going to the other mode - I do not want to 
say extreme — which is autonomous regions — I do not 
know if I missed it in the Article - I did not see the 
pnnciples of decentralization enunciated, the regional, 
provincial, municipal, city levels that would give effect 

o a decentralization system other than an autonomous 
region. 


, _ NOLLEDO. Because we expect Congress to 
e me the government structure in each political unit 
an we are giving Congress a leeway to so organize the 
local government units. 


MR. MONSOD. So, 
versus an autonomous? 


we are not limited to unitary 


MR. NATIVIDAD. No, that is all right with me. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There is a right of retention of local 
taxes by local governments and according to the Nativi- 
dad, Ople, Maambong, de los Reyes amendment, local 
government units shall share in the proceeds of the 
exploitation of the national wealth within the area or 
region, etc. In relation to that, regional taxation is 
granted to the autonomous region. 

On the second question, with respect to the lack of a 
governing body with sufficient authority, because of the 
mandate to the Congress to create a government struc- 
ture in the autonomous region, I think that is parti^ly 
satisfied, and we have no express and wider provision 
here on local authorities with respect to other govern- 
ment units believing that the provisions of the Local 
Government Code may still apply, subject to change by 
the future Congress. 

On the third aspect, on the lack of authority to 
appoint, I think that is very material and corollary to 
the second question of lack of governing body with 
sufficient authority. These things are addressed to the 
Congress of the Philippines when they, as we expect, 
enact a new responsive Local Government Code. 


However, we will welcome amend- 

incnts in that regard. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. What is the Committee’s idea on 
how the autonomous regions are supposed to be 
governed? Will there be a governor? Section 10, of 
course, says that the organic act shall define the basic 
structure of government but as a matter of inquiry, 
what is the plan of the Committee on this? 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Natividad be recognized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the Gentleman for that 
question because in the original LfP draft, a regional 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


217 


executive council, contemplating a collegial body, was 
put there but our Committee changed that to a regional 
executive department, believing that it would be better 
that the executive head, as much as possible, be alone, 
perhaps assisted by some sort of ministers. The execu- 
tive head of the region will be called a regional governor. 

With respect to the legislative assembly, it says here 
that the regional executive department will be headed 
by the regional governor and the regional legislative 
assembly shall be elective and representative of the 
constituent political units. We are making this a little bit 
broader in the sense that we are giving Congress the 
discretion to determine the details of the basic structure 
of government within the autonomous region. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. This regional governor will have a 
term of office. He will be elected. Is that right. Madam 
President? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. As far as the President is con- 
cerned, he has the same supervisory powers over the 
autonomous region as well as the other local govern- 
ment units. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, only supervisory power and 
not control. Control may mean changing certain de- 
cisions of the autonomous regions or local government 
units. The supervision there, as defined in many cases by 
the Supreme Court, refers only to the duty of seeing to 
it that the laws of the country, including the laws of the 
particular region, should be faithfully executed. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The heads of the local govern- 
ments have always agitated for the authority to appoint 
officials, such as the provincial treasurers, the district 
engineers and the provincial health officers. In the con- 
cept of the Article, will the autonomous region have 
that authority to appoint key officials? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. The Gentle- 
man can present an amendment to make that emphatic. 
In our discussion, that was considered. It will be noticed 
that in relation to Section 12 ( 1 ), administrative organi- 
zation, it is the sense of the Committee that the 
appointing power, with respect to what the Gentleman 
has just said, should be given to the local public officials. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Managementwise and countrywise, 
would that be good for the country? This is just for my 
own satisfaction. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In relation to the first part of our 
report, I would say yes, Madam President. Of course, 
that is only persuasive to Congress when they enact a 
local government code because the Gentleman is now 
asking a question with respect to local government 
units other than the autonomous region. Am I right? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I fuUy agree with the Gentleman. 
I support that idea. And perhaps, an appropriate amend- 
ment win be favorably entertained by the Committee. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Section 13 says that except in 
areas of legislation exclusively belonging to the national 
government, they will be able to legislate. There is an 
enumeration here of the exceptions, such as national 
defense, customs, tariff, post and telecommunications. 
Does it mean that they can legislate with regard to 
police forces? National defense does not mean the 
police. This refers to the military. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I answer that question, I 
think Section 13 should be read in relation to Sections 
12 and 15. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And also in relation to Section 14. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. That is why I was wondering. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, in general, the autonomous 
regions have the powers set forth in Section 1 2. 

In. Section 13, the powers of the national government 
are also stated. All powers and responsibilities not 
granted by this Constitution or by law to the autono- 
mous regions are vested in the national government. 

But in relation to Section 1 4, we said that the main- 
tenance of peace and order within the region shall 
remain the responsibility of the local chief executive 
of each constituent unit who shall exercise supervision 
over local police forces within the region. 

In relation to Section 12 (1), my answer to the 
question is yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. If the Constitutional Commission 
approves a provision, especially in the Article on 
General Provisions, laying down the guidelines and 
structure of our police forces, indicating that our police 
forces are national in scope with specific powers given 
to the local executives, will this then be an exception 
to that Article? Is that the concept of the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Gentleman does not mind 
frankly speaking, there seems to be a conflict between 
their report on the Article on General Provisions 
and Section 14 of our report. That is why it seems to 
me, if the Gentleman is agreeable, that this question 
should be submitted to the Commission as a body in 
order to decide once and for all whether or not we 
return to the local chief executive the supervision over 
local police forces, because in our consultation in 
sorne areas of the Philippines, it seems to me that local 
police forces would like to be supervised by the mayor 
for an effective maintenance of peace and order. Also, 


( 


218 / 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


with due respect to the Gentleman’s report, I believe 
that professionalization can also exist even if we give to 
local chief executives the power of supervision over 
local police forces. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I respect the Gentleman’s opinion 
on this, but the reality of law enforcement is this; We 
have 1,500 towns and about 63 cities in the whole 
country. Not all of these towns can afford to maintain a 
decent police organization. A police organization worth 
its salt will have to have a training academy. It has to 
have a crime laboratory which is expensive. It has to 
have a fire department. A fire truck costs PI, 600, 000 
now. A police department would have to be equipped 
with standard equipage, meaning, standard firearms and 
other equipment. They have to be trained on the same 
basic principles in the performance of their duties, and 
they have to be paid on time — equal pay for equal 
work. If we revert back to the conditions of 1965, for 
example, where each town or each area is responsible 
for the whole spectrum of law enforcement, then it 
would be very seldom, indeed, to find a town that can 
afford the basic salaries of policemen. If we throw back 
our memory to those days when we had 1,500 frag- 
mented police departments, we had police patrolmen 
earning P20 a month and chiefs of police earning P60 a 
mon , which is way below the minimum wage law, but 
cannot pay more. So, the situation now is 
s. while we should give a maximum leeway or elbow- 
room to the local executives in the supervision of their 
po ice orces, they cannot avoid the help of the national 
because the situation as it is today is, even 
wi the 8 percent across-the-board contribution of the 
cities, that only amounts to P200 million, 
k-ir ^ the Integrated National Police is P2.2 

th remove the national government from 

e h e of the police forces of this country, we will 
au omaticaUy revert to that era where they have to fend 
or themselves, without the fire trucks, crime laborato- 
nes and the 13 police academies that are training them 
o ay So we in the Commission cannot close our 
eyes to mat reality because if we remove the supervision 
^®®ident over the police forces of our country, 
en that P2.2 billion support for the police will have to 
be removed. 


^ Gentleman a ques- 

tion, It he does not mind? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. 


for^e^ a^igni^n?' supervise these p 

mTee Sport? " ' 


MR. NATIVIDAD. The local executive should partici 
pate in the operation. But the overall administration 
such as appomtment, would be retained by the nationa 
government. There must be a uniform appointment law 


a uniform disciplinary machinery and a uniform training 
mechanism. We have 13 police academies today and one 
full cadet police academy that graduate students after 
four years of cadetship. These, I think, will all be 
scrapped by this Constitutional Commission if we so in- 
dicate that we are cutting the umbilical cord of the 
police from the President. This is a fatal blow to law 
enforcement in this country. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We have no objection if we can 
reconcile the Gentleman’s committee report with the 
provisions of our report. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. The Chairman of our Com- 
mittee invited representatives of the Ministry of National 
Defense, the general staff of the Armed Forces and the 
Chief of the Philippine Constabulary and they sub- 
stantiated and confirmed what I am telling the body 
now. So that while I agree that we have to give the 
mayors or the governors supervision over the police 
forces, I would advise against cutting off the powers of 
the President because if the national government is cut 
off from the police forces, they would lose P2 billion in 
budgetary support. And we will revert to our old system 
where it is better to have no police forces than having a 
policeman earning P20 a month. Give him the gun and 
give him the power to arrest and you have a danger to 
society, not a protector to society. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

I am a member of the Committee and, as I said 
yesterday, I regret to state that I do not agree with the 
honorable Chairman with regard to Section 14. I agree 
wholeheartedly with what Commissioner Natividad has 
said. He knows this because he was once the Chairman 
of the National Police Commission. And I know it 
because I was once the Chairman of the National Police 
Commission. We are fully aware of the dangers of giving 
whole control and supervision of local police forces in 
the hands of the local chief executive. Our experience 
shows that the local police forces are being used by local 
chief executives for their own welfare, more particularly, 
when it comes to election. Furthermore, it is our 
observation that they are being used as bodyguards of 
the mayor or his wife. Sometimes, a mayor has two 
wives and these wives have bodyguards even when they 
go to market. This is a very sad experience. I experienced 
it myself, Madam President, and, perhaps, Commissioner 
Natividad has experienced the same. That is why we are 
now on the same thinking when we say that there is a 
serious need of professionalizing the police forces 
because of its very delicate mission; that is, the main- 
tenance of peace and order and the protection of the 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


219 


rights and properties of the 54 million Filipinos. That is 
why I prepared the necessary amendment to Section 14. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I still have the floor, Madam 
President, have I not? — 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Natividad. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Commissioner de 
Castro said that he does not like the mayor or the 
governor to have supervision over local police forces. 
But the Commissioner said that he is in favor of giving 
supervision to local chief executives. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I think we can have a happy 
meeting ground on this. But we cannot cut off the 
national government. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, we will consider that seriously. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Nor can we cut off the mayors 
completely because they contribute 80 percent across- 
the-board from their budget. But the happy hunting 
ground must be located and from our vast experience in 
law enforcement, I think we can have our own formula 
in the Philippines. 

So, let me continue. Madam President. Yesterday, I 
heard the Gentleman very distinctly when he said that 
the urbanized cities will vote for the province. Is that 
right? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, for purposes only of voting for 
provincial officials. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But how about the provincial 
voters? Will they vote for the urbanized city candidates 
and vice-versa? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I do not think so. Will the Gentle- 
man repeat his question please? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am trying to clarify the causes 
of the many arguments in the local governments, and 
one of these is whether the urbanized cities will vote for 
the provincial candidates. What is the concept in this 
Article? 

MR. NOLLEDO. .We did not touch on that, but we 
are expecting an amendment from Commissioner Rama. 
He expressed his idea that there should be a provision in 
the Constitution that the voters of urbanized cities 
should be allowed to vote for elective provincial officials. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. In that case, I will not pursue the 
point. I am sure that Commissioner Rama will satisfy 
the Commission. I would like to say here that I am glad 
that the Committee has a very favorable attitude to- 
wards a viable police organization in these areas because 


I do not believe in very radical approaches which might 
exacerbate the disorders rather than make our peace- 
keeping chores better. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much, Madam 
President. 

The Committee has completely left out the municipal 
and provincial governments in this Article. What hap- 
pened to them. Madam President? 

MR. NOLLEDO. In what sense. Madam President? 

MR. BENGZON. I do not find any provision here 
with respect to the powers and, much less, any decen- 
tralization of powers to the provincial, cities and 
municipalities. Did the Committee not consider that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We did not consider that because 
we, as I said, opened the avenue for the formation of 
autonomous regions all over the country, but we* are 
receptive to amendments. 

MR. BENGZON. Following the sponsor’s trend of 
thoughts, if, for example, in Region I we apply for 
autonomy and it was granted, what happens to the 
various provinces and municipalities? Do they remain 
as separate political units within the region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. Do they have their own provincial 
governors and provincial board within the region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, although we received a recom- 
mendation from many sectors that the provincial 
government should be abolished if we should establish 
autonomous regions, but we found that impractical. 

MR. BENGZON. I see. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And so, we will maintain the 
provincial government. In fact, in the government struc- 
ture there is a possibility because governors are also 
elective officials and the legislative council or legislative 
department of the autonomous region may consist of 
elective ofpials, like the provincial governors within the 
region mcluding the city mayors. Tlien we will leave 
that for Congress to determine. 


220 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. I also heard yesterday during the 
interpellation of Commissioner Rodrigo and others that 
it is also possible that certain big provinces can also 
apply to become autonomous regions. Do I hear a 
confirmation from the sponsor that that is right? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. That was the question of 
Commissioner Davide because we mentioned that the 
autonomous region consists of provinces and cities, and 
we did not mention municipalities anymore because 
they are deemed included within the province. And he 
asked whether a big province can apply as an autono- 
mous region. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. On the assumption that we believe 
in the statutory construction that the plural includes the 
singular, I said “yes”; that is why he said that the report 
is not clear and perhaps a necessary amendment may be 
presented later on. 

MR. BENGZON. So, if Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur and 
Abra would petition to become an autonomous region, 
that is possible. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible. 

MR. BENGZON. I see. 

MR. NOLLEDO. They are all Ilocanos. 

MR. BENGZON. And, therefore, under this Article, 

ey could also have their own security forces. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is controversial. We put the 
security forces there under the command of the Pres- 
regulation by the Armed Forces of 
t e Philippines should the Commission decide to 
approve that provision. 

MR. BENGZON. And if this happens, there is a great 
possibility that a gentleman from Hawaii may come 
back because he may petition to have Ilocos Norte, 
Ilocos Sur and Abra as an autonomous region and, 
t erefore, cut up Region I, not including Benguet, 

maybe, and Mountain Province. That is a possibility, 
IS It not? 


MR. BENGZON. This Article that we have here also 
does away with the Metro Manila aggrupation of towns 
and cities, am I correct? In other words, the Metro 
Manila aggrupation of towns and cities is dissolved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As I said, the existence of Metro 
Manila is sanctioned by Presidential Decree No. 824, the 
constitutionality of which was upheld in the case of 
Lopez vs. COMELEC and Aralar vs. COMELEC. Ajid so, 
based on the Article on Transitory Provisions that 
all presidential decrees shall exist until repealed or 
amended by the forthcoming 'Congress, then Metro 
Manila Commission can exist while P.D. No. 824 
remains; although I believe that, in my personal opinion, 
that P.D. No. 824 is unconstitutional. 

In the case of Metro Manila, may I inform the Gentle- 
man that because we did not adopt the UP draft author- 
izing the existence of a metropolitan government, the 
Metro Manila government will have no more constitu- 
tional basis, in my opinion, without binding the Com- 
mittee. 

MR. BENGZON. Is it the sense of the Committee 
then that it is not in favor of retaining the Metro Manila 
aggrupation of towns and cities the way it exists now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We do not favor the retention of the 
Metro Manila Commission, but the aggrupation may 
exist in view of our recommendation on Section 5 that 
local government units may group themselves, con- 
solidate, or coordinate their efforts, services and 
resources for purposes commonly beneficial to them. 

MR. BENGZON. May I know the rationale of the 
decision to abolish the Metro Manila Commission? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I believe that highly urbanized cities 
like Caloocan, Manila and Quezon City should not neces- 
sarily form a metropolitan or supergovemment like what 
is existing now because of overlapping of functions. I 
cannot find sense in the national government giving 
national aid to the Metropolitan Commission and the 
Metropolitan Commission distributing the same to the 
local units constitutive of Greater Manila area. In fact, 
one will find out that the Metro Manila Commission is 
a white elephant; it is a financial burden to the national 
government. 


T^here is a possibility, but that 
man frnn^ H because I think when the gentle- 

manv rrimPc^Th comes Over he will be arrested for the 
bency committed during his incum- 


aie”n taken 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I consider that possibility. I 
hope it does not come into reality. 


MR. BENGZON. I only have four minutes to go. I 
can just discuss this matter with the sponsor later on 
because I have resolutions from a majority of the Metro 
Manila mayors stating otherwise. 

But may I now go to another point. Madam President. 
I am more concerned about my region. Region I, be- 
cause it does not only comprise of Pangasinenses and 
Ilocanos but we also have people from the Mt. Province 
and Benguet. 

I am made to understand that there are conflicts 
among the various tribes within a certain province. If we 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


221 


do give autonomy to certain areas, what happens to 
these conflicts among tribes that are part of a certain 
province or , a region? Could Commissioner Bennagen 
enlighten me on that one? 

MR. BENNAGEN. These conflicts have been there 
for centuries but the people have managed them. I do 
not see how the creation of an autonomous region will 
interfere in the management of conflicts. At the same 
time, we are saying that with the new structure, there is 
a possibility of introducing some amendments whereby 
effective supervision at the national level can at least 
mitigate some of the sources of these conflicts. And 
then also, I imagine that with greater decision-making 
powers within the region, both politically and eco- 
nomically, and I should add also, culturally, these 
sources of conflicts should be reduced, and the conflicts 
themselves ought to be minimized. 

m 

MR. BENGZON. I am just apprehensive that we 
might go to tribal rule, if we do create an autonomous 
region comprising of provinces which, in turn, comprise 
several tribes which have their own respective traditional 
conflicts; and since these regions are autonomous in 
themselves, then hell might break loose and we might 
just give way to further accelerated conflicts among and 
between the tribes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think we have answered that 
earlier, both for the Cordillera and the Bangsa Moro. 

MR. BENGZON. It seems to me that if we are going 
to approve all of these subsections from 1 to 10 of 
Section 10, it strikes me that we are definitely gomg 
into the direction of an absolute autonomy. Is my 
impression correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily. Madam President, 
because if we create an autonomous region, let it not be 
a cosmetic autonomy because if it is merely cosmetic, 
then it is not a real autonomous or independent region. 

MR. BENGZON. I am not talking of cosmetics. 
Certainly, we are not talking of cosmetics here. We are 
talking of true and real autonomy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. But what kind of autonomy is it? Is 
it an autonomy that would make this region completely 
independent? And the way this Section 1 2 strikes me, a 
lot of these provisions have urban and rural develop- 
ment; regional economic, social and cultural develop- 
ment; they have their own establishment and mainte- 
nance of schools; the regulation of tourism operation 
and maintenance of health. 

So, just to zero in on certain specific items, what 
happens, for example, if there is a conflict between a 
custom in a particular region and the national planning. 


more specifically in the development and exploitation 
of minerals and natural resources which are located, for 
example, in these mountainous areas which may be 
classified as ancestral lands, and it is shown that the 
development of these resources would be better for the 
improvement of the country as a whole and of that 
region in particular? What happens if such economic 
development plan would conflict with customs and 
tribal laws and traditions? Which would give way? 

MR. BENNAGEN. There are a number of possibilities 
here in terms of customary laws having the priority over 
state laws; another in terms of certain fixed provisions 
about sharing, like how much percentage should be left 
with the autonomous region and how much should go 
to the national region; and a third would be in terms of 
more systematic consultation between the national 
government and the autonomous region, without 
necessarily fixing at any particular point in time the 
ratio of sharing. 

MR. BENGZON. In other words, it is not the intent 
of the Committee to follow and uphold the customs 
and traditions over the national interest. There should 
be a dialogue and a consultation. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Correct. 

MR. BENGZON. In the event that this particular 
group of individuals insists on their own traditions and 
customs and, therefore, refuses to let the national 
government develop the mountainous mineral areas for 
the national interest — for example, they may not be 
agreeable to change — what happens now? Are we now 
going to think of the interest of the nation as a whole? 
Are we going to give priority to that, for example, the 
sharing of the fruits and benefits and, as much as 
possible, the relocation of these people and ushering 
them into a new way of life? But my point is: In a 
conflict like that, what is the intent of the Committee? 
Which interest should prevail? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Again, as pointed out in a number 
of occasions, we see the absolute refusal of existing 
communities to yield to what we now label as the 
national good or common good, but in the event that it 
happens, we have to invoke a number of processes here. 
One of these would be the supervisory power of the 
President, another is the role of the various regional 
agencies in terms of villages and groups. 

In any case, in the Cordillera and the Bangsa Moro 
as well as the other indigenous communities, they have 
a body of traditions that respond to this kind of con- 
flict. In the case of the Cordillera and other indigenous 
communities, there is a great deal of consensual de- 
cision-making going on. I foresee that this will have to 
be elaborated within the framework of the national 
region, on the one hand, and this autonomous region 
and the national government, on the other hand. 


222 


/ 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


We are saying that we have the cultural basis on 
which we could elaborate traditional laws that would 
respond to new problems. We are not starting from 
scratch. 


MR. NOLLEDO. If the Commissioner will permit me, 
I would like to be more specific. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


MR. BENGZON. Yes. It does not really answer my 
question categorically. But I will leave it at that and, 
perhaps, we could develop this as we go along in the 
period of amendments. 

There is another apprehension that I have and I 
would like to find out whether or not the Committee 
shares with me such apprehension and, if it does, what 
can be done about it? 

I think we are all aware that there are problems in 
certain areas, both in Mindanao and up North. And 
some groups are labeled as rebels; others, as bandits or 
just mercenaries. And the apprehension I have is that if 
and when we do grant autonomy to these various 
regions that may apply to become autonomous, these 
particular groups or bands of people may just work 
themselves into a position where they will become the 
regional security force for their region. And I guess, we 
have read in the newspapers and I myself have received 
certain reports about the abuses of these people, not 
only military abuses but abuses of these various bands 
of people. If we accuse the military of theft, robbery, 
rape and acts of lasciviousness, I understand that such 
acts are also committed by these various groups of 
people. 

So, this is precisely my apprehension. Is there any 
way by which we can stop these groups of people who 
pretend to cooperate with the government but who 
actually would just police their own groups? Is there 

any way by which these things can be checked and 
stopped? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner is asking for 
safeguards. The Commissioner will notice that the 
President has supervision over autonomous regions. 
Moreover, in consultation with Commissioners Nativi- 
dad and de Castro, I think they are in agreement that 
the local executive should exercise supervision over local 
police forces within the region. Therefore, we are giving 
the region the responsibility of maintaining peace and 
order. However, in the event that these rebels should 
go against their allegiance to the Republic of the Philip- 
pines, I then cite the provision that the defense of the 
region shall be the responsibility of the national police 
or the army, specifically the army. So it is appropriate 
perhaps that the President, in the exercise of his super- 
visory authority, may send the army to maintain peace 
and order if the local authorities cannot maintain peace 
and order within the region. So we do not dismiss the 
idea of sending the army, as has happened in certain 
instances in the United States. 

MR. BENGZON. In other words, the Commissioner is 
in favor of the principle that we do not cut the umbili- 
cal cord nor do we cut the leash. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 

MR BENGZON. So, there should still be some form 
of control insofar as the national government is con- 
cerned We should use “control” not just “supervisory” 
in order to be able to insure that such apprehensions we 
have will not happen. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Let me elaborate on my earli 
Mswer to the question of Commissioner Colay c 
the thrust of the question is the same. I S 2 
hat having argued for autonomy in the name of pea( 
^ us not have the illusion that everything will be we 
The apprehension applies not only to the Cordillera, r 
omy to the Bangsa Moro but to the whole of the Phil 
pme society. We should look at this social conflict 
structural and historical phenomenon and could 
understood best in a firmer and a more comprehens 
grasp of the processes that lead to this conflict. The 
ore, we cannot just think of safeguards be they l^j 
Whatever, without going into a m« 
of the historical £ 
structure roots of these. My view is that we should i 
look at these as phenomena existing in isolation of 
social conditions in the area. We hope that ha\ 
responded to the social needs and the historical asp 
tions of the people, some of these conflicts will 
resolved. 


MR. BENGZON. I agree with the Commissioner on 
that issue. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That to my mind is an appropriate 
statement. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Padilla be recognized. 

the president. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. Madam President. 

When there was a discussion on the Lopez decision 
on the Metropolitan Manila Commission, I was about to 
insert some information regarding the latest decision of 
the honorable Supreme Court in the North Negros case 
Patricio Tan, et. al, V5. Commission on Elections GR 
No. 73155, which was mentioned yesterday by Com- 
missioner Bernas in some of his interpellations. The 
impression of the honorable Chairman is that the 
Supreme Court has upheld the validity of the Metro- 
poUtan Manila Commission. That is correct, but that 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


223 


majority rule I think has been overruled by the North 
Negros case. In that decision, mention was made of the 
case of Paredes vs. Executive Secretary, 128 SCRA 
VI. It was the creation of a new municipality from 
existing barangays. The court upheld the legality of the 
plebiscite which was participated in exclusively by the 
people of the barangays that would constitute the new 
municipality. There was a strong dissenting opinion by 
Justice Vicente Abad Santos. And in the case of Lopez 
vs. COMELEC, there was again a strong dissenting 
opinion especially by Justice Vicente Abad Santos. And 
in the North Negros decision, the Supreme Court 
followed the dissenting opinion in those two cases. May 
I be allowed to quote just one paragraph of this very 
lengthy Lopez decision, of which case I appeared as 
amicus curiae for the petitioner. It says: 

The dissenting opinion of Justice Vicente Abad Santos is 
the forerunner of the ruhng which we now consider applica- 
ble to the case at bar. This dissent was reiterated by Justice 
Abad Santos. It was assailed as suffering from a constitu- 
tional infirmity — a referendum which did not include all 
the people of Bulacan and Rizai when such referendum was 
intended to ascertain if the people of said provinces were 
willing to give up some of their towns to Metropolitan 
Manila. His dissenting opinion served as a useful guideline 
in the instant case. 

So, the ruling now is: In every plebiscite where you 
cut off some municipalities to form a province, like 
North Negros, or even any other substantial change in 
the political unit, the votes in a plebiscite must cover 
not only the area affected, but also the entire province 
of Negros Occidental, because that dismemberment or 
exclusion will not only affect North Negros but will 
also affect the entire province of Negros Occidental. 

Now I would like to ask a few questions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before asking questions, I hope the 
Vice-President will permit me to comment on his 
statement that the Negros case overruled the Lopez case 
because the dissenting opinion in the Lopez case was 
adopted by the Supreme Court in that Negros case. 

There is a question on the effect of this overruhng of 
the Lopez case upon the validity of P.D. No. 824. To 
my mind, the constitutionality of P.D. No. 824 based 
on the law of the case doctrine in remedial law will still 
prevail. Secondly, we will also notice that in that 
decision, the Supreme Court did not rely upon the 
principle of whether or not there was compliance with 
the plebiscite requirement. The Supreme Court ruled 
that in view of the 1984 Amendments to the 1973 
Constitution which defined the different legislative 
districts in the Philippines, the Batasang Pambansa, 
sitting as a constituent assembly, recognized the 
Metropolitan Manila area as comprising the National 
Capital Region with a constituent composition. So the 
basis of the decision is not only compliance with the 
requirements on plebiscite. The legal reason was that the 
existence of the geopolitical units known as Metro 


Manila was recognized by the people when they ratified 
the ordinance appended to the Constitution which 
ordinance defined the National Capital Region. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. The decision, of course, did not 
mention particularly the Metro Manila Commission, 
but it said very clearly: 

Batas Pambansa Big. 885 (that is the law creating North 
Negros) is hereby declared unconstitutional. The plebiscite 
of the new Province of Negros del Norte, as well as the 
appointment of the officials thereof, is also declared null 
and void. 

That is the dispositive portion of the decision. 
Naturally, said decision could not declare the other 
P.D. or the other Batas unconstitutional because it 
was not the issue, but the body of the decision made 
reference to the Lopez decision and followed the rule 
stated in the opinion of the dissent. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that all? 

MR. PADILLA. No, some few questions more. 
Madam President. 

We are in favor of local autonomy to local govern- 
ments. In fact, the rule is that the central government or 
the President only exercises general supervision, and 
the principal reason is to have all the laws faithfully 
executed as part of the President’s oath of office. And, 
of course, those laws are national laws, not municipal 
ordinances. 

When we say autonomy, that is not very clear, 
because even the Tripoli Agreement which mentions 
autonomy does not define what autonomy is. I suppose 
it means merely the decentralization of governmental 
powers in favor of the local units. 

I tried to find a judicial decision on autonomy, and I 
found in the case of Villegas vs. Subido, 37 SCRA 1, 
that local autonomy refers, more or less, to purely local 
matters, to lend force, of course, to the legislative moves 
enlarging the powers of our local authorities. Decen- 
tralization of government authority practically means 
the same thing as local autonomy. 

I have been hearing the terms “self-determination,” 
“self-government,” and “self-rule.” In the opinion of 
the Committee, is local autonomy the same or similar to 
the right of the local governments to self-determination 
or self-rule or self-government? I think we have to be 
careful that we do not identify local autonomy in local 
government with those other terms I mentioned. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We have never used the term “self- 
rule. The Commissioner must have read that in the 
papers. I think when we talk of local autonomy, we are 
talking of effective decentralization, a division of 


224 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


powers. That is why the Gentleman has to understand 
our report in the light of the provision that the President 
retains supervisory authority over local governments, 
and that autonomous regions shall be established within 
the framework of the national sovereignty and respect 
for the territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines. Then in the light of those provisions, the 
Gentleman will understand what we mean by “local 
autonomy.” 

MR. PADILLA. I am glad to hear that local autonomy 
under the Tripoli Agreement recognizes very explicitly . 
“within the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the 
Republic of the Phnippines.” But I have heard especially 
from Commissioner Bennagen “self-determination. 


right of these people to choose their own path of 
development, we mean in terms of their right to deter- 
mine the political, cultural, and economic content of 
this developmental path but within the framework of 
the territorial integrity of the Philippine Republic. I 
think that is what we said the last time. 

But I can draw the Commissioner’s attention to an 

increasing literature worldwide ^in 

phenomenon in Canada, in the Uni e , 

European countries and all over. Increasingly mter- 
national organizations are supporting this rigi o se 
determination of indigenous peoples, t is no ^ 
gether new phenomenon except perhaps to t le p P 
dons who have been alienated from indigenous cultures 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. Of course, states or nations have the 
right to self-determination. But I do not believe that 
portions of a nation, like the Philippines, would have 
that right to self-determination. We may have fragmen- 
tation. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman excuse the 
Chair. If this takes long, we might faint. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is what I said earlier. 

THE PRESIDENT. Then can we continue this after 
lunch because we also have a very important caucus. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Before Commissioner Bennagen 
replies, we know we are lawyers and we know that “self- 
determination,” as used by a well-known, respected 
anthropologist, does not have the meaning in the legal 
way that we see it. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. If the Commissioner would allow 
me one whole day, I will discuss the relationship 
between the legal concept of self-determination and its 
human right version as it has developed in recent 
years, but we do not have the luxury of time. However, 
I already outlined yesterday the main thrust of self- 
determination as applied to indigenous peoples. I dis- 
cussed it in its historical context as well as political, 
economic and cultural content. I premised that on the 
framework of national unity as well as within the frame- 
work of the whole history of the struggles of the Bangsa 
Moro and the people of the Cordillera. I even mentioned 
that historically, the colonial governments always 
treated these groups as collectivities, not as individuals, 
the way that lowland Christians were treated. This is 
why we have had several government agencies and 
bureaus that addressed themselves singly to these 
cultural minorities or the taxonomic variations through 
the centuries. They were treated as non-Christian tribes. 
They were treated as infieles. Even up to now, they are 
treated as distinctive groups, as collectivities, not as 
individuals. We should take the Office of Muslim Affairs 
and Cultural Communities which has two bureaus — one 
for Muslim affairs and another for cultural communities. 
In other words, even the national government recognizes 
their distinctive characteristics. When we speak of the 


MR. BENNAGEN. If that is the pleasure of the 
President, I thank the Chair. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioners will please 
attend the close-door caucus during lunch time at t le 
South wing Conference Rooms A and B. 

We shall continue this matter after lunch. 

The session is suspended until two-thirty this after- 
noon. 

It was 12:29 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:58 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, we will continue the 
consideration of the Article on Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Would the honorable Chairman, 
Commissioner Nolledo, and the members of the Com- 
mittee please occupy the front table? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Vice- 
President Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Vice-President Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

At this juncture, the President relinquished the Chair 
to the Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12. 1986 


225 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

I have heard in previous discussions that some people 
have been blaming the unitary system even as it existed 
during colonial Spain and so forth. Does the criticism 
on unitary system mean that we do not want a strong 
centralized government? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because we believe that 
political power must be shared with the autonomous 
regions. It is a sort of shared responsibility. That is why 
in the handouts given to us only this afternoon, it is 
stated that decentralization heightens the access of the 
people to decision or policy-making process. 

We will notice that even our government has decided 
to regionalize all its agencies and offices. The Ministry 
of Education, Culture and Sports, the Central Bank, and 
even the Ministry of Trade and Industry are all regional- 
ized. They have what is known as the regional develop- 
ment council at several levels of the local government. 
And so, the national government believes that political 
power must be dispersed in order to attain economic 
and social development. I believe that the unitary sys- 
tem — I repeat it as many times as I could — has been a 
failure in the Republic of the Philippines. 

MR. PADILLA. There are regional offices of the 
national departments or ministries. But it does not mean 
that we must have a weak central government consistent 
with local autonomy. We may increase local autonomy 
but it should not dimmish the strength of the central 
government, especially if we stress the unity of the 
entire country. For example, we have a national eco- 
nomic development program. That must encompass the 
whole nation and all our people. We cannot be stressing 
one region as having a preference over other regions. 
Does not the Commissioner believe that what we need is 
more local government autonomy but within a strong, 
united central government? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have to qualify, if the Vice- 
President does not mind, that we have to strengthen the 
local governments within the framework of national 
sovereignty without necessarily weakening the super- 
visory power of the President over local governments 
because ultimately, if all these regions succeed, the 
-President’s powers will be fully respected but within the 
framework also of authority to set up autonomous 
regions. We will notice that in Section 12, the second 
part of our report, autonomous regions have authority 
over the following: regional, economic, social and 
cultural development subject, as to economic develop- 
ment, to policies laid down by the National Economic 
and Development Authority. 

In other words, certain standards set forth by the 
national government may constitute the guidelines to 
economic, social and cultural development programs of 
regional governments. 


MR. PADILLA. When we say regional, we really 
mean the political units of barrios, municipalities, cities 
and provinces. But Section 1 of Committee Report 
No. 21 makes reference to provinces, cities, municipali- 
ties, barrios and then they added “and the autonomous 
regions.” But we cannot have an autonomous region as 
yet in accordance with the committee report unless 
there be: First, a well-defined territory; and second, a 
plebiscite by all the people comprising that supposed 
region to petition and approve an autonomous region. 

Why are we taking for granted and assuming that we 
will have all these autonomous regions? The danger, as 
already explained by various Commissioners, is that we 
may have too many autonomous regions beginning with 
the Ilocano region. And this may impair the unity and 
solidarity of the nation under one central government 
by stressing too much autonomous regions. 

We agree to grant autonomy to local governments. 
The 1935 Constitution had no provision on local 
governments while the 1973 Constitution provided that 
the National Assembly shall enact a Local Government 
Code, and that was realized through Batas Pambansa 
Big. 337. Why do we not just say that Congress will 
strengthen this Local Government Code to grant addi- 
tional powers within the concept of local autonomy? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am very sorry but our Committee 
has decided to set up autonomous regions. When we 
defined the political units constituting local govern- 
ments, we included autonomous regions as one of them 
in anticipation of the fulfillment of the mandate that 
there should be autonomous regions in Muslim Minda- 
nao and the Cordilleras. I am very sorry, but I beg to 
disagree with the Commissioner. That is why we are 
going to submit this question to the body for considera- 
tion. I do not believe that there will be disunity if we set 
up autonomous regions. The examples of Switzerland, 
Malaysia and other countries, including the United States 
where there is a federal system, show that autonomy 
does not sow disunity. 

MR. PADILLA. The Commissioner mentioned 
Malaysia. My understanding of Malaysia is that there are 
five or six sultanates there with their respective chief- 
tains who are called sultans, datus or chiefs. The sultans 
rotate among themselves within five years or so the rank 
or category of king or perhaps ceremonial president, but 
the power in Malaysia does not rest on those sultans. 
The power is vested in a national assembly and on a 
prime minister. I do not think the parity between the 
conditions of the Philippines and Malaysia is obtainable 
or present equally. Sometimes others talk of Spain but 
it is well known that the people of the southern part of 
Spain, the Vascos, are separatists, and they have been 
accused of many plots against the government of 
Madrid. We should be avoiding autonomous regions here 
and there based on incidental differences, for other 
regions may also demand their autonomy and the result 


226 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


may be sacrificing the unity and solidarity of the entire 
nation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Before Commissioner Ople answers 
the Vice-President, I would like to mention here that 
there ^e state legislatures in Malaysia’s 13 states. Each 
state has its own constitution, legislative assembly and 
an executive council headed by a chief minister 
responsible to the legislative assembly. There are some 
states with hereditary rulers. That is what my note say. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I request that Commissioner 
Ople be recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


The particular relevance of Malaysia to the issue at 
hand has to do with Sabah and Sarawak. Malaysia is a 
federal state. In 1963, Sabah and Sarawak joined the 
New Federation of Malaysia. But what is distinctive 
about Sabah and Sarawak relative to the preexisting 
states of the Malaysian Federation is the fact that both 
of them reserved their sovereignty on labor, immigration 
and education. So, with respect to these spheres, the 
federal government has theoretically no involvement in 
Sabah and Sarawak, and I think in this respect we might 
say that although they are regularly constituted as states 
of the Malaysian Federation, Sabah and Sarawak are 
more autonomous states than the other states which 
were earlier associated with that federation. 


I think in the case of China, this is more illuminating 
It has a unitary state unlike Malaysia which is federal 
ut it has vested autonorrious status in Chingkiang an( 
ibet. And in most ways, Hongkong is the latest o 
regions when the treaty with th 
lu ed Kingdom over Hongkong takes effect in 1 991 
un er the motto “One country, two systems,” becaus 
communist and Hongkong is capitalist. Both d( 
tn th h • autonomy of Hongkong with respec 
economic and social system until 5i 
rs rom 1997, in accordance with that treaty itsell 

of Spain, there is a good warning to th 
ipmo people. The chronic unrest in the Basque regioj 
^ a consequence of the denial of autonomy to th 
asque nation which is, in most ways, really differen 
® Castilian Spanish. So I thought I wouL 
contribute this input on behalf of the Committee. 


soirihenf^p^rt ^havJ^® Spain who are in the 

nnrtintic ^ ^ racial community with some 

but the ornhi^^ Prance. They are given autonomy 
as entitled ^^®re is that they consider themselves 
fre ta l wJ „ “ words, they 

Northern with some Basques ir 

dtustion consider that 

situation because in the PhiUppines, we are all for ont 

united nation, one flag, one people, without many 
distractions as to temporary or incidental differences ir 
the different islands or regions of the country. 


Section 4 (2) of Article XI of the 1973 Constitution, 
which is reproduced in Section 5 of this Article on 
Local Governments, reads: 

Local government units may group themselves, or con- 
solidate or coordinate their efforts, services, and resources 

for purposes commonly beneficial to them. 

Does not the Committee believe that the different 
political units beginning with provinces and cities can 
avail of this provision in the 1973 Constitution and 
repeated in the committee report for a combination, we 
might say, among different provinces in the same part of 
the country, which may amount to what we now call or 
commonly consider autonomous regions? For example. 
Commissioner Abubakar says that autonomy in Region 
IX is working well under the Tripoli Agreement. There 
is a legislative council and an executive council in Zam- 
boanga City. But these really are only aggrupations of 
a few provinces. The fact is that in every province we 
have a governor and a provincial board or a sangguniang 
panlalawigan. If the legislative council will just be a 
combination of provincial boards or the governors 
thereof will become members of the executive council, 
that could be accomplished within the purview of the 
Local Government Code and this provision of the Con- 
stitution. In the same way, the legislative assembly may 
just be a larger assembly over the municipal and provin- 
cial legislative bodies. Does not the Commissioner 
believe that this coud be well implemented within the 
purview of Section 5? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible. I call that a 
“cosmetic autonomy.” And besides. Section 5 of the 
first part of our committee report contemplates only a 
temporary aggrupation and the situation covers only 
essential services. So the function there is merely for 
purposes of coordination. The situation is essentially 
different and apart from the autonomous region. 

MR. PADILLA. Its efforts, services and resources are 
for purposes commonly beneficial to them. So that can 
cover the concept of an expanded autonomy but within 
the local units, particularly the provinces. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Alonto would like 
to answer some more. 

MR. ALONTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I would like to make a little comment on the remarks 
of the distinguished Vice-President of the Constitutional 
Commission. 

In the first place, let us take into account that this 
appearance of autonomous regions in the report of the 
Committee is merely a restatement of something that 
was accomplished by this country through the Tripoli 
Agreement which was entered into by and between the 
regime of President Marcos and the Moro National 
Liberation Front. Tliis was in response to the oppression 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


227 


and tyranny that the Muslims in this country had ex- 
perienced, forcing them to go to the mountains to 
oppose that regime of President Marcos during martial 
law years. In order to eliminate that particular problem, 
the deposed President Marcos, through the help of the 
government of Libya, tried to negotiate with the Moro 
National Liberation Front which, at that time, was 
mistaken for being a secessionist group. This negotiation 
resulted in the establishment of autonomous regions 
in Mindanao, a unilateral decision which did not undergo 
the consideration of the finer details of that negotiation. 
Therefore, as far as the existence of these autonomous 
regions is concerned, they are existing de facto. So the 
term “autonomous regions” as embodied in this commit- 
tee report is merely a recognition of a de facto existence 
of autonomous regions in this country. But as the 
Chairman of the Committee has said, this is merely a 
“cosmetic autonomy” because the deposed President 
Marcos never really intended to put up here a real and 
genuine autonomous region. His purpose was to deceive 
the whole Filipino people, particularly the Muslims. 

In this case, the establishment of autonomous regions 
is not for the purpose of destroying unity among the 
Filipino people but to strengthen that unity as one 
people having one country, one government and one 
flag. 

MR. PADILLA. I am glad to hear that. But does not 
the Commissioner believe that the efforts should be 
more towards representation of, say, our Muslim 
brothers, especially in national offices so that they can 
be heard and represented, with the ultimate goal of 
faster integration? And probably, through more educa- 
tional facilities and interrelations, say, mixed marriages, 
there will be more representation and more integration. 

Would that not be a solution to whatever alleged 
discrimination or other sins may be against some sectors 
which are attributed to the system? Why do we not go 
into this unified central government, with local autono- 
my, and with some representation, say, from our 
Muslim brothers or our Cordillera brothers, so that 
their voices can be heard and their interest protected 
and promoted not only within their local communities 
and their “autonomous regions,” but also in the higher 
levels of national authority? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I answer that question? 

History has proven that the intention to integrate 
these members of the indigenous communities within 
the stream of national life has miserably failed. (Ap- 
plause) 

Is it impossible for us to integrate the Muslims? 
The move to integrate the Muslims began during the 
Spanish regime. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Just a 
minute, please, the audience is requested not to make 
any show of approval or disapproval. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. PADILLA. Let us not talk anymore of the 
Spanish regime. That was centuries ago. We are now 
considering a new Republic which has toppled 20 years 
of dictatorial regime. -- 

MR. NOLLEDO. The question of assimilation began 
during the Spanish regime; then it continued during the 
American regime. There was an attempt by Quezon to 
assimilate the Muslims; it was attempted by many past 
Presidents, and yet these minorities resisted. I do not 
consider assimilation a possibility at all. We have to 
respect our Constitution of 1973; it contains a provision 
that we have to respect the customs and traditions of 
the indigenous communities. Likewise, several provi- 
sions now appear in the 1986 Constitution to the same 
effect. This nation will ever be divided and secession 
movements may continue if we do not recognize the 
right of indigenous communities to maintain their 
customs and traditions. It is high time that we get 
ourselves out of that maverick shell of conservatism 
and obsolescence. I am sorry to say that, but it really 
comes from my heart. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair would like to call the attention of the audience to 
please refrain from any demonstration of approval or 
disapproval. 

MR. PADILLA. One last question. Will the Com- 
missioner agree to delete under Section 14 the phrase 
“may establish its own special forces”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I will submit it to the floor. The 
Committee will insist on its recommendation. I am sorry 
because we have met objections thereto by setting forth 
several limitations on the establishment of special 
forces. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIOmC OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee yield to my questions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 


228 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


BISHOP BACANI. Commissioner AJonto pointed out 
that the autonomous government is already existing 
de facto by reason of the Tripoli Agreement. I would 
ask how the provinces in these autonomous regions have 
de facto fared economically, politically and socially 
since that time. Has there been a marked improvement 
to justify optimism about the results in the future? 

MR. ALONTO. With the permission of the Chairman, 
I wiU answer that very good question. The Commis- 
sioner must have noticed in my remark in response 
to the Vice-President that this present status or compo- 
sition of these autonomous regions was never presented 
to the different provinces that constitute these autono- 
mous regions. In other words, they were established by 
President Marcos in the exercise of his dictatorial power. 
As far as the economic, political and social conditions of 
these existing autonomous regions are concerned, the 
conditions are almost the same as those in other parts of 
the country; that is, instead of improving, they have 
deteriorated as other local units have experienced during 
the time of martial law. Hence, these existing de facto 
autonomous regions in Mindanao, instead of becoming a 
solution to the problem of strongly uniting the Filipino 
people, has worked the other way around because, as 
the Chaiman of the Committee has said, their autonomy 
is only in words but not really in practice, considering 
that even the legislative assemblies are not empowered 
to legislate at all. 

BISHOP BACANI. So, in fact, de facto means it does 
not exist? 


ALONTO. De facto means it is existing. As a 
this regime has continued appoint- 
g officials in these autonomous regions. 

other words, we really 

experience yet even in the so-called autono- 
mous regions. 


MR. ALONTO. In truth and in fact, we have 
exercised any autonomous authority. 

NOLLEDO. In other words, the former I 
1 en retamed his appointing powers. I just want to 

anto that it was really a “cosm 

nomy. Section 32 of P.D. No. 1680 states: 

• collection, custody, use, disbursement and accoun 
onvprn a k f tunds in the autonomous region shall t 
anH ^ ^ regulations which cover similar loc 

and national financial transactions. 

MastuTa:^ And so, quoting Mr. Mici 

mr»nitorino ^’^tonomous regions were n 

oru OMg agencies for the President.” The Presit 
was foohng Muslim Mindanao 


nao. But I am told — I do not know how accurately — 
that there are only three provinces of the 13 provinces 
originally covered by the Tripoli Agreement which are 
predominantly Muslim — Sulu, Lanao del Sur and 
Maguindanao and Sultan Kudarat. 

MR. ALONTO. 1 beg to correct the Commissioner’s 
impression. It is true that not all these 13 provinces 
are predominantly Muslim, but there are at least seven 
— Lanao del Sur, Lanao del Norte, Sultan Kudarat, 
Maguindanao, Basilan, Sulu and Tawi-tawi. 

BISHOP BACANI. There are at least seven. So are 
those the ones to form the autonomous region? 

MR. ALONTO. According to the report of the Com- 
mittee, that depends upon Congress. 

BISHOP BACANI. Let me go to the third question. 
This is similar to the question of Commissioner Suarez 
but I would like to get full enlightenment. Section 9 
has this list of qualities — common historical, geo- 
graphic, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, communal, eco- 
nomic or other characteristics within the framework of 
and respecting the national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Philippines. 

In other words, these autonomous regions should be 
characterized by those aforementioned characteristics. 
This was asked yesterday: “Should all of these come 
together”? The answer was: “Well, some of them.” 
However, which are the minimum characteristics that 
would come together? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I must be very frank that the 
Committee was divided on the interpretation of this 
provision. As Chairman of the Committee, the body 
has to pardon me, if I give my opinion without binding 
those in the Committee who disagree with me. To my 
mind, any of those criteria can qualify as a basis to set 
up an autonomous region. But as much as possible, con- 
sidering that we are mandating Congress to form 
autonomous regions, it will be discretionary on the part 
of Congress which of these characteristics should come 
together or whether a majority of them should go toge- 
ther. So we are giving Congress a leeway to determine 
the criteria. As much as possible, a majority of them 
should exist. But as pointed out by Commissioner 
Napoleon Rama yesterday, other than linguistic or 
ethnic characteristics, economic or other characteristics 
may be a basis. In other words, I can now conclude that 
it is up for Congress to determine the criteria, whether a 
majority or two or three of these should exist in order 
to justify the formation of an autonomous region. 

BISHOP BACANI. From this enumeration, may I 
know the exact meaning of “communal”? 


BISHOP BACANI. I have another question 
would be an autonomous region to be formed in 


MR. NOLLEDO. The word “communal” was intro- 
duced by one of our Muslim brothers who appeared 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


229 


before us because he thought it could be a basis of, for 
example, Ilocanos going together in forming a regional 
government. When we say “communal,” they have 
common aspirations, language, et cetera. So, we do not 
need to apply ethnic, historical or cultural character- 
istics. This term is broader than “cultural, linguistic or 
ethnic.” For example, Ilocanos or Bicolanos in Central 
Luzon can ask for the formation of their autonomous 
regions because they are bound by communal character- 
istics. 

BISHOP BACANI. My final question is related 
to what we may be discussing later on in the Declara- 
tion of Principles. Should we talk about the separation 
of Church and State or something along those Imes? 
Within these autonomous governments, will there be a 
separation of Qiurch and State? Let me explain why I 
ask that. 

Yesterday, Commissioner Uka presented to us 
excerpts from a paper entitled, “A Primer on the 
Autonomy.” This came from the Mindanao State 
University’s conference of 500 Bangsa Moro national 
leaders. There is.a quotation stating that “Islam is both 
religion and government.” The other one, as quoted by 
Commissioner Uka, says: 

Islam is the religion'and way of life of the Bangsa Moro 

that require a separate political or administrative frame- 
work from the western concept and principle of separation 

of Church and State. 

Thirdly, in this paper on the Bangsa Moro we are told 
some details of the proposed autonomy. They say that 
the legislative assembly shall enact political, econornic, 
educational and social legislations including the institu- 
tionalization of shari’a courts and an internal security 
force for the Bangsa Moro nation in accordance with 
Islam. In other words, within this framework, there 
would seem to be a very close union between the 
Church and State or religion and the State. Should we 
approve these autonomous governments or these 
autonomous regions, we would still be able to speak of 
the separation of Church and State for the entire Philip- 
pines or would there have to be an explicit exception 
for autonomous regions? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I answer that? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I just make one statement. 

The Committee will deputize the honorable Ambas- 
sador Abubakar after a few seconds. As far as these 
Shari’a courts are concerned, I do not think they will 
infringe upon the separation of the Church and State 
because those courts will only enforce the customs and 
traditions embodied in the Muslim personal law as 
decreed by Mr. Marcos or as may be passed by Congress. 

May we ask Commissioner Abubakar to comment on 
that. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Abubakar is recognized. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. It seems that my good friend and 
colleague has doubts about the existence of a separation 
of Church and State in Mindanao and in Sulu. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am only asking a question. I 
am asking from ignorance because of the quotations 
that have been furnished me. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. There is an absolute separation 
of Church and State in the Muslim provinces. We have 
the governor for the whole province, the municipal 
mayors for the municipalities, and the councilors or 
members of the board. These two bodies legislate: the 
municipal board for the municipality and the provincial 
board for the province. 

In recognition of the Muslims’ right especially of the 
people of Mindanao — who had the least advantaged 
position of all the regions because during the Spanish- 
American regime they were rather very late in absorb- 
ing modern education and modem practices — a 
department separate from the national government was 
created during the American regime. They called it the 
Department of Mindanao and Sulu. For a while, the 
Executive Secretary was Frank Carpenter, an American. 
But this has passed. Now, there is a complete separation. 
In a Muslim province, we have there a governor, munici- 
pal mayors and councilors. The provincial board legis- 
lates for the province and the municipal council 
legislates for the municipality. There is no amalgamation 
or absorption either by the State or the Church in then- 
respective spheres of influence. The church or the 
mosque is neither built nor administered by the State. 
Churches are administered by the Imam who is selected 
by the Muslim community of that particular region. The 
Imam does not receive a penny of contribution from 
the municipal council or from the provincial govern- 
ment. 

This practice has been going on since the American 
regime up to the present. We have recently instituted 
the Regional Legislative Assembly which is well-known 
as has been accepted in Mindanao and in Sulu. There is a 
Speaker of the Assembly and there are regional rep- 
resentatives from the different provinces like Sulu, 
Basilan, Tawi-Tawi, Zamboanga and other parts of 
Mindanao. 

So, in that context, we are even ahead of the Consti- 
tutional Commission in legislating for the autonomous 
region. There is no regional governor. Each province 
has its own governor. The municipalities are governed 
in the same way the municipalities in Luzon and the 
Visayas are governed. But whUe the Visayas is more 
advanced and is more adjusted to modern administra- 
tion because ot the 360-year rule of Western powers — 
first Spain and then the United States - its orientation 
is easily understandable from our concept of constitu- 
tional arrangement. 

What is now asked for Mindanao is local autonomy in 
terms of the executive as well as municipal powers. 


230 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


Actually, we are already enjoying local autonomy. I 
know that because I am a friend of the Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly for one of the southern autono- 
mous regions. As I have stated before, Mindanao is 
composed of several provinces, the population of which 
is not predominantly Muslim. The residents in Zam- 
boanga are in the ratio of 50 to 60. There are many 
Muslims there. Basilan and Sulu are predominantly 
Muslim, and so on and so forth. So I cannot understand 
then what the Commissioner’s concept of local 
autonomy is. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Ambassador Abubakar. 
Commissioner Alonto will answer for exactly one 
minute. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes, it is only a few remarks about 
the separation of Church and State. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am only asking whether this 
should be part of the autonomous government setup. I 
am not even objecting to it. Please do not misunder- 
stand me. 

The reason is that one of the characteristics cited is 
common cultural” which, of course, would involve 
re igion. In fact, in one actual proposal, even the organi- 
za ion of the army will be according to Islamic laws. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bacani, I think 
s amic law will only be a guiding principle, in the same 
anner that officials of our government who are Catho- 
bound by the Catholic doctrines in the discharge 

pv. oties, without destroying the separation of the 
Church and the State. 


BISHOP BACANI. Yes. I appreciate the answer of 
Abubakar, but he is speaking of the 
setup. What I am asking is, in the future, in the 
region that will be set up, will the conse- 
quences that I have suggested come about? 

^ matter of fact, the provision on 
Church and State is embodied in the 
^ which we are now framing, and which is 
nnrtirf ® country, not only specifically for a certain 
orinrit?! whole country and the 

orovisinn ^ t ®®P^^^^ion of Church and State is a general 
Republic ’ of country; it covers the 

separation of m ^^^PPuies. Besides, this doctrine of 
has been hmi ^ western concept that 

shlld not Church 

but in the case o^lSam, 

relSon can intote 

MR. ALONTO. Yes becanisp in Toi 

t, -ru c* * ..r’ ui Islam there is no 

Church. The State or the community or the nation is all 


Islamic if it conforms with the principal doctrines of 
Islam, and so, that does not affect the government. And 
so, since it is stated in the Constitution that there is 
a separation ' of Church and State, the Church cannot 
interfere in what is purely a State affair. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. • 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Let me respond briefly to the third question of 
Commissioner Bacani with regard to the minimum com- 
bination of criteria for granting autonomy. The criteria 
should respond to the overall criterion of viability. It is 
important that when we look into the geographic, 
cultural, linguistic, ethnic and other criteria, we should 
examine the interrelationship of these and the issue of 
viability. This is important because yesterday, mention 
was made of even the possibility of some islands in 
central Philippines also asking for autonomy. 

In various studies of archipelagic states, it is the 
conclusion that the island ecosystems are not too viable 
as independent development units. We are saying, there- 
fore, that the interrelationship of geographic or, pre- 
ferably, ecological, along with cultural to include 
politico-legal systems and economic capability, should 
be seen. 

The question of language is to me a secondary issue, 
in the sense that there could be several languages within 
an autonomous region. In other words, the criterion of 
history refers nothing more to the temporal processes 
that link together ecological capability, cultural viabi- 
lity and economic capability of the region. That is an 
important consideration in response to the query of 
Commissioner Padilla as to the distinction between 
autonomy and merely decentralization of power. There 
has to be sufficient authority at the regional level to see 
to it that this viability is, in effect, realized. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. In view of the fact that over 25 Com- 
missioners have already interpellated, Commissioner 
Maambong said he will set an example and would 
demand only five minutes to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I will try 
my best to set an example but it depends really on the 
answer to my question. First, my question is on the 
creation of political subdivisions. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


231 


I notice that in Section 1, the tenn “barrios” is used. 
I was wondering whther we could realign this term 
“barrios” because this has created a lot of confusion. 
In all the laws that we have, for example, in the Local 
Government Code — Batas Pambansa Big. 337 — we 
used the word “barangay.” In P.D. No. 1 508, establish- 
ing a system of amicably settling disputes at the 
barangay level, we used the word “barangay,” as well as 
in all other presidential decrees and laws. But, probably, 
the Committee can address itself to this problem later 
on. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to answer that, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. Our Committee has decided to change 
“barangay” into BARRIO because ancient documents, 
titles, surveys, even names of schools still carry the word 
“barrio.” The Gentleman is only talking of decrees and 
statutes passed by the Batasang Pambansa. They can 
easily be changed. But I think barangay is just a Marcos 
invention. Tire real and original term is “balangay.” 

So, we recommend to . the Commission to please 
revert, for valid reasons and also for sentimental reasons, 
to the word “barrio.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am open to the suggestion of 
the Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. But I just want to recall that in 
my study of history, we used to refer to the smallest 
political unit of our country as “balangay which is 
closer to barangay. Anyway, let us just leave that point. 

I will go to the other problem on political subdivi- 
sions and I am referring to a political subdivision not 
mentioned in the present configuration of the provision. 
I am talking about subprovinces which appear to be in 

limbo. 

In the 1973 Constitution, we forgot about our 
subprovinces. Now, we have likewise forgotten the 
subprovinces. I would like to put it on record that we 
do have subprovinces. We have the subprovinces of 
Biliran in Leyte and Guimaras in Iloilo. Biliran has more 
inhabitants than the provinces of Siquijor and Batanes 
combined. How do we treat these subprovinces now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I believe that subprovinces are 
extensions of provinces. And when we talk of provinces, 
extensions are already included. Considering that the 
status of subprovinces is only temporary and they are 
expected to assume the full characteristics and status 
of a province later on, we did not include such sub- 
provinces as political subdivisions of the Republic of the 
Philippines. 

But for legal purposes, I would consider them ex- 
tensions of provinces. And for purposes of redistricting 
in the Committee on the Legislative, I would rec- 


ommend that subprovinces be considered extension 
of provinces. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Unfortunately, under Section 
198 of the Local Government Code, the existence of 
subprovinces is still acknowledged by the law, but the 
statement of the Gentleman on this point will have to 
be taken up probably by the Committee on the Legis- 
lative. A second point, Mr. Presiding Officer, is that 
under Article 2, Section 10 of the 1973 Constitution, 
we have the provision which states: 

The State shall guarantee and promote the autonomy of 

local government units, especially the barrio, to insure their 

fullest development as self-reliant communities. 

This provision no longer appears in the present 
configuration; does this mean that the concept of giving 
local autonomy to local governments is no longer 
adopted as far as this Article is concerned? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No. In the report of the Committee 
on Preamble, National Territory, and Declaration of 
Principles, that concept is included and widened upon 
initiative of Commissioner Bennagen. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you for that. 

With regard to Section 6, sources of revenue, the 
creation of sources as provided by previous law was 
“subject to limitations as may be provided by law,” but 
now, we are using the term “subject to such guidelines 
as may be fixed by law.” In Section 7, mention is made 
about the “unique, distinct and exclusive charges and 
contributions,” and in Section 8, we talk about “ex- 
clusivity of local taxes and the share in the national 
wealth.” Incidentally, I was one. of the authors of this 
provision, and I am very thankful. Does this indicate 
local autonomy, or was the wording of the law changed 
to give more autonomy to the local government units? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. In effect, those words indicate 
also “decentralization” because local political units can 
collect taxes, fees and charges subject merely to guide- 
lines, as recommended by the league of governors and 
city mayors, with whom I had a dialogue for almost two 
hours. They told me that limitations may be questiona- 
ble in the sense that Congress may limit and in effect 
deny the right later on. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Also, this provision on “automa- 
tic release of national tax share” points to more local 
autonomy. Is this the intention? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, the Commissioner is perfectly 
right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My last point is an issue which is 
very close to the heart of our Floor Leader. We have 
here a provision in the 1973 Constitution, Article XI, 
Section 4 (1), which indicates the independence of 


232 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


highly urbanized cities in relation to the province. This 
“independence” is also indicated in Section 15 of the 
Local Government Code, and in Section 165 of the 
same Code. I would like to point out also that in the 
case of Ceniza vs. COMELEC, L-52304, decided on 
January 28, 1980, the issue was: 

. . . whether the prohibition imposed on voters of highly 
urbanized cities from voting in provincial elections subvert 
the Principle of Republicanism by depriving them of the 
right to participate in government through the exercise of 
the right of suffrage. 

The Supreme Court emphatically said, “No, that is not a 
violation, because provinces have no jurisdiction over 
highly urbanized cities.” Considering this particular 
provision of the 1973 Constitution, together with the 
provisions of the Local Government Code and this 
Supreme Court decision in Ceniza vs. COMELEC, is the 
concept on component cities and highly urbanized cities 
no longer acceptable in the present configuration of the 
Article on Local Governments? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That will be the implication because 
we did not reproduce in either of our reports Section 
4 (1). Therefore, in highly urbanized cities, while these 
form part of the province, the people should be allowed 
to vote for the elective officials of the province. That is 
what Commissioner Rama wants to be included here, 
and if he presents an amendment to that effect, the 
Committee wiU gladly accept the amendment. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, if that is 
thinking of the Committee that the voters 
ot highly urbanized cities, Uke Cebu City and other 
Cl les, will be allowed to vote for their provincial elec- 
/m ° there be reciprocity if that happens? 

frtr 1 provincial voters also be allowed to vote 
e e ective officials of the highly urbanized cities? 


As far as I am concerned, uni 

chr. 1 . 4 ^^ amendment to that effect, the reciproc 
should not apply. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Why not? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is because in the case of tl 

in ^ ^habitants thereof have no direct intere; 

oniniorf cities. That is only m 

nor ihp r ^ member of the Committe 

presents itself. If Commissioner Ram 

Sv I rtn™,'!: he might indicate rec 

Procity. I do not know his sense about this question. 

OfMa MAAMBONG. One final question. Mr. Presidin 

In the creation of local government units like th 

.^Tfthe municipality, or the’provinc 

under the l^cal Government Code, there are fot 

critena: minimum area of territory, population leve 
average estimated annual income, and that the ne' 


creation should not reduce the population and income 
to less than the minimum of the unit to which it 
formerly belonged. Now, in the creation of regional 
autonomous regions, will the same criteria be applied? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It will be up to Congress. However, 
those criteria may possibly be considered. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be 
recognized to interpellate for three minutes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Before I address a few questions to the Committee 
headed by the distinguished Commissioner Nolledo, 
may I be allowed to say a few words. 

First, I am one of those who yearn for genuine home 
rule and autonomy for the people of the Cordilleras and 
Bangsa Moro. Second, although I deeply appreciate the 
bold step — the radical innovation introduced by the 
Committee — I have my reservations concerning the 
giving of autonomy to many regions which, in the words 
of Commissioner Nolledo, will pave the way for a 
federal country. 

My first question is: Am I correct to say that the 
Committee, I believe, was actuated by a desire principal- 
ly to give autonomy to the two regions when they 
formulated this Article on Autonomous Regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, generally. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I know from the Com- 
missioner the provinces that would constitute this 
Cordillera autonomous region and the Bangsa Moro 
autonomous region? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Bennagen should 
answer that. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I address my question with 
respect to the Cordillera autonomous region to Com- 
missioner Bennagen. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The answer to the question was 
given yesterday, but for purposes of emphasis, we will 
gladly answer that. Essentially, as we pointed out in 
answer to the query on the idea of autonomy, we said 
that the key issue here is ancestral land rights and not 
necessarily the existing boundaries. For purposes of 
specifying certain clearly bounded areas, the con- 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


233 


templated autonomous region for the Cordillera would 
include Kalinga-Apayao, Mountain Province, Benguet, 
of course, Baguio City, the Tingguian area of Abra, the 
Province of Ifugao and, if my understanding of the 
ethnography of the region serves me right, there will be 
certain areas in Nueva Vizcaya, Pangasinan, La Union 
and Ilocos Sur. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Were the people of these places 
consulted when this draft article on autonomy was 
formulated? What was their response? 

MR. BENNAGEN. There have been ongoing consulta- 
tions in the region as well as consultations in Mindanao. 
For instance, when two Members of the defunct Bata- 
sang Pambansa filed proposals for regionalization, there 
were already consultations even then, and since then 
more intensive, more comprehensive consultations have 
been conducted by various groups, professionals and 
sectoral organizations. As of the last count, there have 
been more than 12,000 signatories or thereabouts 
endorsing the idea of the Cordillera autonomous region. 
It cuts across various sectors and it cuts across the 
various existing political units. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In other words, these people are 
supportive of this idea? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Definitely. But that does not 
preclude other consultations later on. 

MR. SARMIENTO. What about the Bangsa Moro 
autonomous region? We were given a copy of a draft 
constitution by a group of Muslim students, academi- 
cians, etc., who said that the Bangsa Moro region shall 
comprise the provinces of Palawan, Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, 
BasBan, Zamboanga del Sur, Zamhoanga del Norte, 
North Cotabato, Maguindanao, South Cotabato, Sultan 
Kudarat Lanao del Sur, Lanao del Norte and Davao del 
Sur including the cities of Iligan, Cotabato, Marawi, 
General Santos, Zamboanga, Pagadian, Dipolog and 
Dapitan. May I ask Commissioner Alonto if the people 
of these places were consulted when this Article on 
Autonomous Regions was formulated? What was then- 
response? 

MR. ALONTO. That is a very good question, but I 
cannot actually tell you now what are the provinces 
included because that is within the province of Con- 
gress. In this report of the Committee, Congress will 
have consultation with the elected officials of the 
different provinces and cities and municipalities in the 
area. The provinces that were recited are the same 
provinces that were included in the negotiation between 
the government of former President Marcos and the 
Moro National Liberation Front. A1 those 13 provinces 
were included in that negotiation. But after the negotia- 
tion, when they came out with the Tripoli Agreement of 
1976, Mr. Marcos unilaterally implemented that negotia- 
tion and organized the two existing autonomous regions 


of Mindanao — Region IX and Region XII. But not all 
of those 1 3 provinces are within these areas now. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Tliank you. 

I have three questions that will require brief answers. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I give a 
brief comment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. As a matter of firsthand informa- 
tion, I know that there have been ongoing consultations 
amongst various groups of the Bangsa Moro in Marawi, 
in Zamboanga and in Cotabato. As early as 1981, there 
have been smaller consultations between Muslims, on 
one hand, and Christians on the other, together with 
what is generally known as “Lumad,” a generic term for 
tribal groups in Mindanao. So, these consultations are 
ongoing. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yesterday, during the sponsorship 
speech delivered by Commissioner Nolledo and in the 
course of the interpellation made by Commissioner 
Rama, Commissioner Nolledo said that this article on 
autonomous regions will pave the way for federalism 
as he challenged us to transcend the shell of obsoles- 
cence. I think Commissioner Nolledo is aware that in 
July we conducted several hearings in many provinces, 
and in those public hearings, the people clamored for a 
unitary form of government. My question is this: Is it 
not too presumptuous on our part to advocate federal- 
ism when our people in the provinces — we went to 
Bicol and the Visayas — clamor for a unitary form of 
government? May I hear the response of Commissioner 
Nolledo who was with me in Naga City where the 
people clamored for a unitary form of government. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I beg to disagree. In Naga City, I 
personally asked the people and they said they were for 
federalism. In Davao City, they were for an autonomous 
region. Now, I would like to mention here that the 
people are sharply divided in their opinions. Our con- 
sultations are limited in nature. So, we cannot say that 
the opinion expressed is the opinion of the entire Fili- 
pino people because we went to only selected areas I 
wish to say that when I use the word “federalization ” 
I do not mean the federalization as understood in the 
United States. That is why in my original speech I said 
“federalization by the establishment of autonomous 
regions,” as authorized in this report. I have to em- 
phasize that because I am misunderstood I wanted the 
country to be divided so that there wUl be economic 
progress. I feel that the unitary system in the country 
has miserably failed, and we will repeat that. The 
advantages of truly decentralizing the Philippines are 
given in a handout just distributed to us through the 
courtesy of Commissioner Rosario Braid. 


234 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. I will not debate with the Gentle- 
man on federalism. I have these last two points to raise. 
Section 9 states that “The legislature shall create 
autonomous regions.” My emphasis is on the word 
“shall.” Yesterday, Commissioner Nolledo stated that 
many of these provisions were extracted from the UP 
draft; however, the UP draft used the word “may” 
instead of the word “shall.” Also, a group of Muslim 
students gave this Representation a draft constitution 
where the word “may” is used instead of the word 
“shall.” As pointed out by Commissioner Villacorta, 
Spain used the word “may” instead of “shall.” Would it 
not be wise that we use the word “may” instead of 
using “shall”? 


Cordillera and Muslim Mindanao. I think this is the 
golden opportunity for us to open that avenue. We are 
not mandating Congress to create other autonomous 
regions. We are mandating Congress to create the 
Cordillera and Muslim Mindanao autonomous regions 
in obedience to the continuing, loud and clear cry from 
the people in these regions. 

And so, I hope that this body will bear with me again. 
Let us open that avenue; let us give leeway to Congress. 
Congress may decide later on, that there should be more 
autonomous regions in the Republic of the Philippines. I 
ask for broadmindedness on the part of the Members of 
this Commission. 


MR,. NOLLEDO. The word “may” can also be inter- 
preted as “shall” depending on the intention of the 
provision. Let me explain why we used the word 
shall.” Upon the request of the Muslim leaders who 
appeared before our Committee several times, they said 
that it must be mandatory. However, as I explained 
yesterday, the word “shall” here would, in effect, mean 
may because there are certain requirements to be 
complied with before an autonomous region may be 
established. There must be consultation with the respec- 
tive heads of provinces and cities; there must be an 
organic act to be passed by Congress, and Congress is 
^ven the right to set up the government structure with 
e etails set forth also in this report; and there must 
e a plebiscite to be held. Therefore, without these 
con itions being complied with. Congress may not, after 
set up the autonomous region. So, I hope the body 
car with us and with the Muslim leaders who 
appewed before us by tolerating the word “shall” as 
nd m Section 9 of the second part of our report. 


th<^R SARMIENTO. I think the Committee agrees th 
■jhnniH Pcople and the people of Cordille: 

are snr. ^ autonomy and many of our colleagU' 
mentin ^ould it be proper if v 

Ranoo Article these two regions, mentionit 

People and the people of Cordiller 
mniic r ° ^ general statement creating auton^ 

mk<!in would encourage, in the words of Cor 

nnf in the Malaya, the Bicol 

would be dangerous. 


dis^CTee respect to that, I b( 

that it will destroTthe^’^ Romulo was correctly qu 
idential system I w^ulH 

whose father was Am ha remind Mr. Ro 

the United States ^verrm^nt is 

presidential in form, so that nature j 

sistent with the preidential f is not ii 

Commissioner Romi.i government. I 

Commissioner Romulo must have been misquoted 

We should give leeway to Congress for the possi 
of creating more autonomous regions beyond 


MR. SARMIENTO. I also appeal to the Committee to 
give emphasis to these two regions instead of giving 
autonomy to other regions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are giving that emphasis, but 
many are objecting to mentioning the names of Cor- 
dillera and MusUm Mindanao in our report. I would like 
the Members of the Commission to know that in the 
Constitution of Russia, the autonomous regions are 
mentioned specifically. They say that the constitution, 
being the fundamental law, is a permanent document. I 
would like them to know that Cordillera is permanently 
located in the area where it is located within our coun- 
try, and that Muslim Mindanao is also permanently 
located. So, there is no harm mentioning them in the 
legal document that we are now drafting. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Would Commissioner NoUedo 
kindly enlighten this Representation about the clause 
“When circumstances so warrant” which appears on 
page 3, Une 9? This is with respect to the creation of 
special forces. What is so special about these forces that 
they are called “special forces,” not regular forces? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We actually qualified only the term 
as found in the TripoU Agreement. I beg to disagree 
with those who said that the existence of security forces 
as found in the Tripoli Agreement is to be negotiated. 
It was stipulated upon but it is only the relationship 
between the special forces and the central forces that 
remains to be negotiated. 

Special forces are those which are generally inde- 
pendent of the army. For example, since the country is 
archipelagic in nature there are instances when our army 
may be called to contain the insurgency in Cagayan or 
in other parts of Bicolandia or in Samar. And so, there 
will be a need to supplement the local police forces with 
special security forces that may come from volunteers 
from the autonomous region. The Gentleman will notice 
that the original provision is very general. It says that 
they can establish special forces period. 

So, I hope they will not get angry if I added several 
words. I was the one who added “When circumstances 
so warrant” and then, “subject to supervision by the 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


235 


national armed forces” and “under such provisions as 
the law may provide.” In effect, these will weaken the 
strength that may be gained from the establishment of 
these special forces. My purpose is to implement the 
provision that the autonomous regions shall exist within 
the framework of national sovereignty and respecting 
the territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you for the inspired and 
fervent explanation. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Aquino be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrgio). Com- 
missioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, with all due 
deference to the Committee and to Chairman Nolledo 
who has no peer in the field of constitutional law, I beg 
to differ with the committee report. 

I fully support the demand of the Bangsa Moro and 
the Cordillera people for local autonomy. But I cannot 
subscribe to the committee report which would grant 
Congress plenary power and authority to declare 
autonomous regions all over the country. Autonomy as 
a formal and juristic concept essentially involves a 
match between the State’s original power against the 
derivative power of the autonomous regions. Is not 
there any fundamental conceptual incompatibility 
between the State’s sovereignty and the power of the 
autonomous regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As I already stated, these autono- 
mous regions are established within the framework of 
our national sovereignty. And in answer to the question 
of Commissioner Bengzon this morning that should 
there be rebels against the government, whether this will 
prevent the President from sending the armed forces to 
suppress the rebellion, I said, “No, because of the 
expression ‘within the framework of national sover- 
eignty .” We are not granting sovereignty to the autono- 
mous region. That is why the term “power of autono- 
mous region” was appropriately used because as an 
accepted principle in constitutional law, sovereignty is 
indivisible. That is why we also maintain the provision 
in both Committee Report Nos. 21 and 25 that the 
President of the Philippines has supervisory power over 
autonomous regions to see to it that laws are faithfully 
executed. So, I find no inconsistency between the 


powers to be granted to autonomous regions and the 
sovereignty of the Republic of the Philippines. 

MS. AQUINO. On the matter of concepts, I might 
agree with Commissioner Nolledo, but in practical 
application, there are some serious ramifications. For 
example, in the context of a Third World, the concept 
of autonomy is invariably linked to the factors of self- 
sufficiency in a modernized state and state sovereignty. 
In the contemporary times, the present claims for 
autonomy arise essentially from the strained relation- 
ship between a dominant group and a subordinate 
group. 

We hear the assertions for sovereignty and autonomy 
from ethnic, cultural and religious groups, specifically 
from the Bangsa Moro and the Cordillera people. I have 
no quarrel with that; in fact, I am fully supportive of 
that. However, for all of its rhetoric, a claim of autono- 
my for all of the regions as provided for in Sections 9, 
1 0, and 1 1 is fraught with a lot of danger to the exist- 
ence of the State. In fact, it may be more counterpro- 
ductive than productive. 

We have not yet learned how to vitalize a local 
government in the context of the ^ Philippine politics. 
Regionalistic problems remain unresolved. The basic 
problems of poverty, education and welfare are so 
perverse that the traditional modes and approaches to 
these problems are seriously being questioned. All 
serious, sane, and prudent attempts to solve this kind 
of problem would call for more centralization than 
fragmentation. It is my fear that this bold step that 
the Committee is taking borders on constitutional 
adventurism. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. I am happy that Commissioner 
Aquino is making those observations because there is no 
adventurism; we are merely opening the way towards 
declaring the different regions in the Philippines autono- 
mous, in addition to the Cordilleras and Muslim Minda- 
nao. I think the Commissioner’s fears are groundless 
because the Committee has not decided that those should 
be the steps to be taken. We are merely opening the 
avenue towards Congress setting up more autonomous 
regions. Suppose Congress does not set up because 
Congress was convinced by the observations of Com- 
missioner Aquino, then I have no qualms about it- I 
have no objection against it. That is why the Com- 
missioner should say more in discouraging Congress 
from setting up other autonomous regions. 

But to picture the fact that the Committee has 
recommended the setting up of autonomous regions 
other than the CordUleras and Muslim Mindanao in 
explicit terms, I think, is gratuitous. We are merely 
opening the way, giving more leeway to Congress 
to do that. I think this is our duty to the nation because 
of the possibility that later on declaring the Cordilleras 
and Muslim Mindanao as autonomous regions would 
have beneficial effects and Congress, perhaps, may be 


236 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


inspired or urged to set up more autonomous regions. 
The hands of Congress will be tied if we do not make 
Section 9, more or less, flexible. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I cannot seem to 
come to terms with the position of the Committee. If 
that is the intention of the Committee, what then is the 
justification for the unwarranted libertinism in Sections 
9 and 10? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I object to 
the words “unwarranted libertinism.” We are giving 
Congress a leeway. 

MS. AQUINO. I was just proceeding from the posi- 
tion of the Committee as the Gentleman has articulated. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is true. We are giving 
merely a leeway to Congress, otherwise, we can easily 
state here that autonomous regions should refer only to 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. If I did not say 
that this provision is flexible as to open an avenue 
towards formation of autonomous regions, perhaps the 
controversy between us would never arise. In fact, if I 
did not say that, I think the Commissioner cannot even 
imply from that. 


MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
rloor Leader is recognized. 

w'ti!^ Rama. There are two more interpellators, and 
l a little bit of luck we will be able to move to the 

period of amendments. 

I ask that Commissioner Tan be recognized. 

officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tan IS recognized. 


Presiding Officer, I have a short qi 
tion that needs a short answer. 

sometimes the paranoia that such moves 

Has th^r "motivated by minority dominant groi 

if this m found a gauge that would determ 

odaT Tn? ? CordUleras is genuine, historical i 

S ciSe “f the om 

Plebiscite adequate? Is it not too late’ 


MR. NOLLEDO. Please do 

answer. 


not ask us to give a brief 


for^both^fh^^^^H^r ^ 

tZ pvflt th r Moro region: 

the extent that we are aware of the nature of the c 

sultations. 


SR. TAN. What is the gauge? 

MR. BENNAGEN. The range of consultations in 
terms of participants, in terms of sectors, and in terms 
of analysis of the issues. 

SR. TAN. And how about the plebiscite? 

MR. BENNAGEN. The plebiscite has to be done 
according to the Charter, according to Congress. The 
present consultations do not terminate the act of 
creating the autonomous region. They are merely phases 
of this process of attaining a juridical personality as an 
autonomous region. 

SR. TAN. So, the answer of the Commissioner is the 
consultations which are not yet ended. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Not yet ended. 

SR. TAN. Thank you, I am satisfied. 

MR. RAMA. For one question seeking clarification, I 
ask that Commissioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Villacorta is recognized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I beg the 
indulgence of the Chair. I have already spoken, but I 
thought that this basic clarification is needed. 

First of all, I would like to reiterate that I am for 
regional autonomy for Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordillera people, contrary to the allegation of one 
newspaper that I was against it. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
we were given the impression by the Committee that the 
rationale for regional autonomy is the need to rectify 
the imbalance in the development of different regions, 
particularly the regions of Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras and the neglect that these or some com- 
munal groups have suffered through the centuries. But 
now it seems that the Committee is talking about 
federalism rather than regional autonomy. The prece- 
dents that the Committee had mentioned were the 
regional autonomy in Italy, in Spain, in Portugal and in 
China. But in all these four countries that were cited by 
the Committee, there was selective regional autonomy, 
not a blanket one which would give the prerogative 
for all regions in those countries to opt for regional 
autonomy. 

For example, in Italy the Constitution specifies that 
autonomy will be attributed only to Sicily, Sardinia, 
Trentino-Alto Adique, Friuli-Venetia Julia and Valle 
d’Aosta. In Portugal, it was specified that autonomy will 
be given only to the Azores and Madeira. In Spain, 
regional autonomy is theoretically reserved for all the 
regions but the main motivation was to give recognition 
to the regional rights or autonomous rights of the 
Basque region and also Cataluna. Commissioner Ople 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


237 


also mentioned those regions that enjoy autonomy in 
China. Therefore, I am not entirely clear why the 
Committee is suddenly broadening the scope of 
autonomy. My understanding of the rationale is that 
this is something like sectoral representation by which 
we try to correct the imbalance so that the disad- 
vantaged sectors may be raised and become equal some 
day to the more advantaged sectors. By allowing regions 
of the Christian lowland communities the same right, 
the Committee is not really correcting the imbalance 
but m fact, exacerbating it because it will be very diffi- 
cult for Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras to catch 
up with the Christian lowlanders. 


MR. NOLLEDO. If Commissioner Villacorta had 
listened to my explanations to Commissioner Aquino’s 
questions, I think he would have easily understood my 
situation when I explained the meaning of federaliza- 
tion. I was talking also of autonomous regions. Even 
yesterday I already explained in my speech that I am 
talking of the establishment of autonomous regions 
other than the Cordilleras and Muslim Mindanao, and 
we are merely opening the avenue towards Congress 
establishing other autonomous regions. If Congress so 
decides to regionalize all parts of the country adopting, 
for example, the 13 regions now constituted, there is 
no constitutional prohibition. So, please understand 
my situation. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I have been listening attentively 
but I would like to go back to the rationale. How can 
we be opening the doors to other regions when the 
main premise is that we would want to correct the 
imbalance and, therefore, this is some kind of a special 
privilege to be given only to the so-called long oppressed 
communities; namely, Muslim Mindanao and Cor- 
dillera? Now, we want to give it to everyone. Then, 
where is the correction of the imbalance? 


MR NOLLEDO I said we are opening the avenue for 
the possibiUty so that Congress will take a cue from it, if 
Congress so decides. Actually, this country should really 
decentralize effectively. I mentioned the situations 
when governors and city mayors would go to the 
National Capital Region to consult and ask for aid from 
Malacanang or from the Minister of Local Government 
but these officials cannot be found. What happens? 
They go back to their provinces and cities highly 
frustrated and bitter against the national government. 
I believe that it is only through effective decentraliza- 
tion, where political powers are equitably dispersed, 
that this nation will attain progress. The unitary system 
has failed in the Republic of the Philippines because of 

decentralization. 


administrative decentralization. I think what the Honor- 
able Nolledo is referring to is administrative decentrali- 
zation and no one quarrels with him on that point. But 
we also understand that there are communities that 
require not just administrative decentralization, but also 
political decentralization. I think many, if not most of 
us, are willing to grant that to Muslim Mindanao and to 
the Cordilleras, but not to the other regions. Our 
national problem is fragmentation — we are severely 
fragmented as we are, culturally, psychologically, 
linguistically. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is only through fragmentation 
that this country will succeed. Quote me anywhere and 
I will debate with the Gentleman on that when we have 
the time. 

MR. VILLACORTA. But may I also hear the reaction 
of Commissioner Bennagen. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. I was supportive and 1 stiU 
am supportive of the general provision on granting 
autonomy at some future time within the overall princi- 
ple of autonomy as an effort to correct the centuries or 
years of injustice. I have in mind, for instance, the other 
tribal groups in Mindanao, which at some future time 
might evolve into some kind of an autonomous area. It 
does not have to be a province, a district or some other 
groups sharing the same characteristics already men- 
tioned. We go by the principle of autonomy as 
enunciated in a paper by Prof. Albert Blaustein, entitled 
Constitutional Protections For Indigenous Peoples. A 
proposal is with the International Center for Constitu- 
tional Studies at Athens, which says: “In developing the 
constitutional rights of indigenous peoples, the follow- 
ing must be studied,” and these are mentioned in the 
spirit of a proposal: 

1) Autonomy - Autonomy is the constitutional term of 
the art for institutional arrangements granting a degree of 
freedom to a recognized, racial, rehgious, linguistic, ethnic, 
tribal or cultural group to order its own affairs. It is closely 
aligned with principles of self-rule and self-determination. 

In answer to the Gentleman’s question on what 
conditions do the rights of indigenous peoples war- 
rant independent statehood, a federal structure or 
autonomous status, I think it is in this sense that it 
speaks of opening the possibilities for some future 
neglected areas to evolve into some kind of autonomy. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Just a very brief rejoinder, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. There are two kinds of decen- 
tralization and these two concepts are recognized in 
public administration: political decentralization and 


MR. RAMA. We have reached the end of the long list 
of registered speakers. And before somebody stands up, 
I move that we close the period of sponsorship and 
debate on the Article on Local Governments, 


238 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 12, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 


conceptual questions as I have. I was wondering if it is 
possible for us to have a caucus on this Article before 
we go into the period of amendments. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
proceed to the period of amendments on the Article on 
Local Governments and Autonomous Regions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the motion that we move to the period 
of amendments? ( Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. In order to recharge our energies, I move 
that we suspend the session for a few minutes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 4:38 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:1 1 p.m. the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Does the 
Gentleman want to present a motion to that effect? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presidmg Officer, I would like to 
propose a motion that the body meet in caucus to 
discuss some conceptual features of the Article before 
we go into the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). When 
does the Gentleman wish to hold the caucus? 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask the advice of the Presid- 
ing Officer? Is it possible for us to go into the caucus 
right now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has no objection., 

MR. MONSOD. If the Committee has no objection, 
we can go into the caucus right now, although I would 
prefer that we meet in the caucus room. I would like 
to propose if we can have an adjournment and go into 
caucus. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have just 
been designated as the Acting Floor Leader. 

We are now in the period of amendments but before 

we s Mt, may I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Cor 
ssioner Monsod is recognized. 

if ^ONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not kno 
ere are other Commissioners who have the san 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, in view of 
the statement of Commissioner Monsod and the think- 
ing of the body that we should go into caucus, I now 
move to adjourn the session until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in 
the morning. 

It was 5:14 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


239 


R.C.C. NO. 55 

Wednesday, August 13, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:43 a.m., the Vice-President, the Honorable 
Ambrosio B. Padilla, opened the session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is called to 
order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise 
to sing the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody wiU please 
remain standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honor- 
able Vicente B. Foz. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. FOZ. Almighty God, give us the light to write a 
Constitution the people will know and like, neither too 
long nor too short but good for them. Give us the 
strength to carry on with humility though often we get 
carried away when we push our ideas too hard, and say 
words we do not really mean but hurt our fellow 
workers. Give us the time to reflect even as we rush our 
work to meet some crazy deadline, mindful that more 
than stringing together words and phrases, we write 
history and bind our people, that is, if they accept it. 
But Lord, please make them do. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
please call the roll. 


the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 

. . . Present* 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Alonto .... 

. . . Present* 

Brocka 

. Present 

Aquino .... 

. . . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Azcuna .... 

. . . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Bacani .... 

. . . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Bengzon ... 

. . . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Bennagen . . . 

. , . Present* 

Davide 

. Present 

Bemas 

, . . Present 

Foz 



Garcia 

. . Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Absent 

Rodrigo . . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . . 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Nieva 

. . Absent 

Tan 

. . Present* 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present* 

Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Trefias 

. . Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Uka 


Quesada . . . . 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 


Rama 

. . Present 

Villegas 


Regalado .... 

. . Absent 




The President is absent. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the 
presence of a quorum. 

Before calling on the Assistant Floor Leader, we wish 
to acknowledge the presence of a group of students 
from St. Scholastica’s College, Manila and St. Bridget’s 
College, Batangas. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


240 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 198 


The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Communi- 
cations and Committee Report, the Vice-President 
making the corresponding references: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Jose C. Laureta of 105 Paseo 
de Roxas, Makati, Metro Manila, recommending that 
Section (7) 2 of Proposed Resolution No. 53 1 be 
deleted, and that the question whether the advertising 
industry should be nationalized be deferred and be left 
for determination by the legislative body. 

(Communication No. 528 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Emhio Y. Hilado, Jr. of P.O. Box 199, 
Bacolod City, suggesting among others the following: 
(1) that each provision as finally passed by the Com- 
mittee be published in full in the major daily news- 
papers, (2) that provincial governors and municipal 
mayors be encouraged to conduct public hearings on 
ni approved by the Committee; and 

( ) pubhsh each provision as it is finally passed by the 
Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 529 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

One hundred forty-one letters from students in Silang, 
Cavite, all seeking to include in the Constitution the 
following proposals: (1) a No-U.S. MUitary Bases Agree- 
ment; (2) an anti-nuclear power plant; (3) the promo- 
tion of Philippine sovereignty over our natural re- 
sources; and (4) a No-U.S. or any foreign intervention 
on Philippine affairs. 

(Communication No. 530 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from the Philippine Social Science 
ounc , ^c., Don M. Marcos Avenue, U.P., Diliman, 
^ezon ity, signed by its Chairman, Carolina G. 

ernan ez, and thirteen other officers and members, 
en orsing avorably the proposal to grant regional 
au onomy to areas and populations with common 
hisfoncal, geographical, cultural, linguistic and ethnic 
characteristics. 

(Communication No. 531 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


Letter from Ricardo Cardinal Vidal, Archbishop of 
Cebu, expressing his deep esteem and appreciation for 
the sacred task of writing a Constitution for the coun- 
try, enclosing therewith a copy of the 1979 Pastoral 
Letter of the Philippine Hierarchy on the Life of the 
Unborn Child, which may be of help in the deliberations 
of the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 532 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Position Paper of Siguion Reyna, Montecillo and 
Ongsiako containing the following: (1) Advertising 

agencies are not mass media; (2) No public policy is 
offended by the non-nationalization of advertising 
agencies; (3) Foreign owners have nothing to do with 
the content of advertisement and, hence, do not 
impose their own culture on us; (4) The existing consti- 
tutional provision on mass media is adequate to 
promote the purpose envisioned by the proposal; and 
(5) The nationalization of advertising agencies is best 
left to the wisdom of a legislature, which positions 
have been adequately discussed therein. 

(Communication No. 533 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication signed by Mr. Jorge Pelayo Albayda of 
15 Moreno Street, Kabankalan, Negros Occidental, and 
one hundred ninety other signatories seeking the 
retention of the U.S. military bases in the Philippu^®® 
even after the expiry date, saying that the presence o 
these bases is a boon to our economy, aside from 
providing security for the Philippines and Southeas 
Asia. 

(Communication No. 534 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, 
and Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from the Cordillera People’s Alliance 
transmitting a resolution signed by three thousand eign 
hundred thirty -six (3,836) people, seeking a constitu- 
tional provision that would grant a regional autonomous 
government in the Cordillera. 

(Communication No. 535 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Ramon R. Leuterio of 105 P. Cruz; 
Street, Mandaluyong, Metro Manila, urging the Consti- 
tutional Commission not to include in the Constitution 
controversial issues such as the U.S. military bases, 
abortion, nuclear-free Philippines, and expressing ap- 
prehension that the Constitution miglit be rejected if 
these are included. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


241 


(Communication No. 536 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Catalino P. Arafiles, President, Philip- 
pine Meteorological Society, 1424 Quezon Avenue, 
Quezon City, conveying full support to the resolution 
incorporating in the Constitution an Article on Educa- 
tion, Science, Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture. 

(Communication No. 537 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 37 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 539, prepared by the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
HUMAN RIGHTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 365. 

Sponsored by Hon. Foz, Rigos, Abubakar, Concepcion, 
de Castro, Jamir, Monsod, Nieva, Regalado, de los 
Reyes, Jr., Rodrigo, Villegas, Garcia and Sarmiento. 

To the Steering Committee. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
(Article on Social Justice) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
continue the consideration on Second Reading of 
the Article on Social Justice. This is Proposed Re- 
solution No. 534. There would be some reservations 
for the sake of clarification which will be stated by 
Commissioner Monsod. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion of the Floor Leader? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Monsod be 
recognized? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, there are two 
clarificatory refinements or modifications in the Social 
Justice’s report to convey the intent of the Committee 
and the body. The first one is on page 2 of Proposed 
Resolution No. 534, as amended. I think this was dis- 
tributed yesterday. The second paragraph of page 2 
states: “The State shall promote the principle of shared 
responsibility between workers and employers and the 
preferential use of voluntary modes in settling disputes 
including conciliation.” The modification is on the 
following words: instead of the words “and the enforce- 
ment of,” it should read AND SHALL ENFORCE. So, 
the refinement is a substitution of the phrase “and the 
enforcement of” by the words AND SHALL ENFORCE 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the proposed substitution? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. The second one is on page 4, on urban 
land reform and housing, second to the last sentence of 
Section 9, where it says “It shall provide (promote).” I 
have discussed this with the proponent of the amend- 
ment, Commissioner Davide, and the word should be 
PROMOTE and not “provide” because the State shall 
not provide the employment opportunities but shall 
promote employment opportunities. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the proposed substitution of the word “provide” for 
PROMOTE? 

MR. MONSOD. PROMOTE instead of “provide,” 
Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Yes, PROMOTE instead of 
“provide.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, there will be some 
clarifications also to be stated by Commissioner Tadeo 
regarding the same Article. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is 

recognized. 

MR. TADEO. Mr. Vice-President, meron lang po 
akong ilang paglilinaw tungkol sa mga magbubukid dahil 
mayroong ilang tanong ang mga peryodista na hindi ko 
kayang sagutin at may kalabuan. Naging mabUis ang pag- 
pasok ng mga amendments noong tinatalakay natin 
ang agrarian and natural resources reform. Ang tandng 
ko ay para kay Commissioner Bernas at ito ay tungkol 
sa ‘just compensation.” In the case of the NHA vs. 
Reyes. GR 4914, June 29, 1983, sinasabi na ang “just 
compensation ay batay sa assessed value or tax declara- 


242 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


tion, whichever is lower. Sinasabi kasi na nagkaroon ng 
pagkalito sa ibat-ibang interpretation subalit ang ibig 
sabihin nito ay “fair market value.” Ang paglilinaw po 
ng magbubukid ay ganito: kung papasok ang pamaha- 
laan sa sinasabi nating “affordable,” iyon po bang isa- 
subsidize ng government ay babayaran pa ng magsasaka 
sa government o iyon ay grant na sa kanila? 

FR. BERNAS. Hindi na, grant na iyan sa kanila. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. My understanding is that whatever is 
subsidized by the State is precisely a subsidy to the 
farmers; and because it is a subsidy, my understanding 
is that the farmers will not have to repay. In other 
words, this is a concrete implementation of the meaning 
we give to social justice: that those who have less in life 
should have more in law. 

MR. TADEO. Salamat po. Commissioner Bemas. Ito 
po iyong susunod kong paglilinaw. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Vice-President. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, I am a member of 
the Committee and I was the one who answered that 
question, and I think the record will bear out that the 
interpretation of the Committee is the same as the 
interpretation of Commissioner Bernas. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is 
recognized. 

MR. TADEO. Tinanong ko po iyon kay Commis- 
sioner Bemas. Kaya ko po pinadaloy ang tanong ko sa 
kanya ay dahil siya po ang nagpaliwanag noong pinag- 
uusapan ang bagay na ito. Ang pangalawa kong katanu- 
ngan ay tungkol dito sa pagpasok ng ecological, de- 
velopmental or equity considerations. Puwede po bang 
maipaliwanag kung ano ang kahulugan ng ecological, 
developmental or equity considerations? 

FR. BERNAS. I think that has to be answered by 
the Committee; hindi ako ang nagpasok niyan. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 


• "^^^^^^^'^^ESIDENT. We will recognize Commis- 
sioner acam after or does he want to speak now? 

BISHOP BAC.^1. Yes. I just want to ask a question 
ecause Commissioner Tadeo asked Commissioner 
emas or an explanation of the word. What is the bind- 

future interpretation of this 
ns 1 u ion, because Commissioner Bernas is not a 
em er of the Social Justice Committee? I am just 
would be the nature or the binding force 
f . , . ^i^ficatory remark on the future interpretation 

of the Constitution? 

Commissioner Bemas may 

reply if he so desires. 


R. BERNAS. My interpretation and my answer w 
precisely based not so much on the fact that I an 
mem er of the Social Justice Committee but rathei 
a par icipant in the deliberations in the Constitutio 

th® discussi( 

vprv Hp ^ think that is what is binding. It \ 

eive iust^rp ^ intent. The intent is 

of thp on ° owner even if it will be at the expe: 
for thp ^ order to make things afforda 

deliberations o ’^'^ind is the clear intent in 

binding and which I think is what 

bmding and not the committee report. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Hindi po ako ang nagpasok 
niyan pero nagbigay ako ng paliwanag na ang ibig 
sabihin ay isaalang-alang natin iyong pangangailangan 
ng kapaligiran, isaalang-alang din iyong pangangailangan 
ng pag-uniad at saka iyong pagkapantay-pantay. 
Pagsama-samahin iyong tatlong iyon. 

MR. TADEO. Mga kagalanggalang kong mga kasama, 
hindi kaya makabubuting pagkatapos ng salitang “eco- 
logical” ay lagyan natin ng pro-people development? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Ano ang magiging kahulugan ng 
pro-people development doon sa pagsasama-sama noong 
tatlong kaurian? 

MR. TADEO. Kasi mayroong mga developmental 
projects na nangangahulugang pag-eject ng tenant. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Kaya nga ayon doon sa pagpapa- 
liwanag kailangang isaalang-alang nang sabay-sabay iyong 
tatlo para sa ganoon iyung consideration ng equity, ng 
pag-unlad at ng kapaligiran ay nandoon din at hindi 
hiwa-hiwalay kundi magkaugnay. 

MR. TADEO. Salamat po. Ito ay isang paglilinaw 
lamang. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Marami pong salamat. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 


MR. TADEO. Pangalawang paglilinaw, Mr. Vice- 
President; ito po kasi ang napakaselan: “The State shall 
respect the rights of small landowners in determining 
retention limits.” Ito ay tinanong ko rin sa ilang mga 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


243 


kasama ko; nagkaroon din ng medyo dang kaguluhan sa 
Commission. Under Republic Act 3844 at sinusugan ng 
Republic Acts 6389 at 6390 at under P.D. No. 27 pinag- 
lilinaw ang ganito: kung mayroong retention limits na 
seven hectares, halimbawa, ang tenant sa loob noong 
seven hectares ay hindi puwedeng i-eject kung hindi 
mananatiling under leasehold, pero hindi siya puwedeng 
magmay-ari. lyon lang ang gusto kong linawin. Ang 
problema ko kasi dito ay wala si Commissioner Rustico 
de los Reyes na siyang nagpasok ng susog na ito. Ang 
tanong ay ganito: Ang ibig sabihin ba nitong “The State 
shall respect the riglits of small landowners in determin- 
ing retention limits” ay kung ma-determine ang limits na 
seven hectares at mayroon ditong magsasaka ay puwede 
silang i-eject o ang ibig sabihin nito ay under Republic 
Acts 3844, 6389, 6390 and P.D. No. 27, ’yung mga 
magbubukid ay mananatiling leasehold pero hindi sila 
puwedeng magmay-ari ng lupa; Ganoon po ba ang ibig 
sabihin nito? 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is 
recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. The Committee’s interpretation 
proceeds from the basic premise that when one respects 
the retention limits of small landowners, he need not 
necessarily be an owner-cultivator, in which case he is 
allowed under the circumstances to maintain the lease- 
hold arrangement with a tenant. It does not necessarily 
mean, therefore, that it does not follow that the tenant 
can be immediately ejected or evicted by the small 
landowner. 

MR. TADEO. Salamat po. Kasi ito ’yung isang 
mahalagang tanong sa akin na hindi ko masyadong 
masagot din kaya nilinaw ko lamang kung anong ibig 
sabihin nito. Ang ibig sabihin ay sinusunod nito ’yung 
Republic Act 3844 na sinusugan ng Republic Acts 6389, 
6390 at P.D. No. 27. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Dagdag lang doon, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Bennagen 
be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 

recognized. 

MR- BENNAGEN. I think in the deliljerations of the 
Committee, that should also be qualified in terms of just 
share of the fruits of the land. That is an additional 
qualification. 

MR. TADEO. Ito na lang, isang paglilinaw na pinaka- 
huling tanong. Itong “The State shall further provide 
incentives for voluntary land sharing,” ano ang ibi§ 


sabihin nitong “incentives”? Tinatanong din kasi ako at 
hindi ko gaanong maipaliwanag. Pero mayroon pang 
isang paglUinaw. Bukod doon sa “incentives,” anong 
ibig sabihin ng “voluntary land sharing”? Ang pagkaka- 
unawa namin sa “voluntary land sharing” ay ganito; 
kung halimbawa ay mayroon kang sampung ektarya, 
puwede mong sabihin sa mga magsasaka na akin na itong 
lima at maghati-hati na kayo roon sa Uma. Ang ibig 
naming sabihin ay nilalabag nito ang principles of agra- 
rian reform. Ang ibig bang sabihin nito ay hindi lalaba- 
gin ang principles of agrarian reform at iyung kanyang 
karapatan sa kanyang lupang binubungkal? Kasi ayaw 
naming makita na maging loophole ito sa karapatan ng 
nagbubungkal sa lupa kung sasabihin ng panginoong 
maylupa, “Sige, kung mayroon kang three hectares na 
sinasaka sa akin, ibibigay ko na sa iyo ’yung one hectare, 
bibigyan ko ng title, pero ibabalik mo sa akin ’yung two 
hectares.” Kaya gusto naming Uwanagin ito para sa 
ganoon kung magtatanong sila ay maipaliwanag kong 
maigi ito. Noong Linggo, binaha ako ng mga magbubu- 
kid upang ipaliwanag ko mismo itong mga naipasa ng 
Con-Com tungkol sa agrarian reform. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Monsod be recognized to make the explanation. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, during the 
deliberations, the intent was explained that this would 
be incentives to facilitate, accelerate and include areas 
that might not be considered included in the agrarian 
reform program. Therefore, this sentence cannot impair 
or obstruct or diminish the agrarian reform program, 
but this is a matter between the government and certain 
landowners for the government to give them incentives 
in order to give full expression in the agrarian reform 
program. 

MR. TADEO. Salamat po, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Bengzon 
be recognized on the same subject. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 

recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President, I would just like 
to clarify also the meaning of “fair market value” be- 
cause Commissioner Tadeo cited a case which inter- 
preted the presidential decree of the deposed President 
Marcos with respect to the meaning of “just compensa- 
tion.’ It was the intention of the Committee, and which 


244 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


was adopted by this body, that “just compensation” is 
defined as the fair market value of the property which is 
determined by the various market forces. In other 
words, it is the definition of “just compensation” as 
articulated by the Supreme Court before that decree of 
President Marcos was made. The meaning of “just com- 
pensation,” as articulated by the Committee and 
adopted by the Commission, is not the same as that 
given by the decree of President Marcos. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Pursuant to the motion of 
the Floor Leader, will the Secretary-General read the 
title of the resolution. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 534, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. RAMA. I now reiterate my motion to vote on 
Second Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 534 on the 
Article on Social Justice. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 


■ Before we vote, back to “just com- 

pensation, after the remarks of Commissioner Bengzon, 
Would say that although in the deliberations 
on e floor we adopted the principle of fair market 
value in general, in our deliberations on P.D. No. 27, 
w ic was the subject of the decision cited by Com- 
missioner Tadeo, it was also stated here that unless that 
IS c a enged, at least in that case, it was accepted that 
N^ ^arket value could be as specified in P.D. 

O- . And in that particular case, the meaning of 
air market value there of just compensation was not 
c a enged at all. And apparently, in this particular case, 
1 was seen that this was a fair market value. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Rosario Braid would like 
to be recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. We are sorry but can we just go back 
to one interpretation that was given earlier on “ecolo- 
gical, developmental or equity considerations.” 

I believe that the intent of the Committee here is that 
these three factors need not always be cumulative, and 
the reason for this is, we want to cover situations where 
a family with 10 children, for example, has only, say, 50 
hectares; and even if the limit is 25, there may be equity 
considerations for allowing that family to transfer to the 
10 children five hectares each rather than subject it to 
agrarian reform. 

These are situations that we cannot foresee, but 
Congress can certainly look into these things. 

MR. TADEO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is 
recognized. 

MR. TADEO. Ang ibig ko lang sabihin ay puwedeng 
magawa iyon kung walang tenant involved o regular pa 
ang workers involved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. 
Braid is recognized. 


Commissioner Rosario 


lan*d^sh^r^^^^-^^ BRAID. On the matter of voluntary 
IrivUet Z’ that concept, it is a 

And also terms of tax exemptions 

tenants AnH both tenants as well as non 

orovisions sn legislature could make 

STf^Ls^ould n^^ hX°‘?th"? Commissione: 

rather successfully i„ some places in the ' 50 ™ pa” 
ticularly ,n Negros, so I do not think we have to fear. I 
js a complementaty scheme that could work successful!, 
for the benefit of the tillers. 


MR. RAMA. The body is now ready to vote. 

MR. JAMIR. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Jamir would like to be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is 
recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. May we know which of the two 
opinions — the one given by Commissioner Bengzon 
and the other given by Commissioner Bernas — should 
be accepted by the Commission? 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


245 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President, I have just con- 
ferred with Commissioner Bernas and we have decided 
to submit the matter to the floor. When we discussed 
this in the Committee and on the floor, we were always 
laboring under the impression that “just compensation” 
meant the definition as articulated by the Supreme 
Court prior to P.D. No. 76. But Commissioner Bernas 
mentioned that there was this interpretation of fair 
market value as articulated in P.D. No. 76. And it seems 
that according to the records, this definition was not 
challenged, so we have to have this thing clarified. 

I maintain that the intention of the Committee in 
defining “just compensation” is the definition articu- 
lated by the Supreme Court in its various decisions in 
the past prior to P.D. No. 76, which is the fair market 
value of the property as determined by the market 
forces. And even if the interpretation of P.D. No. 76 
still subsists, my position is that this Commission can 
determine and should determine what is the meaning of 
“just compensation.” 

So we would like to submit this to the floor. 

MR. RAMA. Before we submit it to the floor, may I 
ask that Commissioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. In trying to determine just compensa- 
tion for purposes of agrarian reform, we must remember 
that we have to look at this in the context of the Article 
where it is. It is in the Article on Social Justice, and the 
thrust of this Article is precisely to make it easier for 
the disadvantaged to be able to obtain land. Now, we 
have P.D. No. 76 which, in previous remarks I made, I 
said that its definition of “just compensation” is a prima 
facie determination made by the legislative authority 
that that is just compensation; namely, the assessed 
value or the tax declaration of the owner, whichever is 
lower. It is a prima facie declaration. It is stUl within the 
authority of the Supreme Court to take a look at this in 
every instance, whether this, in fact, is the just com- 
pensation. But if it comes to agrarian reform, the 
Supreme Court must look at this in the context 
precisely of the Article which is for the benefit of the 
disadvantaged. Thus, even if, let us say, the Supreme 
Court were to say that this assessed value or tax declara- 
tion, whichever is lower, is not in this particular instance 
equivalent to the market value dictated by the market 
forces, what we are saying here is that the farmer or 
farm worker who is obtaining it will not be forced to 
pay more than that; but if more has to be paid to the 
owner, then the State will carry the burden. This is an 
effort to reconcile whatever differences there may be. 

MR. BENGZON. May I just say a word on what Com- 
missioner Bernas said because I do not think there is a 
real conflict as to the intention. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon 
may proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. There is no doubt that we have to 
read this term “just compensation” within the context 
of the Article on Social Justice which would make it 
easier for the disadvantaged to acquire the land. Pre- 
cisely, if the farmer is only able to afford so much, that 
is when the State comes to the aid and subsidizes it. In 
this manner the situation will not be to the disadvantage 
of the landowner. So, there should be equity on both 
sides. We are not forcing the farmer to pay the land- 
owner the value of that property even beyond his 
means. Whatever the farmer can afford, so be it, but at 
the same time, whatever is the difference between what 
the farmer can afford and what is just compensation, 
which is equitable to the landowner, the State must 
come around and provide that. So, there is no conflict 
insofar as the concept is concerned. What gives con- 
fusion is the definition of “just compensation” and the 
intention of the Committee is not to adopt the defini- 
tion of President Marcos under P.D. No. 76 as interpreted 
by the latest Supreme Court decision. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is 
recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Vice-President, the manifestations 
of Commissioner Bengzon on the matter of the inter- 
pretation of “just compensation” is correct insofar as it 
pertains to the settled usage of “just compensation” 
referring to the power of eminent domain for public 
use. The matter obtaining now is that which has refer- 
ence to the agrarian reform mandate of the Constitution 
which has clearly delineated its objectives in favor of the 
bias for the landless farmers. This clearly involves a third 
party, primarily to the interest of the landowner and 
the State, in which case, if there is any perceived conflict 
between the jurisprudence that is being cited by Com- 
missioner Bengzon, this is best resolved in the context 
of the understanding that the settled jurisprudence that 
he is referring to pertains to the public use on the 
powers of eminent domain of the State. If there is any 
conflict at all between what he cited and what is being 
settled now in this debate, it should be resolved in favor 
of the clear mandate of the Social Justice provisions. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair recalls the state- 
ment of Commissioner Concepcion that if we use a term 
in the Constitution, it should have a uniform or the 
same meaning, because it is dangerous to use the same 
term and have one meaning in one Article and another 
meaning in another. 


246 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


So, this is just compensation to the landowner. It 
seems that the issue is: Is just compensation the fair 
market value or is it just compensation under the 
presidential decree of President Marcos, based on the 
tax declaration, whichever is lower? 

It seems that we have discussed this before and that 
“just compensation” means just compensation as 
decided by many decisions of the Supreme Court. And 
it cannot make reference to the presidential decree of 
the former regime which is not just compensation 
because it refers to whichever declaration is lower. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized, Mr. Vice-President? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 


FR. BERNAS. It is true that when one phrase appears 
in a constitution, we should try to give it the same 
meaning as much as possible. But I think what we are 
entering into here is really something new — just com- 
pensation for purposes of land reform. 


I would like to discuss this in the context of the 
three inherent powers of the government; namely, the 
police power, the power of taxation and the power of 
eminent domain. When the State exercises any one of 
ese three powers, it involves always some loss on the 
par of the citizen. When it exercises police power, it 
can involve the destruction of property without com- 
pensa ion. When it exercises the power of taxation, 
^ t;itizen, the taxpayer, incurs some loss because 
as o pay a tax. When the State exercises the power 
if domain, no matter how much we say that it 

a H — the market value — in effect 

wVi J®^dty, the owner never really gets the value of 
t h • ^ ^^rket forces dictate. It is a necessary con- 
n ution which a citizen must give to society precisely 
because society is valuable. 


n this particular case, what we are trying to dc 
work out a formula for determining just compensati 
in th^e context of agrarian reform, which is for 
benefit of the underprivileged. And the starting po 
we have is the formula given under President Marcos 
the assessment or the tax declaration, whichever 
ower, is not challenged by the owner, then that is 
just compensation. But supposing it is challenged by 
owner and then the Supreme Court says, “In fact, i 
not just compensation,” then what happens? The st 

•savino difference. But I think what we 

situation where the state cannot make 
thpti ccause the state does not have the mon 

owlr thp'n f the state to impose on 

than what • ^ ^ ”^^^6 the Sacrifice of accepting 1 

than what is normally known as the market value. 


MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President. 


MR. BENGZON. I can see now the problem of 
Commissioner Bernas. In the event that the state is 
unable to make the difference between what a farmer 
can afford and what is just for the landowner, then I am 
not saying that the state cannot proceed to implement 
the land reform. 

FR. BERNAS. All right. 

MR. BENGZON. What I am saying is that the state 
must look for ways and means in order to compensate 
the farmer. If it cannot pay cash, it can pay in bonds. 

FR. BERNAS. We are not in disagreement then, if 
that is the understanding. 

MR. BENGZON. In other words, I am not saying that 
because the state cannot afford to make up the differ- 
ence, then land reform cannot be implemented. No, I 
am not saying that. What I am saying is that there 
should be established just compensation. And just com- 
pensation should be defined as it would be equitable to 
the landowner. As to the manner of payment, that is 
another question, because if the state cannot afford to 
pay cash for the difference, then it can certainly look 
for other ways and means by which it can compensate 
the landowner. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask for a 
suspension of the session for two minutes? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Pursuant to the motion of 
the Floor Leader, the session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 10:31 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:42 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. The interpreters of the word “just 
compensation” have come to a meeting of the minds 
and Commissioner Bernas will state the interpretation 
as agreed upon. 

May I ask that Commissioner Bernas be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is 
recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 


FR. BERNAS. Mr. Vice-President, I think we have 
come to some solutions to this. The main principle is we 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


247 


do not want the traditional definition of “market value” 
to be an obstacle to the implementation of land reform. 
So, let us say that the actual market value of a piece of 
land is PI million, but its assessed value or its tax 
declaration is P800,000 and that is all that the farmer 
can afford, then, as far as the farmer is concerned, he 
will be bound only to pay less, but we leave it to the 
state to try to make up for the difference in any way it 
can. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Mr. Vice-President, that is our 
agreement. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Mr. Vice-President, that is the 
interpretation that we have arrived at. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, with those explana- 
tions, I reiterate my motion that we vote on Second 
Reading on the Article on Social Justice. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General has 
already read the title of the resolution. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Just one brief note on my com- 
ment on the interrelationship of the words in the phrase 
“ecological, developmental and equity considerations. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. All right. Commissioner 
Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am sorry for the interruption. I 
just want to clarify that earlier discussion on the inter- 
relationship of the words in the phrase ecological, 
developmental, and equity considerations.” It is the 
understanding of the Committee that while we say that 
in a number of cases, all the three terms should be 
considered together, in our cases, “equity consideration” 
should take priority. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, the body is now 
ready to vote. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 534 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on Social Justice) 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of 
Proposed Resolution No. 534, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Vice-President, I abstain. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. As many as are abstaining, 
please raise their hand. (Two Members raised their 
hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor, none against and 
two abstentions. 

Proposed Resolution No. 534, as amended, is ap- 
proved on Second Reading. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NOS. 496 AND 533 

(Article on the National Economy and Patrimony 
and Provision on Ancestral Lands) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
consider Committee Report Nos. 24 and 32 on Pro- 
posed Resolution Nos. 496 and 533, respectively, as 
reported out by the Committee on the National 
Economy and Patrimony. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Quesada be recognized to explain the defer- 
ment of the report on autonomy because many of those 
interested are still around and they have been here since 
last night. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to express this request 
in behalf of the Cordillera people who are still here and 
whom we saw last night sleeping on just the floor of a 
school. It will be important for them to know just what 
happened in our caucus so that they would know why 
the issue for which they came down was delayed and 
what the decision of the body was. 

Gusto nilang malaman kung ano ang nangyari at bakit 
hindi pala tuloy-tuloy ang pag-uusap sa isyu ng autono- 
mous region. Ang pakiusap nila sa Committee ay kung 
puwede silang bigyan ng impormasyon kaugnay dito 
para hindi na sila maghintay pa nang matagal dahil ang 
pag-uusapan natin ay ibang topic na. lyon lang po. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask that the 
Chairman of the Committee on National Economy and 
Patrimony and its members take their seats in front for 
the sponsorship of said resolutions. 


248 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The members of the Com- 
mittee and its Chairman will please take their seats for 
the period of interpellations. 

MR. RAMA. Before that, Mr. Vice-President, may I 
ask that Chairman Nolledo be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo, the 
Chairman of the Committee on Local Governments, is 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. In 
reaction to the manifestation of Commissioner Quesada, 
I would like to state here that the Constitutional Com- 
mission in caucus yesterday afternoon decided to grant 
autonomy to the Cordillera and Muslim Mindanao. 
(Applause) 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Villegas, 
Chairman of the Committee on National Economy and 
Patrimony, be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is 
recognized. The other members of the Committee will 
please remain seated at the front. 

MR. VILLEGAS. May we call on Vice-Chairman 
Tadeo, Commissioners Bacani, Bengzon, Jr., Bennagen, 
Foz, Gascon, Monsod, Natividad, Ople, Romulo, Sar- 
miento, Suarez, Uka and VUlacorta. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The people in the gallery 
and our guests are requested not to applaud. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Vice-President, the members of 
the Committee also met this morning and adopted 
certam amendments to comply with the guidelines set 

M r that autonomous regions of 

. Mindanao and the Cordillera are recognized by 
the Committee and expected to be affirmed by the 

ons 1 utional Commission when it meets at the appro- 
pnate time. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is 
recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Consideration of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. 496 and 533 is now in order. With the 
permission of the body, the Secretary-General will read 
only the title of the proposed resolutions without 
prejudice to inserting in the Record the whole texts 
thereof. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 496, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY 

and Proposed Resolution No. 533, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY A PROVI- 
SION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS. 


MR. DE CASTRO. I am a member of the Committee, 
ut I was not informed that there is a meeting this 
morning. I was informed that the meeting will be at one 
o clock this afternoon. 


(The following are the whole texts of the proposed resolutions 
per C.R. Nos. 24 and 32.) 

COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 24 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Vice-President, there was an 
^endment made in that caucus yesterday afternoon. 
Commissioner Rodrigo called our attention to the 
meeting of the Committee on Style, so we changed the 
ime to eight o’clock; and I emphatically stated that I 
c anged the schedule. Commissioner de Castro must 
ave e t ahead, and so he was not able to hear the 


CASTRO. Mr. Vice-President, I left t 
caucus room much later than the Chairman of the Co 

Ws Governments. I was the last man 

leave the eaucus room, and I did not hear him say that 
was amended. 


The Committee on National Economy and Patrimony to 
which was referred Proposed Resolution No. 10, introduced by 
Honorable Davide, Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION RESERVING TO FILIPINO 
CITIZENS OR TO CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS 
WHOSE CAPITAL IS WHOLLY OWNED BY FILIPINO 
CITIZENS ALONE THE PRIVILEGE AND RIGHT TO 
DISPOSE, EXPLORE, DEVELOP, EXPLOIT OR UTIL- 
IZE THE NATURAL RESOURCES OF THE COUNTRY, 


Proposed Resolution No. 12, introduced by Honorable de los 
Reyes, Jr., entitled: 


Nevertheless, I will be constrained to manifest my 
oppositron, whatever it may be. on the floor to what- 
ever the Committee did in my absence. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 


RESOLUTION DECLARING THAT RIVERS, LAKES, BAYS 
AND LAGOONS AND OTHER BODIES OF WATER BE- 
LONG TO ALL THE PEOPLE AND SHALL BE MAIN- 
TAINED AS COMMUNAL FISHING GROUNDS AND 
FOR OTHER PURPOSES, 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


249 


Proposed Resolution No. 16, introduced by Honorable Azcuna, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE FOR A NEW ARTICLE ON 
CONSERVATION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 22, introduced by Honorable Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION WITHDRAWING THE RIGHT OF BALIK- 
BAYANS WHO HAVE EMBRACED FOREIGN CITIZEN- 
SHIP TO ACQUIRE LANDS IN THE PHILIPPINES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 46, introduced by Honorable Davide, 
Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION PROVISIONS AFFECTING THE NATIONAL 
ECONOMY AND CREATING A SOCIO-ECONOMIC 
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 47, introduced by Honorable Davide, 
Jr., entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING THE POLICIES ON THE CON- 
SERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE NATIONAL 
PATRIMONY AND SEEKING TO INCORPORATE IN 
THE NEW CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON 
THE NATIONAL PATRIMONY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 63, introduced by Honorable Nolledo, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO PROHIBIT SALE OR TRANSFER OF 
OWNERSHIP OF PUBLIC LANDS TO ANY PERSON 
WHETHER NATURAL OR JURIDICAL AND TO PRO- 
VIDE THAT SAID LANDS SHALL BE AVAILABLE 
ONLY FOR LEASE OR CONCESSION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 89, introduced by Honorable Guingona, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 122, introduced by Honorable Villegas, 

entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION STATING THE FORM OF THE 
NATIONAL ECONOMY MOST CONDUCIVE TO THE 
ATTAINMENT OF A JUST AND HUMANE SOCIETY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 211, introduced by Honorable Bacani, 

entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION TO INSURE THAT OUR NATU- 
RAL RESOURCES ARE USED, AND THE EXERCISE OF 
THE RIGHT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY IS REGULATED, 
FOR THE COMMON GOOD, 

Proposed Resolution No. 213, introduced by Honorable Tadeo, 
Suarez, Aquino, Brocka, Villacorta, Gascon and Tan, entitled: 


RESOLUTION TO DEFINE PATRIMONY AS THE TOTAL- 
ITY OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES, OF THE HIS- 
TORICAL AND CULTURAL TRADITIONS, AND OF 
THE COLLECTIVE TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL 
CAPABILITIES OF THE FILIPINO NATION, 

Proposed Resolution No. 219, introduced by Honorable Sarmien- 
to and Tadeo, entitled: 

RESOLUTION DECLARING THAT THE EXPLOITATION, 
DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION OF FISHING 
GROUNDS AND MARINE PRODUCTS BE RESERVED 
TO FILIPINO CITIZENS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 288, introduced by Honorable Bacani, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROVIDING IN THE NEW CONSTITUTION 
THAT THE STATE SHALL RECOGNIZE THE PRIMACY 
OF LABOR OVER CAPITAL IN THE REGULATION OF 
THE ECONOMY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 309, introduced by Honorable Gascon, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL PATRIMONY 
AND THE ECONOMY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 317, introduced by Honorable Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCLUDE IN THE TRANSI- 
TORY PROVISIONS THE IMPOSITION OF A TWENTY- 
YEAR LOGGING BAN ON ENDANGERED FOREST 
LANDS ALL OVER THE COUNTRY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 368, introduced by Honorable Suarez, 
Jamir and Tadeo, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION THAT THE STATE SHALL 
ADOPT A TRADE POLICY THAT WILL GIVE PRIORI- 
ITY TO THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE DOMESTIC 
OVER THE EXPORT SECTOR, 

Proposed Resolution No. 369, introduced by Honorable Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO GRANT SPECIAL CORPO- 
RATIONS THE RIGHT TO ACQUIRE IN OWNERSHIP 
LANDS OF PUBLIC DOMAIN, 

Proposed Resolution No. 374, introduced by Honorable Calde- 
ron, Alonto, Tingson, Maambong, Nolledo and Rama, entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO INCREASE FROM SIXTY 
TO SEVENIY-FIVE PER CENTUM CAPITAL OWNER- 
SHIP OF FILIPINO CITIZENS IN CORPORATIONS AND 
OTHER ENTITIES FOR THESE CORPORATIONS TO 
QUALIFY AS GRANTEES OF FRANCHISES OR CERTI- 
FICATES TO OPERATE PUBLIC UTILITIES AND TO 
DISALLOW FOREIGNERS FROM SITTING IN THE 


250 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


GOVERNING BODY OR BOARD OF ANY PUBLIC 
UTILITY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 375, introduced by Honorable Tingson, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO SET ASIDE LANDS OF 
PUBLIC DOMAIN AS PERMANENT SETTLEMENT 
AREAS FOR CULTURAL MINORITIES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 378, introduced by Honorable Trenas, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS AND 
THE DISPOSITION AND UTILIZATION OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES FOUND THEREIN, 

Proposed Resolution No. 388, introduced by Honorable Rosario 
Braid and Bacani, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE ARTICLE ON NA- 
TIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY OF THE NA- 
TION A PROVISION TO INCLUDE AIRWAVES AS 
PART OF THE NATIONAL PATRIMONY, 

Proposed Resolution No. 389, introduced by Honorable Padilla, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING A PROVISION ALLOWING 
FOREIGN INVESTORS TO ACQUIRE, HOLD OR OWN 
LOTS WTH LIMITED AREA, REQUIRED FOR THE 
OPERATION OF EXPORT-ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL 

enterprises. 

Proposed Resolution No. 401, introduced by Honorable Tadeo, 
Suarez, Quesada, Brocka, Jamir, Bennagen, Sarmiento, Villacorta, 
Gascon, Garcia and Aquino, entitled: 

resolution proposing to incorporate IN THE 

NEW CONSTITUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ESTAB- 
LISHING THE FRAMEWORK FOR A NATIONALIST, 
SELF-RELIANT, AND PROGRESSIVE ECONOMY 
FOUNDED ON GENUINE INDUSTRIALIZATION 
GUIDED BY THE PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL SELF- 
DETERMINATION AND EQUITABLE SHARING, 

Proposed Resolution No. 412, introduced by Honorable Rosario 
Braid, entitled: 

RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PRACTICE IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES OF THE VARIOUS PROFESSIONS TO FILIPINO 
PROFESSIONALS, 

Proposed Resolution No. 432, introduced by Honorable Maam- 
bong, Ople, Natividad and de los Reyes, Jr., entitled; 

RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PRACTICE OF ANY PRO- 
FESSION TO FILIPINO CITIZENS SAVE IN CASES OF 
RECIPROCITY TO ALIENS OF ANOTHER COUNTRY 
UNDER CONDITIONS PRESCRIBED BY LAW, 

Proposed Resolution No. 453, introduced by Honorable Gascon, 
entitled: 


RESOLUTION FOR THE PROTECTION OF OUR EN- 
VIRONMENT AND THE PRESERVATION OF OUR 
NATURAL RESOURCES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 528, introduced by Honorable Guingo- 
na, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE TO RESTRICT INSTANCES 
WHEN THE STATE MAY ENGAGE IN BUSINESS EN- 
DEAVORS, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that attached Proposed Resolution No. 496, prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 10, 12, 
16, 22, 46, 47, 63, 89, 122, 211, 213, 219, 288, 309, 317, 368, 
369, 374, 375, 378, 388, 389, 401, 412, 432, 453 and 528 with 
the Honorable Villegas, Tadeo, Bacani, Bengzon, Jr., Bennagen, 
Foz, Gascon, Monsod, Natividad, Ople, Romulo, Sarmiento, 
Suarez, Uka, Villacorta, Davide, Jr., de los Reyes, Jr., Azcuna, 
Nolledo, Guingona, Aquino, Brocka, Tan, Tingson, Jamir, Cal- 
deron, Alonto, Maambong, Rama, Trenas, Rosario Braid, Padilla, 
Quesada, and Garcia as authors thereof. 


Respectfully submitted: 

(Sgd.) Bernardo M. Villegas 
Chairman 

Committee on National Economy and Patrimony 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 496 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled, To incorporate the National 
Economy and Patrimony of the new Constitution, the following 
provisions: 


ARTICLE 

NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY 

SECTION 1 . The State shall develop a self-reliant and inde- 
pendent national economy. The goals of the national economy 
are a more equitable distribution of income and wealth, full 
employment of human, physical and technological resources, and 
a sustained increase in the amount of goods and services produced 
by the nation for the benefit of the Filipino people, with priority 
to the welfare of the poor. In the attainment of these goals, all 
economic sectors shall be given optimum opportunity to develop 
and a broader-based ownership of private enterprises shall be 
encouraged. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


251 


SEC. 2. Since the use of property bears a social function, all 
economic agents in the private sector sliall contribute to the com- 
mon good. Individuals and private groups shall be given freedom 
to establish and operate economic enterprises; subject always, 
however, to the duty of the State to promote distributive justice 
and to intervene when the common good so demands. 

SEC. 3. All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, 
petroleum and other mineral oils, all forces of potential energy, 
fisheries, forests, flora and fauna, and other natural resources are 
owned by the State. With the exception of agricultural lands, all 
other natural resources shall not be alienated. The exploration, 
development, and utilization of natural resources shall be under 
the full control and supervision of the State. Such activities may 
be directly undertaken by the State, or it may enter into co- 
production, joint venture, production- sharing agreements with 
Filipino citizens or corporations or associations at least sixty per 
cent of whose voting stock or controlling interest is owned by 
such citizens. Such agreements shall be for a period of twenty- 
five years, renewable for not more than twenty-five years, and 
under such terms and conditions as may be provided by law. In 
cases of water rights for irrigation, water supply, fisheries or 
industrial uses other than the development of water power, bene- 
ficial use may be the measure and limit of the grant. The Congress 
may by law allow small-scale utilization of natural resources by 
Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish farming in rivers, 
lakes, bays, and lagoons. , 

The President with the concurrence of Congress, by special 
law, shall provide the terms and conditions under which a foreign- 
owned corporation may enter into agreepients with the govern- 
ment involving either technical or financial assistance for large- 
scale exploration, development, and utilization of natural 
resources. 

SEC. 4. Lands of the public domain are classified into agri- 
cultural, forest, or mineral lands, and national parks. Only agricul- 
tural lands of the public domain, which may be further classified 
by law according to the uses to which they may be devoted may 
be alienated to citizens of the Philippines. No private corporation 
or association may hold alienable lands of the public domain 
except by lease, not to exceed one thousand hectares in area; nor 
may any citizen hold such lands by lease in excess of five hundred 
hectares or acquire by purchase or homestead in excess of 
twenty-four hectares. The Congress, taking into account conserva- 
tion, ecological, and developmental requirements of the natural 
resources, shall determine by law the size of lands of the public 
domain which may be developed, held or acquired by, or leased 
to, any qualified individual, corporation, or association, and the 
conditions therefor. The foregoing shall be subject to the require- 
ments of agrarian reform. 

SEC. 5. Upon recommendation of the President, Congress shall 
determine by law the specific limits of forest lands and national 
parks, marking clearly their boundaries on the ground. There- 
after, such forest lands and national parks shall be conserved and 
not be diminished. 

SEC. 6. Save in cases of hereditary succession, no private lands 
shall be transferred or conveyed except to individuals, corpora- 
tions, or associations qualified to acquire or hold lands of the 
public domain. 


SEC. 7. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6 of this 
Article, a natural-born citizen of the Philippines who has lost 
his Philippine citizenship may be a transferee of private lands 
solely for residential purposes, not to exceed an area of one 
thousand square meters. 

SEC. 8. The President, after consultations with the appropriate 
public agencies and the private sector, including labor and peasant 
organizations, shall recommend to Congress and implement an 
integrated and coordinated approach to national development. 

Until Congress provides otherwise, the National Economic 
Development Authority shall function as the independent 
planning agency of the government. 

SEC. 9. The Congress shall reserve to citizens of the Philip- 
pines or to corporations or associations at least sixty per cent of 
whose voting stock or controlling interest is owned by such 
citizens or such higher percentage as Congress may prescribe, 
certain areas of investments when the national interest so 
dictates. 

SEC. 10. The Congress shall establish an independent central 
monetary authority, the majority of whose governing board shall 
come from the private sector, which shall provide policy direction 
in the areas of money, banking, and credit. It shall have supervi- 
sory authority over the operations of banks and exercise such 
regulatory authority as may be provided by law over the opera- 
tions of finance companies and other institutions performing 
similar functions. Until Congress otherwise provides, the Central 
Bank of the Philippines, operating under existing laws, shall 
function as the central monetary authority. 

SEC. II. The Congress may, by general law, provide for the 
formation, organization, or regulation of private corporations. 
Government-owned or controlled corporations may be created 
or established only in the interest of the common good. 

SEC. 12. The State may, in the interest of the common good 
and the people’s security against external aggression, establish and 
operate vital industries, and upon payment of just compensation, 
transfer to public ownership utilities and other private enterprises 
to be operated by the government. 

SEC. 13- In times of national emergency, when the common 
good so requires, the State may temporarily take over or direct 
the operation of any privately owned public utility or business 
affected with public interest. Such takeover or direction of opera- 
tion shall be only for the duration of the state of emergency. 

SEC. 14. The State shall regulate or prohibit monopolies when 
the public interest so requires. No combinations in restraint of 
trade or unfair competition shall be allowed. 

SEC. 15. No franchise, certificate, or any other form of autho- 
rization for the operation of a public utility shall be granted 
except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associa- 
tions organized under the laws of the Philippines at least two- 
thirds of whose voting stock or controlling interest is owned by 
such citizens. Neither shall any such franchise or right be granted 
except under the condition that it shall be subject to amendment, 
alteration, or repeal by Congress when the common good so 
requires. The State shall encourage equity participation in public 
utilities by the general public. 


252 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 32 

The Committee on National Economy and Patrimony to 
which was referred Proposed Resolution No. 375, introduced by 
Honorable Tingson, entitled; 

RESOLUTION PROPOSING TO SET ASIDE LANDS OF 
PUBLIC DOMAIN AS PERMANENT SETTLEMENT 
AREAS FOR CULTURAL MINORITIES, 

Proposed Resolution No. 378, introduced by Honorable Treflas, 
entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCLUDE IN THE PROPOSED CONSTI- 
TUTION A PROVISION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS AND 
THE DISPOSITION AND UTILIZATION OF NATURAL 
RESOURCES FOUND THEREIN, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report them back 
to the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that attached Proposed Resolution No. 533, prepared by the 
Committee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY A PROVI- 
SION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution Nos. 375 and 
378 with the Honorable Villegas, Tadeo, Bacani, Bengzon, Jr., 
Bennagen, Foz, Gascon, Monsod, Natividad, Ople, Romulo, 
Sarmiento, Suarez, Uka, Villacorta, Tingson and Trefias as 
authors thereof. 

Respectfully submitted; 

(Sgd.) Bernardo M. Villegas 
Chairman 

Committee on National Economy and Patrimony 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 533 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE ARTICLE ON 
national economy and PATRIMONY A PROVI- 
SION ON ANCESTRAL LANDS 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled. To incorporate in the Article 
on the National Economy and Patrimony of the new Constitution 
the following provision: 

ARTICLE 

national economy and patrimony 

SECTION 1. The State, consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution, shall guarantee the rights of indigenous communi- 
ties to their ancestral lands to ensure their economic and social 
well-being and shall consider indigenous customary law governing 
proprietary rights in determining the ownership and extent of the 
ancestral domain. The ancestral lands shall be held in trust by the 
indigenous community for the benefit of their future generations. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that Com- 
missioner Villegas be recognized for his sponsorship 
speech. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is 
recognized. 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER VILLEGAS 

MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Vice-President, I would like to 
call the attention of the body to a modified version of 
Committee Report No. 24. It is a corrected copy; it was 
modified for the bicameral legislature. This was dis- 
tributed this morning. This is what we are going to use 
for purposes of the interpellation and amendments. The 
other committee report which was not changed is 
Committee Report No. 32 on ancestral lands. 

The first two sections of the proposed Article on the 
National Economy and Patrimony of the nation are 
packed with principles that shall serve as constitutional 
guidelines for the various branches of the government 
for the promotion of the common good in the economic 
sphere. 

Section 1 opens with a statement that “The State 
shall develop a self-reliant and independent national eco- 
nomy.” Economic self-reliance is a primary objective of 
a developing country that is keenly aware of over- 
dependence on external assistance for even its most 
basic needs. It does not mean autarky or economic 
reclusion; rather, it means avoiding mendicancy in the 
international economic community. Independence 
refers to the freedom from undue foreign control of the 
national economy, especially in such strategic industries 
as in the development of natural resources and public 
utilities. 

The three traditional goals of every national economy 
are then enumerated. The usual order, however, is 
reversed; economic growth is mentioned last, with 
equity being given prominence as the first objective of 
national economic development. The goal of reducing 
economic inequality is reiterated in an explicit state- 
ment of the emerging concept in social philosophy: the 
preferential option or love for the poor. The priority 
afforded to the welfare of the poor in the production of 
goods and services is further fully developed in a sepa- 
rate Article on Social Justice, which we have just 
approved on Second Reading — a major innovation of 
the new Constitution. The reference to the national 
product being for the benefit of the Filipino people tries 
to guarantee that national development efforts shall give 
priority to the needs of the local population rather than 
foreign consumers. Without unduly tying the hands of 
the policy-makers on the appropriate balance between 
production for the domestic market and for export, this 
constitutional mandate takes cognizance of the fact that 
the Philippines is a resource-rich and populous nation in 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


253 


which export does not have to play as vital a role as it 
did in Japan, Korea or Singapore, in which production 
for export was given the highest priority because of the 
paucity of natural resources and/or the small size of the 
population. 

Equal opportunities for all economic sectors to 
develop are guaranteed by the Constitution. The use of 
the word “optimum” suggests sufficient flexibility for 
policy-makers — whether in the executive or the legisla- 
tive — to decide on the appropriate balance, say, 
between agriculture and industry at any stage of our 
development process. 

Section 1 ends with an elucidation of the objective of 
equity in the distribution of wealth by articulating the 
ideal of a broader-based ownership of private enterprises. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Let the Chairman finish 
first. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think because he wants to pro- 
ceed to the second section, he is througli with the first 
section. My question has to do with the first section. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is the Gentleman through 
with the first section? 

MR. BENGZON. This is the period of sponsorship. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am sorry. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Section 2 presents the twin princi- 
ples on which a humane economic society is to be 
based: the principles of subsidiarity and solidarity. The 
first principle is the philosophical route of people 
power: what can be performed efficiently and com- 
petently by individuals and private groups should not be 
absorbed by higher bodies, least of all, by the State. The 
role that must be played by the state is a subsidiary one. 
It only intervenes when private initiative is helpless 
because of the complexity or magnitude of the pro- 
blem. The principle of solidarity — more honored in the 
breach in the Philippines — requires individuals and 
private groups to deliberately contribute to the common 
good in the performance of their daily tasks. This princi- 
ple clashes with the assumption of laissez-faire eco- 
nomics which overly glorifies free enterprise as the road 
to economic prosperity for all. Experience has shown 
that there is no invisible hand which automatically 
promotes the common good in an environment where 
everyone is encouraged to pursue his selfish economic 
interest. Although it is not necessary to constitutional- 
ize any specific economic philosophy, the phrase 
“private enterprise” comes closest to the type of eco- 
nomy described in Section 2. The term “private” 
includes not only the private business sector but all 
private voluntary organizations such as cause-oriented 


groups, cooperatives, foundations and other nonprofit 
organizations. 

Section 2 first mentions the principle of solidarity. 
All economic agents in the private sector shall con- 
tribute to the common good. It opens with the very 
timely reminder that private property as a social func- 
tion cannot be considered absolute.. The limitations to 
private property and private enterprise are reiterated in 
the proviso that freedom of initiative in the economic 
sphere shall always be subject to the duty of the state 
to promote distributive justice and to intervene when 
the common good so demands. 

The Article then proceeds to restate the regalian 
doctrine that all natural resources belong to the state. 
The exploration, development and utilization of natural 
resources are limited to corporations at least 60 percent 
of the voting stock of which is owned by Filipinos. 
Agreements with the development of natural resources 
can be for as long as 50 years, a period considered long 
enough to attract both local and foreign capital. 

An innovation of this Constitution is the special 
mention of small-scale utilization of natural resources; 
for example, small-scale coal or gold mining as well as 
cooperative fish farming. Again, this focus on small- 
scale natural resource utilization jibes with what can 
be considered a distinct flavor of the 1986 Consti- 
tution - the preferential concern for the poor or the 
underprivileged. 

In the classification of lands of the public domain, 
there is a return to the 1935 Constitution which limited 
the categories to three - agriculture, forest or timber 
and mineral lands. A fourth category is suggested; 
national parks which should be segregated from existing 
timber lands and preserved permanently as forests for 
ecological and recreational purposes. The size of agricul- 
tural lands that can be leased by private corporations is 
limited to a maximum of 1,000 hectares. Individual 
citizens can lease a maximum of 500 hectares or acquire 
by purchase or homestead not more than 24 hectares. 
These are the outer limits beyond which Congress 
cannot go in determining the size of lands of the public 
domain which may be developed, held or acquired by or 
leased to any qualified individual, corporation or asso- 
ciation. All these are subject to the requirements of land 
reform, as contained in the provisions of the new Article 
on Social Justice. 

The committee report continues to limit land owner- 
ship to Filipino citizens with the exception of a natural- 
born citizen who has lost his Philippine citizenship and 
who is allowed to own residential land not to exceed an 
area of 1 ,000 square meters. There were some in the 
Committee who disagreed with such a restrictive policy 
and reserved their right to introduce amendments in the 
plenary session. Another issue in which the Committee 
was divided was the question of foreign participation in 
the ownership of public utilities. Tlie majority decided 
on increasing the minimum Filipino ownership required 
to 66 2/3 from the existing 60 percent. 


254 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


The National Economic and Development Authority 
has been removed as a constitutional body and may be 
abolished by Congress if the need for it no longer exists. 
There was a consensus in the Committee that an eco- 
nomic planning agency should not be constitutionalized 
since formal economic planning is not an indispensable 
part of managing the national economy. However, untU 
the legislative body provides otherwise, the existing 
NEDA shall function as the planning agency under the 
executive. 

On the other hand, a central monetary authority has 
been retained as a constitutional body. The majority of 
its governing board shall not be occupying positions in 
the executive branch. Either they shall be representa- 
tives from the private sector or full-time members of the 
Monetary Board appointed by the President for a fixed 
term. Until the legislature provides otherwise, the 
Central Bank of the Philippines shall function as the 
central monetary authority. 

Lastly, it should be mentioned that provisions on 
social justice and land reform have been transposed to 
the new Article on Social Justice. Although there is a 
separate Article on Social Justice, it must be stressed 
that the whole Article on the National Economy and 
Patrimony of the nation is permeated through and 
through by the spirit of social justice. The preferential 
concern for the poor is an underlying theme. This 
coiicem, however, is neither exclusive nor excluding, 
t is not exclusive because the poor were considered 
not in the narrow economic sense. Anyone who suffers 
privation economically, politically, culturally or 
spmtually is considered poor. It is neither excluding 
ecause the preferential treatment for the poor does not 
m any way lead to a condemnation of those who are 
e ter off in life. The common good precisely covers 
evety single member of society and is inherently incom- 
patible with any ideology based on class conflict or 
struggle. The only effective binding force of a pluralistic 

society is a spirit of solidarity based on both justice and 
love. 

And finally, let me just call your attention to Com- 
mittee Report No. 32 which is on the issue of ancestral 
lands which Commissioner Bennagen can explain in 
greater detail. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

A/f ^\r’ Yes, very briefly. Thank you, 

Mr. Vice-President. 

May I ask the Committee Chairman one clarificatory 
question? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Did I hear right that the Chair- 
man s interpretation of an independent national 


economy is freedom from undue foreign control? What 
is the meaning of undue foreign control? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Undue foreign control is foreign 
control which sacrifices national sovereignty and the 
welfare of the Filipino people in the economic sphere. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Why does it have to be qualified 
still with the word “undue”? Why not simply freedom 
from foreign control? I think that is the meaning of 
independence, because as phrased, it stiU allows for 
foreign control. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It will now depend on the inter- 
pretation because if, for example, we retain the 60/40 
possibility in the cultivation of natural resources, 40 
percent involves some control; not total control, but 
some control. 

MR. BENNAGEN. In any case, I think in due time 
we will propose some amendments. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. But we will be open to an 
improvement of the phraseology. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any other inter- 
pellator? 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, it is the general 
sentiment of the body that the period of interpellations 
should be limited to two sessions — morning and after- 
noon. This is also the sentiment of the Chairman of the 
Committee on Rules, so I move that this sentiment be 
approved by the body, that the interpellation should 
be limited to two sessions. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion that the interpellations on this Article be 
limited to two sessions? 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Bengzon would like to be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. It would not really be f air both to 
the Committee and to the Commissioners if we apply 
this motion this morning because we already lost two 
hours. I mean, the Committee has already lost two 
hours. So, I suggest that perhaps we start this rule, if 
ever, beginning this afternoon. 

MR. RAMA. I accept the amendment. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


255 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Anyway, we proceed with 
the interpellations. There might not be as many inter- 
pellators as sometimes we expect. We might be able to 
terminate the period of interpellations within or early 
tomorrow morning. Why do we not just continue 
the interpellations now and then consider the motion 
this afternoon, in case we find that there are too many 
interpellators? 

MR. RAMA. That is fine, Mr. Vice-President. I ask 
that Commissioner Nolledo be recognized to inter- 
pellate. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 
Will the Committee Chairman please yield to some 
questions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Very gladly. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

On page 2, line 10, 1 would like to know the meaning 
of the term “full control,” In political law, when we 
talk of control, an authority can supersede the decision 
of a lower authority. Does it apply to this situation? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That proceeds from the statement 
that all natural resources are owned by the State. And 
so, that full control is deducted from the fact that 
these resources belong to the State. But then the State 
can, of course, delegate some part of that control 
through lease of those that can be alienated. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Suppose a juridical entity is given 
the power to exploit natural resources and, of course, 
there are decisions made by the governing board of that 
juridical entity, can the State change the decisions of 
the governing board of that entity based on the words 
“full control”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. If it is within the context of the 
contract, I think the State cannot violate the laws of the 
land. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In relation to line 23, with reference 
to the words “Filipino citizens,” disregarding the word 
“cooperative” since that is self-explanatory, do I under- 
stand it right that when we say that Congress may by 
law allow small-scale utilization of natural resources, 
the same must be done only by individual Filipino 
citizens or by entities controlled by Filipino citizens? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the spirit of the Committee 
is that since this is small-scale, it should refer to single 
proprietorships and, therefore, to individuals. Examples 
are what they call “camote minmg” in the coal mines of 
Cebu. 


MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to line 29, I spoke 
about this before the Rotarians of Makati, and they 
asked me if I can convey to the Commission their query 
which is; “What do you mean by the term ‘large-scale 
exploration, development,’ etc.?” Is the term “large- 
scale” within a particular area or particular region, or in 
the light of the entire country? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The term “large-scale” usually 
refers to very capital-intensive activities like, for 
example, petroleum mining, copper mining, et cetera. It 
refers to the requirement for capital. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is capital the only factor that 
should be considered or is it the economic importance? 
If an entity, for example, will export products that will 
contribute to the national economy, will the Commis- 
sioner consider that large-scale also? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely, yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In Sections 3, 9 and 15, the 
Committee stated local or Filipino equity and foreign 
equity; namely, 60-40 in Section 3, 60-40 in Section 9, 
and 2/3-1 /3 in Section 15. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In teaching law, we are always faced 
with this question: “Where do we base the equity 
requirement, is it on the authorized capital stock, on the 
subscribed capital stock, or on the paid-up capital stock 
of a corporation”? Will the Committee please enlighten 
me on this? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We have just had a long discussion 
with the members of the team from the UP Law Center 
who provided us a draft. The phrase that is contained 
here which we adopted from the UP draft is “60 percent 
of voting stock.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That must be based on the sub- 
scribed capital stock, because unless declared delinquent, 
unpaid capital stock shall be entitled to vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

With respect to an investment by one corporation in 
another corporation, say, a corporation with 60-40 
percent equity invests in another corporation which is 
permitted by the Corporation Code, does the Commit- 
tee adopt the grandfather rule? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is the understanding of 
the Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, we need additional 
Filipino capital? 


256 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. This is with respect to Section 7 on 
page 3. We know that all Members of the Commission 
received telegrams from Filipino doctors of medicine, 
who have embraced American citizenship and are now 
residing in the United States, asking us to reconsider this 
report. What is the reaction of the Committee? They 
wanted to delete “1,000 sq.m.” and possibly leave the 
determination of the area to Congress. So they would 
like the provision to read: “Notwithstanding the provi- 
sions of Section 6 of this Article, a natural-bom citizen 
of the Philippines who has lost his Philippme citizenship 
may be a transferee of private lands solely for residential 
purposes, AS DETERMINED BY LAW.” 

Is the Committee amenable to that amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. As I said in the sponsorship speech, 
the Committee was divided on this issue so we are open 
to amendments on this specific question. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I filed a resolution on idle lands. 
We wiU remember that the honorable Chairman of this 
Committee and I went to Butuan City and there the 
people told us that there are vast tracts of idle or 
abandoned lands in Mindanao. Has the Committee 
adopted any provision on how to deal with such idle 
lands? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We considered that as implied by 
the statement that all these provisions are subject to the 
requirements of land reform as suggested in the Article 
on Social Justice. So we would leave that to Congress to 
decide on the basis of all the principles articulated in the 
Article on Social Justice. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President; and 
I also thank the Chairman of the Committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Azcuna be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is 
recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

Will the Committee yield to a few clarificatory 
questions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR AZCUNA. Page 4, Section 8, lines 7 and 8 
thereof, states that the NEDA shall function as the 
independent planning agency of the government. Would 
it not be better if the NEDA is not independent, but 
rather should follow the socioeconomic thinking of the 
executive branch? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. That is really the meaning so 
we are open to a rephrasing. The NEDA is independent 
of Congress but it is under the executive branch. It is 
under the Office of the President, but probably that can 
be clarified. 

MR. AZCUNA. With respect to Section 14 on page 5, 
regarding combinations in restraint of trade, would it 
not be better to limit this to domestic trade so as not to 
prevent the State when it deems it necessary to form 
cartels for its export products as retaliatory measures 
against predatory trade practices of foreign countries? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Actually the reason the first 
sentence talks about monopolies in general is that in the 
1973 Constitution, the reference was only to private 
monopolies. So the State shall regulate or prohibit 
monopolies when the public interest so requires. The 
implication is that State monopolies may be actually 
organized but they should be regulated for the common 
good. So, the possibility of State monopolies being 
organized is considered here. 

MR. AZCUNA. With respect to the phrase “The State 
may . . . operate vital industries ” found on Section 1 2, 
is there no need to define these “vital industries” to 
forewarn the private sector that if they go into these 
fields they may be taken over? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We think that determination should 
be left to Congress because there is so much dynamism 
in technology that, for example, notwithstanding a 
whole discussion centered on how vital telecommuni- 
cations and related industries are, still, it was difficult 
for the body to decide on which are vital industries. So 
that is better left to legislation. 

MR. AZCUNA. That is all. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Bengzon would like 
to say something. 

MR. BENGZON. Besides, that is preceded by the 
phrase “people’s security against external aggression.” 

MR. AZCUNA. That is all; I thank the Committee. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes 
is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President, will the 
Committee yield to a few questions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


257 


MR. DE LOS REYES. On lines 1 8 to 24, Section 3 of 
Committee Report No. 24, mention is made of fisheries 
and granting fishery rights stating that the “beneficial 
use may be the measure and limit of the grant.” And 
then, it also says: 

Congress may by law allow small-scale utUization of natural 

resources by Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish 

farming in rivers, lakes, bays, and lagoons. 

Are we to understand that this should be interpreted 
also in relation to Section 7 of the Article on Social 
Justice, meaning, that no fisheries right shall be granted 
to anyone within the communal marine and fishing 
resources? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely, that should be taken in 
that context. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Does the phrase “small-scale 
utilization of natural resources” also refer to small-scale 
cooperative fish farming? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Are preferential rights always 
given to subsistence fishermen? Is that the correct inter- 
pretation? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The committee report enu- 
merated Resolution No. 432, authored by this Member 
and Commissioners Maambong, Ople, and Natividad; 
and Resolution No. 412, authored by Commissioner 
Rosario Braid, limiting the practice in the Philippines of 
the various professions to Filipino professionals. I do 
not see any proposal on the matter in this committee 
report. May we know why? Were these rejected by the 
Committee or were these referred to another commit- 
tee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. They were referred to the Commit- 
tee on General Provisions. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So, they were not totally 
rejected but referred to another committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Was the referral with a favora- 
ble endorsement as to whether to adopt them or to be 
completely silent about them? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Rosario Braid will 
answer the question. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid is recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. To set the records straight, 

I am afraid those proposals were never sent nor referred 
to our Committee. So they must have been lost on the 
way. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We will be willing to entertain 
amendments on the specific issue. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I thank the Chairman of the 
Committee, the Floor Leader and the Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. May we know the next 
interpellator? 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Rodrigo would like to be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Vice-President, just a question 
or two to Commissioner Bennagen regarding Committee 
Report No. 32. 

The last sentence of this report reads: 

The ancestral lands shall be held in trust by the indigenous 

community for the benefit of their future generations. 

The phrase “in trust” means ownership cannot be 
given to anybody. Is that right? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, not to individuals outside 
the community. 

MR. RODRIGO. Not to individuals outside the 
community but how about individuals within the 
community? Can they own? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. It accepts a wider range of 
ownership from individuals to groups of families and 
then to the community. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, it is possible that in time, all 
these ancestral lands might be owned individually by 
members of the community? 

MR BENNAGEN. Historically that has not taken 
place and we do not see it as taking place, unless there is 
some radical change in the social system. 

MR. RODRIGO. But is there a constitutional pro- 
hibition in this proposed Article or section to safeguard 
these ancestral lands so that they will remain “in trust” 
for the whole community, instead of being owned 
individually? 


258 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


MR. BENNAGEN. The spirit of the provision is 
towards that effect — that the ancestral lands should 
never evolve to every individual member but should be 
kept in perpetuity for the community while recognizing 
the minor variations in ownership because certain types 
of lands could be owned individually while other types 
could be owned by families or by groups of families or 
clans. 

MR. RODRIGO. I ask this because there seems to be 
an inconsistency — if not contradiction — between the 
previous sentence and this last sentence. 

The last sentence reads: “The ancestral lands shall be 
held in trust by the indigenous community. . .” while 
the preceding sentence states that the indigenous cus- 
tomary laws governing proprietary rights determine the 
ownership and extent of the ancestral domain. Which 
win prevail, the last sentence which states that these 
ancestral lands should be held merely “in trust,” or the 
preceding sentence which says that there can be “pro- 
prietary rights” and “ownership” over these lands? 

MR. BENNAGEN. This seems inconsistent because 
when the previous part speaks of proprietary rights, it 
includes those whole range of rights which I mentioned 
earlier but still within the framework of that particular 
community. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you very much. 

+ 1 , Mr* Vice-President, I would like to ask 

the Committee a few questions. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is 
recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Section 14 states: “The State shall 
regulate or prohibit monopolies when the public interest 
so requires.” I have heard the Chairman say that this 
would not prohibit the State to set up monopolies for 
the common good. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. Rama. I was thinking, for instance, of the 
pro^dure or the system in Japan where tobacco is the 
mo poly of the State and serves substantially the 
good and its revenues form a substantial part 
of the budget of the Japanese government. 

Therefore, the monopoly on tobacco is a desirable 
monopoy, irst, it is hazardous to health; and second, 

, ® ^ ® converts this kind of industry into something 

at benefits the country. On the other hand, although 
the statement has been made by the Chairman that this 
would not prohibit the State from setting up mono- 
polies, the second sentence in Section 14 seems to 
contradict that statement because it states: “No com- 


binations in restraint of trade or unfair competition 
shall be allowed.” It is addressed to both the State and 
the private sector. So, does the Commissioner think that 
there should be some kind of a phrase here that would 
allow the government or the State to set up monopolies 
that would serve the common good? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The second sentence is interpreted 
in the context of the antitrust legislation or the juris- 
prudence on antitrust legislation, for example, in the 
United States, to the extent that combinations in 
restraint of trade or unfair competition actually pre- 
judice the consumers and the people. Then- that is 
where the law comes in. But precisely, there are certain 
monopolies which actually favor the consumers be- 
cause of the economies of scale since we do not have 
unnecessary duplication of resources. However, these 
types of monopolies have to be regulated. 

MR. RAMA. But this will not prohibit the State from 
setting up monopolies for the common good? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It wUl not. 

MR. RAMA. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Mr. Vice-President, may I ask that Commissioner 
Tingson be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is 
recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. May I ask the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee some questions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Gladly. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Chairman and members of the 
Committee, we Filipinos are very much concerned 
about our denuded forests so much so when experts say 
that within the next 1 0 years or less, we might become a 
Sahara Desert here in the Philippines. Has the Commit- 
tee at all considered the possibility of, say, a ten-year or 
twenty-year logging ban on endangered forest lands, 
except probably for building materials that we might 
need for domestic purposes in our country? Has the 
Committee considered that? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely. In fact, the provision on 
Section 5 is all about the forest limits being determined 
by law and not being diminished. Actually, there is an 
additional category of national parks which would not 
even permit any logging whatsoever in perpetuity. So 
that is definitely the spirit of Section 5. 

MR. TINGSON. Our sad experience is that when 
something like this is left for the implementation by 
Congress or by the lawmaking body, then a good 
number of politicians with self-aggrandizing purposes 
would work against the welfare of our country and this 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


259 


has actually happened. I am just wondering if it would 
not be better for us to state a certain period here, upon 
ratification of this Constitution, that there will be a 
complete logging ban on endangered forest lands, say, 
10 years or so. Would the Committee consider an 
amendment along that line? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We will definitely consider an 
amendment, but let me just give the Commissioner the 
results of the public hearings we had. According to the 
people from the forestry sector, there are so many tech- 
nical issues involved here. An example is to determine 
what areas should be considered as forests in perpetuity; 
what types of trees should be planted; or whether or not 
ecological considerations can also be complied with for 
some fast-growing trees like Albiccia Falcata, Acacia 
Mangium and others. There are just so many technical 
questions involved in reforestation that we do not think 
the Commission has the time nor the resources to 
actually make very explicit statements about forest 
policies. 

MR. TINGSON. I agree with the Commissioner, 
except that probably, it would be feasible to state some 
kind of a time limit there. I have filed a resolution along 
that line, and I am now asking for technical data from 
our Minister of Natural Resources, Minister Maceda, for 
my amendment later on. 

My second question is this: The Filipino nationals 
abroad who are able and willing to help develop our 
country have lost their Philippine citizenship. We are 
aware of the fact that many of our countrymen in the 
United States cannot work there as practicing physicians 
or doctors unless they become citizens of the country, 
and yet their hearts really are still with us. Tliey do not 
want to forget the Philippines altogether. As a matter 
of fact, they do send quite a goodly amount of their 
dollar earnings from America to help develop our 
country. Would the Committee earnestly look into the 
possibility of giving these countrymen of ours, many of 
whom still count themselves really as Filipinos by heart, 
a greater participation in the development of our 
national economy? Section 1 states that we should be 
self-reliant and independent in the development of our 
national economy. I suppose the Commissioner would 
like to say that as much as possible we will not borrow 
from abroad. Let us see what we can do with our own 
indigenous ability here as Filipmos to develop our 
country. Am I right in looking at it that way? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We would welcome an amendment 
along that line. If the Commissioner wants to go beyond 
that 1,000 square meters, that can be considered. 

MR. TINGSON. I appreciate that very much. My last 
question is in relation to Section 4 which states: 

The Congress, taking into account conservation, eco- 
logical, and developmental requirements of the natural 

resources, shall determine by law the size of lands of the 


public domain which may be developed, held or acquired 
by, or leased to, any qualified individual, corporation, or 
association, and the conditions therefor. The foregoing shall 
be subject to the requirements of agrarian reform. 

After having itinerated in this country of ours for a 
good number of years in my capacity as an evangelist 
and a Filipino who loves to see his country develop to 
the maximum, and with a feeling of gratitude to people 
like those of the various churches, nonprofit cor- 
porations such as schools and colleges, say, in Mindanao, 

I found out that they have somehow acquired the privi- 
lege of occupying certain pieces of land which happen to 
be public domain. They have been there for the last 20 

years or so, yet they have not been allowed to purchase 
even just 2,000 square meters of land so that they could 
continue operating there. In due time, would it be 
possible for the Committee to probably consider an 
amendment along that line? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I do not see the problem being 
described by the honorable Commissioner. If the lands 
are alienable, then there is no reason why private groups 
cannot purchase lands within this 24-hectare limit. 

MR. TINGSON. These lands belong to the public 
domain. 

The committee report says, “. . . the size of lands of 
the public domain which may be developed, held or 
acquired by.” I am just wondering whether that also 
refers to churches, schools and nonprofit entities. Would 
they be within what we call here “qualified individuals, 
corporations or associations”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. If we go to line 5, probably that is 
the part that is more relevant. Line 5 of Section 4 states: 

No private corporation or association may hold alienable 
lands of the public domain except by lease, not to exceed 
one thousand hectares in area; nor may any citizen hold 
such lands by lease in excess of five hundred hectares or 
acquire by purchase or homestead in excess of twenty-four 
hectares. 

Is that what the Commissioner would like to amend? 

MR. TINGSON. I will write out what I have in mind 
and I will confer with the Committee. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong, 
the Acting Floor Leader, is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Davide 
be recognized for his interpellations. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is 
recognized. 


260 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. I 
would like to seek some clarifications. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposal, I notice that 
except for the lands of the public domain, all the other 
natural resources cannot be alienated and in respect to 
lands of the public domain, private corporations with 
the required ownership by Filipino citizens can only 
lease the same. Necessarily, insofar as other natural 
resources are concerned, it would only be the State 
which can exploit, develop, explore and utilize the 
same. However, the State may enter into a joint venture, 
coproduction or production-sharing. Is that not correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Consequently, henceforth upon the 
approval of this Constitution, no timber or forest con- 
cessions, permits or authorization can be exclusively 
granted to any citizen of the Philippines nor to any 
corporation qualified to acquire lands of the public 
domain? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Would Commissioner Monsod like 
to comment on that? I think his answer is “yes.” 

MR. DAVIDE. So, what will happen now to licenses 
or concessions earlier granted by the Philippine govern- 
ment to private corporations or to Filipino citizens? 
Would they be deemed repealed? 

MR. VILLEGAS. This is not applied retroactively. 
They will be respected. 


MR. DAVIDE. In effect, they will be deemed re- 
pealed? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you for that information. I will 
go to another point. Insofar as fisheries is concerned, it 
IS provided in the proposed Section 3 that the legisla- 
ture may by law allow small-scale utilization of natural 
resources by Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish 
arming m rivers, lakes, bays and lagoons. Must this be 
construed to be subject to the preferential rights we had 
earlier granted to the marginal fishermen? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. DAVIDE. Section 1 1 touches on the formation, 
orgamzation, or regulation of private corporations. As 
worded it will now read: “The Congress may, by general 
law, provide for the formation organization, or regula- 


tion of private corporations.” In both the 1935 and 
1973 Constitutions, the language used was “shall not, 
except by general law.” May we know the difference? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Actually, after discussing this 
specific section with the UP Law group, we were open 
to going back to the old statement. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have to go back to the old state- 
ment, otherwise it would be interpreted to mean that 
these corporations can be organized by whatever means. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. Commissioner Suarez 
can clarify this. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Vice-President, when this mat- 
ter was discussed with the members of the UP Law 
Center, precisely, the point raised by the Commissioner 
was taken up. It could mean that there will be a pro- 
liferation of corporations which may be violative of this 
particular Section 1 1 . 

MR. DAVIDE. Another point is that government- 
owned or controlled corporations can no longer be 
organized under that general law. So, government- 
owned or controlled corporations under this present 
proposal will have to be organized by means of special 
charters? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. And also their subsidiaries? Or may 
subsidiaries of government-owned or controlled cor- 
porations be organized under the general corporation 
law? 

MR. SUAREZ. In the matter of subsidiaries, no; 
under the general corporation law. 

MR. DAVIDE. In effect, would these subsidiaries of 
government-owned or controlled corporations become 
private corporations if they are to be organized under 
the law? 

MR. SUAREZ. In effect, yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yet it might collide with certain 
provisions we approved earlier, especially the matter of 
prohibition of government officials and employees 
which would include government-owned or controlled 
corporations and their subsidiaries. 

MR. SUAREZ. That was the meaning of the exercise 
with the UP Law Center group - to provide for all these 
safeguards, taking into consideration all the other pro- 
visions that had already been approved by the Commis- 
sion. 

MR. DAVIDE. For instance, in the Article on the 
Constitutional Commissions and Agencies and in some 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


261 


of the prohibitions against public officers and em- 
ployees, we would include public officers or employees 
in government-owned or controlled corporations with 
charters and their subsidiaries. So, shall we not also 
compel the creation or establishment of subsidiaries of 
government-owned and controlled corporations under a 
charter and not under the general corporation law? 

MR. SUAREZ. By a special law. 

MR. DAVIDE. It must be under a special law, other- 
wise we will convert a subsidiary into a private corpora- 
tion. 

MR. SUAREZ. There is logic in the Commissioner’s 
presentation of this problem. The Committee will con- 
sider that at the proper time. 

MR. DAVIDE. Another point is that since it is now 
to be mandated that government-owned and controlled 
corporations will have to be organized not under the 
general law on corporations but by special charters, 
what will happen to existing government-owned and 
controlled corporations organized under the corporation 
law? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod will answer 
that. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe we have to make a distinc- 
tion here. Under Section 1 1 , the proposal of the Com- 
mittee is that government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions need not be by original charter. I think that is the 
intent of the Committee. There are government-owned 
or controlled corporations that were organized under 
ori gin al charters and there are those that were organized 
under the general corporation law. It is not the intent of 
the Committee under Section 1 1 that from now on all 
government-owned and controlled corporations should 
be organized under original charters. 

MR. DAVIDE. With that clarification, would govern- 
ment-owned and controlled corporations organized 
under the corporation law be considered private cor- 
porations? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. As a matter of fact, if the 
Commissioner recalls in the previous provisions we have 
approved, there were sections in which we made a dis- 
tinction between government corporations under 
original charters and government corporations and 
subsidiaries under the corporation law, particularly in 
the provision on the civil service. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would it not open the floodgates to a 
circumvention of our doctrine of a public office as a 
public trust, including therein government-owned and 
controlled corporations because henceforth the govern- 
ment could circumvent it by merely organizing sup- 


posedly a government corporation under the corpora- 
tion law and the outcome will be a private corporation? 

MR. MONSOD. I believe the position of the Commit- 
tee is that Congress should make a distinction at that 
time between a corporation performing government 
functions and a corporation performing proprietary or 
business functions. And there is a time during which 
such distinction can be made when corporations are 
being suggested for establishment. 

MR. DAVIDE. So we will leave it to Congress to 
determine whether the organization of a government- 
owned and controlled corporation to exercise govern- 
mental functions should be by special charter, or 
whether if it is to exercise proprietary functions, it 
should be within the general law on corporation. 

MR. MONSOD. That is up to the judgment and 
discretion of Congress. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will go to another point. 

Under Section 15 on franchise, certificate, or any 
other form of authorization for the operation of a 
public utility, we notice that the restriction, provided in 
the 1973 Constitution that it should not be exclusive in 
character, is no longer provided. Therefore, a franchise, 
certificate or any form of authorization for the opera- 
tion of a public utility may be exclusive in character. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think, yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. It may be “yes.” But would it not 
violate precisely the thrust against monopolies? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The question is, we do not include 
the provision about the franchise being exclusive in 
character. 

MR. SUAREZ. This matter was taken up during the 
Committee meetings. The example of the public utility 
given was the MERALCO. If there is a proliferation of 
public utilities engaged in the servicing of the needs of 
the public for electric current, this may lead to more 
problems for the nation. That is why the Commissioner 
is correct in saying that that will constitute an exemp- 
tion to the general rule that there must be no monopoly 
of any kind, but it could be operative in the case of 
public utilities. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does not the Commissioner believe 
that the other side of the coin may also be conducive 
to more keen competition and better public service? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner may be right. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does not the Commissioner believe 
that we should restore the qualification that it should 
not be exclusive in character? 


262 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


MR. SUAREZ. In other words, under the Commis- 
sioner’s proposal, Metro Manila, for example, could be 
serviced by two or more pubhc utilities similar to or 
identical with what MERALCO is giving to the public? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner feels that that may 
create or generate improvement in the services? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because if we now allow an 
exclusive grant of a franchise, that might not be con- 
ducive to public service. 

MR. SUAREZ. We will consider that in the commit- 
tee level. 

MR. MONSOD. With the Commissioner’s permission, 
may I just amplify this. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod would Mice 
to make a clarification. 

MR. MONSOD. I beUeve the Commissioner is address- 
ing himself to a situation where it lends itself to more 
than one franchise. For example, electric power, it is 
possible that within a single grid, we may have different 
distnbution companies. So the Commissioner is right in 

at sense that perhaps in some situations, nonexclusiv- 
1 y may be good for the public. But in the case of power 
generation, this may be a natural activity that can only 
e generated by one company, in which case, prohibit- 
mg exclusive franchise may not be in the pubhc interest. 

MR. DAVIDE. The point is that we should leave it to 
Congress to determine what would be the extent and 
scope of a particular franchise. But as worded now, we 
do not embody into a particular franchise, certificate or 
authority the inherent nonexclusive character of the 
same. 

Another point I would Uke to clarify is in the same 
section. Section 15 does not provide for a maximum 
period or the Ufetime of the franchise, authority or 
certificate. May we know the reason? 

VILLEGAS. Regarding the length, again we 
to Congress because there are so many 
con 1 ions in different pubhc utilities that we cannot 
determine right now. 


simply limit it to, say, 25 years renewable for another 
25 years. 

MR. DAVIDE. In the other portion of the proposal, 
when it comes to water rights, the extent of the use 
would be the governing principle. But here I believe the 
Constitution itself must fix a certain limit, but allowing 
Congress to allow a renewal; the phrase “renewable for 
another 25 years” was the wording of the 1973 Consti- 
tution. So, we whl not grant perpetual right to a 
particular entity. 

MR. SUAREZ. What we are saying is that under 
Section 15, we are dealing with pubhc utilities. Tiiere 
may be a point to what the Commissioner is bringing 
up, but that was the sense that was elevated in the 
committee level. 

MR. DAVIDE. Finally on Section 14. There is no 
qualification anymore as to the nature of the monopoly, 
unhke that in the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions where 
private monopolies are the ones prohibited. But in 
Section 14, the word “private” no longer appears. May 
we know the justification of the Committee because I 
remember that the Committee, in answer to a question 
of Commissioner Rama, admitted that the government 
may still have a monopoly. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. But here, with the deletion of the 
word “private,” it would mean that neither private nor 
pubhc entity can have monopoly. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. The Commissioner should 
please take a look at the two verbs “regulate or pro- 
hibit.” When the word “regulate” was inserted, that 
means that there can be monopohes as long as they are 
regulated. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, they may be aUowed but regu- 
lated. But when it comes to prohibition, because the 
State is given an option, it can either be absolute pro- 
hibition or partial prohibition in the sense that that is 
part of regulation? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 


point out again the thing; 
T Pt during the Committee meetings 

^t us take the case of MERALCO. If MERALCO wil 
be given a franchise for, say, 50 years, what will happer 
after the expiration of the franchise? There will be j 
dismantling of the services being furnished by MERAL 
CO and the public may thereby be prejudiced That i 
why we in the Committee felt that the duration of th. 
franchise should be left to Congress. We could no 


MR. DAVIDE. When the Committee deleted the 
word “private,” does it mean that government can be 
prohibited to engage in a monopoly? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely yes, because there were 
so many cases under the Marcos regime where certain 
government monopohes were completely agamst pubhc 
interest and, therefore, there should have been a pro- 
hibition against those kinds of government monopohes. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


263 


MR. DAVIDE. If the idea is really to promote the 
private sector, may we not provide here that the govern- 
ment can, in no case, practice monopoly except in 
certain areas? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, because in the economic field 
there are definitely areas where the State can intervene 
and can actually get involved in monopolies for the 
public good. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, we have provisions here allowing 
such a monopoly in times of national emergency. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Not even in emergency; for the 
continuing welfare of consumers. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just make a distinction? As 
we know, there are natural monopolies or what we call 
“structural monopolies.” Structural monopolies are 
monopolies not by the nature of thek activities, like 
electric power, for example, but by the nature of the 
market. There may be instances where the market has 
not developed to such an extent that it will only allow, 
say, one steel company. Structural monopoly is not by 
the nature of the business itself. It is possible under 
these circumstances that the State may be the appro- 
priate vehicle for such a monopoly . 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you very much, Mr. Vice- 
President, members and Chairman of the Committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Colayco be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is 
recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I would like to ask some questions on Section 8, 
page 4. Under this section, the President shall recom- 
mend to Congress an integrated and coordinated ap- 
proach to national development with prior consultation 
with public agencies and the private sector. May I know 
to what particular persons or professions the phrase 
“private sector” refers? 

MR. VILLEGAS. May Commissioner Monsod answer 
that. 

MR. MONSOD. I guess that should be read in the 
context of the different private sectors that have an 
interest or relevance to the plan involved. Let us say 
that it is the industrial plan of the government, then 
there should be capital, labor, suppliers and so on. I 
guess this should be read that people without any 
interest in or relevance to that plan should not be 
consulted. 


MR. COLAYCO. I hope Commissioner Monsod will 
not consider this question personal. Would the Com- 
missioner have any idea on whether the decision of 
Minister SoUta Monsod regarding importation was 
reached after consultation with the private sector, 
especially with the businessmen? 

MR. MONSOD. As far as I know from reading the 
papers, the appropriate consultations were made with 
the sectors that are affected by such policies. 

MR. COLAYCO. But the Commissioner will notice 
that Minister Concepcion, whose ministry is directly 
affected by the policy, is against it. I wonder if he was 
consulted here. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I can assure the Commissioner that 
he was consulted. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Chairman mentioned the 
National Economic and Development Authority as an 
independent planning agency of the government. I 
suppose that decision was formulated by the NEDA, of 
which Minister Monsod is the head. Am I correct? 

MR. MONSOD. I believe that the word “independent” 
here, as we answered Commissioner Azcuna, was meant 
to be independent of the legislature because the NEDA 
under the present law is under the Office of the 
President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. In other words, the members 
of that agency are appointed by the President? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The President heads the NEDA. 

MR. MONSOD. The President is the Chairman of the 
NEDA. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. Section 10 of the committee 
report recommends that the majority of the central 
monetary authority be appointed from the private 
sector. My question is addressed to both the Chairman 
and Commissioner Monsod: Would the Committee 
advise this composition with reference to the NEDA? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. During the Committee hearings, there 
were proposals to change the composition of the govern- 
ing body not only of the Monetary Board but also of 
the NEDA. That is why if we notice in this Article, we 
did not constitutionalize the NEDA anymore unlike in 
the 1973 Constitution. We are leaving it up to Congress 
to determine whether or not the NEDA is needed later 


264 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


on. The idea of the Committee is that if we are going for 
less government and more private sector initiative, later 
on it may not be necessary to have a planning agency. 
Thus, it may not be necessary to constitutionalize a 
planning agency anymore. 

So this provision leaves room for the legislature not 
only to revise the composition of the governing body, 
but also to remove the NEDA once it is no longer 
needed in its judgment. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am satisfied with the Commis- 
sioner’s answer. 

Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Rosario 
Braid be recognized for her interpellations. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid is recognized. 


ferred to the Article on General Provisions but our 
resolution on airwaves, coauthored with Commissioner 
Bacani, would be included in the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. 

In summary, my concerns are the need to cooperate 
with Third World countries in the transformation of the 
world system in trade and technology transfer, the 
wider participation of people in economic planning and 
the partnership of government with nongovernment and 
voluntary associations, and the airwaves as part of the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We have fully deliberated on the 
question of airwaves and there are two conclusions: 
First, air space is already included in the provision on 
natural resources and that was considered to be suffi- 
cient because from all the testimonies that we had, the 
technological complexities of airwaves were such that 
they were open to so many disputes as to how the 
country could control the airwaves. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Vice-President, I wish to 
raise some questions on some provisions which did not 
explicitly express my concern, and it is the need to 
look at economic development within the international 
economic order. My views are premised on the fact that 
a ough we have made considerable progress in various 
areas of national development, this could be negated by 
r international trade and other factors 

m ed to the economic order. I would hope that during 
e period of amendments, I may propose the need for 
e country to cooperate with other Third World coun- 
nes m working towards more equitable international 
ra e relationships as a matter of economic policy. This 
wou d, therefore, move towards South-South trade and 
l^eferential trade schemes among developing countries. 

he latter could cooperate in the production and 
consumption of appropriate goods and technology. 


This would also relate to the problem of technolog; 
ransfer and attendant effect such as dependency. Thi 
would mean coming up with more equitable provision 
m terms of technology transfer agreements. Puttin 
more muscle to the existing boards which govern tech 

Technology Transfer Board an 
other departments under the Ministry of Trade woul 
e examples in the operationalization of these prov 
sions. IS Would lead to desirable ends such as th 
s reng enmg of indigenous technological capacity an 
Thi^l Participation of people in economic plannini 
concern in local government abou 
vniii ^ n^ihistrative systems and the support fo 

voluntary organizations and participation of mass-basec 
nongovernment agencies in economic planning. 

My other concern is that of including airwaves an 
radio frequencies in the section on natural resources 
We had an agreement that in the case of ownership c 
telecommunications systems, this was going to be tran 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Bernas be recognized for his interpella- 
tion. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Vice-President, my questions 
have reference to page 3, line 5 which says: 

No private corporation or association may hold alienable 

lands of the public domain except by lease, not to exceed 

one thousand hectares in area. 

If we recall, this provision did not exist under the 
1935 Constitution, but this was introduced in the 1973 
Constitution. In effect, it prohibits private corporations 
from acquiring alienable public lands. But it has not 
been very clear in jurisprudence what the reason for this 
is. In some of the cases decided in 1982 and 1983, it 
was indicated that the purpose of this is to prevent large 
landholdings. Is that the intent of this provision? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think that is the spirit of the 
provision. 

FR. BERNAS. In existing decisions involving the 
Iglesia ni Cristo, there were instances where the Iglesia 
ni Cristo was not allowed to acquire a mere 313-square 
meter land where a chapel stood because the Supreme 
Court said it would be in violation of this. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

FR. BERNAS. So, I wonder if something can be done 
here. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, along the lines of the decision. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


265 


FR. BERNAS. The other problem with this is that 
the prohibition applies to lands of the public domain. 
So, a very important point is: When does the land of the 
public domain become land of the private domain, or 
cease to be land of the public domain? It seems tliat 
there are conflicting decisions on this. One decision says 
that the public land ceases to be public land only when 
the title is issued. Another decision seems to indicate 
that public land ceases to be public land when all the 
requirements for the acquisition of the public land have 
been fulfilled, even prior to the physical issuance of the 
title. Was there any attempt to determme this? 

MR. VILLEGAS. None. That was not brought up in 
the Committee meetings, but we would be open to any 
suggestion on how to make further refinements on this 
specific provision. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. COLAYCO. Mr. Vice-President, may I react to 
that question? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is 
recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Land Registration Act provides 
that the President may, from time to time, declare 
certain parcels of public land open for private acquisi- 
tion, if I am not mistaken. 

FR. BERNAS. Such a provision would be in violation 
of this because a declaration of the President would 
only have, at most, the level of a statutory act. Tlie 
President, certainly, cannot contravene what our Consti- 
tution says. 

MR. COLAYCO. I know, but that has been the 
practice until now. 

FR. BERNAS. The problem has not been with that, 
but the problem was more on determining whether this 
particular land has, in fact, already become private and, 
therefore, could be acquired by a corporation. As far as 
private individuals are concerned, thfey can acquire 
alienable public lands, but private corporations cannot. 
That is why Commissioner Tingson was asking about 
schools, nonprofit institutions, for instance, which are 
prohibited from acquiring alienable public land because 
they are corporations. So, perhaps, the Committee 
might entertain an amendment that will give exemptions 
for nonprofit purposes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, and I would like to point out 
also that probably President Marcos had tremendous 
leeway for declaring public lands alienable, because 
Section 10, Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution states 
that lands of the public domain are classified into 
agricultural, industrial or commercial, residential, reset- 


tlement, mineral, timber or forest, and grazing lands and 
that gave him a lot of elbowroom. That is why we are 
suggesting that we go back to the 1935 definition with 
the exception of national parks. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I now ask 
that Commissioner Gascon be recognized for his inter- 
pellation. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is 
recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

I would like to ask some questions of the Committee 
with regard to some clarifications. 

Section 1 defines very clearly the goals of our 
economy and the preferences. I would like to highlight 
line 1 3 which says: 

. . . with priority to the welfare of the poor. In the at- 
tainment of these goals, aU economic sectors shall be given 

optimum opportunity to develop and a broader-based 

ownership of private enterprises shall be encouraged. 

Does such provision provide for a democratization of 
access to natural resources? It is a known fact that if we 
provide openness to opportunities, those who have more 
tend to get more, but those who have less tend to ac- 
cumulate less because of the competition involved 
where the stronger always gets better off than the 
weaker. So in that context, do we have any assurances 
of some form of a democratization of access to natural 
resources whereby the weaker, let us say, entrepreneurs, 
small businessmen, etc., will have greater opportunities 
to avail of the provisions in this section? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the answer to the question 
is “yes.” First of all, the very title of one of the 
sections of the Article on Social Justice is “Agrarian 
and Natural Resources Reform,” and so, definitely it is 
in the spirit of the whole Constitution that we want 
wider access to the natural resources. In addition, the 
specific mention of small-scale utilization of natural 
resources and cooperative fish farming in Section 3 
would definitely be in the spirit. 

Does Commissioner Suarez, who was responsible for 
this omnibus provision, have additional comments? 

MR. SUAREZ. I think that is the thrust of this par- 
ticular section. 

MR. GASCON. Will the Committee, perhaps, enter- 
tain a proposal to include such a term as “democratiza- 
tion” in the proper time? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, we will, definitely. 

MR. GASCON. My other question is with regard to 
page 2, Section 3, beginning on line 25 which says: 


266 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


The President with the concurrence of Congress, by 
special law, shall provide the terms and conditions under 
which a foreign-owned corporation may enter into agree- 
ments with the govenunent . . . 

Does “concurrence” mean simple majority of both 
Houses? 


of business and the economy, it must first be explicitly 
stated by Congress that such areas are open to invest- 
ment to nonnationals. So, in a sense we are changing the 
emphasis. What does the Committee think? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That can be considered. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. I think that was already voted 
upon. 

MR. GASCON. Is it a simple majority — 50 percent 
plus 1? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. GASCON. Is it possible that instead of a simple 
majority, we allow a two-thirds vote of Congress for 
such conditions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Since the Committee was divided 
on that issue, definitely there is a possibility of bringing 
that to the floor. 

MR. GASCON. Could the Commissioner elaborate 
on the pros and cons of a majority vote and why the 
Committee decided to maintain 50 percent plus 1? 


MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, may I just add 
something. While the sentiment is clear, there may be 
operational problems. In other words, the Gentleman is 
saying that the economy is closed except for the follow- 
ing areas, in which case the Congress now will determine 
each specific case, say, this area is all right for foreign 
investment. That may be operationally quite difficult. 
And, secondly, it would be sending the wrong messages 
as far as the kind of economy we have is concerned, 
because our economy is not a state-dictated economy. 
It is a private initiative economy. 

MR. GASCON. I just like to express that Section 9, 
as it is written now, gives the impression that the 
State is open to all foreign investments, but which is 
open exclusively to Filipinos. Since we are writing a 
Constitution directed primarily for the Filipinos, could 
we just interchange the emphasis? 


MR. VILLEGAS. I think the main reason for the 
majority vote is that there is greater capital scarcity 
today than there has ever been in our economic history 
because of all of the abuses of the last 20 years, and that 
we should rnake it relatively easier to get this type of 
fmancial assistance for large-scale exploration, develop- 
ment, and utilization of natural resources. 


MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

My next question is with regard to Section 9 on page 
4 which says: 

The Congress shall reserve to citizens of the Philippines 
or to corporations or associations at least sixty percent of 
whose voting stock or controlling interest is owned by such 
citizens or such higher percentage as Congress may pre- 
scribe, certain areas of investments when the national 
interest so dictates. 


Is it possible for us to amend the section in the sense 
that instead of providing for a provision on reserving 
certain areas for Filipinos as Congress may prescribe, we 
allow Congress to prescribe certain areas where foreign 
investments may enter into. 


We should also define very clearly that the National 
Assembly or Congress may allow persons other than 
citizens of the Philippines, and corporations or asso- 
ciations less than 60 percent of whose voting stock or 
controlling interest is owned by citizens of the Philip- 
pines, certain areas of investments when the national 
interest so dictates. It would be the case that all areas 
of investment are exclusively for Filipinos, and for 
foreign investors to be allowed to invest in certain areas 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, but as I said, there is a problem 
in that kind of an approach because we have an entire 
economy to contend with. 

MR. GASCON. Yes. What is the Committee’s defini- 
tion of '‘national emergency” which appears in Section 
13, page 5? It reads: 

When the common good so requires, the State may 

temporarily take over or direct the operation of any 

privately owned public utility or business affected with 

public interest. 

MR. VILLEGAS. What I mean is threat from external 
aggression, for example, calamities or natural disasters. 

MR. GASCON. There is a question by Commissioner 
de los Reyes. What about strikes and riots? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Strikes, no; those would not be 
covered by the term “national emergency.” 

MR. BENGZON. Unless they are of such proportions 
such that they would paralyze government service. 

MR. GASCON. How will a takeover by the State 
operate? Will former owners be compensated for their 
losses? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, this is only temporary, so there 
is no need to transfer ownership. Only the operation 
will be taken over, which precisely is the reason for such 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


267 


a takeover. Directed operation shall be only for the 
duration of the state of emergency. 

MR. GASCON. During the period of taking over by 
the State, will there be compensation for the owner 
who will be deprived? 

MR. VILLEGAS. If they are prejudiced, definitely 
yes. No one can be deprived of private property without 
just compensation. 

MR. GASCON. Section 10 says: “The Congress shall 
establish an independent central monetary authority.” 
What is the definition of “independent” here? Does this 
mean that independence should mean free from the dic- 
tates of foreign and local interests? And does it also 
imply that the monetary authority will pursue a nation- 
alist self-reliant cause for the common good? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Independence applies to all undue 
control or influence. 

MR. GASCON. Whether it be from local capital 
interest or foreign interest or even the State or the 
government? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right; from the executive. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

My final question is with regard to Section 15, lines 
19 to 20, page 5, which reads: “. . . under the laws of the 
Philippines at least two-thirds of whose voting stock or 
controlling interest is owned by such citizens.” 

This refers to public utility, is that correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. GASCON. And we know for a fact that the 
primary concern of public utility is the interest of the 
common good. Is it possible to increase ownership from 
two-thirds to three-fourths thereby assuring the interests 
of the common good at the proper time? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Again, if the Gentleman remem- 
bers, we were divided on this. This can be entertained 
as amendments — yes. 

MR. BENGZON. If the Gentleman will propose it, 
then we will consider it. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, we have 
only two interpellators left, but the time is now 12:26 
p.m. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we finish with the two inter- 
pellators? 


MR. MAAMBONG. If it is the pleasure of the Com- 
mittee. 

I now call on Commissioner Jamir for his interpella- 
tion. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is 
recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Vice-President, my questions to 
the Committee refer to this second paragraph of Section 
3, more specifically line 26, with reference to the phrase 
“special law.” Does this mean that everytime a contract 
is entered into with a foreign-owned corporation. 
Congress has to enact a law for that specific purpose? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Suarez will answer 
that — yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the question because 
this particular provision has precisely been the subject 
of full discussion. 

The answer to the Gentleman’s question is in the 
affirmative, but we have been trying to improve the 
wording and the impact of this particular provision. 
There is a school which submits the proposition that it 
should be the Congress that should take the initiative of 
formulating the terms and conditions, subject to the 
approval of the President. And so, the Committee is still 
deliberating hard on this particular provision. But as it is 
worded now and as the question is addressed to this 
provision, the answer to the question is “yes.” 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

My other question is with regard to the phrase 
“foreign-owned corporation” on line 27. Does this mean 
corporations formed or organized under the laws of a 
foreign jurisdiction? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. JAMIR. So that if a group of Filipinos or Fili- 
pino citizens form a corporation, let us say, in the State 
of California, that will be considered a foreign-owned 
corporation and will be the subject of a special law, in 
case they want to engage in any technical or financial 
assistance to the government? 

MR. SUAREZ. That depends, because under the 
situation pictured and envisioned by the Commissioner, 
this corporation is owned by Filipinos, although it is 
foreign established. 

The Commissioner will notice that the words used are 
“foreign-owned corporation,” which mean that the 
owners of the corporation are foreigners. 

MR. JAMIR. Foreigners? 


268 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes, but in the case just cited, the 
owners are Filipinos, although it was organized in a 
foreign country. 

MR. JAMIR. So, strictly speaking, the foreign-owned 
corporations here do not refer exclusively to corpora- 
tions organized under foreign laws. If they are organized 
by noncitizens of the Philippines under foreign laws, 
they are fully covered. 


MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you very much. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Let us have the last inter- 
pellator. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Natividad be recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is 
recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

I refer to Section 1 0, page 4, which says: 

The Congress shall establish an independent central 
monetary authority, the mqority of whose governing board 
shaU come from the private sector, which shall provide 
policy direction in the areas of money, banking, and credit. 

If this is an independent major governmental 
actimy , why do we want that it should have a majority 
coming from the private sector? If we do this, shall we 
not lose control of monetary and fiscal policies? The 
government may lose control of monetary and fiscal 
poUcies because we use the word “independent” and 
then say majority of the members of the governing 
board shall come from the private sector.” Is this not a 
formula for losing control of monetary and fiscal 
policies of the government? 


MR. VILLEGAS. No, this is a formula intended to 
prevent what happened in the last regime when the 
fiscal authorities sided with the executive branch and 
were systematicahy in control of monetary policy. This 
can lead to disastrous consequences. When the fiscal 
and the monetary authorities of a specific economy are 
combined, then there can be a lot of irresponsibility. So, 
this word independent” refers to the executive branch. 


natividad. How about the fact that the 
majori y o e governing body of this monetary author- 

rJlL ^®"tor? Will this not, in 

effecL ^ loss of control of the government 

over monetary and fiscal policies? 


MR. VILLEGAS. No. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. But a majority of tha governing 
body comes from the pnvate sector. 


MR. VILLEGAS. That depends on what Congress 
would eventually decide. This was the subject of a full 
discussion with Governor Fernandez and members of 
the Central Bank, as weU as people from the financial 
community. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I understand that. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Congress may decide that the 
so-called representatives of the private sector may 
actually be appointed full-time governors and may work 
for the government like the Federal Reserve System of 
the United States. The important thing is that they are 
independent of the executive and they are not beholden 
to him. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I understand that because I was 
there. However, here we are establishing a very primor- 
dial duty of the government — that of a central mone- 
tary authority, and yet we are putting it in the hands of 
a majority of the private sector. I was just asking for an 
explanation because, to my mind, it seems a little bit 
incongruous. Usually, the private sector is only rep- 
resented, but in this case, they are in the majority. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, but this is also in the spirit of 
always taking into account the sectors that are affected 
by a certain policy, and there will always be the Govern- 
or of the Central Bank who will be definitely protecting 
the government’s point of view. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But he is going to be the presiding 
officer, and the majority can vote him down. I believe 
that the government should retain control of govern- 
ment function and not abdicate it in favor of the private 
sector because this is a primordial duty of government. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is right. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. During the hearing, this was at the 
back of my mind. I am one of the authorities on this 
provision. But it is a little bit different from what we 
filed. I am asking this clarificatory question because I 
can conceive of a situation in the future where a hostile 
pfrsaxe sector might throw a monkey wrench on our 
monetary policies. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MON SOD. There is a good distinction between 
fiscal and monetary policies because a monetary policy 
is more an accommodating rather than initiating 
function. It is the fiscal policy that does that. I believe 
the Committee, in putting in this provision, had in mind 
to reduce the direct control and interference in the 
Monetary Board, for example, of the Ministry of 
Finance or people who are directly involved in the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


269 


executive function of government. As it is now, there 
are five government ministers out of the seven members 
and there would be an imbalance because the Monetary 
Board may be completely subservient to the fiscal or 
budgetary requirements of government. That could 
distort the system. So we felt that there was a need for 
independence in the monetary function in order to 
balance the situation, although the monetary function 
may not be completely able to balance this, if the fiscal 
function is very active. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Nevertheless, I was wondering 
why the majority would be the private sector as far as 
the monetary functions are concerned. In due time, 
perhaps I can offer an amendment if the Committee is 
willing. In the case of Section 9, certain areas of invest- 
ments are reserved to citizens of the Philippmes or to 
corporations or associations at least 60 percent of whose 
voting stock is owned by such citizens. But I am raising 
this clarificatory question. I read in the papers that the 
government has converted our foreign debt into equity. 

I am referring to the foreign equity that we have. 

So what happens to Section 9? If there is a conver- 
sion into equity of our foreign debt, this will mean 
opening the country to foreign investors. 

MR. VILLEGAS. In those areas actually specified by 
law. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, but would this not conflict 
with Section 9 of this Article? 

MR. SUAREZ. I think in a situation hke that the 
conversion of the debt equity should correspond only 
to the limitations imposed by law — meaning, 40 per- 
cent — unless there is a higher percentage imposed by 
Congress and this is allowed under this particular 
Section 9. So, as the situation presently stands, I would 
venture the proposition that such conversion into equity 
should be limited to the 40-percent participation of 
foreign corporations. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, may I just men- 
tion that to this date, as fat as we know, there has 
been only one instance when that ri^t has been availed 
of and that is in the case of the conversion into equity 
in Interbank, in which case, the maximum limitation of 
foreign ownership of 40 percent for a commercial bank 
was applied. 

MR. BENGZON. We also would like to indicate that 
perhaps the better term in order to avoid any conflict 
or misinterpretations would be the use of the phrase 
“capital stock.” 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Capital stock? 

MR. SUAREZ. We will discuss that on the committee 
level because precisely, there were three criteria that 


were submitted. One of them is with reference to the 
authorized capital stock; the second would be with 
respect to the voting rights; and the third would be with 
respect to the management. And so, again, we would 
like to inform the members that the Committee is stiU 
trying to polish this particular provision. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. I am satisfied. From ex- 
perience, the government has always reserved land for 
national parks but it has done almost nothing to protect 
the national parks. Should not this Constitution direct 
the government to protect the national parks and have 
more rangers? Section 5 says “marking clearly their 
boundaries on the grounds,” but as soon as these 
boundaries or markings are placed on the grounds, the 
people remove them and either plunder the forest or use 
these areas for private residences. Therefore, what is 
more equally important is a direct mandate of the 
Constitution to the legislature to protect the parks. We 
have no rangers to speak about, unlike the United States 
and the European countries which have enough 
personnel to protect their parks and rivers. 

Law after law has been promulgated, designating 
areas for national parks but nothing has been done to 
protect those areas reserved for parks. So, this will be a 
dead provision of the Constitution, if we do not direct 
the legislature to protect these parks in terms of hiring 
more personnel or rangers and other personnel necessary 
to protect these. 

MR. BENGZON. We will accept amendments along 
that line. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. And my last question is with 
regard to franchises appearing in Section 15. What does 
the Committee envision? Which agency of the govern- 
ment shall issue the franchise to operate electricity from 
town to town? Are we going to continue this under this 
Article? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is still going to be given by the 
legislative body. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. It is the most inefficient form of 
issuing franchises, Mr. Vice-President, and that is why 
our telephone and electric systems are very primitive 
because there has been very little improvement in this 
country. It is more difficult to call from Manila to Malo- 
los than to call from Manila to Los Angeles, Washington 
D.C. or New York because the little tyrants who own 
these franchises do not give a damn. Having come from 
Congress, I have authored a number of these franchises 
myself, and then I was the one who acted as lawyer of 
the people to revoke or to modify these franchises be- 
cause they have never given adequate nor satisfactory 
services to our people. I think that if we continue this 
practice, the communication system in this country will 
remain subpar. Besides, there is already a monopoly 


270 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


here of the Philippine Long Distance Telephone 
Company. 

MR. BENGZON. But that is only one of the problems. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I know. 

MR. BENGZON. We also have other problems. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. That is why I would like to speak 
against the giving of franchises. 

MR. BENGZON. Then maybe the Gentleman can 
propose the amendment at the proper time and we will 
favorably consider those points. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

I was just expressing what I witnessed in previous 
times. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, before I 
move for a suspension, I have been asked to announce 
that after lunch the representatives of the Cordilleras 
request our presence at the lobby for a sort of presenta- 
tion they have prepared for us to articulate their thanks 
for allowing them to attend our sessions and for what- 
ever assistance they received from us. They cannot stay 
for long, and will be going home shortly. I think we 
should also thank them for their presence. 

I now move for a suspension of the session up to two- 
thirty this afternoon. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Before we suspend, the 
Chair wishes to announce that at one-thirty today, two 
Soviet delegates are paying a courtesy call at the office 
of Madam President. They are Victor Gochakov, Deputy 
of the Supreme Soviet Russian Federation, and Alexi 
Drokov, member of the Soviet Solidarity Committee. 
The Members who wish to be present are welcome. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. MAAMBONG. I reiterate my motion, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:44 p.m. 

resumption of session 

At 2.35 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, this is the 
continuation of the interpellation on the Article on 


National Economy and Patrimony but the Chairman of 
the Committee and the other members are not yet here. 
So may I ask for a suspension of a few minutes. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 2:36 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:41 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, the Com- 
mittee is now prepared to respond to interpellations. I 
now caU on Commissioner Rosario Braid to be recog- 
nized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Vice-President, I think 
I wUl yield to other interpellators because I am now 
ready with some amendments. 

Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is 
recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Mr. Chairman and the members of the Committee, I 
have read through all the sections proposed in this 
Article, but I am still looking for something which I 
believe concerns most of us — that of using our own 
materials and our own manufactured goods. In short, I 
am referring to what we called the NEPA — we use our 
own goods, our own materials, and our own labor. 

I understand that even “Marlboro,” although prod- 
uced here and still called “Marlboro,” is paid a certain 
amount for royalty, as is Coca-Cola and Pepsi-Cola. In 
China, they use Coca-Cola but they use another name 
for it and, therefore, are free from paying royalties to 
the Coca-Cola company. The same holds true with 
Pepsi-Cola. I wonder if at this pomt we can introduce m 
this Article the possibility of using our own goods, our 
own materials, our own labor. In Japan, one hardly sees 
any goods labelled after the Western countries. All these 
are named after the Japanese goods. 

In short, let us be a little bit nationalistic in this 
matter, because I feel that our country can produce 
more and can make more if we become conscious of 
using our goods. Take, for example, corn. At this period 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


271 


of the year, we have plenty of com produced. And yet, 
we already have certain importations already being 
planned for some time in Hie middle of September to 
October. This is true with the fish meal used in the 
production of our feeds for livestock, chicken and cows. 
We have plenty of meat, yet we are prone to import. 

I wonder if we can introduce in this Article what we 
call “NEPA” or the use of local goods, materials locally 
manufactured and the use of local labor. We may add a 
section if the Committee will permit us. 

Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Vice-President, may we request 
that Commissioner Monsod be recognized to answer the 
query of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, I believe that 
the first sentence of Section 1 covers the principle that 
Commissioner de Castro wanted to enunciate — “The 
State shall develop a self-reliant and independent eco- 
nomy.” With respect to the enabling legislation on 
specific activities, including the legislation on labeling 
and brand names, those are already details that perhaps 
should not be covered by the Constitution. But I shall 
ask Commissioner Romulo to explain that in more 
detail. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Vice-President, the suggestion 
of the Gentleman is meritorious but that is really a legis- 
lative matter dealing with labeling and trademarks. 
There are at present labeling and trademark laws, so that 
it is difficult to legislate on that matter in the Constitu- 
tion. There are costs involved in changes in labelling and 
trademarks. Besides, under our present law, protection 
is given certain trademarks. We believe that the proper 
body to pass upon this would be the legislature. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Vice-President, I have read 
and reread the first sentence of Section 1. The only 
thing that can be deducted out of what I said is the word 
“self-reliant,” but I believe that the word is not suffi- 
cient in order to register in the minds of our people, our 
Congressmen, in the mind of our President, and of 
everybody the meaning of “nationality” and “nation- 
alism” in the use of our locally made goods. 

So, in the matter of these rights or the payment of 
royalties for the use of names, we believe that we can 
formulate something in general to give credit to what I 
have said before in the form of an amendment by the 
addition of a section. I wonder if the Committee will 
welcome the suggestion. 

MR. MONSOD. The Committee will be happy to 
entertain amendments along those lines. We also wanted 
the Gentleman to note that in Section 1, on line 10, 
there is a mandate for the full employment of all the 
resources of the country, which means that opportuni- 
ties should be afforded so that these resources can be 


properly utilized. Second, there is a mandate for a 
sustained increase in the amount of goods produced by 
the country. Again, this is a mandate for local produc- 
tion. Also mentioned is the phrase “for the Filipino 
people” which means that the local product should first 
be made available to Filipinos rather than exported, 
if that is for the greater good of the Filipinos. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I agree with the Commissioner but 
that is what we call in Tagalog “dapUs” because the pro- 
vision does not expressly provide for giving priority to 
local products. We need something that the Filipino 
people and our leaders will understand. We still prefer 
to use a pair of Florsheim shoes and we feel proud 
because it is imported. A very few of us want to use the 
Marikina-made shoes. While it is so stated here, it is not, 
in fact, being followed by many Filipinos. 

I hope that we can formulate something which will be 
acceptable to the Committee, so that when we say 
“NEPA” this will register in the minds of our leaders 
and our people. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. We will await the Commissioner’s 
amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is 
recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I would like to make general remarks with reference 
to Sections 1, 2, 3, 4, 9 and 10. First of all, may I say 
that I consider this Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony crucial and important. In fact, I believe that 
the Article on Social Justice in a sense cannot be 
realized unless the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony shares the same vision. And, therefore, I am 
making my remarks in that context, hoping that this 
Article can provide the thrust, the environment so that 
the social justice direction can be realized. 

At the same time, I want to make an admission. It 
was only yesterday evening that we were told to tackle 
this Article on the National Economy and Patrimony. I 
would have wished that I had sufficient time to do 
further study and research on this very important Arti- 
cle. Since I did not have sufficient time, I asked the 
Floor Leader regarding the number of interpellators. I 
was told there was only just one more or two. I thought 
it was important that I should at least lay some general 
questions. Nonetheless, I want to make an admission 


272 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


that I feel there is a need for further research on this 
matter. Anyway, the two major questions that I have in 
mind are these. As to the entire Article, I asked myself 
how we can work towards more economic democratiza- 
tion, so that the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony can truly safeguard the provisions that we 
have worked out very carefully and systematically in the 
Article on Social Justice. 


I find that there are certain areas here where this 
entire question can be posed. Do they really lead to- 
wards the furthering and deepening of economic 
democratization? For example, if we look at Sections 1, 
2, 3, 4, 9 and 10, we will notice that there is a strong 
stress on the move towards private initiative, the private 
sector, the private groups. I am wondering whether the 
preference, as pointed out by the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee, for the private ^oup or the private sector has 
contrast with the previous experience of the public; 
whether it could also admit of a differentiation between 
private and social. In other words, the distinction should 
not be only between private and public but also be- 
tween private and social. Initiative should not just be 
left to certain individuals or to those who within the 
free enterprises could be the strong monopoly group, 
but there must be a greater regard for the social groups 
or the social sectors in society which normally are 
excluded from the economic distribution system. In 
fact, there is a certain definition given in Section 1 , but 
am wondering whether in the last sentence, when one 
speaks of a broader-based ownership of private enter- 
prise, that would include a mixed economy with the 
private enterprise and a social sector composed of 
cooperative ventures and aggrupation of large communi- 
les Idee, for example, the peasant groups and the labor 
groups that we spelled out in the Article on Social 
us ice and finally the state sector. A proper combina- 
lon of these three sectors and a recognition of the 
mterplay of their working together could bring forth a 
more just and economic democratization process. How- 
ever, I feel there is a strong preference given to the 
private sector in this entire Article. 


The other question is: How does one ensure a greater 
protection of the national interest? The first sentence 
reads: “The State shall develop a self-reliant and 

independent national economy,” and yet one has still to 
find provisions for greater protection. How do we 
intend to realize this? Is there a rational, comprehensive 
direction or vision of how one creates a self-reliant, 
mdependent economy? Is there a priority? Are there 
economic and national priorities that will safeguard 
independent development? I seem to miss these in the 

K-i' * “iS provides a lot of opening, a lot of 

flexibility We have to consider this in the Third World 
con ex where there is unequal and uneven relationship 
between strong nations and weak nations, also especially 
considermg our phase of development when there is a 
need to put a lot of stress on social justice. This eco- 
nomic prioritizing, I think, is very important to ensure 
precisely that we can develop, independent of other 


factors and forces that are sometimes ranged against our 
national interest. 


I would like to look deeper into this and with more 
detail, and perhaps suggest in what manner those 
sections that I mentioned can be strengthened. May I 
refer you to Sections 9 and 10, particularly lines 13 and 
14 of Section 9. With regard to reserving certain areas 
of investment to citizens of the Philippines, I was 
wondering whether we can specify and say in a deter- 
mined manner, so as to reserve traditional priority areas 
to Filipino interest. I think that could perhaps be clari- 
fied and, in fact, strengthened, so that we can defend 
Filipino interest in priority areas. 


With regard to Section 10, following the interpella- 
tions by Commissioner Natividad on the monetary 
authority, I think I also mentioned this in relation to 
some other sections regarding the monetary authority 
and the private sector’s majority participation. It is 
important to note that the word “private” must like- 
wise connote the idea of “social.” Very clearly, the 
expertise and the technical knowhow that we need 
to participate in the monetary authority could be found 
very strongly m those who have the expertise and the 
experience within the banking circles. And these are the 
private banking people, I would presume. So, how do 
we protect the social sectors who are most affected, m 
fact, by the entire procedure and workings in this 
banking relationship? 


Perhaps, something like sectoral representation can 
also be insured in this area. Sometimes we are 
reacting to the use of public sector or pubUc 
because of the martial law experience where the puh ic 
sector was not used for the public good but omy or 
private crony interest. Therefore, some kind of re- 
orientation has to be made so that the Article has t e 
social dimension rather than simply the kind of negation 
of our experience during martial law. 


Thank you very much. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you very much. 

Let me just give some preliminary response to the 
remarks of Commissioner Garcia, and then the other 
members of the Committee could give their own. First 
of all, we would like to assure Commissioner Garcia 
that we welcome suggestions on how to refine the 
phraseology, so that the preferential treatment for the 
poor which we would like to permeate the whole Article 
will stand out more clearly. This is definitely a welcome 
source of amendments at the opportune time. 

But, first, let me say that we should take the whole 
Constitution as an organic whole and keep in mind that 
social justice, which used to be just one provision in the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony, has now 
been expanded into one whole article. We would like to 
think of the Article on Social Justice as still very much 
an organic part of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. We should not look at the various articles 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


273 


piecemeal, but should interrelate them especially these 
two articles I have referred to. 

Then I would like to reiterate what I said this 
morning, that we want it very clear on record that the 
word “private” is not limited to profit-making for busi- 
ness groups. Precisely, we have taken into account the 
importance of relating private to social or common good 
causes by making sure that the word “private” here is 
interpreted to include cause-oriented groups, coopera- 
tives, nongovernmental organizations, precisely any 
grouping that is not part of the government sector. So, 
there is really no disagreement on this emphasis on the 
social reorientation for the private group, and that is 
exactly why Section 2 opens with the statement that 
“the use of property bears a social function,” and that 
all economic agents, whether they belong to the profit- 
making sector or the nonprofit-making sector, should 
contribute to the common good. If that can be im- 
proved, definitely we would welcome some suggestions. 

Then that leads to the statement that the so-called 
private representation in the Monetary Board can very 
well include nonprofit organizations, whether they 
represent the labor sector or the farming sector, and that 
we wilt leave it to Congress to decide who the so-called 
private representatives in the Monetary Board should be. 
We are not thinking only in terms of bankers or mem- 
bers of the profit-making sector when we say that the 
majority of the members of the Monetary Board come 
from the private sector. I am very glad Commissioner 
Garcia gives us an opportunity to reiterate this. We can 
have members of the Monetary Board representing the 
labor sector^ the farming sector, or other sectors that 
Congress may decide. That is why we are leaving it open 
to Congress to decide on this representation. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I am a member of the Committee, and for the benefit 
of Commissioner Garcia, I did remember that I sug- 
gested the term “mixed economy” to describe the range 
of economic subsystems within the overall economy of 
Philippine society to include those that were already 
mentioned, including private communal state-owned. 
But it was the feeling of the other members of the Com- 
mittee that the concept is embodied in the whole 
Article in relation to cooperatives, to ancestral land, to 
the participation of the private sector and also the role 
of the State. But if it does not seem to give that strong 
impression, maybe some amendments later will be 
entertained to fully project that idea of a combination 
of various economic subsystems within the overall 
national economy. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Also, it is explicitly stated that the 
freedom of initiative is limited by the duty of the State 
to promote distributive justice and to intervene when 
the common good so demands. I think it is very clear 
that we are not anti-State in situations where it is very 
clear that the State has to intervene. Definitely that 
demand for the civil justice wiU prevail over freedom of 
initiative. 

MR. GARCIA. Precisely this is my point. It is not 
simply a dichotomy between the private and the public, 
between the individual and the State. But what I seek 
here is the recognition of the social sector, a social area 
where the economic agents are not simply private enter- 
prises but also cooperative sectors where you may have 
an association of farmers or a cooperative of workers 
who may become the agents of development, the en- 
gines of development. In this way development is far 
more distributed towards the recognition and apprecia- 
tion not only of the role of the private or the role of 
the State but at the same time the role of the social area 
which creates more involvement. So it should not 
simply be a question of nationalization but of socializa- 
tion. 

How do we create a greater social base for ownership? 
How do we create a greater social base of control and 
enjoyment of fruits of labor? It should not simply be 
attention between one pole which is the government 
and the other pole which is the individual agent for 
economic development, but also that of the social bond. 
We speak of solidarity, and I think this could be the 
example. The statement of principle in Section 1 defines 
it and yet, it falls short. It does not go into a precise 
recognition of the sector. 

Secondly, we are bound by our own history of 
understanding the private sector as always limited to 
what we have historically seen. In the case of private 
initiative, very often because of the nature of competi- 
tion, those who have great resources and great capacity 
end up controlling. That is the very nature of things, so 
that we have to define the weak, defend those who are 
normally marginalized by providing recognition and 
protection to that social area. This is what I am trying 
to stress. 

MR. BENGZON. That is precisely one of the prin- 
cipal reasons why this Commission opted to create a 
separate Article on Social Justice - to emphasize not 
only the need for social justice but the social aspect of 
the use of property and the development of national 
economy. Sections 19 and 20 of the Article on Social 
Justice cap the whole thing by recognizing people’s 
organization. It is precisely these people in their partici- 
pation with nation building that all of these things we 
are talking about can be brought up. The Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony zeroes in principally 
on the means and manner of generating revenues and 
on how development is going to be achieved in order 
that the necessary support can be generated so that 


274 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


the provisions of the Article on Social Justice can be 
implemented. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, may I just add 
my own comments. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. The whole economy is concerned 
principally with two things: efficiency and equity, that 
is, creation of wealth and disfribution of wealth. In both 
the Articles on National Economy and Social Justice, 
we are trying to strike a balance — the demands for 
equity and distribution are primarily in the Article on 
Social Justice and the requirements for efficiency and 
productivity and wealth creation are in the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. Even then, we will 
notice that the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony is permeated with the social aspect. So, if we 
look at both articles, there is a very strong emphasis on 
the social aspect of production, distribution and the 
activities within the economy. 


steel company is now managed by a group listed in the 
stock market and which has a broad-based ownership. In 
times of war, the State says that this is an emergency 
and we would like to take over this industry because 
production, not profit, is important. Now, where does 
the third sector come in? 

MR. GARCIA. Since that is a very vital industry with 
such strategic nature and character, then it should be in 
the hands of the State. In fact, I am very doubtful 
whether a steel industry could be given to one family, 
like the Jacinto family, rather than be in the hands of 
the State. 

Let us take a newspaper, for example. Should a news- 
paper be in the hands of one family or the State? I 
would say neither. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, let us take the 
example we had earlier because it is a company that 
should be in the hands of the State. In his previous 
statement, the Gentleman was referring to a third sector 
other than the State . . . 


MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. I am not simply speaking 
of the social aspect. I am speaking here of a very vital 
sector as an engine of economic development. I think 
t is Article is very important because it provides the 
direction, the economic priorities and the economic 
structures that can be in place. 


MR. MONSOD. Is the Gentleman talking about tl 
lower mcome groups, the disadvantaged? 

MR. GARCIA. When we speak, for example, i 
engines of development, very often we speak of tl 
private enterprise or the private groups or the priva 
sec or. And very often, we would say that in times i 
emergency or on other occasions, the State or the pub! 
sector can come in. What I am trying to say is the 
t ere is a third and very important sector which we ha 
o enlarge if we are going to make economic democra 
zation a reality, and that is the social sector — the soci 
sector being the association of a great majority in tl 
country. Basically, these are the associations of worke 
peasants, low-income earners who can come togeth 
and perhaps be themselves the creators of wealth. This 
^ iniportant area. Tliere can be property wi 

eitheTtht ^ command, in control rather th 

either the State or the individual entrepreneur. 

a questi^n?^^^^' may I just a: 

Can we put this in operational terms? 


MR. GARCIA. Yes. 


MR. MONSOD. Let us talk about a steel company. 
Let us say that in case of invasion or in case of war, the 


MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. ... or private enterprise even if it is 
broad-based in the stock market. In the specific situa- 
tion we were talking about, how does the third sector 
enter into the picture as a preferred mode in order to 
make sure that that company is run for the common 
good? 


MR. GARCIA. The third sector, the social sector as a 
preferred mode, could only be envisioned within a 
certain set of circumstances. In other words, it is not for 
every enterprise. There are some strategic and vital 
industries that cannot be under its control or under its 
leadership. But there are areas, for example, the shoe- 
making industry in Marikina or a newspaper publishing 
industry. Perhaps, rather than it be under the control of 
an individual entrepreneur who will own it or a family 
or the State, why not a social sector like a cooperative 
of newspapermen or of writers and other people who 
work in that newspaper Or the shoemakers themselves, 
banding together, be made the cooperative owner to 
provide room for this sector as another engine for 
economic development in this area? 


MR. MONSOD. Perhaps, if we expand the second 
sentence of Section 2 in order to accommodate the 
cooperatives, maybe we can say “individuals and private 
groups, SUCH AS, OR INCLUDING COOPERATIVES,” 
and so on. Is this what the Commissioner means be- 
cause the Committee, in its deliberations, took into 
consideration the different forms or the different types 
of organizations within private groups? The Chairman 
mentioned that “private groups or individuals” need not 
be profit-making. These “private groups or individuals” 
need not be a corporation nor a big business. If the Com- 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1 3,1 986 


275 


missioner wants some explicit mention of certain types 
of organizations in order to highlight the social sectors 
he is talking about, the Committee would be happy to 
entertain suggestions in that regard, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. GARCIA. Actually, I am not sure whether this is 
simply a language problem or a matter of phrasing. I feel 
there should be some effort to include in the vision of 
this Article a recognition of the social sector as a partner 
and one of the priority areas in our national develop- 
ment. Really, I am not sure. Does the Commissioner 
think this is only a language problem? Can we accom- 
modate this sector by a change in phraseology of the 
section or should this be part of the vision of this 
Article? 

MR. MONSOD. If we can address the questions 
squarely, when the Committee formulated this Article 
there was a very distinct preference for private initiative. 
If the Commissioner is saying that the section should 
have a different orientation, that it should talk about 
socialism or socialization of factors of production or 
assets, then that is a different thing altogether. I think 
the concept of the Committee was that private groups 
should include collective organizations and coopera- 
tives. But in fairness to the Commissioner in case there 
is a difference in interpretation, the Committee does not 
subscribe to the system where the assets for production 
are in the hands of the State in the name of the people. 
Perhaps, we can argue more on that point rather than on 
the wordings of the section. 

MR. G/ARCIA. I am sorry, but I think there is a mis- 
understanding here. The reason I precisely tried to 
introduce the idea of the social sector is to get away 
from that dichotomy between the individual entre- 
preneur and the State. There is a third area where, in 
fact, the whole theme of solidarity moves into, which is 
the social area or the social sector. Therefore, there 
must be a proper recognition of that mixed economy 
which I tried to spell out earlier. Besides relying on the 
important role of private enterprise, still there must be a 
recognition and an encouragement of the social sector 
while respecting the preferred action of the State where 
it is necessary in vital areas. In other words, this is a 
mixed area. 

MR. MONSOD. May I ask the Commissioner a ques- 
tion: In his concept, who would own enterprises that 
produce goods and services? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. I think the Chair will want 
to recognize Commissioner Bacani because the time of 
the Gentleman has already elapsed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. I 
think Commissioner Garcia is creatmg a dichotomy 
between “private” and “social” which we do not want 
to do. What we mean is that “private” includes social 


and socialized sectors in contradistinction to the public 
or governmental sector.* I believe that if the Commis- 
sioner recognizes this, his difficulties will at least be 
lessened and he will realize that social and socialized 
sectors are indeed included in the private groups that are 
explicitly mentioned in this committee report. 

Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Ople be recognized for his interpellation. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is 
recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I am a member of the Committee and, of 
course, I am in support of the committee report, but I 
thought it might be useful to put some questions to the 
Committee for purposes of determining its intent and of 
the Commission later with respect to some of the major 
provisions. 

Section 1, lines 7 and 8, states: “The State shall 
develop a self-reliant and independent national eco- 
nomy.” I do not know whether in constitutional lite- 
rature these terms “self-reliant” and “independent” 
correspond to certain well-established meanings. The 
Committee cannot be referring in any case to self- 
reliance and independence in the context of economic 
autarky. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. As I said in my sponsorship 
speech this morning, that is not what the Committee 
means. 

MR. OPLE. Perhaps, the most conspicuous change 
in economic history in modem times is the great inter- 
dependence according to which national economies 
are now linked together to a vital and often fickle global 
economy. Is that not correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And the most strikingly successful 
economy is in our own part of the world where those 
who early on recognize this major discontinuity as, some 
economists call it, the arrival of an era of global' inter- 
dependence say that what happens in one part of the 
world, let us say, when the OPEC meets in Vienna can 
actually exert a direct impact within 24 hours on the 
pocketbooks of workers in the Philippines. Would that 
be correct? 

So there is no intention here to speak of an economy 
in isolation in the name of self-reliance and inde- 
pendence. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, Mr. Vice-President. 


276 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13,1986 


MR. OPLE. I bring this up because certain contrasts 
in fundamental perspectives might be involved. Earlier 
in a committee meeting, I put this question to a dis- 
tinguished economist, who is the Chairman of the 
Committee on National Economy and Patrimony, on 
why 20 years ago we had a higher per capita income 
than Korea, Taiwan and Japan. Our engineers buUt the 
runway in Seoul; we were considered an emerging eco- 
nomic Cinderella of Asia and the Pacific, and the 
potentials of an import-substituting economy got 
exhausted because we turned inward and, in effect, 
nourished some companies that enfranchised themselves 
in a small domestic market with low volumes and high 
mark-ups so that, in effect, the consumers were penal- 
ized ultimately in terms of having to buy shoddy goods 
at exorbitant prices. And, in the meantime, some of 
these countries to our north — Japan, Korea and 
Taiwan - turned outward and competed for then- 
fair share of emerging global markets, with the result 
that today, Korea and Taiwan earn more than $30 
billion from their export strategy compared to $5 
billion of the Philippines, even if we put all of our 
exports together, including copper, coconut oil, sugar, 
handicrafts and all goods. Korea owes the banks about 
$40 billion while the Philippines $26 billion, but the 
banks still queue at the door of the Korean companies; 
whereas, we are a basket case in the international 
economy. Is that not correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


^ wanted to make sure that there i 
retreat into our own economy and ni 
ac o s uttiiig our eyes to opportunities in the globa 

economy with this term “self-reliant and independen 
economy. 

Earlier, Commissioner Monsod, in replying to Com 
missioner Garcia, said that productivity is the majo 
concern of this Article, as distinguished from th 
redistributive justice in the Article on Social Justict 
look in vain for any reference to productivity as 
national policy in this Article. Productivity is nc 
mentioned a single time throughout this Article. Wi 
the Committee, therefore, at the proper time conside 
a section on productivity as a national policy which, c 
course, will also be established in the context of share 
rewards for all those engaged in the effort of produ( 
ion . would also remind the Chairman of the Commi 
tee at in t e course of the debate on the Article o 
Social Justice I explicitly asked whether or not th 
omrni ee wou d consider absorbing the overflow froi 
one of the sections in the Article on Social Justice aboi 
e a e owmg protection to our own citizens in term 
of the marme wealth of our territorial waters whic 
should be reserved exclusively to the exploitation b 
Fihpino citizens, especially the small fishermen. 

'welcome an amendme, 
to that effect, Mr. Vice-President. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Vice-President 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President, I would like to 
preface my interpellation with a request that we still be 
allowed to present some questions or interpellations 
tomorrow, because I agree with Commissioner Garcia 
and some other Commissioners who felt that we should 
be given more time to review some of the concepts that 
have been enunciated in this particular Article since this 
unscheduled discussion on this particular Article was 
only received yesterday. So we would like to request a 
reservation to interpellate tomorrow morning. Would 
the Committee still entertain interpellations even if 
amendments may already be presented? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, we can stiU continue the inter- 
pellations tomorrow. 

MR. BENGZON. The Commissioner can certainly ask 
questions even if we are already in the period of amend- 
ments, especially if the matter brought out is something 
that is vital to an amendment. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you very much. 

For many of us who are not economists, we still have 
to grapple with a lot of technocratic terms. As the Com- 
mittee members have accused some of us, so we do the 
same for the economists who have formulated some of 
these provisions which to noneconomists would mean 
certain things. We would like to be clarified on such pro- 
visions so that we, in turn, can explain these to the lay- 
men who have to understand what these all mean and 
how these relate to the Article on Social Justice. We 
hope the committee members will not mind our being 
persistent in clarifying some of the terms that may 
already have been repeatedly expressed by them, one of 
which is the concept of “common good.” 

The first time we heard the term “common good” 
was when we were formulating the Preamble. We would 
like to find out if the meaning of “common good” in 
the Preamble of the Constitution would be the same as 
that used in this Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. In fact, the phrase “common 
good” is even more applicable when we talk about 
“marginalized” sectors, people who have been deprived 
systematically over the years. If we will remember, I 
insisted on the use of the phrase “common good” as a 
substitute for the more ambiguous phrase “general 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


277 


welfare” because in the past, “general welfare” had 
been used by the majority to inflict certain injustices on 
the minority. “General welfare” means the greatest 
good for the greatest number. So, often, people who 
belong to the marginalized sector are systematically left 
out. 

As I said earlier, the term “common good” is a phrase 
in social philosophy which is defined as a social order 
which enables every single individual and society to 
attain fullest development economically, politically, 
culturally and spiritually. So when we talk about eco- 
nomic privation, “common good” is more appropriate. 
We have seen in the Article on Social Justice that we 
have to provide for the marginalized sectors. 

MS. QUESADA. I notice that at one point, the 
Commissioner substituted “common good” for the 
word “public interest.” Is this the general term of 
reference then? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. Is this a theological concept? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is a philosophical concept. 

MS. QUESADA. I understand this has been based on 
the policy of the Vatican II. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Even before the Vatican II. 

MS. QUESADA. Even before Vatican II? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is right. 

MS. QUESADA. In this particular Article, what 
would be the parameter of having arrived at the term 
“common good”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In every decision we make in the 
economic sphere, we must consider the welfare of 
everyone. We cannot be very summary in dismissing the 
interest of special groups just to promote the good of 
the majority, although in the field of economics, as in 
politics, the public interest sometimes may require a 
decision in favor of the majority. This is the reason 
“public interest,” in certain situations, can actually 
mean the “common good.” 

MS. QUESADA. Let us take the case of the people of 
Cordillera. Would the Commissioner say that the 
common good of these people was served when the 
Chico Dam was constructed? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In that particular case, not necessa- 
rily. Precisely, we have provisions in the Article on 
Social Justice to make sure that the rights of indigenous 
tribes are more seriously considered in public works 
projects. 


MS. QUESADA. Also, in the case of the construction 
of the Pantabangan Dam when a lot of inhabitants of 
Nueva Ecija were actually displaced and dislocated, 
would the Commissioner say that the common good was 
served? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely not, if there is evidence 
that the welfare of these indigenous tribes has been 
completely neglected without any fair treatment. 

MS. QUESADA. So, as a nation, how would we relate 
to this concept of common good? 

MR. VILLEGAS. By precisely always considering the 
welfare of everyone in a decision. It does not mean that 
we cannot make decisions for the good of the majority, 
but we must not be completely oblivious to the good 
of the minority. We must provide some ways and means 
of resettling individuals who may be displaced because 
of the power of eminent domain. As we very well know, 
there is the power of eminent domain, but we cannot 
just say that we could not care less what happens to 
those who are dislocated because that would be against 
the common good. 

MS. QUESADA. So the Committee would not be 
using the parameters of economic growth? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely not because economic 
growth is not the only objective of the Article on the 
National Economy, as very clearly stated in Section L 

MS. QUESADA. When we say “development,” we ask 
the question of for whose development. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly. 

MS. QUESADA. I suggest we again use simple terms 
because I am thinking of how I could explain this to the 
laymen like farmers, workers, and the urban poor, so 
that they would realize that, indeed, this Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony does not conflict 
with the other Articles that we have been working out 
very conscientiously. In simple terms, would the Com- 
missioner then say that the component of this common 
good can be expressed in parameters, like the equitable 
distribution of income, etc.? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly, it is the first goal. 

MS. QUESADA. Would the parameter that there is 
conservation of this income, that we keep this income 
so that it does not get away from us, that it remains in 
our country, also apply in this particular concept of 
common good? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The phrase which says “goods and 
services produced by the nation for the benefit of the 
Filipino people” is supposed to capture the concept, 
Mr. Vice-President. 


278 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. Would the third parameter that 
there is full employment of income to create our wealth 
and produce capital goods be covered in this particular 
definition? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Actually, that is one of the answers 
to Commissioner Ople’s query about self-reliance. To 
the extent that we have resources and we have domestic 
savings, we should not rely on outside help. We should 
only rely on outside help once we have exhausted all 
our possible resources. 

MS. QUESADA. So the Commissioner has expressed 
in a way the philosophy of Sections 1 and 2 of this par- 
ticular Article, which does not appear in either the 1935 
or 1973 Constitution. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right, Mr. Vice-President. 

MS. QUESADA. The next question I would like to 
ask is. What was the rationale behind the transposition 
of the different sections? I notice that in the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony, the section, for 
example, that refers to NEDA which is denominated as 
Section 1 in the 1973 Constitution is now Section 8; 
Section 2 is now Section 14. 


MS. QUESADA. The 1973 Constitution used the 
words “service contracts.” In this particular Section 3, is 
there a safeguard against the possible control of foreign 
interests if the Filipinos go into coproduction with 
them? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. In fact, the deletion of the 
phrase “service contracts” was our first attempt to avoid 
some of the abuses in the past regime in the use of 
service contracts to go around the 60-40 arrangement. 
The safeguard that has been introduced — and this, of 
course, can be refined — is found in Section 3, lines 25 
to 30, where Congress will have to concur with the 
President on any agreement entered into between a 
foreign-owned corporation and the government involv- 
ing technical or financial assistance for large-scale 
exploration, development and utilization of natural 
resources. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. Does the Commissioner 
not think that Section 9 on page 4 somehow runs in 
direct contradiction with Section 1 which provides for 
the development of a self-reliant and independent 
national economy? 

MR. VILLEGAS. May I know in what sense? 


♦i, Yes, that is right. We thought that 

e order followed in the committee report is more 
lopcal. We found the 1973 Constitution with NEDA 
m ro ucmg the whole Article very inappropriate be- 
cause we o not even know what the goals of the eco- 
nomy are. Introducing immediately an economic 
p anning agency is not even an indispensable part of 
managmg the economy. 


MS. QUESADA. Section 9 appears to open the eco- 
nomy to the unhampered participation by foreign 
investment in almost all areas of economic activity while 
empowering the legislature to establish certain areas of 
investment as reserved to citizens of the Philippines 
or to corporations or associations 60 percent of whose 
voting stock or controlling interest is owned by 
Filipinos. 


MS. QUESADA. So in Section 2, page 1, Une 19, 
which states all economic agents in the private sector,” 
it appears that we are giving a lot of leeway for the 
private sector to take the lead in the development 
sphere. There are some concerns about the private 
sector being covered in the Article to include not only 
the local private sector but also the foreign private 
sector. Is that right? 


MR. VILLEGAS. There is no intention to do that in 
IS ^eci 1 C provision. In fact, the intention here is to 
mclude cooperatives, cause-oriented groups and non- 
pro 1 ma mg organizations as part of private sector, but 
there was never any intention to expUcitly include the 
oreign sec or. ut definitely to the extent that there is, 
for example, the 40-60 provision on exploration of 
natural resources, the foreign groups can be deluded. 


MS. QUESADA. So it does 
businesses. 


not exclude big foreign 


MR. VILLEGAS. It does not. 


MR. VILLEGAS. It can be stipulated at a higher rate 
by Congress. 

MS. QUESADA. It could be higher? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. I also notice that the traditional 
areas of investment are mentioned in the 1973 Consti- 
tution. What was the rationale behind the removal of 
the term “traditional”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee precisely believes 
that in order to protect the welfare of the people, the 
word “traditional” should be deleted because it is very 
ambiguous. What is traditional today may no longer 
be traditional tomorrow. So we give Congress greater 
leeway to declare as exclusively for Filipinos any area 
of investment. 

MS. QUESADA. Does the Commissioner not think 
that it will make it more difficult for the national 
entrepreneurs because then they will be subjected to 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


279 


the vagaries of lobbying? There is always the problem 
of lobbying when one does not have the means by 
which he could lobby. And the bigger or the richer one 
is, the more chances of getting his interest entered into a 
legislation or something like that. Does that not make it 
difficult for our own businessmen? Instead of this 
Constitution giving justice to Filipino businessmen, we 
are making it harder for them because we will have to 
enter again into the field of legislative or parliamentary 
ways of helping them in their interests. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Romulo would like 
to answer that question. 

MR. ROMULO. I think there is a misapprehension 
here as to the provision of Section 9. This section does 
not seek to change what the Constitution and the law 
already provide as far as national equity is concerned. 
What has been stipulated by the Constitution as 60-40 
will remain 60-40 or 75-25 will remain 75-25. Indeed, 
what this Article wants is to allow Congress to make 
those ratios even higher. That is the whole point of this 
section in the 1973 Constitution as weU as in this new 
Constitution. 

MS. QUESADA. But I am concerned about the 
traditional areas of investment. Does this mean now that 
if we are silent about the limitations of the areas of 
investment foreign investors can get into, that means 
foreign business can compete with the local business? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. I think there is a misunder- 
standing here, Mr. Vice-President. The meaning of this 
section is that all areas that were considered traditional 
in the 1973 Constitution are included in this section, 
plus more. 

MS. QUESADA. At this point, this is all I can under- 
stand; but tomorrow we will study this Article again, 
and see how we could fully understand it. 

I thank the sponsors. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

At this juncture, the Vice-President relinquished the 
Chair to the Honorable Cirilo A. Rigos. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. M A AM BONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, 1 ask that 
Commissioner Tan be recognized for her interpellation. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I am also a layman, so I would like to ask 
the Committee’s patience about my questions, the first 
one of which is on Section 8. 


This section sounds very nice because it assures that 
the production sectors will be consulted in relation 
to the framing and implementation of national develop- 
ment programs; however, the absence again of definite 
guidelines or principles to this integrated approach may 
reduce this exercise, as in a couple of our public hear- 
ings, to parochial problems which will give rise to a 
system of lobbying. But this section would be clearer to 
us, the laymen, if it enunciates the principles enu- 
merated by Lichauco which are decolonization, indus- 
trialization and economic democratization. So are these 
completely off? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. Commissioner Ople would like 
to answer the question. 

MR. OPLE. I want to answer that smaller part about 
the mandatory consultations in Section 8 which states; 

The President, after consultations with the appropriate 
public agencies and the private sector, including labor and 
peasant organizations, shall recommend to Congress and 
implement an integrated and coordinated approach to 
national development. 

I do remember that in one of the committee meetings, 

I proposed the inclusion of labor and peasant organiza- 
tions under the private sector to make sure that the 
private sector here refers not only to men in business 
and industry but also to representatives of labor and 
peasant organizations. I think this is a very important 
innovation in implementing integrated and coordinated 
development programs. The President is obliged to con- 
sult not only with government agencies but also with 
the private sector, which in this new context includes 
labor and peasant organizations. In this respect, we 
build even into the NEDA planning process consulta- 
tions with sectoral organizations. 

With respect to the bigger “isms” mentioned by 
Commissioner Tan, I would like to refer these to the 
economic philosopher who is the Chairman of the 
Committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. Although anyone is entitled 
to his own views on how to run the economy, whether 
to decolonize, industrialize or do something about it, 

I think it is more subject to the discussion that should 
lead to legislation because there are many issues in- 
volved, like the extent of foreign control and of the 
industries we would like to develop. Should we put up 

I I major projects as against small and medium-scale 
industries? Should we accent agriculture? Those are all 
very debatable issues that are better left to Congress to 
legislate. The Committee was of the opinion that going 
into those policy issues would clutter the Constitution. 

SR. TAN. But if it is important, it would not clutter. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is an important empirical 
question which is very difficult for us to settle right now 
because of our limited time and resources. 


280 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


SR. TAN. My only feeling is that we have been 
following this during the past years and now we have 
more paupers than we have ever had before. What is 
written here is really good, but if we do not put some- 
thing definite like what we did in the Article on Social 
Justice which took us so many days, we will have the 
same banana. But I appreciate all the efforts of the 
Committee. 

Also in Section 9, I feel the same apprehension as a 
layman — that what is not said is more apprehensive 
than what is said. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We would welcome any suggestion 
to rephrase it so that it can be less apprehensive. 

SR. TAN. Yes, we will consult. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. I speak only for myself, but I think 
Commissioner Tan might be right. She misses in this 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony a policy 
statement on industrialization. And I think if that is 
lacking, maybe we should provide for that later. 

Thank you. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presidmg Officer, this morning, 
I think the same question was asked, and the sense of 
the Committee was that central planning may be neces- 
sary at this time, but it may not be necessary later on. 
Since we are framing a Constitution that is going to be 
valid for a long time, the Committee felt that the refer- 
ence to planning as the central theme of the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony may not be appro- 
priate. It may be needed now but it may not be needed 
later, particularly in the context of our directions that 
there should be less government, that there should be 
more reliance on private initiative, includmg not only 
individuals and business enterprises, but also nongovern- 
mental, cooperative, collectivist organizations and the 
like. That is the reason the provision on NEDA was not 
put in Section 1 but in later sections, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. So it is not the intention of the Committee to 
downgrade planning, especially at this time when it may 
be needed. 

MR. FOZ. But just the same, even if the economy has 
progressed, and in whatever stage the national economy 
finds itself in, there has to be some kind of central 
planning by the State or the government. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I remember Commissioner Ople’s 
own concern about marine resources. Probably, he 
cou also incorporate a phrase about industrialization. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 


'• ^^^®ONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask tl 
Commissioner Foz be recognized. 

OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Comm 
sioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. FOZ. First of all, I would like to also support 
e proposal to include some provisions regarding indus- 
tnalization, if only to stress the importance of indus- 
nalization in national development. Also, I am 
about Section 8, the same provision over 
which some questions were previously asked. 


seems to be some vagueness which I suppos 
tne Committee believed should be ampUfied with th 
pass^e of a legislation regarding the National Economi 
iq-70 Authority. I think the provision of th 

ons itution regarding the National Economic an 

'^^tter in one sense in thi 
thp rn\p f ^ ^®^tion 1 to give importance t 

mpnt Nn Planning body for national develoi 

ent. Now I notice that in the draft Article on Nation: 
Economy and Patnmony, the role of the NEDA 
somewhat downgraded. Is there a reason for this? 


VILLEGAS. I think Commissioner Monsod 
address that issue. 


can 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presidmg Officer, there are many 
kinds of planning, like total planning and indicative 
planning. In fact, the Committee considered the 
possibility that later on, as the economy is more de- 
veloped, what we may only need is a council of eco- 
nomic advisers which may not include a centralized 
planning function. 

So we are leaving the Constitution more flexible so it 
can attune itself to the needs of circumstances. 


MR. FOZ. Is that the reason the draft Article 
provides that the President, after consultations with the 
appropriate public agencies and the private sector, shall 
recommend to Congress and implement an integrated 
and coordinated approach to national government? Will 
the burden of drawing up and carrying out the ap- 
proach, the social and economic plans for the nation, 
now fall on the shoulder of the President? 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the planning 
agency is under the Office of the President, and the 
introduction and recommendation of the economic 
program is primarily an executive function. This is 
merely a recognition of the executive function. 

We also came to other situations in the Article where 
it would be a matter of, say, forest and aquatic re- 
sources, and we asked ourselves: “Why is it that in these 
other sections the Ministry of Natural Resurces is not 
mentioned? Why is it that in the section on taxes and 
tariff, the Ministry of Finance is not mentioned?” So we 
arrived at the conclusion that these are all executive 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


281 


functions and, therefore, to put things in the proper - 
perspective, the Ministers are really subsumed in the 
term “President” who are his alter egos. 

MR. FOZ. In the Committee’s view, what exactly 
should be the relationship between the National Eco- 
nomic and Development Authority ajid the Office of 
the President? Will the President be the chairman in the 
conception of the Committee? 

MR. MONSOD. Right now, the President is the 
Chairman of the National Economic and Development 
Authority. 

MR. FOZ. I still have some other questions to ask of 
the Chairman of the Committee, but I am just not ready 
at the moment. If I will be given a chance to pose them 
tomorrow, I would like to make that reservation. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I am a member of the Commit- 
tee, but I would like to make a few comments and 
clarifications. 

I share the concern of many of our colleagues that 
the Article on Social Justice and even the Bill of Rights, 
without economic justice, economic Filipinization, 
economic democratization and even industrialization 
and protectionism, will be useless provisions in our 
Constitution. 

Somebody said, and I quote: 

The security and defense of the State, as well as social 
justice, are illusory objectives as long as the economy is 
without a strong industrial base. Even a Bill of Rights is 
meaningless to a people in hunger. Man’s survival depends 
on his opportunity to work. A free industrial society 
cannot possibly generate opportunities for work in any 
meaningful scale. 

I have been reading this Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony and I notice that we give undue em- 
phasis on the role of the private sector. For instance, the 
word “private” has been mentioned two times in Sec- 
tion 2, lines 18 and 19. In Sections 8 and 10, the private 
sector was again mentioned. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I have my fear in giving 
emphasis on the private sector. Allow me to briefly 
explain the reason for this. My understanding of 
“private sector,” of course, is subject to clarification. 
Private sector, to me, has reference to private capital. 
My fear concerning undue emphasis on private sector is 


that today’s Filipino capitalists, by and large, do not 
believe in hidustrialization, much less in full indus- 
trialization. One only has to review the policy and 
public statements of the nations giving figures of capital 
and their acknowledged ideologies to be convinced of 
this point. One reason for this is that the capitalist class 
is composed and dominated largely by merchants, 
bankers, miners and plantation owners whose interests 
stand either to be inconvenienced or prejudiced by an 
industrialization program. 

Even Pope Paul VI expressed his concern in giving 
role to private capital. In his “Populorum Progreso,” 
he said “private capital carries no corresponding social 
obligation.” 

The other reason for my fear in giving undue empha- 
sis on the role of the private sector is that we are giving 
the State a decreased role in the economy. We are not 
transforming the State into an activist in the economy. 
We must all remember that State activism in the eco- 
nomy is the general, if not the universal, practice in all 
Asian countries, which include Japan, Taiwan, Korea, 
Singapore, India and China. 

Animated by different ideologies, these six non- 
Christian nations in Asia have been moved by different 
development strategies which, however, share one 
common element and that is the direct and active role 
of the State in the economy, particularly as an indus- 
trial pioneer and entrepreneur. So these are my fears, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Even the late Claro M. Recto expressed these fears in 
a speech entitled “A Realistic Economic Policy for the 
Philippines,” w'hich he delivered on September 26, 
1956, and I quote: 

. . . government initiative and intervention should be 
given encouragement; should have a place in the Constitu- 
tion . . . only a bold leadership and decisive action by the 
government can produce the breakthrough that will set us 
moving away from present poverty and nationwide unem- 
ployment. 

Will the Committee accept an amendment at the 
proper time that instead of using “majority” we use 
MINORITY so as to give the State more participation in 
the development of our country? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Let me address some of the ques- 
tions that the Commissioner posed and ask the other 
members of the Committee to also comment. First of 
all, I would like to reiterate what we said earlier that the 
word private includes cooperatives, labor organiza- 
tions, private monetary organizations and all types of 
social groupings that are not part of the government. 
And relevant to the Commissioner’s suggestion about 
the Monetary Board, it is up to Congress to decide 
whether some of these members who represent the 
private sector could come from the labor or farmer 
sector. So the difficulty of the Commissioners who have 
been apprehensive about the word “private” comes 


282 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


from the semantic connotation. For example, we would 
have no hesitation to say “individuals and social groups 
or sectoral groups” instead of “private groups.” We use 
“private groups” just to highlight the fact that we do 
not mean profit-making or capitalistic enterprises. We 
mean all the possible ranges, the whole spectrum of 
social groupings, as Commissioner Garcia was saying, 
that can work for the common good which do not have 
to be capitalistic enterprises. I think it was the sense of 
the Committee that the Monetary Board should not be 
predominantly in the hands of the executive because of 
the dangers of the fiscal and monetary authorities being, 
to put it very bluntly, in incestuous relationship, which 
actually happened during the Marcos regime. The fiscal 
managers could do anything they wanted to the money 
supply because they were completely monopolizing the 
decision-making of the Monetary Board. So we are very 
open to suggesting to Congress — and we can put it on 
record — that the Monetary Board be composed of 
predominantly the private sector to include representa- 
tives from labor and farmer sectors and so on and so 
forth. But it is still the common thinking of the Com- 
mittee that we cannot go back to the old practice where 
the President s men or women are completely in control 
of the Monetary Board, which is very unhealthy. 

I believe some of my colleagues in the Committee 
have some other remarks. 


• I think some of the objectives o 

mdustnahzation mentioned by the Commissioner an 
re y qui e valid objectives. I just want to ask the Com 
mis^oner whether or not the government is the prope 

u ^ perhaps, if the Commissioner cai 

show the record of the government with respect to th( 
management of business enterprises and even to func 
tions that are inherent in government, the government i 
sliver services and goods that are properh 
wi in its functions efficiently. How can we now addi 
lonely impose on the government the task of havinj 
a direct hand in industrialization by owning an( 
state enterprises in industry? Mr. Presidin; 
fficer, I am willing to be corrected if we can show th 
good performance of the government. 

^ j^st supplement the remar 
^ hitervention.” Actually, in one of ou 

roeetings — and I am sure Commissione 
t this — the Committee eve 

neiphhmHno references we made to ou 

her 3 n< 5 e it^ ^°'^^tnes that Succeeded in industrializatio 
which we arc^ t- °’^’^tssioner Villacorta’s judgment 

Korea Taiwan H +i, ^ these countries - 

1 ’ f countries - achieved higl 

orSin allSr"' " human cost - dicta 

Ihr^tradeoff^?hat leadership - which is actual!' 
the tradeo f that we are now trying to address ver 

squarely. We cannot use our neighboring countries loi 
percent as a model precisely because we are now tryin 
to balance human and economic rights. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I do not think that 
any moral proprium attaches to the name “private 
sector” or “private capital,” especially when this is 
understood in the context of the ambitions of our own 
people to become successful entrepreneurs. There is 
some historical context to this. I still recall the philo- 
sopher Karl Marx when the Industrial Revolution was 
emerging in Europe, which moved him to say: “This is 
the greatest liberative force that mankind has ever 
known.” And that was the first of the stages of national 
capitalism based on certain values, like self-denial and 
frugality. We will remember that the book by R. H. 
Toni connects the emergence of mercantilism and 
capitalism to the Calvinist values, which means hard 
work is great in the sight of God, and the rewards of 
hard work are also great in the sight of God. But I think 
the most prosperous societies on earth are those that 
have successfully combined “State activism” or “State 
intervention” with the unmatched dynamism of private 
initiative, which is a fact that cannot be controverted. 
We might say something about the defects of such 
societies, but if we look at the scale of assessments in 
the United Nations based on the per capita incomes of 
nations, about 70 percent of all the contributions to the 
United Nations and to the multilateral aid program 
come from these societies. I am not an apologist for the 
sins of capitalism, but I think Filipino capital, as I 
understand it and this is the context in which we are 
describing the private sector, ought to be given the 
recognition and the encouragement that it deserves. 
After all, there is no question that private initiative is 
the engine on which we shall depend, until the form of 
government changes, for the development of our country 
and the generation of wealth that can be equitably 
shared among Filipinos. 


At present, there are nonperforming assets worth 
P200 billion in the government portfolios, and that is 
the reason we resort to debt and equity swap which are 
a kind of desperate strategy for us to get rid of these 
nonperforming assets of government corporations -- a 
monument to the waste and, perhaps, to the corruption 
of a certain form of State intervention in the economy. 
That is the reason I do not feel the Committee should 
apologize for the accent that is being placed on the role 
of Filipino entrepreneurs in the development of their 
own country under this Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony. 


Tliank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Let me react to Commissioner 
Ople s statement. We would welcome any amendment 
probably to restore references to indigenous small and 
medium-scale entrepreneurs in the Philippines. I think in 
this way we can definitely make the meaning of “private 
sector” even clearer. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just add 
that if one were to look at the economic crisis of the 
past three years, I think he will note that the corpora- 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


283 


tions that went down the drain faster were government 
corporations. In fact, what sustained the economy 
during these three years were the small and medium- 
scale enterprises both in the formal and informal sectors 
of this country. This is the base upon which we can 
build on. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Bennagen be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev.Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Before I ask the question, I would like to supplement 
the comment of Commissioner Monsod on the pheno- 
menon of corporations properly belonging to that 
discussion we have on cronyism. One important con- 
sideration in the understanding of cronyism is its being 
a derivative function of feudalism as we interpreted it 
in the committee hearings. Because it was a derivative 
function of feudalism, it reUed on nonmarket forces, on 
extraeconomic forces. Therefore, there was no manage- 
ment expertise that went into this and no surplus capital 
was ever plowed back to investment. Rather, there were 
expenses for ostentatious infrastructure projects. In 
other words, what would have been part of increasing 
capital accumulation was drained into these nonmarket 
expressions of feudalism or cronyism, such as those 
projects associated with the Cultural Center of tlie 
Philippines, with tourism and all forms of nonmarket 
investments. This was the drift of the discussion at that 
committee hearing. 

Going back to the questions that I would like to raise, 
on Section 1, line 15, reference is made to “a broader- 
based ownership of private enterprises.” What would be 
included in these private enterprises, and why should 
private enterprises be broader-based? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We have more and more of the 
people who participate in the ownership, either through 
cooperatives or public corporations that are open to 
thousands of stockholders, so in a way we broaden the 
base. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Would this be limited to Filipino 
citizens? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Basically, yes, but subject, of 
course, to the 60-40 arrangement, if we approve it. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

Going back to Section 2, the first sentence reads; 

Since the use of property bears a social function, all eco- 
nomic agents in the private sector shall contribute to the 

common good. 

As formulated, it appears more as a statement of 
aspiration, something that is devoutly to be wished. 


How is this expected to operate in the new context, 
particularly in relation to all those provisions in the 
Article on Social Justice? Since I already asked that 
question, maybe we can proceed to the second sentence 
which says: 

Individuals and private groups shall be given freedom to 

establish and operate economic enterprises. 

And then it says: 

. . . subject always, however, to the duty of the State to 

promote distributive justice and to intervene when the 

common good so demands. 

In the first sentence, the reference is general; it is to 
“the use of property” and that this property must have 
a social function; that is, the contribution to the com- 
mon good. My view is that property has a certain his- 
torical specificity and at certain stages, it does perform 
to serve the common good. But at other stages of its 
liistorical development, property does not necessarily 
contribute to the common good. I suppose that is where 
some kind of State intervention has to take place. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think it is well-established. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. To go back to that possibility 
of State intervention particularly in reference to dis- 
tributive justice, what is envisioned to be the mode of 
intervention? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is either the government actually 
takes over business as there is nothing wrong with some 
State enterprises or the government regulates a specific 
industry. 

MR. BENNAGEN. By law? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, by law. 

MR. BENNAGEN. It shall not set up charity organi- 
zations? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There are some charity organiza- 
tions supported by the State like the Red Cross and the 
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office. The State can 
also do it. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Would there be other modes of 
State intervention that would truly respond to the 
provisions of the Article on Social Justice without 
violating the complementarity of private initiative and 
the State? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think we have a perfect example 
earlier this morning when we talked about the State 
subsidizing just compensation when farmers cannot 
afford to pay the whole price. That is clearly State 
intervention in order to promote agrarian reform. 


284 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, but that is a kind of a one- 
shot deal. I am thinking in terms of a long-term program 
because subsidy has a distorting effect on the economy. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The whole area of taxation has 
definitely a State intervention angle. 


Kung mananatiling import liberalization ang ating 
patakaran, mananatili tayong agricultural country. Dara- 
ting ang panahon na hindi na makakayang tugunan ng 
ating lupa ang lumalaki nating populasyon. Ang sobrang 
lakas sa mga kanayunan ay kadangang i-absorb ng 
national industrialization. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Meaning, taxes could be in- 
creased? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly, to redistribute income. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Or efficiency of tax collection 
maybe. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is one way of looking at it. I 
do have other questions but for now I will limit them. I 
would like to follow this up eventually when we go into 
the proportions of control and ownership that the 
Gentleman mentioned earlier. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Lommissioner Tadeo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Tadeo is recognized. 


R. TADEO. Kasama ako sa Committee on the 
ational Economy and Patrimony. Noong pinag- 
uusapan natin ang tungkol sa social justice, inalis natin 
ang Section 9 na nagsasaad: 

The State shall promote the integrated development of 
agricultural, fishing and marine resources to meet the basic 
needs of the people and the industrialization objective of 
the country. 

Kaisa ako sa panawagan nina Commissioners Tan, Foz at 
Sarmiento na kaUangang Uagay sa Article on National 
conchy and Patrimony ang tungkol sa industrializa- 
lon. anggapin natin ang katotohanan na kapag mahina 
ang national economy at patrimony, ang takeoff stage 
Sovernment o ang susunod na pamahalaan ay 
mahihirapan. Kailangang malakas ang Article on Nation- 

sapagkat dito kukuha ng 
ng na lonal recovery. Sa ganitong kalagayan, ang 
pagpapatupad ng tunay na reporraa sa lupa ng Article on 
Social Juyice ay kaugnay ng Article on NaUonal Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony. Kapag ipinatupad ang tunay na 
magkakaroon ng purchasing power ang 
35 to 40 mdlion people. Ngunit kapag walang national 
industrialization at patuloy ang import liberalization, 
ang pagtangkihk sa produkto ng mga dayuhan, bale wala 
rm ang genuine agrarian reform. Kay a lagi naming 
sinasabi na kasabay ng isang tunay na reporma sa lupa 
ang pambansang industriyalisasyon. 


Ang kalagayan ng bansa sa kasalukuyan ay malungkot 
Sa panig na lamang ng pagsasaka, 85 porsiyento ng ating 
itlog ay imported; 53 porsiyento ng ating pork ay im- 
ported; 63 porsiyento ng ating chicken ay imported; 49 
hanggang 73 porsiyento ng ating mga gulay ay imported; 
85 porsiyento ng ating fertilizer ay imported; 90 por- 
siyento ng dairy ay imported. Isang bilyong dolyar ang 
lumalabas sa kabangbayan ng Pilipinas bunga ng pag-asa 
natin sa mga dayuhan. HaUmbawa, 75 hanggang 85 
porsiyento ng ating textile ay inaangkat natin sa labas ng 
bansa; ganoon din sa appliances. Samantalang napakara- 
ming PUipino ang walang ginagawa kayat dapat tayong 
lumikha ng tinatawag na backward at forward integra- 
tion. Kaya kailangan natin ang malakas na Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony hindi lamang para sa 
Cory government kundi pati na sa mga susunod pang 
pamahalaan. Hindi ako naniniwalang kailangan na mg 
iasa sa legislature ang pagpapalakas ng Artie e on 
National Economy and Patrimony. Nakita natin ang 
naging problema sa Article on Social Justice tungko sa 
agrarian reform. Ano ang tinatawag nitong 
Kapag inalis ang “by law” sa pariralang “The State s 
by law,” ito ay magiging “The State shall underta e. 
Inuutusan na ng pamahalaan ang Kongreso at maaarmg 
magsagawa na agad ng expansion ang Ministry of Agr 
rian Reform. Subalit hindi maaaring magsagawa ang 
Ministry of Agrarian Reform ng ano mang programa 
tungkol sa agrarian reform; hihintayin pa nito ang 
Kongreso. Ang pariralang “shall by law” ay mayroong 
positive at negative aspect. Kung ang bumubuo ng 
Kongreso ay landlord at comprador class, magkakaroon 
ito ng negative aspect. Magiging mabuti lamang ang 
“shall by law” kung ang bumubuo ng Kongreso ay pro 
people. Kaya hindi ako sang-ayon na iasa natin ito sa 
legislature. Dapat, bdang supreme law, ang Saligang 
Batas ang mag-uutos sa Kongreso; hindi ang Saligang 
Batas ang aasa sa Kongreso. 

Napakahalaga ng Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony sapagkat ito ang take-off stage ng nationa 
recovery. Kailangan dito ang isang malaKas na seksiyon 
tungkol sa national industrialization. Sa palagay o 
naman, ang Committee on the National Economy an 
Patrimony ay bukas sa isang malakas na seksiyon sa 
national industrialization. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, as we told Commissioner Ople, 
we, in fact, encourage an amendment introducing that 
provision which refers to industrialization. So, I hope 
the Gentleman can coauthor the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Aquino be recognized. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


285 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. I fully appreciate the Committee’s 
efforts to define in the broad stroke some kmd of a 
thrust for the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony but maybe I was expecting more. I had 
hoped that instead of just motherhood concepts of self- 
reliance in economic development, there is an urgent 
need for us to address the imperatives of setting up 
a definitive mandate, cutting through the bull, and 
addressing and defining precisely a specific industrial 
policy. 

I had hoped that we could have seen a formulation in 
Section 1 stating, in effect, the need for an industrial 
policy that is dynamic and active, and would stir up a 
domestic cyle of surplus accumulation and invest- 
ments. 

In other words, the thrust should be to encourage the 
creation of industries that will produce capital and inter- 
mediate producer goods. It should be going towards the 
drift of encouraging small entrepreneurship and en- 
couraging competition, at the same time, active and 
direct State support for investments in large-scale 
industries, even as there is a deliberate posture to 
regulate monopolistic tendencies of aU industries 
that are now already operating on this line of busi- 
nesses. Why the reluctance? Why the “yes” on vague, 
umbrella principles but “no” on definitive policies? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We said we would definitely 
welcome an amendment that would make this statement 
specific. Given optimum opportunity to develop to all 
economic sectors, we thought that would be sufficient. 
But if the body thinks that we should explicate that 
expression that all economic sectors should be given 
optimum opportunity to develop, we would highly 
welcome some amendments to that effect. 

MS. AQUINO. I went through the minutes of the 
Committee meeting and, apparently, these ideas have 
been surfacing quite perceptibly and significantly. But 
I could not seem to understand why we moved into 
another direction with a great deal of diffidence. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Because at that time, there was the 
thinking, which also permeated many other commit- 
tees, that it was bordering on legislation. But if the body 
thinks otherwise, we can definitely fine tune that 
specific phraseology. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presidmg Officer. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just ask a question? More than 
the question of whether there should be enough provi- 
sions citing the need for mdustrialization, I think an 
issue here is economic strategy. If I get the drift of 
the suggestions of the Commissioner when she talks 
about government going into or supporting large-scale 


enterprises and government being involved directly in 
industrialization, the question that was faced by the 
Committee was: Should the government go into tliese 
activities? In the past two or three weeks, we have been 
talking about the great demands on the government to 
deliver social services. We have been hstening to remarks 
that one of the problems is that a great amount of the 
resources of government has been used to finance corpo- 
rations, equity contributions, and so on with respect to 
business activities. The remark of Commissioner Ben- 
nagen about crony companies is that those can really be 
called government enterprises because perhaps 90 per- 
cent of the resources of those companies were really 
government resources. So, in that context, I think the 
dilemma of the Committee was: What kind of thrust do 
we have in terms of the role of the private sector and 
the pubhc sector in economic development? Maybe this 
is a bigger question than just adding a sentence or a 
paragraph or several sections on industrialization. As a 
matter of fact, I think the comments of Commissioners 
Garcia and Sarmiento also touched on the same issue. 
This may be a bigger issue than just mentioning indus- 
trialization as part and parcel of national economy. 

MS. AQUINO. I agree with the Gentleman, but on 
the question of strategy, strategic flexibility could only 
go so far. As far as the Philippine economy is concerned, 
we have to grapple with certain givens which would 
assume certain definitive answers and solutions. For a 
fact, we are a country that wallows in a neocolonial 
history. For another fact, whether we like it or not, we 
are a country that is economically based on agriculture. 
In fact, it is generally perceived that the Philippines is 
like the vegetable garden of the whole of Asia. That 
makes us a basket case for the whole of Asia. We rank 
15th among the countries rich in natural resources; but 
we are dormant; we are underdeveloped and mis- 
managed. These are certain givens which do not yield to 
strategy or tactical planning in terms of economy. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presidmg Officer. But we do 
have the question of priority. If we have only a limited 
amount of resources which is investible at this point, 
how do we use it? Do we put it in capital-intensive 
undertakings where the labor, the employment gener- 
ated is one unit of labor for every P400,000 of capital? 
Or do we invest it in other activities where one unit of 
employment generated is for P20,000 to P25,000 
capital? These are very important questions on indus- 
trialization. As a matter- of fact, there was even a sug- 
gestion that the strategy to be enunciated is that we 
should first have a complete program for agricultural 
development and forget about industrialization for a 
while. We did not want to put that because this is a 
Constitution that is going to last for a long time, and 25 
years from now we may have a fully developed agricul- 
ture that is subsidized by the State, similar to the 
United States where they are stuck with overproduc- 
tion in agriculture. So, we felt there should be some 
flexibility as far as that is concerned. 


286 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, if only I would 
be allowed to reply briefly. 

I will have no' quarrel with Commissioner Monsod on 
that matter. In fact, I am not wflUng to go to that 
extent of specifics; I am only saying that we might as 
well clearly deflne the framework of industrial growth 
here, and that is possible in terms of deflning what we 
perceive to be a historical solution to a historical 
problem. We do not have to go into the mechanics that 
would require specific data management or program- 
ming. 

MR. MONSOD. We would be willing to accept some 
amendments or suggestions in that regard. Essentially 
the issue is really the mix of the private and public 
sector participation in the economy. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Bennagen is recognized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Let me try to get into the dis- 
cussion in relation to the way we are reacting to the 
nature of the State or even its modes of intervention. 

It would seem to me that we have not gone beyond 
e character of the State during the Marcos years and 
at we have failed to make a shift in paradigm even 
a er the political revolution of February. In the Marcos 
years we did have a dictatorship which was an alliance 
ot a fraction of the political elite and a fraction of the 
economic elite. I would like to think that that alliance 
was dismantled duimg the February uprising and that 
we are moving on into a new alliance where a broader 
r^ge of private sector organizations or groups, in- 
ividuals, cause-oriented groups, civic organizations are 
involved; meaning, we already have a wider range of 
participants in both the political and economic exercises 
to warrant the explosion of some kind of creativity in 
the economic sphere that was absent during the Marcos 
years. 

Earlier I indicated that during the Marcos years, there 
was a lot of distortion in the process of capital accumu- 
lation. I would like to think that those distortions have 
been minimized, if not eliminated, and we are now pre- 
pared to have an alliance between the government and 
t e wide range of private sectors. There should be no 
resistance to the exploration of viable relationship 
etween government and this whole range of private 
participants. ® ^ 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. GARCIA. Mr. 
brief remark. 


Presiding Officer, may I make a 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Garcia is recognized. 


MR. GARCIA. During the past few hours we have 
been zeroing in on three concepts at least where we had 
misunderstandings, as Commissioner Bennagen already 
pointed out; public, private, and ultimate objectives. I 
agree we have been gripped by the pohtical trauma of 
martial law years where the whole idea of pubUc or 
State enterprises has evolved to have pecuhar meanings 
to most people. I maintain that we did not have a 
democracy; I think it is very clear, it was a dictatorship, 
it was “kleptocratic,” it was not responsive, it was not 
accountable and neither was it independent. And there 
is definitely a change now to a more popular and majori- 
tarian kind wherein the State could be in the hands of 
people. 


On the concept of “private,” I think the Committee 
is trying to utilize the concept and expand it to be 
elastic. Let us take the example of Asia Brewery. Is it 
private if it is owned by Lucio Tan? Yes. Is it private if 
it is owned by the workers of the company of Lucio 
Tan? Yes. But there is a very big difference. Do you call 
both private sector or private groups? In one sense it is 
private but in the other sense, if it is owned by t e 
workers of the company, it can be an area of socm 
property. It is not in the hands of the State, neither is it 
in the hands of Lucio Tan, one individual or one farnily. 
It is an area of social property. So, that is the kind o 
concept I was trying to introduce — social sector, soci 
property, social area. 


On the question of Commissioner Aquino regarding 
ultimate objectives, we are not simply working at a 
document; that is, looking at it piecemeal. What do we 
do now strategy-wise? I think it is a statement of ulti- 
mate objectives. Eventually, we want to have a nationa 
economy that is self-reliant and independent. How do 
we pursue this? I think central planning, as was 
mentioned, is crucial. No matter what kind of economy 
we have, we have to have central planning. Secondly , we 
must have some form of industrialization which we can 
manage in our own terms, based on our own resources. 
Also, we must have the ability to walk on many legs, 
and not simply be dependent on one or two trading 
relationships but on many different and diverse 
dependencies until we are, in a sense, more relatively 
independent. What we are looking for in this Article is a 
supplement, a very strong support, for the Article on 
Social Justice. This is precisely the kind of ultimate 
objective, the vision of an ultimate objective and 
framework. That is all. 


I was actually going to propose just as we did in the 
local government, if the Commissioner feels that this 
could help us to come together, to put our thoughts 
together and work this thing out thoroughly. After all 
the interpellations, we could go to a caucus as we did 
the last time and hammer out the ideas because I am 
afraid this is not just a matter of semantics. It is really 
trying to find but if, upon putting all of our different 
ideas together, we can come up with an Article that 
would truly serve, for a long time, the upliftment and 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


287 


recovery of our economy and our people. Can we come 
to a caucus together and discuss these ideas and find out 
what is the real sentiment? We are not simply debating 
on the proper wording but on an ultimate vision. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Can the Commissioner give us an 
idea? Maybe he can write it out or have a presentation 
to the Commission on the process of development that 
he has in mind? 

MR. GARCIA. I was thinking that perhaps we can 
come together in a caucus and discuss what kind of 
economy we really want to have in the future. Let us sit 
down together, face each other and talk. Maybe after all 
the interpellations, we can discuss it. I think we will 
really save time because we will not be just amending 
the different words. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Mr. Presiding Officer, what we 
need are other options that what the Committee feels are 
the path or process of development that would be 
appropriate for the country. What we need is an ex- 
planation of the other options available to us. 

MR. GARCIA. What I am proposing actually is this: 
We could come together and perhaps some of us could 
propose some alternative ideas. Actually, if the Gentle- 
man will look at the minutes of his own committee, he 
will find that there have been many ideas expressed 
already. It is just a matter of putting them together in a 
far more integrated fashion. 

MR. BENGZON. We would like to start off with the 
Gentleman. Maybe he could just write down his ideas 
and give them to us, and then we can get into a caucus. 
So, we will have a starting point because if we get into a 
caucus without any concrete ideas or other options, 
then we will just be using the committee report as the 
basis. 

MR. GARCIA. All right, I accept the invitation of the 
Gentleman. I would like to invite every single Commis- 
sioner here who may have his own ideas regarding this 
point. How can we open the economy so that other 
social sectors could become more active participants and 
enjoy the benefits of economic recovery? How can this 
be pushed? I feel we can enrich this by this kind of 

participation. 

MR. BENGZON. In the meantime, we can continue 
the various interpellations we have. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, precisely. My proposal is that 
after all the interpellations, we go back to the Article 
on Local Governments. Is that correct? 

MR. BENGZON. No, I was told that under the 
schedule that we have we are going back to the Article 


on Local Governments on Friday morning because we 
still do not have copies of the new report of the 
Committee. 

MR. MONSOD. We are willing to ask the Chair if we 
can have a caucus tomorrow for this purpose. That 
might be a good idea. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to suggest this. Let us try 
to finish all the interpellations, as we did with the 
Article on Local Governments, and then we can come 
together and talk. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). May the 
Chair suggest that during our merienda recess. Commis- 
sioner Garcia and the others talk with the members of 
the Committee on the possibility of having a caucus 
either this afternoon or sometime tomorrow. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner OpIe is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think this 
morning, on motion of the Chairman of the Steering 
Committee, the body approved a proposal that we 
devote two sessions to the period of interpellations on 
the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. Is that 
right? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, to get it over with. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Including tomorrow morning. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, because we lost two hours on 
the discussion on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. OPLE. So, unless we are willing to overturn this 
previous decision, I would like to suggest that we go 
ahead with the period of interpellations. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, earlier the 
Chair recognized Commissioner Rosario Braid, but at 
that moment she was not prepared. If she is now ready 
with her interpellation, I ask that she be recognized. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, I 
would like to continue on the same note. I have been 
working on some amendments because, like the others, I 
note that the document should perhaps contain short- 
term, medium-term and long-term strategies and direc- 


288 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


tions. I also suggest emphasis on entrepreneurship and 
small-scale industries and the need to attend to the 
informal sector of the economy, like the nonmonetized 
sector, the need for comprehensive planning to ensure 
that we give incentives to investors. Therefore, we 
cannot go by the usual model of allowing just the 
market forces to provide all the signals. We need, for 
instance, protection to agriculture and industry by 
providing these sectors full information that would help 
identify priority areas, particularly in pricing and 
profitability. The State must also provide entrepreneur- 
ship with incentives, such as subsidies and tax shelters so 
that they are encouraged to enter these priority areas. 
I believe that this is one direction that should be 
pursued and expressed in terms of a short-term goal. 

Another thing that bothers me is the lack of a vision 
for the future in terms of a direction for an independent 
national ecoiiomic growth. I would like to quote a 
critique by different scholars from several parts of the 
^rld who evaluated the development strategies in 
Third World countries. 

It states: 


If development means obtaining and securing the basis 
of life for the masses, the world’s population, if it is to in- 
crease emancipation of oppressed people, classes, and mar- 
gmalized social groups, if it is to aspire to the creation of a 
just, nonexploitative and mutually beneficial social order 
or the free development of each individual condition and 
tor the free development of all, then clearly, develop- 
mentahsm cannot be the answer. Human and social develop- 
rnent for all can only mean the necessary transformation of 
the world’s system into a different social order aimed at a 

different mode of production and a different form of 
society. 


If we could only support this movement even in an 
evolutionary way towards South-South cooperation, 
owards the production of appropriate technology, 
appropriate consumption and production style so that 
we would not be overdependent on the North, I think it 
IS this kind of vision that I would like to see expressed 
in a development philosophy. We should then move for- 
ward, unleashing all the creative forces of our society 
towards this direction of freeing ourselves from the ex- 
p oitative international order which has produced an 
environment that favors investment of transnational 
^pi a and other inequitable relationships between the 
u South. I would like to see a provision 

w 1 C s ows the need for short-term and medium-term 
as we as long-term strategies which will work towards 
full sovereignty in the economic sector. 

Thank you. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Vice-President Padilla 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). The Vice- 
President, Commissioner Padilla, is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I am referring to Section 5 of the 1935 Constitution 
which is repeated in Section 14 of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion, and is again repeated in Section 6 of Committee 
Report No. 24. This section provides that: 


Save in cases of hereditary succession, no private lands 
shall be transferred or conveyed except to individuals, 
corporations, or associations qualified to acquire or hold 
lands of the public domain. 


In accordance with the early decision of Krivenko vs. 
Register of Deeds. 1979 Philippines 461, which held 
that aliens cannot acquire private agricultural lands and 
therefore, are also disqualified to hold any residentid 
land, the Committee has included an exception which 
was found in Section 15 of the 1973 Constitution m 
favor of natural-born citizens who have los 
citizenship - they may be transferees of pnvate land 
solely for residential purposes. The 1973 Constitution 
mentions “as the Batasang Pambansa shall provi e. 
Under the committee report, it is limited not to excee 
an area of 1 ,000 square meters. 


Chairman and gentlemen of the Committee, I filed a 
proposed resolution for another exemption w ic 
would permit, under conditions to be prescribed by 
foreign investors engaged in the manufacture of expo 
products as certified by the Board of Investments o 
acquire, hold or own private lots with limited area 
required in the operation of their export -oriented indus 
trial enterprises. What motivated me to file this reso u 
tion is the policy of our government to encourage 
economic growth, to produce national wealth, to he p 
solve the problem of unemployment, underemployment 
and poverty, and to afford our people a decent life with 
dignity. One of the potent factors towards economic 
reconstruction — I prefer to use the word “reconstruc- 
tion” rather than “recovery” — is foreign investors in 
industrial enterprises, especially of export-oriented 
goods produced with local materials and labor. But 
such foreign investors would need private lots for the 
establishment and operation of their industrial manu- 
facturing plants. So, the purpose was to permit, as an 
exception to Section 6, another exception. 


MR. SUAREZ. Section 7, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


to that welcome an amendment 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). The Act- 
mg Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. PADILLA. Another exception to Section 6 
because Section 7 has only one exception — to allow 
only a limited area of industrial lots necessary for the 
operation of this export-oriented industrial enterprise. 
I even added “under conditions as may be provided by 
law.” But I found that this proposal was not even 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


289 


considered by the Committee whether or not it has any 
merit. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It was considered, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. In fact, there was full deliberation; we had a 
number of people from the various sectors — the export- 
oriented sector, real estate sector — and the Committee 
decided, although there was no consensus, that it was 
not an indispensable ingredient in attracting foreign 
capital. But we would leave it up to the body to decide, 
if the Gentleman likes to introduce an amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the prohibition 
is with regard to aliens acquiring pubUc agricultural 
lands. But the prohibition has been extended to pro- 
hibition to acquire private land. If we must encourage 
foreign investments and attract foreign investors, espe- 
cially in the manufacture and export of products that 
are export-oriented which may be not only dollar- 
saving but dollar-earning — and we always say we want 
economic development — does not the Gentleman agree 
with me that this second exception or another excep- 
tion to the general rule that private lands are to be 
reserved exclusively to citizens, to which I agree, can be 
followed to attract foreign investments and foreign 
industrial enterprises, especially in the manufacture of 
goods for export and using as much as possible local 
materials and necessarily local labor? 

MR. SUAREZ. Precisely, the points raised by the 
Gentleman this afternoon were taken up in connection 
with the public hearings conducted by his Committee. 
We remember an English gentleman who presented his 
situation very forcefully in the way the Vice-President 
is presenting it now. One of the answers given was the 
fact that all of these enterprises could flourish and 
prosper under a lease agreement. In other words, there 
was no necessity for that exporter, who is a foreign 
investor, to own the land on which the industry will be 
established or set up. That was one of the proposed 
solutions to correct the situation, a long-term lease 
without getting involved in the matter of ownership. 
The examples were also given in the case of the EPZA or 
of industrial operators wherein certain portions of the 
EPZA estate were being leased to companies like Ford 
Philippines, Mattel and Globe Textile Manufacturing. 
They did ,not have to own the land on which their 
industries were set up, notwithstanding the fact that 
their industries were, indeed, export-oriented. But at 
any rate, at the proper time, with all the necessary 
limitations regarding the area, we in the Committee 
would be pleased to entertain the proper amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. The lease of industrial lots for long 
term is not a sufficient incentive for foreign investors. 
Moreover, the owners of industrial lots may not agree on 
a long-term lease with fixed rentals. However, the fear 
of acquiring or owning a limited industrial lot where the 
manufacturing plant is established is not serious, for the 
lot and its buildings are permanent, immovable real 


estate which the foreign investor cannot take away, and 
such land improved by these industrial buildings and 
plants remain as assets of the country. With regard to 
“lease under long term,” some believe that the prohibi- 
tion would include not only title or ownership of land 
but holding land, which may not be the naked owner- 
ship but also the right of use, like the usufruct or in 
lease. If lease is on a long-term basis, maybe 25 years 
renewable by another 25 or even 99 years, for all 
practical purposes, that is like owning the land. It is not 
exactly correct to say that all foreign investors are 
happy in a continuing lease when their foreign invest- 
ments, the dollars they bring in, may not only be used 
for the plant but also for the acquisition of a specific, 
limited industrial lot, which will encourage foreign 
investments and the manufacture of industrial goods 
especially if they are export-oriented. 

We always talk of the State, the private sector and the 
social aspect. What will develop this country is creating 
wealth, producing additional goods and services. I have 
heard our friend Commissioner Tadeo mention so many 
who are out of work — workers, farmers and others. 
Tliey look for work but they cannot find work. Many 
invoke and rely on the State. The State can help by 
giving incentives to the private sector for the production 
of additional goods and services. But we cannot really 
expect social benefits or more distribution of the bene- 
fits of wealth unless we first produce wealth, unless we 
first increase our productivity. 

The State or the government has never been success- 
ful in the operation of private business. The so-called 
government-owned and controlled corporations have 
usually been financial failures. The government may 
only be justified if it enters into pioneer fields of enter- 
prise which the private sector cannot enter into, but 
never for the State to engage in business in competition 
with private business. 

We must realize that we cannot remove the profit 
motive in business, whether it be agriculture, industry or 
commerce. There must be an incentive for investment 
and there must be a reasonable expectation of profits. 
These profits should be shared not only by the owner 
or capital but also by the workers or labor. 

If we do not have additional industrial enterprises, we 
will continue to have numerous and growing armies of 
unemployed. Unfortunately, the workers cannot help 
themselves; they need industrial entrepreneurs, usually 
called the captains of industries who not only have 
capital but also experience and vision to enter into 
business enterprises with some risks of loss. That is, in 
my opinion, the real approach to a growing national 
economy. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, many think right away of State 
control or a just share of workers when we refer to the 
underprivileged to share in the benefits. Well and good. 
But we cannot share the benefits unless we first produce 
those benefits. In my opinion, the greatest factors for 
the production of wealth for increased productivity are 


290 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


the entrepreneurs, the private sector, under the principle 
of free enterprise and, we must admit, profit motive, 
subject, of course, to the regulatory power of the State 
for the common good. 

So, instead of speaking about an ideal society, we 
have to be more pragmatic and realistic such that, as 
according to the Cory government, the first thrust is 
agriculture. Very good, because we must satisfy the 
needs of our people, our growing population, and after 
agriculture will be a certain amount of industrialization. 
Maybe Filipino domestic capital cannot undertake big 
ventures. That is why we should encourage small- and 
middle-size enterprises. But if we have an opportunity 
for greater investments by foreign capitalists — I am not 
an advocate of multinationals but the principle of 
investments for more production — more economic 
benefits can be shared by aU the elements of society. 

Thank you. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I thank the honorable Gentleman. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that 
Commissioner Brocka be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Brocka is recognized. 


MR. BROCKA. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I hesitate to speak up because, Uke Commissioners 
vuesa a ^d Tan, I am a layman as far as economics is 
concerned and I am only trying to listen to aU the ideas 
that have been expressed so far. 

I share the fears of Commissioner Sarmiento and the 
appre ensions expressed by Commissioner Aquino 
regar mg the clarity of some of the particular provisions 
on an industrial policy that should be adopted by this 
Constitution. 


I will rnention two things about my own fears and 
apprehension. First, it is the words ‘ ‘common good.” We 
saw this term in the Preamble; it was all over the Article 
on Somal Justice; now it is again in the Article on Na- 
tional Economy and Patrimony, and I suppose we shall 
more of this in the other forthcoming 

Articles. 


would like to express my fears because I am a littl 
1 con used about this. In one of the meetings of th 

Justice, I expressed my feeling 
nrAf» 1 Social Justice definitely shows 

onnrA(f”i Poof, the deprived and th 

thp XU t ^°yrse, some questions were asked as t< 

^Sht to life, liberty an< 
Cn^Spi that we were not honest enough - th( 
Committee was not honest enough - in telling some o 
the Commissioners that were raising questions on th. 
conrnct between social justice and private property 
right to emment domain etc., that, definitely, socia 
justice will be bloody and painful, and that, definitely 


it will show preferential option for the poor. That was 
clear. Definitely, if you have lands, your lands will be 
taken away from you to be given to the poor. 

I guess I was waiting for that, but there was a lot of 
skimming over and a lot of euphemisms. Everytime 
there is a question presented as to the fear of infringing 
on the right to property and emment domain, the 
answer was always for the “common good, due process 
of law, in accordance with law,”et cetera. 

I bring that up because in the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony, I see the same thing. Section 
2, for example, states: 

Since the use of property bears a social function, all 
economic agents in the private sector shall contribute to the 
common good. Individuals and private groups shall be given 
freedom to establish and operate economic enterprises; 
subject always, however, to the duty of the State to pro- 
mote distributive justice and to intervene when the com- 
mon good so demands. 

So, it seems that the phrase “common good” is a 
good excuse to neutralize whatever fears some sectors of 
society feel regarding the implementation of these 
particular Articles. 

I am bringing that up because I would like to ask the 
Committee once and for ail to give a definition of 
“common good.” I do not expect that answered now, 
perhaps tomorrow or some other time. But I think it 
would be good if we are clear insofar as the definition of 
“common good” is concerned. Probably, we can use the 
Article on Social Justice as framework, because in 
original Article on Social Justice, there were phrases like 
“social justice is the moral, cultural, political, economic 
imperative.” However, they were taken out completely. 

So, for the peace of mind of most people who want 
some clarity on this, I would ask the Committee to 
come up with a definition of the “common good.” 

Secondly, I am in receipt of a correspondence that 
just arrived today and I went through it when Com- 
missioner Aquino stood up and spoke about the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony not being clear or 
not being brave enough to come up with a definite 
policy or industrial policy, call it what you want. I was 
reading this particular correspondence — I do not know 
if the other Commissioners have it — signed by well- 
known businessmen, some of whom I know from the 
parliament of the streets, containing a proposed consti- 
tutional provision which makes sense to me. It is a 
proposed constitutional provision on industrialization, 
economic protectionism and Filipinization of the 
economy, and it reads: 

The State shall promote the fuU and rapid industrializa- 
tion of the economy to generate mass employment. For 
this purpose, the State shall adopt, among others, a policy 
of direct and indirect protectionism that will preserve and 
ensure the domestic market for local industries, as well as 
for agricultural and other sectors of the economy. The 
State shall at all times ensure that the economy is under 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


291 


the control of Filipinos and that industries so vital to 

national security do not fall under the control of non- 

Filipinos. 

I would like to follow up what Commissioner Tan 
said earlier. As I said, when I read this, it makes sense, 
although I am not very clear on what protectionism 
means in all these things. The reason I read this is for 
the Committee to enlighten us on this particular pro- 
posed constitutional provision being proposed by a 
group of businessmen. 

Whether the Committee wants to adopt this or not, I 
would like to know why, since some of the members of 
the Committee on the National Economy and Patri- 
mony are well-known economists — and I suppose this 
was submitted by economists also probably of a dif- 
ferent persuasion, a different outlook and a different 
perspective. 

I would like to request the Committee on ,the 
National Economy and Patrimony to discuss this pro- 
posal so that laymen like I and others would under- 
stand. I realize that I am being very naive and very 
simplistic about this. But I hear talks from people from 
the IMF and the World Bank and people from the other 
side, and being a layman, I am completely confused. 
They speak of Filip inization. Definitely it sounds good 
to me, and I think I agree because their reasons make 
sense. 

On the other hand, people from the IMF and the 
World Bank insist on foreign capital because our eco- 
nomy is in such dire state. So, as a layman, I am com- 
pletely confused; would it be asking too much if I ask 
the Committee to discuss the principles or policies being 
recommended here? I suppose if an explanation is given, 
it will not only be for me but for many other laymen 
and people who are confused about the IMF,. World 
Bank and the school of Lichauco or of Constantino. I 
have read all these and, frankly speaking, I am very 
confused. As a Filipino, I am for the Filipinization of 
the economy. Commissioner Garcia suggested that we 
have a caucus. Probably we can confront the problem 
and discuss it once and for all. In this way, we do not 
talk in whispers and say that somebody is a member of 
the IMF and World Bank, one is a nationalist and has a 
tendency of being socialistic or communistic, like when 
we were deliberating on the Article on Social Justice. 
So, for the enlightenment of laymen and people who 
are confused about the kind of industrial or economic 
policies that we will put in the Constitution, may I 
reiterate that we take these up in a caucus. As I said, 
I am terribly confused at the moment. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you very much, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 

To answer the first question of the Gentleman, I will 
reiterate the answer I gave to Commissioner Quesada. 
The “common good” is defined by the Committee as 


“a social order which enables every single member of a 
society to attain his or her full development, economic- 
ally, politically, culturally and spiritually.” So, that is 
the definition of the “common good” that we have in 
the record. As I told Commissioner Quesada, we can 
actually substitute “pubUc interest and general welfare,” 
especially in this specific Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony because there are situations in the eco- 
nomic sphere when the wishes of the majority can be 
legitimately followed as long as we do not completely 
ignore the welfare of the minority. We do not have to 
use “the common good” repetitively in the specific 
Article. Some people want to introduce certain 
amendments. 

On the second point that the Gentleman raised, we 
would not want to speak for the group about their 
definitions of protectionism and all the other words that 
they used. They were the ones who made the rec- 
ommendation and I think it would be presumptuous of 
the Committee to speak for whoever wrote that specific 
letter. 

MR. BROCKA. I am not asking that the Gentleman 
define it, but I would Like to find out what he thinks 
about it as a businessman or economist, or whether he is 
for or against it, and what his reasons are. That is what 
I am asking for; I am not asking for his own definition. 

I do not think I can invite the proponents to come here 
and explain but the Gentleman, as businessman and 
economist, knows what they are talking about; I do not. 
So, I would like to ask how the Gentleman feels and 
thinks about it and why. Is it good for the economy? 
What are the implications if this is adopted? I think I 
am speaking for the enlightenment of the rest of the 
Commissioners as far as this is concerned. 

Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Gladly, we can always give the 
Gentleman several hours of lecturing on these issues. 
This is really a very important illustration of what I was 
trying to communicate to Commissioner Aquino — that 
the moment one tangles with these issues, he is literally 
bordering on legislation. Whether or not we should 
follow the wishes of the IMF and the World Bank, 
whether or not we should develop agriculturally first or 
when we develop industrially - all these are very 
specific questions. 

MR. BROCKA. I understand the Gentleman’s appre- 
hensions about legislating, but the thing is I become 
completely confused when I read the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. I do not know what 
it is trying to say. I get the feeling that it is trying to be 
very careful and very cautious on something so vital to 
our country at the moment so that it becomes accepta- 
ble to everybody. We have to be very clear about our 
stand; I am not saying that we are hidirtg behind words 
like common good.” This was the same apprehension 
I mentioned during the discussion on the Article on 


292 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 1986 


Social Justice. We wanted to please everybody when, 
in fact, all I wanted to hear was that social justice 
will be bloody and painful; it has preference and is 
biased toward the poor — that if one has 50,000 
hectares, all of it will be taken away. I guess that was 
what I was waiting for. The thing is that the discussion 
went on and on and the Committee as a group kept 
saying: “No, the land will not be taken away from you 
without due process of lav/, et cetera” which was, of 
course — pardon the language — a lot of bull . . . (deleted 
by order of the Chair). As I said, the Committee was not 
being honest to the Commissioners; it should be honest 
with them and tell the Commissioners who were voicing 
their apprehension that “Yes, under the Article on 
Social Justice, you will lose your land. That land will 
be taken away from you because we are trying to 
balance the great imbalance of social injustice — that 
the majority are propertyless, and that they are poor, 
underprivileged and disadvantaged.” We went on talking 
about the disadvantaged and the underprivileged but the 
moment a propertied landowner raises questions, our 
answer was always “No, there should be due process 
of law, that is why there is Congress, et cetera.” I guess 
what I wanted was some honesty in the discussions, and 
I realize that this is the way the Article should be 
worded. But as it is, right now we are sacrificing clarity. 

One Commissioner, for example, came up with a 
resolution for the removal of the bases “as may be 

provided by law.” Of course, it is a joke but there is a 
certain honesty. 

MR. OPLE. ParUamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I am in full sympathy with the presenta- 
tion of Commissioner Brocka but in the course of his 
impassioned statement, I think he mentioned a word. I 
would not move to delete it but only the last part of the 


word so that only “bull” is retained. (Laughter) Will 
the Gentleman agree to drop the last part of the word so 
that only “bull” is retained? 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). The 
Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF CONSIDERATION 
OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 496 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony) 

MR. MAAMBONG. I have actually two motions to 
present. The first one is to suspend consideration of the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. MAAMBONG. The second motion, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, is that in order to give the Committee and t e 
Members of this Commission time to recharge 
energies early, and considering that per a report whic 
just received, one of us has just been considered m is- 
posed because of fatigue, I move to adjourn the session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Rev. Rigos). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none, e 
session is adjourned until nine-thirty tomorrow 
morning. 

It was 5:28 p.m. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


293 


R.C.C. NO. 56 
Thursday, August 14, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:49 a.m., the Vice-President, the Honorable 
Ambrosio B. Padilla, opened the session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Tlie session is called to 
order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise 
to sing the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody will please 
remain standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honor- 
able Jose C. Colay CO. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. COLAYCO. Dear Lord and Heavenly Father, 
when we assumed office on June 2, 1986, we solemnly 
swore to perform our task of framing a new constitu- 
tion that will embody the ideals and aspirations of our 
people, and guarantee the enjoyment of our people’s 
freedom from tyranny and oppression for generations 
to come. We were then eager and able to do what had to 
be done. It has been more than two months now since 
we made that promise. We reaffirm it now. 

The task is tremendous, but we have not spared 
study, time and diligence to accomplish what we have 
set out to do. In the process, some of us, including Your 
humble servant, are beginning to falter and to fall be- 
hind. Others have had to drop back out of strain and 
sheer fatigue and exhaustion. Our spirit is faltering; our 
health weakening. We need Your help. 

We beseech You, dear Lord, restore our energy and 
rekindle our spirit, so that we can carry on and resume 
our assigned task to its final and successful completion. 
Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Secretary -General will 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Absent 

Aquino 

. Present 

NoUedo .... 

. . Present* 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present* 

Bernas 

. Present* 

Rama 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Absent 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Da vide 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Foz 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . . 

. Absent 

Tan 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. Present 

Trenas 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Uka 

. . Present 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Monsod 

. Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 


The Secretariat is in receipt of official advice of 
absence of Commissioner Bacani. 

The President is absent. 

The roll call shows 28 Members responded to the call. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the 
presence of a quorum. 

The Assistant Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


Appeared after the roll call 


294 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications and Committee Report, the Vice-President 
making the corresponding references: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Geronimo A. Carreon of 263 
Turingan Street, Santiago, Isabela, proposing that 
teachers should not be compelled to perform election 
duties; civil service employees should be on equal foot- 
ing with the military personnel when it comes to retire- 
ment, age limit should be required of candidates for 
president and vice-president, among others. 

(Communication No. 538 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Rev. Paul B. Marx, O.S.B., of 418 
C Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 2002, saying that if 
legalized, it becomes a primary means of 
birth control; some people will not even bother with the 
use of contraception; young people will have increasing 
irresponsible sexual intercourse because they know they 
can always get rid of it, but expressing the hope that the 
new Constitution will contain protection for the unborn 
from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 539 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Cornmunication from Mr. Ric C. Rubia of Claveria, 
Masbate, transmitting Resolution No. 86-55 of the 
Bayan of Qaveria, requesting the transfer 
rom e hihppine Gamefowl Commission to the local 

execu ives t e power to issue cockpit license and 
permit. 

(Communication No. 540 - Constitutionai Commission 

To the Committee on Local Governments 

Communication from the European Chamber of Com- 
merce of the Phiiippines, signed by its President Arthur 
G.D. Gilmour, 3rd Floor Electra House, 115-117 Este- 


ban St., Legaspi Village, Makati, Metro Manila, urging 
the retention of the current 60/40 restrictions on 
foreign participation in the area of telecommunications, 
and expressing apprehension that further reduction of 
foreign equity ceiling might dampen the enthusiasm for 
additional investment and subsequently create an 
unnecessary gap in the overall development of the 
telecommunications industry. 

(Communication No. 541 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Mr. Benjamin M. Orteza of 
Butuan City, transmitting Resolution No. 47-86 of the 
Sangguniang Panlungsod of Butuan, seeking to incor- 
porate in the Constitution the following proposals: 
(1) that the State shall limit the exploitation, develop- 
ment and use of the country’s natural resources to 
natural-born FHipmos; (2) that salvaging, torture, ham- 
letting, zoning, food blockade and similar acts in any 
form shall in all cases be prohibited and shall be punish- 
able by law; (3) that the State shall provide free 
elementary and secondary education; and (4) that youth 
and student organizations’ right and freedom to sympa- 
thize with the people’s struggle shall not be stifled or 
suppressed. 

(Communication No. 542 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Mr. Oswaldo Bacarza of Dipolog 
City and sixty-one (61) other signatories expressing 
strong support to the following: (1) enshrinement ot 
health as a basic human right; (2) nationalization of the 
drug industry; (3) creation of people’s congresses and 
sectoral consultative committees to enshrine people s 
participation in policy and decison-rtiaking processes oi 
the State; (4) prioritization of health and other social 
services; (5) enactment of laws to promote better 
mother-child health; and (6) respect for the right of 
privacy between patients and doctors, among others. 

(Communication No. 543 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) ^ 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Leandro I. Verceles, Suite 612/614 
Manila Hilton, United Nations Avenue, Manila, submit- 
ting, in behalf of the Philippine Council for Foreign 
Relations, Inc., proposals in respect to some provisions 
of the proposed Constitution, specifically on foreign 
military bases in the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 544 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


295 


Letter from Mr. Elly Velez Pamatong of Room 600, VIP 
Building, 1140 Roxas Blvd., Ermita, Manila, submitting 
his suggestions on Declaration of Principles for con- 
sideration by the Constitutional Commission. 

(Communication No. 545 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Resolution 67-68 of the Sangguniang Panlungsod of 
Butuan City, signed by City Mayor-Designate Guillermo 
R. Sanchez and other city officials, expressing support 
to the approved resolution of the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions, fixing the term 
of office of President Corazon C. Aquino and Vice- 
President Salvador H. Laurel for a period of six years 
counted from February 25, 1986. 

(Communication No. 546 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Telemessage from the Association of Philippine Physi- 
cians in America seeking the amendment of Section 7 
of Proposed Resolution No. 496 so as to allow a natural- 
born citizen of the PhiUppines who has lost his Philip- 
pine citizenship to be a transferee of private lands. 

(Communication No. 547 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Ms. Ruth B. Duran of Pagadian 
City, transmitting Resolution No. 106 of the Sangguni- 
ang Panlungsod of Pagadian City , expressing resentment 
over the lack of recognition extended to the City Chief 
Executive by the sponsors/organizers of the Baganian- 
wide Dialogue on Human Rights held at Pagadian City 
on June 26, 1986, and the ConCom public hearing held 
on July 12, 1986 where no Mayor’s permit was secured 
for the purpose. 

(Communication No. 548 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

One hundred eighty-six letters from students of the 
Infant Jesus Academy, Silang, Cavite, all seeking to in- 
clude in the Constitution the following proposals: (1) a 
No-U.S. Military Bases Agreement; (2) an anti-nuclear 
power plant; (3) the promotion of Philippine sovereign- 
ty over our natural resources; and (4) a No-U.S. or any 
foreign intervention on Philippine affairs. 

(Communication No. 549 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Communication from Mr. Rodolfo V. Revilla, Jr. of the 
Forestry Development Center, U.P. College of Forestry, 
Los Banos, Laguna, seeking for the inclusion in the 
Constitution a basic statement on the need to conserve 
our natural resources, and to exempt from the provision 
that leases for exploration of natural resources be 
limited to a maximum of twenty-five years, renewable 
for not more than twenty-five years. 

(Communication No. 550 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

One hundred three letters with four thousand eight 
hundred fifty-one signatories with their respective 
addresses, all seeking to include in the Constitution a 
provision obligmg the State to protect the life of the 
unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 551 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986). 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 38 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 540, prepared by the Committee on Amendments 
and Transitory Provisions, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION AN ARTICLE ON TRANSITORY PROVISIONS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution Nos. Ill, 120, 129, 137, 149, 214, 241, 
254, 262, 285, 294, 348, 67, 362, 427, 443, 458, 461, 
462, 463, 464, 473, 474, 475, 476, 483, 484, 485, 487, 
490, 492, 494, 503, 527 and 529.' 

Sponsored by Hon. Suarez, Ople, Padilla, de Castro, 
Foz, Maambong, de los Reyes, Jr., Tingson, Lerum, 
Sarmiento and Tan. 

Cosponsored by Hon. Natividad, Jamir and Davide, Jr. 
To the Steering Committee. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NOS. 496 and 533 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony 
and Provision on Ancestral Lands) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

* 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we con- 
tinue the deliberations on the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. 


296 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to have a rather irregu- 
lar motion, if this will be considered by the floor. But I 
feel hesitant discussing the Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony without first responding to a 
clamor, which has been received by the Commission 
only yesterday, of a broad sector of our country rep- 
resenting the business sector, the labor, the consumers 
and other sectors. They would like to be part of this 
discussion which might not be realized if we continue 
the discussion of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony today. I would like to suggest the postpone- 
ment of the deliberation on this particular Article for 
tomorrow and instead continue the discussion on the 
Article on Local Governments. We have just received the 
amended Article on Local Governments. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. What does the Floor Leader 
say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is 
recognized. 


So while we respect the opinion of the members of 
the Committee, we feel that a broad participation of all 
these sectors should be allowed in the discussion of so 
vital an issue as the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. There has been a representation made that 
tomorrow if this body would be so open enough to hear 
them, various groups from the private sector — business- 
men, consumers, labor, and many others — would be 
coming here. I think it is our responsibility to respond 
to them. 

If we had spent some time listening to the proponents 
of the pro-life when they struggled or lobbied and made 
representations for the right of the unborn child, I sup- 
pose that this issue would have been just as important 
to be given due consideration. We feel that we are being 
rushed into finishing an article which will affect the 
future of our country. We agree that we have econo- 
mists here, but as Commissioner Brocka suggested 
yesterday, we would like to have a free discussion on 
this Article because most of us are not economists. We 
would like to have these two perspectives or points of 
view, if this body would be so broadminded enough to 
respond to this representation. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes 
is recognized. 


M^- VILLEGAS. I would strongly object to the 
modon, first of all, because in response to the request 
of Commissioner Brocka yesterday, I have fully pre- 
^ point-by-point examination of the proposal 
of this coalition of businessmen referred to. Actually 
t at was my plan. I think the request of Commissioner 
Brocka was very meritorious. This Commission has 
been bombarded with a lot of proposals on the outside 
with all sorts of technical jargons like import liberaliza- 
tion, protectionism and many others. In response to the 
request of Commissioner Brocka, could I ask the Chair 
for some minutes to actually explain some of these 
detmls to the laymen, the nonspecialists in economics? 
I think they will be given sufficient hearing since I have 
been in close contact with Ronnie Concepcion and all 
the others who are in that coalition. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President, actually, 
the report of the Committee on the National Economy 
and Patrimony was just an insertion because what was 
really scheduled is the report of the Committee on 
Local Governments which was interrupted because ot 
certain questions raised during the plenary session. Inas- 
much as the report of the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments is ready, and I have asked its Chairman who said 
that he is raring to sponsor the reformulated report 
of the Committee on Local Governments, I join Com- 
missioner Quesada in moving that we take up first the 
scheduled report of the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is 
recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT 

recognized. 


Commissioner Quesada is 


m. QUESADA. Many of us feel that this particul 
Article is a very important part of this document th 

T m Social Justice, we feel that the 

should also be justice m the discussion of this very vii 
aspect which would affect the rest of the provisions th 
we will introduce in this Constitution. 


MR. DE CASTRO. We stopped deliberating on the 
Article on Local Governments because there are certain 
amendments which the Committee itself will still have 
to work on. We are now in the middle of the period of 
sponsorship and debate on the Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony. We do not like to leave this 
subject now because leaving it will be like stopping in 
the middle of the street and forgetting what we have 
already done. So, let us cross this street. Let us finish 
first what we have started to do and go to the amend- 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


297 


ments. Then the new report on the Article on Local 
Governments may be taken up later on. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I add something to that? I 
received this committee report on the Article on Local 
Governments, as amended, only five minutes ago. I 
would like to have time to study this matter. So, I am 
sorry to oppose the motion to postpone consideration 
of the very important matter of this particular Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Vice-President, may I join 
Commissioners Quesada and de los Reyes in their 
motion to defer discussion on the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. The people of Cordillera are 
still here. They are waiting for our decision on local 
autonomy. I think it is but fair that we should tackle 
local autonomy and local governments before we finish 
the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. In fam- 
ness to them who came all the way from the Mountain 
Province and also to the Muslims who have representa- 
tives in this Commission, may I request that we defer 
our discussion on the Article on National Economy an 
Patrimony, and tackle the Article on Local Govern- 
ments? After ail, the Chairman of the Committee on 
Local Governments is ready to defend the said Article. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recog- 
nized. 

SR. TAN. Mr. Vice-President, I do not see any harm 
if we postpone our discussion on the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. But I can see very much harm 
if we rush into this discussion without the desire to hear 
what others have to say. It is a very sensible desire. What 
will suffer will only be our schedule. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas, the 
Chairman of the Committee, is recognized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would propose a compromise. 
Since there are just very few individuals who want to 
continue the interpellations and also to satisfy the 
reasonable request of Commissioner Rodrigo, I suggest 
that we allow one hour to finish the Unfinished Business 
yesterday, and then we go to the Article on Local 


Governments during the second half, as we did yester- 
day. Then I would be wilUng to postpone the dis- 
cussion on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony until Monday. 

Since there were very important questions raised 
yesterday that are still very fresh in the minds of the 
Commissioners, I would ask for at least one hour where 
we could address the issues raised by Commissioner 
Brocka, and others can continue to interpellate. Some 
were pleading for a possibility to continue the dis- 
cussion this morning, so that is a compromise. Let us 
take up the Unfinished Business yesterday, and then we 
can move on to the Article on Local Governments so 
that the people will have the opportunity to read the 
revised report of Commissioner Nolledo. Afterwards we 
go on as is needed for that Article. We can postpone the 
deliberation on the amendments to the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony until next week. 

MR. RODRIGO. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is 
recognized. . 

MR. RODRIGO. This is only an inquiry. What is the 
meaning of “listening to the proponents from different 
sectors”? Will there be another public hearing by the 
Committee? Will there be a public hearing by the whole 
body where we will listen to the different representa- 
tives of the different sectors who have sent their sug- 
gestions regarding national economy? I would like to 
know the meaning or the mechanics of this question. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. If the Commissioner has read the 
papers today, for the first time in the history of the 
Philippines, a broad coalition of various sectors in our 
society met at the historic Qub Filipino. There is such 
a growing ferment in these sectors about the direction 
to which the national economy of our country will be 
decided on in this Constitution. Many of us feel that the 
various sectors have not been given broad participation 
in the discussion of the national economy. It is true that 
there were various committees and representations made 
during the public hearings; stUl we feel that in compari- 
son with the way the Committee on Social Justice con- 
ducted its hearings, we as a body have not really gone 
through hearing all the important points that need to be 
considered on this very vital area. 

So, these sectors have made representations to come 
here tomorrow and this constituent body will be con- 
verted into a big committee to hear them, whether here 
or outside, so that we can be enlightened on the various 
aspects that we need to consider as we finally make our 
amendments and our decisions on the national eco- 


298 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


nomy. So like what we did for certain groups, like the 
Pro-Life Movement and others, when we sat and heard 
them, we hope that this coalition of pro-Fihpino, pro- 
industrialization and pro-decolonization of our 
economy would also be given time to be heard by all of 
us, not just by a committee but by all the Members of 
the Commission. 

That is the reason behind the request for a post- 
ponement — so that we cannot be accused of really 
having pushed through in a hurry to finish this particu- 
lar Article in comparison with the other articles which 
took us about a week. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to seek for more 
clarification because the only motion that I heard was 
to postpone the consideration of the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony for tomorrow. It appears that 
it is not only to postpone the consideration but to 
convert this body into a committee of the whole and to 
listen to the different sectors which have proposed 
certam amendments. 


r- Y^^^'**^ESIDENT. The motion has been suffi- 
ciently discussed. Shall we submit it to a vote? 

pr<JJ!ise^S^n there is a com- 

rersonahir??h '"i’ “ ^“^^ndment which I think is 
reasonable. I thmk we should act on that first 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 


^THE vice-president. The Floor Leader is recog 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


^ move that we suspend the sessio 
for two mmutes to discuss the compromise. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 10:19 a.m. 


resumption of session 

1 10.29 a.m., the session was resumed. 

E VICE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
The Floor Leader is recognized. 


of a ifteeting of 

finish first the intemeliar decided tha 

decide what to do ne?t. 

Before we proceed with the *• 

call on Commissioner Monsod to clarify VerSn p'^ 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Does 
want to be recognized first? 


Commissioner Alonto 


MR. ALONTO. Could I be recognized after Com- 
missioner Monsod? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to clarify certain points 
that were raised here. First, that there were no ex- 
haustive hearings by this Committee. I believe that the 
facts and the records will bear me out that there were 
very exhaustive hearings conducted by this Committee 
where all position papers submitted were considered. 
Second, there was a suggestion here that the papers 
submitted were not considered yesterday and that those 
who, in effect, are critical of the Committee’s report 
represent the pro-Filipino view. I believe that that is an 
unkind statement. Third, if there is any suggestion that 
we should listen to one sector or a group who wants to 
propound its views, despite the fact that we have 
finished the public hearings, what this Commission 
should do is to convene in caucus to discuss this among 
ourselves. And if there is going to be a reopening of this 
through a consultative meeting or a committee heaiwg 
or the committee of the Whole, then it is our obligation 
to listen to all sides. If this Commission does not feel 
that it can give opportunity for all proponents of dif- 
ferent views to be heard, then it is not fair to listen to 
only one view. 

Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion of the Floor Leader that we proceed to the 
period of interpellations on the Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony and later on decide to go into 
caucus as suggested by Commissioner Garcia yesterday? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

So we request the Chairman and the Committee 
members to take their places in the front table to con- 
tinue the period of interpellations on the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, before we do that, I 
ask that Commissioner Bengzon, the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee, be recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President, we have revised 
the schedule of the articles to be deliberated upon 
and the new schedule is on top of each of the Com- 
missioners desks. But due to the situation today, I 
think we will have to revise it again. That is why I am 
before this microphone. I was told by Commissioner 
Alonto that Friday is the most important holiday for 
the Muslims all over the world. Looking at the new 
schedule, we will find that the Article on Local Govern- 
ments is scheduled for Friday. So Commissioner Alonto 
has requested this Member to inform the Commission 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


299 


that he plead for a deferment of the consideration of 
the Article on Local Governments until Saturday. 

Therefore, as Chairman of the Steering Committee, 

I would like to move tliat we consider the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony starting today up to 
tomprrow, and then we consider the Article on Local 
Governments on Saturday. Also, together with this 
motion. Commissioner Alonto is requesting that the 
Commissioners make an additional sacrifice of having an 
all-day session on Saturday so we can finish the Article 
on Local Governments. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion of the Chairman of the Steering Committee? 

MR. ALONTO. I second the motion, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Vice-President, may we be recog- 
nized? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is 
recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

Substantially, in principle, we have no objection to 
the proposal submitted by the Chairman of the Steering 
Committee, but I was going to pick up the suggestion 
which was advanced yesterday by the honorable Com- 
missioner Garcia that after the period of interpellations, 
we will call a caucus preferably during lunchtime today. 
Hopefully, we can finish the period of interpellations in 
an hour-and-a-half. Then we could determine in the 
caucus the procedure to be adopted in connection 
with the Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony without committing ourselves to accepting 
the proposal earlier submitted by the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee that we will continue the discussion 
on the National Economy up to tomorrow. 

I think that is a better way of doing it rather than 
making a commitment on the floor this morning. Let us 
resolve that in the caucus. That is my respectful 
suggestion. 

MR. BENGZON. All right. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. So, we agree to continue 
the interpellations. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. But has the body agreed that 
we will defer the consideration of the Article on Local 
Governments on Friday? In other words, has the body 
agreed that we will not take up the Article on Local 
Governments on Friday because that is the meat of the 
plea of Commissioner Alonto? 

MR. SUAREZ. I think there is merit in that sugges- 
tion. However, I have here with me the memorandum of 
the Chairman of the Steering Committee where he sets 


August 18 and 19 for the continuation of the dis- 
cussion on Committee Report Nos. 24 and 32 on the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. In other 
words, even under this schedule, tliere is no need to 
terminate the discussions on the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony and, hopefully, the caucus 
would be productive of results insofar as the scheduling 
of discussions is concerned. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, aU I am asking is that we do 
not take up the Article on Local Governments on 
Friday. Then we can discuss the rest during the caucus. 

MR. SUAREZ. How about this afternoon? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is 
recognized. 

MR. ALONTO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I merely want to add something that would make the 
Constitutional Commission realize that our request for 
not putting up the report of the Committee on Local 
Governments tomorrow is due to what we call in Islam 
as Yaum ul Nahr or the Day of Sacrifice — the most 
important religious holiday in the Muslim world. 
Because of that, we, as Muslims could not attend to 
other work except to celebrate that day. That is why we 
requested the postponement of the deliberations on the 
Article on Local Governments from Friday to Saturday. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to 
the motion to postpone or transfer the discussions on 
the Article on Local Governments from Friday to 
Saturday? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 

The FlooCLeader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, the motion to 
continue and finish the period of interpellations has 
already been approved. I ask that we continue the 
period of interpellations now. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. That is why I have been 
asking the Chairman and the Committee members to 
take the front seats for any further or additional inter- 
pellations from other Members of the Commission. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Will the members of the Committee 
join me here in occupying the front table? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 

recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. This committee report was signed by 
all the members of the Committee and, therefore, may I 


300 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


ask that the other members of the Committee join us at 
the table in front. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. May the other members of 
the Committee join the Chairman. 

Mr. Floor Leader, are there any further interpellat- 
ors? 


MR. RAMA. There were some reservations but the 
parliamentary situation is that the Chairman of the 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony 
is supposed to answer pending questions in the last 
session. So, I ask that Commissioner Villegas be recog- 
nized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is 
recognized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. This is in response to the very 
meritorious request of Commissioner Brocka yesterday 
for me to give a very brief technical explanation of some 
terms used in specific proposals that we have received 
from different groups. I fully sympathize with the 
noneconomists in the Commission who really have been 
given very short time to prepare to respond to specific 
technical issues that are being raised. If the Com- 
missioner would bear with me, I would like to literally 
e iver a short lecture on economic terms since there 
am words and phrases that we will have to grapple with 
ike protectionism,” “import liberalization,” “national 
mdustnalization” and “industrial policy.” It is under- 
standable that lay persons would want, first of all, to 
ave simple definitions of these terms. There were also 
requests for a more open presentation of specific issues 
on w ich we may be able to vote either in caucus or 
duimg the period of amendments. That is also the 
intention of these introductory remarks ^ to delineate 
the issues that came from yesterday’s period of inter- 
pellations. In a way, I am also responding to the impli- 
cation of Commissioner Brocka’s statement that there 
should be complete mental honesty, as we say in 
Spanish, cuentas claras. ” So, let us not have hidden 
agendas, so to speak, in this Article. 


Let me first comment on the apprehensions expresse 
y a number of interpellators yesterday about tl 
trequency with which the words “private,” “priva 
en erprise and “private individual” appear in tl 
checked the number of times the won 
a e or government, ’ or “President” or “Congres! 
appear, an can assure the body the number of tim 
u mentioned is about five tim 

Honed “private” is me 


First ot all, I would like to say that the majority 
the members ot the Committee are unabashedly in fav 
of an economy that is propelled mainly by priva 
individuals, private gioups or nongovernmental agench 
So the first issue that is very easy to delineate is: Do \ 


want an economy that is propelled mainly by an activist 
State or do we want an economy that is propelled 
mainly by the private sector? Definitely, the spirit of 
the committee report is that we want an economy 
that is propelled mainly by the private sector and 
there is absolutely no hidden agenda about the specific 
statement. 

It is very clear that in all the public hearings and in 
the Committee meetings, although there were always 
dissenting opinions, there was a categorical no to the 
following forms of economy: 

1 . State capitalism — This is a form of economy in 
which — although recognizing that the means of produc- 
tion can still belong to private individuals — the govern- 
ment decides to take over a lot of economic activities 
from food distribution like KADIWA, to steel mills, to 
all types of goods and services, such as had occurred 
during the Marcos regime. This is a form of economy 
that has been clearly repudiated by this committee 
report — we do not want “state capitalism.” We do 
not want the State to get into all types of — to P^ra* 
phrase Commissioner Aquino, “economic adventurism 
— economic activities in which it is not competent. 

2. Socialism — It is also very clear in the committee 
report that we gave an even more resounding no to 
socialism. It is defined as a form of economy in which 
the goods of production, the means of production, can 
be owned only by the State m principle. That, ot 
course, is even more condemnable than state capitalism, 
from the standpoint of the committee report. 

3. Communism — I do not have to say that the most 
categorical no has been given to communism which, 
incidentally, is the most bankrupt form of econornic 
organization, and which has made Deng Xiaoping, the 
head of China, very famous all over the world. 

The main reasons for our choosing the private sector 
as the engine not only of economic growth ° 
equitably distributing income and generation of full 
employment which are the three goals of economic 
development can be summarized in the following: 

1 . It is based on our belief in human freedom that a 
private-sector economy maximizes the opportunity for 
individual freedom. 

2. As regards state capitalism: As explained by 
Commissioner Monsod yesterday, it is very clear that 
even if it is legitimate for the State to take over some 
economic activities since that is very possible in a mixed 
economy, but given today’s circumstances when the 
government is unable to provide billions and billions of 
pesos for social services like education and health, and 
for paying the salaries of schoolteachers at the rate of 
P3,000 a month, it is really irresponsible for the Philip- 
pine government to start interfering in economic 
activities when it cannot even take care of its own 
household. 

3. I he proot ot the pudding is in the eating. All over 
the world, from Communist China to Socialist France or 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


301 


Spain, to Australia and New Zealand with their labor 
parties, to capitalistic United States, there is a con- 
sensus: Let the private sector — the private entrepre- 
neurs, the small-scale capitalists — be the engine of 
economic development. Deng Xiaoping, Mitterrand, and 
Reagan all agree to this consensus. Hence, if one wants 
to be completely empirical, if one is impatient with 
motherhood statements and with ideologies, I think the 
strongest evidence is that in no part of the world is the 
State recognized as the main engine of growth. 

Another issue that was brought up during the period 
of interpellations was the question of “national indus- 
trialization.” That is one of the magnificent obsessions 
of this coalition that we are willing to listen to and, I 
must repeat, we have time and time again listened to in 
the past public hearings. As I must say also in fairness 
to some members of the Committee, they were given all 
the chances to explain what they meant by “national 
industrialization.” 

This is just to elaborate on what I answered Com- 
missioner Aquino about a specific point. Pardon me for 
sounding pedantic but let us make sure that we under- 
stand the word “industrialization.” 

In order to understand the word, we must understand 
that there are several sectors of the economy and one of 
these is called the primary sector which is involved in 
either agriculture, fisheries or mining. Anything that has 
to do with the growing of raw materials is called 
primary. Every country that has enough agricultural 
resources starts with a situation where anywhere from 
60 to 80 percent of the labor force is involved in hand- 
to-mouth existence, producing raw materials just for 
day-to-day survival. 

As the income of that nation increases, and it is able 
to provide sufficiently for its most basic necessities 
which have to do with food and clothing and shelter - 
which are basically taken from the so-called primary 
sector or the raw material sector — then the secondary 
sector called “manufacturing” starts becoming pre- 
dominant, both in the share of the labor force and in 
the value of the product that is produced by the whole 
nation. Strictly speaking, industrialization is the in- 
creasing predominance of the secondary sector called 
“manufacturing” in both the labor force and in the 
value of the goods and services produced in the 
economy. 

Then there is the tertiary sector which is the sector 
that produces services from education to banking, to 
health services, to insurance — all those phases of the 
economic life in which tangible goods are not pro- 
duced but intangibles called services, which also expand, 
as agriculture and manufacturing, are only auxiliary to 
both agriculture and manufacturing. 

To update the body with the latest terminology, 
there is now the so-called “quaternary sector” which 
produces services which have absolutely nothing to do 
with helping agriculture or manufacturing. It is not a 
handmaid to either agriculture or manufacturing. 


What is this sector? This is the sector that is becoming 
very predominant in every industrialized country. It 
includes tourism, the arts, and all other intangibles 
which people who earn $10,000, $12,000, or $13,000 
per capita increasingly spend their money on. For 
example, they travel all over the world buying art collec- 
tions. That is what we call the quaternary sector. 

It is obvious in the experience of all modernized 
countries that industrialization in itself is not a fetish 
nor an idol that has to be worshipped on the economic 
altar. It is just one stage of the development process. As 
we get individuals to earn more and more, they go from 
primary to secondary, then to tertiary and finally, to 
quaternary. 

That is the background behind the reluctance of the 
majority of the members of the Committee to start 
singling out sectors in a constitution that should last for 
centuries. The moment we single out the second sector 
called “manufacturing,” which is industrialization, then 
we have to say, “Therefore, 30 to 50 years from now we 
should accent the service sector. 

Incidentally, in the United States, the service sector 
is already the predominant sector. More than 40 percent 
of the labor force is in services. It is no longer in manu- 
facturing, and that is increasingly the case in Japan. 

And so, this is the reason we have been very careful 
not to build into our Constitution some very legitimate 
short-term and medium-term concerns of this coalition. 
These phrases, “short-term,” “medium-term” “long- 
term,” were used by Commissioner Rosario Braid yes- 
terday. And I must respectfully disagree with Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid that we cannot incorporate into 
a constitution short-term, medium-term and long-term. 
Otherwise, we will not know where to stop. 

The phrase “industrial policy” which was used by a 
number of interpellators yesterday is also fraught with 
dangers. Let me cite the following: 

Item 1 . Stalin was obsessed with an industrial policy 
to industrialize at any cost. In the name of state militar- 
ism, he actually had millions of small Russian farmers 
called kulaks liquidated because they refused to 
cooperate with his “industrial policy.” 

Item No. 2. Mao Tse Tung had his great leap forward, 
again following an industrial policy to get China to 
industrialize at any cost. That violated human rights 
galore because the Chinese were forced to go through 
years and years of starvation since their leader, Mao Tse 
Tung, and the other members of the Communist Party 
were so obsessed with the great leap forward. 

It is very dangerous to talk about forcing through a 
certain policy as regards which sector to favor at any 
given time. 

Commissioner Bennagen yesterday used the phrase 
“non-market forces” when he was referring to crony 
capitalism. When we start constitutionalizing which 
sectors to encourage, we are completely forgetting that 


302 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


what should determine which sector should be given at- 
tention to at any given time is the market, not some 
high-and-mighty planning agency, or a state corporation 
that will say we have to do this and we have to do that. 


below the poverty line. So when we say we need foreign 
capital, it is not to fatten the pockets of the rich. It is to 
provide opportunities for the millions of people who are 
looking for work. 


That is the detailed background about why there was 
hesitation to start mentioning sectors. That is why we 
agreed, and that was the work of a team led by Com- 
missioner Suarez, to have that omnibus provision which 
states that all economic sectors shall be given optimum 
opportunity to develop. We thouglit that was a better 
phrase rather than singling out a specific sector. But as I 
said yesterday, as long as we can avoid the risk of 
forcing through industrialization, at an opportune time, 
I am willing — and I am sure the members of the Com- 
mittee would be willing — to entertain an amendment 
that could mention industrialization but always in 
tandem with other economic sectors. 


Then there is this very open question on the role of 
foreign investors. Actually, this is in response again to 
an interpellation, the first one of Commissioner Ben- 
nagen s,^when he questioned the phrase “undue foreign 
control. In this world of interdependence, the moment 
we are mterdepehdent on aU the other parts of the 
wor , control is always relative. To a certain extent, we 
are controlled, whether we like it or not, by those who 
supp y us with petroleum, those who lend us money and 
ose who provide our babies with indispensable mUk. 
"u ^ ^ Commitee meetings, it was decided 
should expurgate from the Constitution phrases 
hke foreign domination,” “foreign control” and “neo- 
colomalism because they sound self-flagellating. They 
^ indicative of an inferiority complex, and those 
were e words used by the Committee members. They 
were u y discussed, and we decided that we would 
remove such phrases as “foreign control,” “neocolonial- 
ism, et cetera because we do not put those negative 
mgs m a constitution for then we would sound foolish. 

It is very clear that we need foreign investment. There 
IS no question about that and that is the stand of the 
ommittee. It is a supplement to domestic savmgs. 
ow, to go beyond that motherhood statement, domes- 
ic savings today in the Philippines are in the worst state 
we ever had in our postwar history. During the last 20 
years, we could invest 30 percent of our national 
income or what is called “GNP.” Out of that 30 per- 
cen , on y 25 percent was raised by Filipinos; the 5 
percen a to be borrowed and that is why we went on 
Does the body know what is the 
Philippines after the 
oercent wp the last regime? Instead of 30 

that most 15 to 18 percent, and out of 

dom'pstir soi ^ literally squeezed from the 

domestic sources because as we very well know our 

international credit standing is very bad. That is why it 
is very clear that for many years to come we will need 
foreign capital to supplement domestic savings in order 
to help the millions and millions of Filipino people who 
are unemployed, underemployed and those who are 


And, finally, let me just explain this. I am sure the 
body will end up more confused and I am not saying 
this with a condescending attitude. As 1 mentioned to 
Commissioner Romulo in private, the issue of “import 
liberalization,” for the information of those who have 
not been following economic literature, has been 
debated over the last 200 years. What is this issue of 
“import liberalization” and what is the related concept 
of “protectionism” which Commissioner Brocka found 
very intriguing? 


As I said, when we were just beginning our process of 
development, the majority or 60 to 80 percent of our 
people are in agriculture. We are producing merely food 
products and raw materials. We have very little manufac- 
turing. Now, there is a legitimate argument in favor of 
protecting fledgling local industries. Suppose we want to 
start food processing or fish canning, say, sardines. In 
the beginning, we just start our process of developrnent. 
Obviously, the Japanese and the Koreans can produce 
canned fish more efficiently because they already h^e a 
lot of tinplates being produced there. They already have 
tremendous technologies and economies of scale, no 
to mention the abundant capital that they are ab e 
to get at 4 to 5 percent rate of interest. On the other 
hand, the local fish canners are going to be at a 
tremendous disadvantage in the beginning because reey 
have a very small market and they do not have abund^ 
capital. So it is legitimate to protect those industnes 
when they are still “infants.” That is why it is called e 
“infant industry argument.” That was exactly what we 
did in the ’50s and the ’60s. 


There is absolutely nothing wrong in protectiomsm 
at the beginning of the efforts of industrialization, u , 

without boring this body with all the debates that ave 
been going on for decades, in contrast, Taiwan, Korea, 
Thailand and Malaysia were able to phase out 
infant industry protection after 10 to 15 years. cy 
started to get their industries to open up more and 
more to outside competition so they could have the 
psychological pressure to be more efficient. 


In contrast, in the Philippines, we lingered too long 
on this stage of protecting our industries. That is my 
opinion. There are other economists who are entitled 
to their contrary opinion. They will say: “But we need 
to protect industries forever and ever because there are 
so many changes in the world economy.” 


“Efficiency” is a relative term. The Americans are 
protecting their sugar. I listened to them and I assure 
everyone I have listened to them so many times. But 
that is exactly the point. The nonspecialists, the lay 
persons, are going to hear equally convincing arguments 
to protect local industries or to let local industries com- 
pete in the world market. On one hand, to protect local 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


303 


industries, pity all of those people who are going to be 
unemployed. On the other hand, let these local indus- 
tries compete in the world market after a given time. 
Why? It is because there are millions of Filipino con- 
sumers of canned sardines, textile products and all types 
of housing materials. If the Filipino consumers are 
forever asked to pay prices which are two, three or 
three-and-a-half times more than what they can get from 
other countries, who are we protecting? I am not saying 
that 1 am dogmatic about one or the other. I am listen- 
ing to them, and I still continue to listen to them. But 
these types of debates should better be left to the halls 
of Congress and not to Commissioners who do not have 
either the expertise or the time to actually decide, at a 
given period of our economic history, who is right — the 
coalition or the government ministers who are in favor 
of import liberalization. 

I am not, in any way, taking sides in this specific 
presentation. So this is, as I said, a short economic 
lecture, and I must beg the body’s indulgence because I 
really inflicted this group with a professorial stance. 
However, that was the request of Commissioner Brocka. 
Now, we are open for interpellations. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Opie be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is 
recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

The most topical of the subjects covered by Com- 
missioner Villegas’ brief but sweeping presentation — I 
congratulate him for condensing several volumes worth 
of expertise in just a few minutes - is all about import 
liberalization. This is, of course, part of the structural 
adjustment prescription of the International Monetary 
Fund and the World Bank, is it not? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It does not have to be part, in fact; 
it can be done completely independent of what the 
World Bank and the IMF people tell us. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but the IMF’s coercive power helps 
not so long the political will of governments otherwise 
incapable of, let us say, choosing a painful step of 
import liberalization. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I must say this; Get some help. But 
let me just say that, as early as 1964 to 1965, more than 
20 years ago, Gerry Sicat, who was then a professor of 
the UP School of Economics, and John Power, too, 
wrote voluminous tracts and essays saying we have to 
liberalize imports. We have to get the economy on an 
export-oriented track. That was the opinion of a group 
of UP people. 


MR. OPLE. Even among the objectors— Commissioner 
Villegas will have to agree — let us say, our friends in the 
Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry, and 
some of their affiliated trade or manufacturing asso- 
ciations, there is agreement in principle that import 
liberalization must be allowed in order to expose our 
industries to more competition and, perhaps, even com- 
petition among themselves. That is how they develop 
the muscle to stay competitive, meaning the ability to 
produce better goods at lower costs. But do we have to 
choose this greatest slump in our economic history in 
order to execute an import liberalization policy when, 
as a matter of fact, we have about 50 percent over- 
capacity in our existing industrial plants? Do we have to 
choose that most notorious slump in our economic 
history when so many thousands have lost their jobs? 
Can we not take charge of a phasing process and post- 
pone this to better times? I refer to the decision to 
liberalize imports. 

MR. VILLEGAS. In fact, I have made my economic 
opinion publicly known. I am in favor of a two-year 
postponement, and for us to study industry by industry 
to find out why they are stiU “noncompetitive.” If after 
two years we prove that they are noncompetitive, not 
because of incompetence or inefficiency due to high 
rates of electricity and inefficient telecommunication 
facilities, then I am willing for an indefinite postpone- 
ment. That is my view. But as I said, my view will be 
opposed by others, and the best place to debate on this 
is in economic policy-making. 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, the framework of 
our economic program that has been approved by the 
Cabinet does provide for a two-year period within which 
liberalization can be looked into. But let me just point 
to several other facts. One must take a look at the so- 
called unutilized capacity of 50 percent. If we are refer- 
ring, for example, to the unutilized capacity in the auto- 
motive industry, it is better that this is not revived 
because it is never going to be competitive in this coun- 
try. Television manufacturing and picture tube manufac- 
turing are likewise not in competitive scale. During the 
years of martial law, we made the mistake of enacting 
an investments program based on what they called 
measured capacity which was fitted to the local market. 
So, the scale at which these industries were approved 
was only fitted to the local market. 

Just one example is the case of picture tubes. The 
largest capacity in this country is 700,000 tubes; actual- 
ly, the average is 350,000. The economic scale is three 
million picture tubes a year. No matter what we do, 
despite efforts to revive it, the industry is not going to 
be competitive unless we bring in new equipment and 
modernize the bottleneck in the industry. But another 
aspect to consider is this: perhaps, people should look 
into these companies which ask for protection. I was 
fortunate to have been a member of the private sector 
task force in the past two months, and I would like to 


304 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


say that many of these companies — in fact, all of the 
companies we questioned as to whether they were 
unprofitable during the last three years — did not 
provide their financial statements. We found out, for 
example, that the SPPP Production which produces 
phosphate used for detergents had its most profitable 
year in history in 1984, and that it was operating at a 
93-percent capacity. The SPPP charged that they cannot 
compete with the dumping prices here, which were pro- 
vided by the foreign affiliate of the 40-percent foreign 
owner of that company. 

If we take a look at the tire industry, it is the same 
thing. It is profitable and has never lost money. The 
glass industry has been under protection for 20 years 
and has been asking for another 10 years of protection 
because they did not invest in economic and efficient 
facilities over the past two years. They bragged they 
could have invested, but somehow the money disap- 
peared. Now they want protection because they again 
want to have profits and savings out of the consumers 
money in order to put up this new facility that will 
enable them to be competitive. This company is owned 
by a crony. 

We can go on and on on this question of protection- 
ism and nationalism, but I would like to make one last 
pomt. Mention was made that this plan is dictated by 
the World Bank and the IMF. That is not true. The plan 
was formulated by Filipinos. As a matter of fact, it is a 
complete framework to which IMF objects because part 

o that framework is selective repudiation of foreign 
debt. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is 
recognized. 


MR OPLE. I think there should be a good numb 
o such cases where companies continue to invoke pi 
ection and probably lie to the government. A go< 
number of these are multinationals. But I think that 
or the government to deal with, especially when th^ 
* lies to government agencies. But I think what 
wou ike to be able to foresee is precisely that aw 
nnr SO much Overcapacity 

then thousands are being laid off ai 

aeree thaf^ u liberalization. But I al 

tion certain''^e framework of import liberals 

is in'tellieent i^hary steps can be taken so that the 
existing industries alrea. 

vZJ sX wrSttot^Te 

nomic policy in the Constitutional CoSfsion a‘ 
should probably leave this to the future Congress. B 
IS not the setting of strategic visions for the counti 
including in the economic policy field, part of t 
business of writing a constitution? 


MR. VILLEGAS. The strategic objectives, like 
products and services, should be for Filipinos. We 
should not have undue foreign control, of course. But 
how to do it, whether or not to pennit foreigners to go 
into textile or into car manufacturing or into natural 
resources, are the issues that would clutter a constitu- 
tion. Definitely, there are strategic directives, like it 
being national, independent and self-reliant. Obviously 
they would be motherhood statements but is not the 
Constitution a listing of motherhood statements? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, umbrella statements which do not 
have to be motherhood statements or virginity state- 
ments. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is right. 

MR. OPLE. And within that context, would it not 
be superfluous in this draft Constitution to lay out a 
kind of strategic vision for industrialization? After ml, 
the world consists of the rich industrialized countnes 
and the poor nonindustrialized countries. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. In fact, I encourage any amend- 
ment that would incorporate that word. I just reserve 
the right to make sure that it does not lead to some o 
those horror stories that I enumerated. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Vice-President, we are not in the 
period of amendments, but in order to test the inten 
of the Committee in connection with Commissioner 
Villegas’ very illuminating presentation, would ® 
Committee, of which I am a member, entertain a new 
section, at the proper time, that will read someming 
like this; THE STATE SHALL ESTABLISH POLlClbS 
THAT PROMOTE NATIONAL INDUSTRIALIZATION 
BASED ON A SOUND FOUNDATION OF AGRICUL- 
TURAL DEVELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN REFORM 
CONSISTING OF INDUSTRIES THAT OPTIMl^R 
THE USE OF INDIGENOUS RESOURCES AND ARR 
FULLY COMPETITIVE AND THE STATE MAY MO 
BASIC INDUSTRIES BUT THEY SHALL STAND OIN 
THEIR OWN ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE. Would a 
commitment to industrialization of this tenor which i 
consider very constructive and responsible and set m 
parameters that take account the major thrust of the 
Committee’s proposals be acceptable? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Does Commissioner Villegas think this 
can find a place at the proper time? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. My tentative reaction is that 
the tenor of the proposal is acceptable. My immediate 
reaction is to clarify what the Gentleman means by 
“national industrialization,’’ because we know very well 
that some people use “national” to mean “nationalized.” 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14. 1986 


305 


MR. OPLE. “National industrialization” here is used 
in the generic sense. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is it Filipino-oriented? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. It is national industrialization in the 
sense that when we do attain industrialization, it will be 
seen that we did not discriminate against any part of the 
country, whether in terms of locating physical plants or 
in providing jobs or benefits or distributing the benefits 
flowing out of it. It is in that sense that “national” is 
used here. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I said the proposal looks accepta- 
ble. We just have to make sure that each word is well 
explained. 

MR. OPLE. I am glad that the Committee agrees that 
we should set forth some strategic visions for the future 
in terms of our economic aspirations as a nation. These 
are not attempts to make laws but to set visions. I 
understand from the Floor Leader that there will be a 
caucus. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. OPLE. If that is correct, I thank him for nagging 
me about a caucus, so that I can leave the other matters 
I had hoped to present to the Committee in that forum. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

We already have a copy of the Gentleman’s series of 
amendments and this will be definitely studied by the 
Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Garcia has reserved his 
right to speak before we go into a caucus. I ask that 
Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is 
recognized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

First of all, I feel it is unfortunate that there has been 
a hardening of positions this morning. If there is really a 
difference of ideas, I submit that we must try to 
identify these differences and try to work together so 
that we can hammer out what could be the consensus of 
this body regarding our plans for economic recovery. In 
fact it was my proposal yesterday that we come toge- 
ther in a caucus so we can discuss these differences and 
find out where we stand on very vital issues. 


The members of the Committee requested me to 
formulate a very brief statement as to an alternative 
vision. This is what I have done, and during the caucus 
I hope to give each member a copy. It is only two pages. 

I wish to put it on record that tliis alternative vision 
takes into account the actual conditions of the country 
and grapples with the reality so as to forge ahead. It is 
not a perfect answer; it is definitely imperfect but it is 
an attempt. 

Therefore, I object to some of the statements of 
Commissioner Villegas who has used labels during the 
discussions this morning. It is unfortunate because if we 
approach it in that way, it probably closes our mind to 
some of the ideas that we can listen to. And so, I will 
read the piece that I have been asked to draft. 

It is a framework of an economic alternative. There 
are no ready-made models of ideal societies. The task 
of forging dtematives for our nation and our people 
falls on the shoulders of all Filipinos who search for 
justice, freedom and dignity. In this effort, we propose 
here, for the purposes of discussion, our vision of an 
alternative future, describing particularly the outlines of 
its economic structure. The alternative society we want 
must have an economy which embodies the following 
three central objectives: 

1 . Self-reliant development of the nation’s productive 
forces geared to satisfy the needs of our people; 

2. Filipino control of the economy; and 

3. Economic democracy towards social equity. 

I will very briefly explain each point. 

1 . Self-reliant development of productive forces - 
Two processes are crucial in the building of a genuinely 
self-reliant national economy: agrarian reform and 
development on the one hand, which we worked at in 
the Article on Social Justice, and nationalist industriali- 
zation on the other. The former provides for the freeing 
of productive forces locked up in antiquated patterns of 
feudal land ownership and, as explained earlier on the 
floor, sets the stage for the more rational, efficient and 
equitable exploitation of the nation’s agricultural re- 
sources. In this process, the State extends necessary 
technical, financial and other support services to 
farmers; promotes the shift from emphasis on produc- 
tion for exports to the primacy of production for local 
basic needs; and provides for greater linkage between 
the agricultural and industrial sectors, encouraging, 
among others, the local processing of agricultural 
products. 

Nationalist industrialization builds on the surplus 
generated in the agricultural sector, provides inputs to 
further enhance agricultural production and absorbs the 
work force released from the latter. The process involves 
the promotion of an indigenous, scientific, techno- 
logical and entrepreneurial base that will harness the 
full productive capacities of our people and be capable 
of producing basic goods and services for the majority 
of our population. By this, the following are implied: 


306 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


greater reliance on local resources as inputs for our 
production needs; measures to protect our industries 
from undue competition from foreign enterprises and 
imported products; a de-emphasis on export-oriented 
production towards prior production for local con- 
sumption needs; and, finally, the promotion of back- 
ward linkages in our industrial sector, meaning, the 
establishment of capital goods industries that will 
further enhance our productive capacities. 

2. Filipino control of our economy — The princi- 
ple of economic sovereignty must underlie all efforts 
towards self-reliance and the full development of 
our nation’s productive forces. This means, first of all, 
that the entry of foreign capital, technology and 
business enterprises into the national economy shall be 
effectively regulated to insure the protection of the 
interest of our people. 


Secondly, it means resistance to dictation imposed 
by the International Monetary Fund and the World 
Bank with regard to the conditions of the repayment of 
our external debt in order to insure that the terms are 
not contrary to our development objectives. 

I think the phrase “selective repudiation” has been 
mentioned by Commissioner Monsod. 


. "^^dly, it involves the nationalization of specific 
vital mdustries and the reservation to Filipino capital of 
certain privileged areas of investment. 

3 Economic democracy towards social equity. 
Economic democracy means the democratization 
o e ownership of the means and processes of pro- 
uc ion, popular participation in the control and 
management of their use and the equitable distribution 
eir ruits and increments. Inasmuch as economic 
sovereignty insures that Filipino interests are served, 
economic democracy guarantees that the interest of all 
pmos, eginning with the underprivileged and disad- 
van age , is protected. Economic democracy means the 
of different and preferably more egalitarian 
an democratic forms of economic organizations and 
property ownership from corporate and private to state, 
mixed, cooperative and social enterprise — what we 
discussed yesterday — as a mixed economy. 


t so means the direct involvement of all sectors i 
socie y in the formulation and implementation ' 
na lona eve^pment programs initiated by the centi 

i^portance also of central pla 
hpiipvp these are imperfect ideas; in fact 

wp trv ^ writing, no matter how ha 

hpvP^Hiffp“”^^^^®^l Constitution. I also reaUze that v 
^f^npr th— ^ but in this very critic 

rnme and th generations 

thrpsh out a unportant for us to real 

thresh out and understand where we differ and whe 

we agree. Hopefully, we will respect the differences ar 
rejoice m t e points of convergence. And this is whai 
hope we can accomphsh during the caucus. This is 
modest contribution; I know there are others who 
have other ideas and we should welcome this. 


I would like to thank the Chair for being very kind in 
providing me these few minutes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, a member of the 
Committee would like to make a response. I ask that 
Commissioner Bennagen be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen 
is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I am a member of the Committee but I would like to 
say a few words in relation to what may be a change in 
the committee report arising from the approval of the 
Article on Social Justice and the submission of a report 
on the Declaration of Principles. 

In the deliberations of the Committee, there was 
originally the idea of describing the economy as mixed 
in the way that we mentioned yesterday, and in order to 
recognize the complementarity of efforts of the private 
sector — individuals, cause-oriented groups, civic organi- 
zations and other private organizations and not necessa- 
rily individual big businessmen. However, in the Article 
on Social Justice as well as in the Article on Declaration 
of Principles and State Policies heavy demands would be 
made on the State. If we do not underscore the reci- 
procal relationship of the State and the private sector, 
we may not be able to provide the adequate and app^' 
priate mechanism for the expected response to the 
social justice provisions, as well as those in the Declara- 
tion of Principles. 

At this point, I must say that I am impressed by 
brief discourse of the Committee Chairman, although 
must hasten to add that for all its brevity, it caricatures 
the contours of the economic systems that are in 
ence worldwide. That is expected from such a brie 
discourse but it glosses over the adaptations that have 
been made by various economies, especially those that 
have chosen a more autonomous path of development, 
not necessarily according to the classical models of 
capitalism or socialism. 

My view is to be more historically specific, as enun- 
ciated partly by Commissioner Garcia, that we must be 
able to examine the historical conditions that have 
brought us to where we are now and make the necessary 
adjustments. We must be able to examine carefully the 
changing character of the social structure and the appro- 
priate partnership between the private sector and the 
State or government. I do not think that privatization, 
in the way that it has been described as if it were a 
matter of “either or,” will be sufficient to respond to 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


307 


the provisions in the various articles that I have already 
mentioned. I am saying, therefore, that there is a need 
to revise in massive terms many of the provisions so that 
some internal consistency will be arrived at, and I hope 
to be able to make some contribution in the caucus 
towards the attainment of this kind of internal con- 
sistency that is demanded by the seeming contradictory 
articles that have so far been submitted. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Quesada be 
recognized for the clarifying question. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President and members of 
the Committee: First of all, I would like to preface 
my submission by saying that when I do express my 
opinions, it is an expression not only mine but of the 
people who would like to speak through us. I have 
always maintained that the dialogue with the people is 
a continuing proceSs; that it is not only after we have 
gone through a series of public hearings that we close 
the doors to a continuing kind of representation. So, 
when I bring forth some opinions, it is not only mine 
but that of the people who would like their voices also 
heard through this humble Representation. When I said 
this, it was with the apprehension that the Constitution 
we are making, particularly on this provision on national 
economy, might not truly be reflective of the aspira- 
tions, the needs and the interests of these particular 
sectors who will be affected by what we finally write. 
That is why when we finally amend and approve these 
provisions, we hope that we shall have really given the 
full realm of discussions, not only among ourselves but 
among the people who want to be heard. I made that 
earlier presentation of the people’s position not to dis- 
parage the points of view or the perspectives of the 
members of the Committee who felt slighted because 
I said something about the people who had this pro- 
Filipino protection and pro-national industrialization 
set forth in a different kind of tone. But it was not mine • 
personally; I was only expressing a point of view that 
was relayed to us during a breakfast forum where we 
just came from, and that is why I was speaking with the 
kind of sentiment they wanted the body to hear. That is 
why I moved for that kind of opportunity for tomorrow 
because I did not want this discussion to end up just 
today without the benefit of a public representation. 
But, anyway, what they would like to ask is: How does 
this Article on National Economy and Patrimony really 
assure the protection of the Filipino interest? They said 
that we have publicly assured them that the Constitu- 


tion is going to be pro-people, pro-God and pro-Filipino. 
And they felt that it is in this Article where we can truly 
express this pro-FUipino interest. 

So, I would like now the Committee to teU me in 
layman’s terms how I can teU a worker, a peasant, a 
small businessman or even the big Filipino businessmen 
how this particular Article will protect their interest, 
without having to refer to Sections 13, 14, 15 or all the 
sections. What are these fundamental principles that are 
carried here that will assure them that we have the 
interest of the Filipinos first and foremost when we 
shall be approving this particular Article? I would want 
to relay this again in order to relieve their apprehension 
that it might not be for their interest. I think that is the 
kind of assurance we must give them because they are 
going to be the ones who will ratify or reject this par- 
ticular Constitution and it might be this particular 
Article which they feel will not be serving their interest. 
That is how I would like to be assured in a few non- 
technocratic economic terms. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Vice-President, first of all, 
against whom do we protect the interest of the Filipino 
people? That is the first question. And who may abuse 
the interest of the Filipino people? It could be certain 
individuals who may misuse natural resources and may 
expropriate natural resources for their own selfish use. 
So what is the provision that will protect that? It is the 
provision on the adherence to the regalian doctrine — 
the idea that the State is there to protect the interest of 
Filipinos, and is the one that owns all the natural re- 
sources and will have a lot of controls in the way those 
natural resources are going to be used and exploited. As 
suggested by Commissioner Bennagen, the cultural 
minorities, in one specific provision here, will be able to 
hold ancestral lands and have priorities to specific use of 
the lands. So that would be one interest that can be 
protected. Second, the people should be protected 
against the selfish foreigners who may come here to 
exploit in contrast with the other foreigners who are not 
selfish and who may be here to help out against those 
who are exploitative. There are provisions t^at will limit 
their control of Filipino enterprises, depending on what 
the whole Commission will finally decide. 

What about protection in general? We are assuring the 
fullest liberty for every single Filipino to undertake eco- 
nomic enterprises that would lead to their livelihood, so 
there will be no interference from the State as regards 
their putting up small and medium-scale enterprises, 
their going into small farms and their getting together 
as cooperatives in order to help one another. These are 
probably the best guarantees for the full flowering of 
liberty in the economic field without the oppressive 
“Big Brother trying to dictate what economic activities 
we should enter into. 


you. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank 


308 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, the last interpellator 
is Commissioner Tadeo. I ask that he be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is 
recognized. 


MR. TADEO. Mr. Vice-President, gusto ko lang pong 
ipaalam ang aking posisyon bilang Vice-Chairman ng 
Committee on the National Economy and Patrimony. 
Totoong napakaselan para sa isang magbubukid na ang 
mga kasama niya’y hindi lamang economist kung hindi 
lawyer-economist pa. Kaya makikita ninyo iyong 
kahirapan sa deliberation pa lamang. Sa Simula pa 
lamang ng deliberation ay ipinasok ko na ang “national 
industrialization” at iyan ay alam ng bumubuo ng 
Committee. Dito sa Article on Social Justice, ipinasok 
ko rin ang national industrialization.” Ibig kong ang 
aking magiging posisyon ay nababatay mismo sa 
national situationer na tinalakay ng anak ng kagalang- 
galang nating Vice-President, si Alexander Padilla. Ito 
ay natutunan ko kay Alex nang talakayin niya sa isang 
syrnposmm ng promotion ng Church People’s Rights 
and Response ang kanyang posisyon tungkol dito sa 
economy and patrimony. Sinabi ni 
r. a ilia na sa Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony na FiUpino ang dapat na maging sole deter- 
mmant o ang kauna-unahang principle, ngunit sa pagga- 
mi ng private, kasama riyan ang foreigners. Nakata- 
takot ang pagbanggit ng “private”; maaaring gamitin ang 
pnva e, ngunit dapat sabihing “private Filipino entre- 
preneurs para maialis natin ang ating national eco- 
nomy and patrimony sa kamay ng mga dayuhan. Dalawa 
ang kanyang sinabi: sole determinant ay Filipino. Panga- 
lawa, pmakamahalaga raw na ang principal beneficiaries 
ay ang Filipino. 


Sa kamay ng Con-Com nakalagay ngayon ang kapak 
nan ng 55 milyong mamamayang PUipino. Ano ai 
Sang-ayon sa record ng Central Bank nooi 
1981, ang kabuuan ng ating imports ; 
^44 bilhon^ang kabuuan ng ating exports ay $33 billic 
ugi tayo ng $ 1 1 billion sa isang tinatawag nath 
o onyal na kalakalan, na tayo’y bilang tagapagluw 
amang ng hilaw na sangkap at tagabdi ng kanhang m; 
ymng produkto. Sang-ayon sa record ng 1983, $7.^ 

imports. Ang kabuuang expoi 

tnionv?/ ^2.48 billiin, bunga i 

hilaw ^lakalang tagapagluwas lamang tayo i 

nila 9a^of^ yaring produk 

mla. Sa gamtong kalagayan makikita natin ang pang 

ngailangan sa national industrialization, ngunit ibig 1 

lamang sagutm ang Chairman ng Committee on tl 

National Economy and Patrimony nang sinabi nivan 

“We need foreign investments.- Lu'^bos aL^nasasak^ 

sapagkat nanto ang kasalukuyang kalagayan. Sa baw 

dolyar na ipmapasok ng dayuhan sa Pilipinas sang-ay< 

kay Alexander PadUla, $25 ang kanilang hinUiiram 


atin. Ano ang sabi ni IBON? Sa bawat P25 na pinamuhu- 
nan ng mga dayuhang ito, PI 00 naman ang inuutangsa 
atin. They decapitalize our economy. 

Tungkol naman sa repatriation, ano ang sinasabi ni 
Alexander Padilla, ng CEPO at ng Bantigue Study? Sa 
bawat dolyar na ipinapasok nila, ang inilalabas nila ay 
S3. 95. Sang-ayon sa Central Bank, sa bawat ipinapasok 
na dolyar ng mga dayuhan dito, ang inilalabas nila ay 
$3.58. Sang-ayon kay Hilarion Henares, sa isang dolyar 
na ipinapasok nila, $5.66 ang inilalabas. They de- 
capitalize our economy, pagkatapos sasabihin nila na 
maliwanag ang record ng U.S. Bank of America. Wala 
silang ipinasok na kapital sa Pilipinas. Ang nag-invest 
diyan, ang nagdeposito riyan ay mga Phipino. Seventy- 
five to 85 percent ang pinauutang ng Bank of America 
sa mga dayuhan, pero kapital na Phipino. 

Ilan lamang iyan sa mga halimbawa para makita 
ninyong hindi natin kailangan ang kapital nila. At sina- 
sabi ng aking kasama at kaibigang Chairman ng Commit- 
tee on the National Economy and Patrimony na kaila- 
ngan ang foreign investment dahU indispensable daw ang 
gatas. Alam ba ng kasamang Chairman na ang ating 
niyog mula sa 44 to 45 U.S. cents per pound ay bumag- 
sak ng 1 7 percent? Kay at bagsak na ang coconut indus- 
try. At alam ba natin na sa kanayunan, 78 percent ay 
malnourished — ang ibig sabihin ng “malnourished,” 
may poverty; ang ibig sabihin ng “rnalnourished,” kama- 
tayan. Sabi nga ni Doctor Edelino de la Paz, sa bawat 
sampung batang isinisilang, walo ang namamatay bunga 
ng malnutrition. At 90 percent ng ating gatas ay ina- 
angkat natin sa labas ng bansa, bagamat ang ating 
coconut ay napakayaman sa protina — 20 to 2 1 percent, 
kamukha ng gatas na inaangkat natin sa labas ng bansa. 
Ngunit hindi natin dine-develop ito; iniaasa nating 
maging hilaw na sangkap. 

Ang metal na binibili ng Hapon sa atin na PIO isang 
kilo, kapag ibinahk sa atin, transistor at telebisyon na- 
Kailangan ko pa bang banggitin sa inyong econornists 
ang backward integration at ang forward integration? 
Napakasakit ang ginagawa sa atin. Noong dati ay nagpa- 
palahi tayo ng manok sa Nueva Ecija; pangunahin ang 
Nueva Ecija sa mga mag-iitlog sa buong Pilipinas. Pero 
nang sabihin ng mga technocrats nating higit pang 
mabuti kung umangkat tayo ng mga breeding stocks, 
100 percent perpetually dependent ang Pilipinas sa 
manok, sa baboy at sa baka — hindi na tayo nagpapalahi 
sa Pilipinas. Ano ang sinasabi ng ating Director ng 
Animal Science sa UP Los Banos? Kapag inangkat natin 
ang breeding stock, aangkatin rin natin ang technology 
kung paano sila palalakihin. Kaya 85 percent ng ating 
itlog ay inaangkat sa labas ng bansa. Ito ang isang kala- 
gayang sinasabi ng anak ng kagalanggalang nating 
Vice-President Ambrosio Padilla. 

Sinasabi namin na ang pag-unlad ay mayroong tatlong 
kailangan: genuine agrarian reform, national industriali- 
zation at isang nasyonalistang democratic government. 
Hindi yung gobyemo noong nakaraan. Tinawag ito ng 
ating kagalanggalang na anak ng ating Vice-President na 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


309 


democratic coalition government; Hindi iyong pamahala- 
ang Hindi mapagkalinga sa mga dukHa. lyon ang ibig 
naming sabiHing perspective ng state capitalism — na 
ang istratehikong mga industriya ay hahawakan ng 
pamahalaan at ang hahawakan lamang ng mga pribado’y 
iyong mga industriyang Hindi makakaapekto sa interes 

0 public welfare ng sambayanang Filipino; Hindi iyong 
pamahalaang kamukha noong nakaraan. Ang sinasabi 
namin ay isang nasyonalistang democratic government 
na hahawak ng mga istratehikong nahawakan ng estado 
— Hindi tumataas ang bilihin, Hindi tumataas ang kor- 
yente, Hindi tumataas ang pamasahe, walang tumataas 
sa loob ng 30 to 50 years. Ayaw namin ang economic 
concentration of power sa kamay ng iilan lamang: Kaya 
ang gusto namin, kinakailangan nating mag-brainstorm 
at katayin natin ang Article on the National Economy 
and Patrimony sapagkat dito mismo nakaatang ang 
buhay ng nagugutom na sambayanan. Seventy-three 
percent of rural households have incomes below the 
poverty line. 

Nasa atin ang kayamanan: nakaupo tayo sa bundok 
na ginto, pinakamayaman ang Pilipinas sa buong Asya at 
sa buong mundo, subalit ginawa lang tayong kasangka- 
pan ng mga dayuhan. Babasahin ko sa inyo ang kahulu- 
gan ng economic underdevelopment: 

Economic underdevelopment is a people’s state of in- 
capacity to produce their means of production — the 
machines, the tools that will enable them to produce goods 
and to render services. The tools that produce needle and 
scissors; the machines that produce engines; the mills that 
produce textiles; the equipment that produce typewriters 
and xerox machines. 

Ano ang sinasabi ni Senator Diokno? Ninety- five 
percent ng ating essential commodities ay inaangkat 
natin sa labas ng bansa. Ni hindi tayo makagagawa ng 
pako, ng palito, ni anumang bagay na hindi natin aang- 
katin ang makina sa labas ng bansa. What essentially 
distinguishes a developed nation from an underde- 
veloped nation is that the former manufactures the 
means of production while the latter does not. And 
because the latter does not, its capacity to generate 
weaPh as well as employment is severely constricted. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recog- 
nized. 

MR. FOZ. I made a reservation yesterday, Mr. Vice- 
President, to make further statements or to ask ques- 
tions because I expected to be given certain papers which 

1 think are relevant to the discussion of the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. But the information 
that I received is just a set of preliminary findings. This 
has to do with the economic and technical assistance 
program between the United States and the Philippine 
government. I think this is the so-called Quirino-Foster 
Agreement or Memorandum of Agreement, which I was 
told has been the basis of U.S. Government assistance 
to the Philippines. 


I said that this is just preliminary information. On the 
basis of the available information that I have, this 
agreement is one-sided in so many provisions in favor 
of the United States, particularly the United States 
Agency for International Development. Many provi- 
sions are said to be onerous to the point of being 
exploitative. But in connection with this, I would like to 
go deeper into this but at the moment, I would like to 
find out if the Committee is amenable to accepting 
some kind of an amendment that will authorize or 
direct the government to review existing multilateral 
or bilateral economic and technical agreements and 
programs with foreign governments with a view to doing 
away with those which imposed onerous conditions on 
the Philippine Government supposedly to obtain foreign 
assistance and also to retain others which actually re- 
dound to the benefit of the country. Would such an 
amendment fit into the Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The President, through the NEDA, 
has the responsibility of safeguarding the economic in- 
terests of the nation. If the Gentleman thinks that he 
would like to expand that specific reference to the 
NEDA and its role, including this type of “watchdog 
task,” I think we will entertain a specific amendment. 

MR. FOZ. I have drafted a proposed amendment 
which I would Like to take up with the Committee at 
the proper time. 

Thank you. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION * 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
suspend the session so we can go into a caucus until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:57 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:48 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I call on the Chair- 
man of the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony and the members to be seated at the front 
for further interpellation. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas and 
the members of the Committee are requested for the 
continuation of interpellations on the Article on Na- 
tional Economy and Patrimony. 


310 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


Mr. Floor Leader, is there any registered interpel- 
lator? 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, there are no more 
registered interpellators, but I would like to ask the 
Commissioners if they would like to interpellate because 
that was the request of those who had a different view 
from that of the Committee. 

I ask that Commissioner Gascon be recognized to 
interpellate. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is 
recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I am a member of the Committee and I asked some 
questions for clarification yesterday, but I would like to 
ask some more comments from the Chairman of the 
Committee and the members with regard to some 
points. 

For example, with regard to a vision for the economic 
developinent of our country, Commissioner Garcia pre- 
sented three major points, and maybe we could use 
these as a basis for further discussion. The Commissioner 
stated that the economy must embody the following 
three cental objectives: First, a self-reliant development 
' productive forces geared to satisfy the 
needs of our people; second, Filipino control of the eco- 

^ democracy towards social 

devHonJJ^t^^f+f ^ self-reUant 

satisfv^th ” nation’s productive forces geared to 

firlt people- This is elucidated in the 

seronH n ” V cV ^o concentrate on is the 

second pomt - Fihpino control of the economy. What 

would assure for such, if this is 
embodied m the proposed Article? 

MR. VILLEGAS. All the provisions that limit the 
participation of foreigners, for example, to 40 percent 
in na ural resources, according to the present commit- 
ee report, to only one-third in public utilities, and in 
o er areas where the Congress can decide to limit the 
owners ip to 100 percent Filipino — there is that provi- 
sion m one of the sections which give Congress the 
power o ecide on investment areas. If the Gentleman 
Temoved the word “traditional” in 
thp arpac K leeway to Congress to decide on 

Filininos h^v ^ ^Ipinized. Then definitely on land use, 
limitations in foreigners have tremendous 

“u^dUnd^ advantage of 

Thfr^a^l^aho preset lIwsTh^furth ^ 

owne^hip. The" Boara'“:i tesr„r f„ 
regulates any investment beyond 30 percent for a 
foreigner; foreigners cannot come in beyond 30 percent 
without the explicit permission and approval of the 


Board of Investments; retail trade is reserved by law to 
100-percent Filipino; finance companies must observe 
the 70-30 setup, and so on. We really have so many laws 
requiring the majority control to be in the hands of 
Filipinos, quite apart from what we have stated in the 
Constitution. The Investment Code has further regula- 
tions with regard to majority Filipino equity. It is 
relaxed only in the case of pioneer and preferred, in 
those cases, the foreigner starts to disinvest after the 
eleventh year until he becomes the minority. All of 
these must be taken into account. 

MR. GASCON. With regard to Section 9, I asked 
some questions on it yesterday, but I would Uke to be 
further clarified. Section 9 reads: 

The Congress shall reserve to citizens of the Philippines 
or to corporations or associations at least sixty percent of 
whose voting stock or controlling interest is owned by such 
citizens or such higher percentage as Congress may pre- 
scribe, certain areas of investments when the national 
interest so dictates. 

Are there areas of investment significant to our 
development efforts that only foreigners can provide? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Does the Gentleman mean “pro- 
vide” in terms of capital or technology? 

MR. GASCON. As far as investment is concerned m 
developing certain priority areas for our economic 
development, are there areas where there is much need 
for foreign investments? 

MR. VILLEGAS. During the public hearings, we 
heard people from the mining and oil exploration indus- 
tries, who presented a very strong case, that foreign 
investment is actually indispensable because there is no 
risk capital available in the Philippines. If the Gentleman 
will remember, the figure cited over the last ten years is 
that P800 million literally went down the drain in oil 
exploration and up to now, no oil has been found, and 
all that money was foreign money. These people asked a 
rhetorical question: Can you imagine if that money 
belonged to Filipinos? 

MR. GASCON. I would like to read a commentary 
and elicit some reaction. 

Both India and Brazil restrict foreign investment in com- 
puter hardware. India also restricts foreign investment in 
nuclear technology, motorcycle manufacture and steel 
production, among others. The results have been encourag- 
ing. Their products may not be as superior in quality as 
what the Europeans and North Americans can produce, 
but they are not dependent on international market forces 
to obtain these commodities. Currency devaluations need 
not affect them as painfully as they do to us, Filipinos, 
because the Brazilians and Indians produce basic commo- 
duties. Moreover, by restricting even the entry of technical 
personnel, Brazil and India have produced a core of quali- 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


311 


fied local scientists and technicians, and have thus created 
the beginnings of a scientific culture in their countries. 
Thus, in any plan for further industrial expansion, they 
have the facilities and personnel to train future technicians 
and need not rely on foreign “experts” who would need to 
be paid in foreign exchange. 

Incidentally, a recent American-broadcasting corpora- 
tion news report argued that South Africa could conve- 
niently resist economic sanctions. Why? Because of uncer- 
tainty of foreign support. The South Africans have de- 
veloped their own coal base, energy industry, food produc- 
tion, and computer industry for the past 15 years. Again, 
power could have been cheaper had they decided to import 
petroleum, and food and computers would be cheaper if 
they just allowed importations of foreign investments. But 
for them, autonomy was important. Indeed, by being self- 
reliant, they just might be able to resist foreign pressure. 

Compare their case with that of ours. We cannot get 
our economic recovery program started because we need 
foreign investments and loans, and import liberalization 
is imposed on us to obtain standby IMF loans. To think 
that we do not even practice apartheid. What does the 
Committee think of this concept of giving certain 
restrictions on certain areas of the economy so that we 
can be more self-reliant? Is that a possibility? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is very much within the spmt 
of Section 9, and that is an issue that will be studied 
by an investment board and by Congress. That is very 
much within the possibility of the present Constitution, 

MR. GASCON. Are foreign investors the only or 
major source of finance, technical expertise and 
managerial talent? 

MR. VILLEGAS. They are a supplementary source. 

MR. GASCON. What are other sources for domestic 
market? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Domestic sources, of course. 

MR. MONSOD. There are generally considered five 
sources of investments, domestic savings of investment; 
domestic savings, foreign debt, foreign investments, 
multilateral or bilateral grants and government expendi- 
tures. These are the five major sources or categories of 
investment. 

MR. GASCON. Is it possible to tap, let us say, Fili- 
pino nationals abroad as a major source of financial 
technical expertise for developing our economy? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely. In fact, that is the plan 
of a number of groups - to launch what they call a 
Philippine Fund addressed to the more than one million 
Filipinos in the United States and other foreigners who 
sympathize with the Philippines. 


MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, a good point that 
the Gentleman raised is that if there are only a limited 
number of sources, then we have to take a look at the 
totality of our loss. 

A large number of Filipinos abroad who have ac- 
quired American citizenship, for example, have been 
making representations that they should be given the 
opportunity to invest in this country, in the country of 
their birth, because they are interested in its future. We 
have received communications from them, if they can 
be allowed to be given certain rights as to ownership of 
property. 

In our report because it was a Committee decision, 
the limit, for example, of residential land that they may 
own is 1 ,000 square meters. But they are asking if we 
can increase the limit to give them a chance to invest. 
They are also asking if their investment can be con- 
sidered Filipino investment, considering that they are 
former citizens, natural-bom citizens who are no longer 
citizens. These are ways to attract them and we have to 
balance the needs of the economy with our thinking on 
these restrictions. We cannot say we do not need invest- 
ment. But while we want to limit certain forms of 
investment, we might end up limiting all and shutting 
ourselves out from investment. 

If we look at the enumeration, it seems to me that 
one of the main areas we should now induce is domestic 
savings. This is why this whole Article is based on the 
economic philosophy that private initiative should be 
encouraged because the other sources are really less 
desirable sources — foreign debt, foreign investment, 
grants or doleouts from others, and government 
expenditures. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just add something? I was 
informed by two real estate businessmen that the world 
trade mission was created to invite Filipinos abroad to 
invest in the Philippines. So, these Filipinos who 
acquired foreign citizenship but who are still desirous 
to invest in the Philippines will be another source of 
funding. 

MR. GASCON. With regard to investments, does the 
Philippines have a clearcut policy on foreign invest- 
ments? Are there restrictions and rules on it? 

There was a comment made by Charles Lindsay and 
Ernesto Valencia in their article, “Foreign Direct In- 
vestment in the Philippines,” that our rules on foreign 
investments are so complicated and full of exceptions 
that concededly any foreign investment can be justified 
in our country. Is that the case? If this is so, is it not 
about time that the Constitution establish clear non- 
negotiable conditions for foreign investments? If there 
are none, I would like to be clarified since I am not a 
student of economics. 


312 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


MR. VILLEGAS. As far as I know, there are very 
specific guidelines about foreign investments promul- 
gated by such agencies as the Board of Investments 
(BOI). There is even the Foreign Investment Code 
passed by Congress. The lawyers may be able to say 
more about the implementation. 


MR. ROMULO. No, because it is meant to precisely 
attract foreign processors to come in. Filipinos can also 
invest in the Export Processing Zone, but it is not meant 
primarily for Filipinos. The idea is precisely to attract 
foreign processing firms and, therefore, create jobs for 
Filipinos. 


MR. GASCON. I would like to be clarified parti- 
cularly on the conditions to foreign investments, if there 
are any? 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is 
recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. There are, in fact, complaints that 
the conditions are too rigid and, indeed, too compli- 
cated rather than that there are plenty of loopholes. Let 
us begin with what is called “permissible investments.” 
Beyond 30 percent in this category, you have to go to 
the Board of Investments for permission to invest. The 
Board of Investments has to decide whether that par- 
ticular permissible investment tends to monopolize or is 
contrary to any of our announced policies or laws, 
or whether it will enter a field that is already fuDy 
exploited by Filipinos. So there are already three 
safeguards. 


For other types of investments. Book I of the Inves 
ment Code applies. This is where there is the so-calle 
pioneer and nonpioneer, preferred and nonpreferre 
mvestments. The rules are very specific again as to whc 
IS Classified as pioneer investments. There is an IP 
(Investment Priority Plan) issued by NEDA every yea 
wluch determmes what particular industries are cor 
sidered pioneer and which particular industries ar 
un er preferred. There are also incentives given the ir 
yestor under each category. As I say, if it is a pionee 
mvestment, initially it can be owned 1 00 percent by 
foreigner. But after the eleventh year, the foreign invesi 
ment starts to divest so that by the twentieth or, at th 
a es , the twenty-fifth year, he must become a minorit 
- he will own only 40 percent. The same thing happen 
with regard to preferred investments. The differenc 
e ween preferred and pioneer investments lies in wha 
e pre erred investment gets by way of incentives. Tha 
is practically the whole package. In the Export Process 
g (me, tor example, where 100-percent foreigi 
allowed, the only activity undertaken is o 
le<!<! thrxf ®^ ^®*^l'raw materials for export. More o 

that whpn th^ ^ investment packages. I thin^ 
that when they say one is able to justify any foreigi 

cTmZ™ " "o. correct On S 

contrary, my own experience is that a great 

mvestment laws are so rigid that in facT 
investments are disallowed. ’ ^ 


MR. GASCON. Has such a program, in the past years, 
been successful or beneficial to the economy? 

MR. ROMULO. I think it has not been as successful 
as expected because it was not properly conceived and 
implemented. They now run into competition against 
other foreign processing zones which are far more effi- 
cient and attractive. In fact, I would say that many of 
the firms in EPZA are closing down. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just to present economic statistics 
in the ASEAN, I think the statement the Gentleman 
quoted is contradicted by the evidence — that over the 
last 10 years foreign investments in the Philippines has 
grown very, very slowly. Actually, over the last three 
years, foreign investments have been declining in con- 
trast with Malaysia and Indonesia, not to mention 
Singapore. So the statement that it is easy to invest in 
the Philippines is contradicted by the facts. 

MR. GASCON. Line 22 of Section 3 states: 

. . . The Congress may by law allow small-scale utiliza- 
tion of natural resources by Filipino citizens, as well as 
cooperative fish farming in rivers, lakes, bays, and lagoons. 

Hypothetically, does this provision suggest that priority 
in the utilization of natural resources shall be granted 
to large establishments? Does the phrase “may by law 
allow small-scale utilization” mean that if it does not 
allow by law, that priority is given to large establish- 
ments? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, I do not think the implication 
is there. 


MR. GASCON. Does the provision suggest that since 
Congress may allow cooperative fish farming by law, 
cooperatives in aquaculture are not to be given primary 
consideration? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, I do not think it means that. 
This was just an attempt to operationalize the preferen- 
tial option for the underprivileged, to make special 
mention of it, because historically natural resources in 
this country have been exploited by capital-extensive 
groups. 


MR. GASCON. With regard to the EPZA are then 
steps bemg taken tow^ds pater Filipinization sine, 
the Gentleman sard that at this point in time it is 100 
percent foreign-owned? 


MR. GASCON. With regard to the basic objectives of 
equity and efficiency, economic efficiency is defined as 
the utilization of the minimum necessary amount of 
resources to attain a desired outcome. Clearly, equity 
is not antagonistic to this notion. In fact, equity may be 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


313 


a major cause of demoralization among laborers and the 
poor, resulting in inefficiency. Efforts towards greater 
equity can, in fact, inspire greater productivity on the 
part of labor and the poor when they realize that their 
efforts are being rewarded on a level at par with that 
of others in society, knowing that the segment of 
society remains idle and others are in luxury because 
of the inequitable distribution of wealth and access to 
opportunities. 

Are equity and efficiency necessarily divorced or do 
they go together, just for purposes of discussion? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In fact, they should go together in 
this first section of our Article. If the Gentleman will 
notice, the first goal mentioned is equity. 

MR. GASCON. In the Gentleman’s opinion, what are 
the steps that we should take towards achieving effi- 
ciency in our economy? Would it probably be providing 
for greater equity? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. GASCON. So, what should be the primary goal 
in the beginning? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In the Article on Social Justice, I 
think we have a lot of very clear-cut guidelines on how 
to make small farmers more productive through land 
reform, for example. 

MR. GASCON. I thank the honorable Chairman of 
the Committee. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Jamir be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is 
recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Mr. Vice-President, I have a very simple 
request to the Committee. 

May all the others concerned and I be enlightened as 
to the exact meaning of “mixed economy”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I will attempt an answer, and the 
other members of the Committee can supplement my 
answer. 

A “mixed economy” is an economy where economic 
activities are in the hands of private individuals, whether 
they be single proprietorships, partnerships, corpora- 
tions, cooperatives, without any prejudice to the 
possibility of the state also operating economic enter- 


prises that are considered vital for the common good. 
So, this has to do with the way economic enterprises are 
owned and operated. A “mixed economy” is one that 
admits of both possibilities — economic enterprises in 
the hands of private individuals and economic enter- 
prises in the hands of the state. As to which specific 
blend is chosen in a very particular period of a nation’s 
history will depend on circumstances. As Commissioner 
Monsod was saying, government expenditures as a 
source of investment for establishing economic enter- 
prises are extremely limited right now because as we 
very well know, as we go through from one social justice 
provision to another, we need billions and billions to 
give health services, to even subsidize the expropria- 
tions of land, et cetera. After the government tries 
to implement the Article on Social Justice, the govern- 
ment will be bankrupt. Therefore, we just have to leave 
the establishment of economic enterprises to private 
individuals. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just add two principles that we 
thought would be very useful in determining whether 
government should go into a particular activity or not. 
The first is that before government goes into activities 
that are not purely government functions, it should first 
prove that it can do those activities efficiently which are 
its appropriate functions. That is the first principle. 
Until then it should not go into other activities. It must 
first efficiently perform those that are appropriately 
government functions — garbage, police, customs, et 
cetera, before it goes into the production of, say, 
bicycles. 

The second principle is that the government should 
not go into activities which the private sector can do 
more efficiently. It may regulate such activities, if these 
are monopolies; it has the power of regulation and 
police power, if necessary. But it should not engage in 
activities that the private sector can perform more 
efficiently. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would like to answer the 
question on what “mixed economy” is in historical 
perspective. This arises from an understanding of the 
classical model of the development of economies from 
an alleged primitive communal type that eventually 
develops mto a slave type, then to a feudal type, then to 
a capitalist type, and socialist and so on. These are ideal 
types in the sense that they are pure economic organiza- 
tions or economic systems. Unfortunately, this is not 
the case m the real world. It is not the case that all 
economies undergo this kind of evolution, particularly 
in the case of Third World countries whose economies 
have already been distorted by all sorts of historical 
experiences as well as by the current influences of all 


314 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


sorts of economic models. We are saying, therefore, that 
the development of economies, in terms of these ideal 
types, is already foreclosed. This means that we cannot 
develop as a pure capitalist type, nor can we develop as 
a pure socialist type for a number of reasons. Even in 
the present Philippine economic context, we have a full 
range of economic subsystems from subsistence econo- 
mies that characterize Negrito societies to a kind of 
communal organization as m some cases of the Lumad 
of Mindanao and the Cordilleras of Northern Luzon. 
These are subsystems within the overall national eco- 
nomic system, in addition to all those economic systems 
that were discussed earlier both by Commissioner 
Monsod and Commissioner Villegas. 

In other words, in the real world of Philippine 
economy, there are various ways of harnessing the 
resources of nature and human groupings to meet the 
needs of an evolving society. It is important that we 
examine the precise interrelationships of all these eco- 
nomic subsystems within PhiHppine society, and the 
i^i®^®i^iionship of this total national economy with the 
rest of the world. At present, it would be a mistake to 
speak of a pure economic system in the Philippine 
context or in a tribal society or even in the case of 
advanced capitalism or of socialism. It would be a 
mistake to think in terms of pure types. This is why in 
the early stages of our deliberations in the Committee, 
we argued that we would like to describe the PhUippine 
economy as a mixed economy. It is not pure capitalism. 
It IS not a pure kind of economic system whatsoever 
but a mixture of all these various economic subsystems. 

Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask 
j C!ommissioner Rosario Braid be recognized for 
additional clarificatory questions? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid is recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will the Committee membei 
enlighten me on some questions I have raised in 
general manner earlier. The first question is whethe 
some of these provisions would allow for evolutio 
towards South- South trade; meaning, the developmer 
o mec anisms and procedures by which we coul 
encourage trade between the Third World countriei 
s ar mg per aps with ASEAN. This would, of course 
permi e evelopment of appropriate technology an 
some sem ance of an appropriate import substitutio 
policy. I am sure that this is one step to a futui 
direction. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I think Commissioner Ople has a 
proposed amendment to which Commissioner Rosario 
Braid may want to introduce some amendments. In the 


international field, it should be the responsibility of the 
State to help industries attain access to technology, 
markets and finance as may be applicable, and to make 
common cause with other Uke-minded states — that is 
where the South-South trade comes in — in negotiating 
better terms of trade for developing countries. Foreign 
investments are also determined to be necessary. So, this 
could be an appropriate place where the Commissioner’s 
concern for South-South trade or relationships could be 
introduced. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. On the matter of technology 
transfer, since we have very weak provisions on tech- 
nology transfer, are there ways by which a provision 
could strengthen existing policies on technology trans- 
fer? As we know from available literature, all countries, 
particularly Third World countries, have suffered more 
from technology transfer agreements. They have 
become more dependent. As a matter of fact, the costs 
of technology transfer are tremendous. UNCTAD has 
made estimates of costs of technology transfer com- 
pared with the gains which show that developing 
countries have not gained much. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We will welcome an amendment. At 
the moment, we do not have a phraseology in mind. 

MR. MONSOD. Perhaps we might also add that we 
would like to see provisions to that effect. The provi- 
sion has to be harmonized with the sentiments already 
expressed in this body against foreign investments. You 
cannot have your cake and eat it, too. We have to 
balance these different interests and we must also 
devote a large part of our own domestic resources. In 
many countries, 2.0 percent or more of the gross 
national product is appropriated for research. That is a 
political decision as well as a budget decision — to put 
money in appropriate technology and not just transfer 
technology from other countries. 

May I go back to another point which the Com- 
missioner raised earlier about like-minded states 
developing common interests for terms of trade? I think 
we have to be a little careful not to constitutionalize 
international cartelization. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Lastly, regarding multina- 
tionals, we have to live with the reality that they are in 
our midst. They can accomplish many positive things 
but, at the same time, we are distressed that there are 
not enough regulatory measures. We need measures that 
would ensure that the Filipinos can bargain from a 
position of strength as evidenced by the problems 
effected by Dole and Del Monte plantations in the fruit 
industry. 

In Malaysia, Kenya and Indonesia, multinational 
companies are regarded in a more positive light because 
they have initiated such schemes as nucleus estates — 
the Felda and Feltra. Our multinational corporations 
like Sime Darby or San Miguel and other local corpora- 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


315 


tions could help anchor small landholdings by providing 
the needed production input in partnership with 
government. 

Can the Commissioner provide some more schemes in 
the scenario of how we can live with the reality of the 
presence of multinationals and yet be able to develop 
survival schemes, develop ways by which partnership 
can be forged with government, and so forth? In this 
way we can inform everyone that we have short-term 
tactics for survival. But we should be working towards 
the goals of independence and sovereignty. In short, we 
have to face the reality now, and work out a way by 
which we could meet the economic problems of the 
country, yet keeping our primary goal in mind. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, I think that can also be 
inserted in the last phrase of the amendment I referred 
to coming from Commissioner Ople: “FOREIGN IN- 
VESTMENTS DETERMINED TO BE NECESSARY TO 
THE COUNTRY’S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MAY 
BE WELCOMED ON EQUITABLE GROUNDS WITH- 
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF A NATIONAL POLICY OF 
SELF-RELIANCE AND INDEPENDENCE.” The Com- 
missioner may also want to introduce some refinements 
for her concepts to be incorporated. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Quesada 
be recognized for additional questions. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 
recognized for additional interpellations. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President, I would like to 
have some clarification on Section 2, starting on line 21 
of page 1 to page 2, which states: “subject always, 
however, to the duty of the State to promote dis- 
tributive justice and to intervene when the common 
good so demands.” 

My understanding of “distributive justice” is justice 
that would have preferential option for the poor. This is 
what I understand when we talk about the common 
good — that the common good would actually be to the 
most number of people who are deprived and disad- 
vantaged. So, I was v^pndering why there is a need 
to add the phrase “to intervene when the common 
good so demands.” Is this not redundant to the term 
“promoting distributive justice”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There are positive ways of promot- 
ing the shift to justice, which has nothing to do with 
intervening. There are specific cases when intervention 
is necessary, and I think it precisely strengthens the 


power of the State to come in and actually prejudice 
specific sectors to be able to help the poor. If we will 
just say “promote distributive justice,” it is not strong 
enough. 

MS. QUESADA. So, actually, this is related to “dis- 
tributive justice” and “common good” here does not 
refer to any other. 

MR. VILLEGAS. As the Commissioner said, it refers 
to the 70 percent of Filipinos who are living below the 
poverty line. 

MS. QUESADA. So, the Gentleman thinks that this 
has to be strengthened. It has to be explicitly stated that 
we are intervening for the common good because we 
would like “distributive justice” to be really imple- 
mented. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. May we just add that Section 2 must 
be read together with Section 1 because Section 1 pro- 
vides that priority be given to the welfare of the poor. 
This is a continuous idea in Sections 1 and 2 and in 
other sections of the Article. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. For further clarification, Mr. 
Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think this was also discussed 
rather briefly yesterday in relation to the first sentence 
of Section 2. As formulated, it seems to be highly 
voluntaristic on the part of the private sector to con- 
tribute to the common good, which is why we said that 
at certain points the Constitution mandates the State to 
intervene when there is need for distributive justice. In 
other words, it does not leave the private sector alone to 
do what it wishes even at the expense of distributive 
justice. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

Through a review of the 1973 Constitution, I gather 
that Section 3 of this Article actually covers Section 8 
and Section 9, Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution; is 
that right? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. In relation to lines 6 and 7 which 
state; “and other natural resources shall not be alien- 
ated,” I would like to find out the difference of this 


316 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


partieular phrase with that of the statement contained 
in Section 8 of the 1973 Constitution that all lands of 
the public domain, waters, minerals, et cetera belong to 
the State. Being a lay person, I would like to be clear on 
whether there is any difference between the phrases 
“belonging to the State” and “shall not be alienated.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. I am sorry. The Commissioner is 
still using an obsolete draft. There was a correction. I 
think the Commissioner is using a draft where the 
phrase “other natural resources are owned by the State” 
was omitted. 

MS. QUESADA. I see; I am sorry. 

MR. VILLEGAS. With the provision of agricultural 
lands. We are using now the corrected copy, modified 
for bicameral. 


“as the Batasang Pambansa may provide.” What was the 
rationale behind “explicitating” this in this particular 
provision? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It was the majority opinion, 
although there were some people who dissented, that we 
should even be more restrictive. However, we would 
welcome any amendment to going back to the 1973 
version. 

MS. QUESADA. I just want to find out if this is an 
improvement instead of a retrogression. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It depends on the point of view. 
Some people think it is an improvement; others, a 
retrogression. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I give my comments? 


MS. QUESADA. I am probably holding an old copy THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento 
then. is recognized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I would like to read it then. Section 
3 of the corrected draft states: 

All lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, 
petroleum and other mineral oils, all forces of potential 
energy, fisheries, forests, flora and fauna and other natural 
resources are owned by the State. 

That is the regalian doctrine. To continue: “With the 
exception of agricultural lands, all other natural re- 
sources shall not be alienated.” So, one whole line was 
skipped in the copy of the Commissioner. 


MS. QUESADA. Another point of clarification is the 
phrase and utilization of natural resources shall be 
under the full control and supervision of the State.” 
In the 1973 Constitution, this was limited to citizens of 
the Philippines; but it was removed and substituted by 
shall be under the full control and supervision of the 
State. Was the concept changed so that these par- 
ucular resources would be limited to citizens of the 
Philippines? Or would these resources only be under 
the full control and supervision of the State; meaning, 
noncitizens would have access to these natural 
resources? Is that the understanding? 


MR. VILLEGAS. No, Mr. Vice-President, if the 
Commissioner reads the next sentence, it states: 

Such activities may be directly undertaken by the State, 
or It may enter into co-production, joint venture, produc- 
tion-sharmg agreements with Filipino citizens. 

So, we are still limiting it only to Filipino citizens. 


MS. QUESADA. I am glad to understand that tl 
On Section 7, may I know why in this particular 
stance, on line 29, there was a specification on the 
of property; that is, not to exceed an area of 1 ( 
square meters. In the 1973 Constitution it was stal 


MR. SARMIENTO. The Committee is divided in this 
issue of whether the property should be limited to 
1,000 square meters. But lately we have been receiving 
comments and feedbacks from groups that this should 
be expanded because there are many Filipinos who want 
to invest in the Philippmes. But I think this matter 
should be left to legislation for Congress to decide. Tn^y 
are in a better position to find out what should be the 
exact size or area which Filipinos who lost their citizen- 
ship can acquire as property. 

MS. QUESADA. Going back to Section 3, the section 
suggests that: 

The exploration, development, and utilization of natural 
resources . . . may be directly undertaken by the State, or 
it may enter into co-production, joint venture or produc- 
tion-sharing agreement with . . . corporations or associa- 
tions at least sixty percent of whose voting stock or 
controlling interest is owned by such citizens. 

Lines 25 to 30, on the other hand, suggest that in the 
large-scale exploration, development and utilization of 
natural resources, the President with the concurrence of 
Congress may enter into agreements with foreign-owned 
corporations even for technical or financial assistance. 

I wonder if this first part of Section 3 contradicts the 
second part. I am raising this point for fear that foreign 
investors will use their enormous capital resources to 
facilitate the actual exploitation or exploration, de- 
velopment and effective dispoijjtion of our natural re- 
sources to the detriment of Filipino investors. I am not 
saying that we should not consider borrowing money 
from foreign sources. What I refer to is that foreign 
interest should be allowed to participate only to the 
extent that they lend us money and give us technical 
assistance with the appropriate government permit. In 
this way, we can insure the enjoyment of our natural 
resources by our own people. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


317 


MR. VILLEGAS. Actually, the second provision 
about the President does not permit foreign investors to 
participate. It is only technics or financial assistance — 
they do not own anything — but on conditions that 
have to be determined by law with the concurrence of 
Congress. So, it is very restrictive. 

If the Commissioner will remember, this removes the 
possibility for service contracts which we said yesterday 
were avenues used in the previous regime to go around 
the 60-40 requirement. 

MS. QUESADA. Section 10 states, and I quote: 

The Congress shall establish an independent central 

monetary authority, the majority of whose governing board 

shall come from the private sector, which shall provide 

policy direction in the areas of money, banking, and credit. 

Is my understanding correct that the Committee is 
leaving it to Congress to define the criteria on who 
become members? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Vice-President, as long as 
it is independent of the executive, that is our constitu- 
tional mandate. We want to avoid that situation where 
the ministers from the executive branch systematically 
dominate the Monetary Board which actually leads to a 
lot of excesses in spending. 

MS. QUESADA. Is it possible, when the proper time 
comes, to qualify the private sector to insure that even 
in this Constitution we are already protecting Fihpino 
interests? Private sector could mean people sitting in 
this very important governing board of the Monetary 
Authority but who might not be protecting the interests 
of the Filipinos. Is that not possible? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We will welcome suggestions on 
how to ensure that Congress will really take into ac- 
count the interests of all in the private sector. 

MS. QUESADA. We would not want to give Congress 
the ultimate responsibility to define. But should we not, 
at this point when we have the chance to define just 
who this private sector is, define it so that we can 
qualify it to mean that the private sector would refer to 
those primarily carrying Filipino interests? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Does the Commissioner think of an 
adjective like private Filipino sector? 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. There would be no quarrel with 
that qualification. 

MS. QUESADA. Regarding Sections 12 and 13, 1 take 
it that these two sections address the mode of participa- 
tion and control by the State of economic enterprises, 
particularly vital industries, during periods of external 


aggression and other national emergencies. In this 
respect, does the Gentleman not think that it is necessa- 
ry to define “vital industries” to eliminate any ambi- 
guity in the exercise by the State of this power when 
the eventuahty arises? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, this was fully discussed in the 
Committee and the decision was that the word “vital” is 
so dependent on changing circumstances that we would 
actually be tying the hands of the State if we start enu- 
merating what are vital now. What may be vital to- 
morrow may not be vital now. So, I think it would also 
be presumptuous of the Constitutional Commission to 
actually define what will be vital forever. 

MS. QUESADA. On the proposed Section 15, is it the 
understanding that part of the intent of this particular 
section precludes the intervention of foreign-vested 
interest in the actual operation and management of 
public utilities either as an officer, employee or con- 
sultant? Would this not be unduly constitutionalizing 
dummies? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, in this specific section we are 
limiting the participation in equity to one-third and 
there is no mention of any other control that they can 
have. 

MS. QUESADA. So, there is no safeguard at all that 
those who would get into these corporations or associa- 
tions may actually be dummies? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think that will now have to be 
enforced by Anti-Dummy Law and all sorts of legisla- 
tion. It is very difficult to see all the loopholes in the 
Constitution. For the information of the Commissioner, 
there is an Anti-Dummy Law. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is 
recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. All the provisions limiting foreign 
ownership in different enterprises are all subject to the 
same danger where there are Filipinos who allow them- 
selves to be dummies of foreigners, and it is very diffi- 
cult to guard against that. But the Anti-Dummy Law 
should take care of those cases because there are both 
civil and criminal penalties or sanctions for allowing 
oneself to be a dummy of foreign interests. 

MS. QUESADA. Should there not be some kind of 
provision here that would penalize Filipinos who act as 
dummies? 

MR. MONSOD. That is already in the Anti-Dummy 
Law, and we would get into very detailed legislation 
because there are also different intensities or difficulties 
or degrees of being a dummy. We would have to go into 
quite a bit of detail if the Commissioner wants to go 


318 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14,1986 


into that. Or we can put a general statement that Fili- 
pinos who allow themselves to be dummies of foreign 
interests shall be dealt with by law. 

MS. QUESADA. Something like what Commissioner 
Ople said about dual allegiance being dealt with in 
accordance with law. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, we would welcome any sugges- 
tions the Commissioner may have along those lines in 
order to reflect the intent of this Commission. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you very much, Mr. Vice- 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I ask that 
Commissioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is 
recognized. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, I have one or two 
questions to ask of the Committee and Commissioner 
Ed Garcia. The first question I would like to ask the 
Committee is that stated in Section 10, about the 
operation of banks: 

The Congress . . . shall have supervisory authority over 
the operations of banks and exercise such regulatory 
authority as may be provided by law over the operations of 
finance companies and other institutions performing similar 
functions. 

I notice that there are quite a number of banking facili- 
ties in our country today that are being run by people 
who do not seein to be Filipinos to me — I do not know 
whether they are Filipinos. Is this something that the 
Committee would like to curb to see to it that under 
our new Constitution such important financial agencies 
or banks of the country would be controlled completely 
by FUipino citizens? 


MR. VILLEGAS. There are very strict regulations of 
the Central Bank right now limiting what foreigners can 
u ^ banking sector. Again, that is something legis- 
lation has already been addressing systematically. 


MR. TINGSON. But is that the sense of the Commit- 
tee now, to make it more strict? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

I have in my hands a well-written treatise entitled: 
Framework of an Economic Alternative. Our colleague 


mentions the alternative society we want — sort of an 
ideal society — that must have an economy which 
embodies the following three central objectives: 

The first one is a self-reliant development of the 
nation’s productive forces geared to satisfy the needs 
of our people. I think I do understand that. That is 
clear. 

The second is also self-explanatory — Filipinos should 
have control of the economy and that is called eco- 
nomic nationalism. 

But regarding the third one, may I hear from the 
proponent what is exactly meant by “economic de- 
mocracy towards social equity”? It sounds something 
beyond my comprehension for I am not an economist 
and I would like to know the meaning of “economic 
democracy towards social equity.” 

MR. GARCIA. Mr. Vice-President, may I be permit- 
ted to answer? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is 
recognized. 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

This was precisely the debate in our caucus. In fact, 
when we were discussing the idea of private initiative. . . 

MR. TINGSON. I wanted the Gentleman to state it 
for the record. That is one of the reasons I am asking. 


MR. GARCIA. In discussing the issue of private 
initiative, it is important to distinguish. It is not suffi- 
cient to have the wealth of the country in the hands or 
private initiative as the engine of economic growth. We 
must stress and emphasize again and again that it is not 
only for Filipinos but for the majority of Filipinos. In 
other words, it mtist be socialized as much as possible, 
the base must be broadened in terms of participation, 
management and control. If there can be sectors in our 
society that want to participate in economic enterprise, 
that must be recognized. To say “private” is not suffi- 
cient. That is why I was advocating to include md 
recognize the cooperative or social sector to broaden it. 


Secondly, on the whole idea of popular participation, 
the mechanisms of consultation or sectoral representa- 
tion, for example, in the Monetary Board and in other 
institutions are necessary to insure that those who 
decide policies affecting the lives of a great majority also 
concern those social sectors, not just the limited con- 
cept of “private.” My difficulty with stressing “private” 
is that sometimes or very often, our experience his- 
torically is that it becomes confined to just a very few. 
That has been our problem. In fact, accusations or 
critiques have been made against state- or public-led 
development. I can also cite many examples where 
simply relying on private initiatives without stressing or 
underscoring the whole social character of economic 
growth leads to so much injustice. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


319 


MR. TINGSON. Within the purview of what the 
Gentleman is saying, would he welcome friendly for- 
eigners to lend us their technical expertise in helping 
develop our country? 

MR. GARCIA. Part 2 of this proposal, Filipino 
control of the economy, in fact, says that the entry of 
foreign capital, technology and business enterprises into 
the national economy shall be effectively regulated to 
ensure the protection of the interest of our people. 

In other words, we welcome them but on our own 
terms. This is very similar to our position on loans. 
We welcome loans as long as they are paid on our own 
terms, on our ability to pay, not on their terms. For 
example, the case of Peru is instructive. They decided 
first to develop and grow, and were willing to pay only 
10 percent of their foreign exchange earnings. That, I 
think, is a very commendable position given the eco- 
nomic situation of a country such as Peru. The Philip- 
pines is a similar case, especially when we realize that 
the foreign debt was made by a government that was 
bankrupt in its desire to serve the people. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, I think we have 
to make a distinction that it is not really realistic to say 
that we will borrow on our own terms. Maybe we can 
say that we inherited unjust loans, and we would like 
to repay these on terms that are not prejudicial to our 
own growth. But the general statement that we should 
only borrow on our own terms is a bit unrealistic. 

MR. GARCIA. Excuse me. The point I am trying to 
make is that we do not have to borrow. If we have to 
borrow, it must be on our terms. In other words, banks 
do not lend out of the goodness of their hearts. Banks 
lend to make a profit. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Vice-President, I think the 
trouble in our country is that we have forgotten the 
scriptural injunction that the borrower becomes a slave 
to the lender. That is the trouble with our country; we 
have borrowed and borrowed but we forget that we 
become slaves to those who lend us. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Vice-President, we do not have to 
borrow. But we have to have domestic savings, or we 
should be willing to be taxed by the government for 
government expenditures because there are very few 
ways by whiph we can raise funds for investment. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, I appreciate that. I thank 
Commissioner Garcia very much. 

I have only one more question to ask the Committee. 
On page 5 of the first part of the committee report, the 
following proposed resolutions can be found; Proposed 
Resolution No. 412, introduced by Honorable Rosario 
Braid, entitled: RESOLUTION LIMITING THE PRACTICE 
IN THE PHILIPPINES OF THE VARIOUS PROFESSIONS TO 
FILIPINO PROFESSIONALS; and Proposed Resolution 


No. 432, introduced by Honorable Maambong, Ople, 
Natividad and de los Reyes, Jr., entitled: RESOLUTION 
LIMITING THE PRACTICE OF ANY PROFESSION TO FILI- 
PINO CITIZENS SAVE IN CASES OF RECIPROCITY TO 
ALIENS OF ANOTHER COUNTRY UNDER CONDITIONS 
PRESCRIBED BY LAW. Since the Committee did take 
cognizance of these resolutions, I suppose the Commit- 
tee is in sympathy with the idea in these resolutions 
although I cannot find specifically where it is stated in 
the report. Am I right to say that? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, when it was discussed yester- 
day, although the intention of the Committee was to 
send it to the Committee on General Provisions. It 
seems it never got there; it got misplaced. So, what we 
suggest is that at the appropriate time some amend- 
ments be introduced which we will entertain. 

MR. TINGSON. Filipino doctors in America are 
trying their best to have the U.S. change their regula- 
tions so that they, too, can have reciprocity there. If we 
ask it from another country, would there not be a corre- 
sponding response on our part to also give the same 
privilege to the countries that offer such reciprocity to 
us? 

MR. MONSOD. I think we have to realize that some- 
times we are in a very poor bargaining position. Also, 
the situation may not be the same in both countries. In 
our country, we may need to put more limitation than 
they would in theirs for the common good. 

MR. TINGSON. I understand. 

MR. BENGZON. May I also add that, perhaps, we 
would already be treading into legislation at that parti- 
cular point. 

MR. TINGSON. T just wanted to find out. Thank you 
very much. 

Finally, I suppose the Gentleman will agree that 
scientific knowledge is no respecter of racial or geo- 
graphical boundaries. Therefore, if there is no Filipino 
know-how and, for example, we need medical experts, 
we certainly would not prevent European or American 
doctors from coming, and giving them the privilege of 
practicing along that line, would we? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is really something that can be 
studied by the Congress and by the executive on a case- 
to-case basis. 

MR. TINGSON. 1 am very much aware of the Chris- 
tian virtue of gratitude. For instance. Dr. Jose Rizal was 
in high praises in his writings of his benefactors, Euro- 
pean tutors, in gratitude for giving him the benefits of 
education and other help he received in Europe. Similar- 
ly, since for so many years we were under the tutelage 
of the United States, we should also have a feeling of 


320 


THURSDAY. AUGUST 14, 1986 


gratitude towards Americans. I know an American from 
Memphis, Tennessee whose name is Mr. Ed McAteer and 
is the head of the Round Table in the United States. He 
has helped quite a number of our Filipino students. Of 
course, we do not want him to feel that'he is no longer 
welcome in our country. We do not want them to feel 
that this country is only for the Filipinos and they are 
not allowed anymore. Certainly, that is not our feeling; 
is it? 


tion, he forgot to ask a question or two. So, may I ask 
that Commissioner Gascon be recognized? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President, before he is 
recognized, I want to ask Commissioner Garcia one brief 
question. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. When we speak of foreigners, we 
make distinctions between the citizens and their govern- 
meat. When we criticize foreign intervention, we criti- 
cize the intervention of government as reflected in its 
foreign policy but not the citizens. I think that dis- 
tinction should be very clear in oqr mind so that it will 
not be understood that when we speak against Ameri- 
cans, we are speaking also against all American citizens. 

MR. TINGSON. That is very helpful. Thank you very 
much. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President, I would like to 
respond to Commissioner Tingson. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 


MR. BENNAGEN. Regarding the Gentleman’s answer 
to the question of Commissioner Tingson on economic 
democracy, there is one provision on page 4, Section 8. 
It says: 

The President, after consultations with the appropriate 
public agencies and the private sector, including labor and 
peasant organizations, shall recommend to Congress and 
implement an integrated and coordinated approach to 
national development. 

Is that, in any way, related to the Gentleman’s under- 
standing of economic democracy — only as a part, not 
necessarily the whole concept of economic democracy 
and if he feels that it is not, would the Commissioner 
be willing to provide us with some amendments to 
strengthen the participation of other sectors in the 
overall planning and implementation of national 
economic programs? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia may 
reply, if he so desires. 


MS. QUESADA. The Gentleman asked if we should 
medical specialists to come to the 
huippines and practice their profession in the spirit of 
tnendship or goodwUl. As far as I know, there are 
existmg provisions of the Professional Regulatory Act 
that prevent the practice of professions in the PhUip- 
pmes unless such professionals are fully registered in the 
Philippines. We have not established that kind of parity. 
And there will be vehement objection to putting that 
provision on the entry of foreign experts to practice 
meir profession in the Philippines in the Constitution. 
As a matter of fact, there are experts in the Philippines; 
and we export our experts to other countries. They are 
very exportable; they are well in demand all over the 
wor . So, I would really be cautious about including 
+ \ ^ ^iiderstanding that when we talk about 
ec mca exchange, we would not allow that encroach- 
ment on the realm of our own professionals. 

Thank you. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The 
recognized. 


Acting Floor Leader is 


Vice-President, I understand 
that when Commissioner Gascon made his interpella- 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

That type of popular participation is one mode of 
participation that is envisioned. In fact, I was envision- 
ing that even in central planning of the econorny like 
what is being done by the NEDA, popular participation 
can be incorporated to make it truly democratic. That is 
what I meant by this democratic participation even in 
the highest levels of economic planning for the nation. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Sarmiento has some- 
thing to say. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Ople gave us a list 
of his amendments. Will these two amendments be 
closer to the Commissioner’s idea of “economic de- 
mocratization”? For instance, amendment (d): ‘ THE 
SUSTAINED DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL 
TALENT POOL OF ENTREPRENEURS, MANAGERS, 
PROFESSIONALS AND SKILLED WORKERS OR 
CRAFTSMEN IN ALL FIELDS SHALL BE A SHARED 
RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE AND THE 
PRIVATE SECTOR.” Then another amendment, now 
(f): “IT SHALL BE THE POLICY OF THE STATE TO 
ENCOURAGE WORKERS AND FARMERS, AS WELL 
AS OTHER SECTORS TO PARTICIPATE DIRECTLY 
IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BY FORMING 
THEIR OWN COOPERATIVE ENTERPRISES WHICH 


321 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


SHALL ENJOY SUCH INCENTIVES AS CONGRESS 
MAY PROVIDE.” 

MR. GARCIA. I think the second one especially is 
in the same spirit. As I have mentioned earlier, there are 
two aspects actually: First, is the participation and con- 
sultation level; and, second, is basically management 
control and ownership which perhaps is a higher level, 
depending on the stage of economic level that will be 
reached by the country. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, may I ask 
that Commissioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT.* Commissioner Gascon is 
recognized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I just have one or two more questions on Section 3; 
then as a response, actually an echo to Commissioner 
Garcia’s beautiful paper on economic alternatives, I jot- 
ted down some reflections and perspectives on the 
economic problem myself and I would like to share 
them with you. 

With regard to Section 3, line 25, says: 

The President, with the concurrence of Congress, by a 
special law, shall provide the terms and conditions under 
which a foreign-owned corporation may enter into agree- 
ments with the government involving either technical or 
financial assistance for large-scale exploration, develop- 
ment, and utilization of natural resources. 

I do recall that in the June 30 and July 2 drafts of 
this proposed Article, the phrasing was: 

The Legislature may, by two-thirds vote of all its Mem- 
bers, by a special law, provide the terms and conditions 
under which a foreign-owned corporation may enter into 
agreements with the government, involving either technical 
or financial assistance. 

As I asked yesterday what “concurrence” means, 
the Commissioner said that it is a simple majority. What 
was the rationale of the Committee for diminishing the 
two-thirds vote of Congress to a mere concurrence of 
the majority? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Commissioner might have been 
absent during that meeting, but the majority voted. 

MR. GASCON. Yes. What was the rationale for the 
decision of the majority of the members of the Com- 
mittee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the rationale was, since we 
need a lot of financial assistance at this particular time 
of our development, we have to make it easier for 
foreign investors to come in. 


MR. GASCON. In Commissioner Nolledo’s textbook 
on the 1973 Constitution, he pointed out that one 
major reason for the inclusion in the 1973 Constitution 
of an explicit provision allowing service contracts was 
that there was doubt about their constitutionality based 
on the 1935 Constitution. Also, Professor Merlin 
Magallona of the UP College of Law pointed out in the 
paper “Nationalism and the New Constitution” that, in 
effect, service contracts legalized dummyism in natural 
resource exploitation. Thus, if the spirit behind this 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony is the 
development of a self-reliant and independent national 
economy, should not Congress be extracareful in allow- 
ing foreigners to exploit our already scarce natural 
resources? Since these resources are scarce already, 
should not their utilization be reserved first and fore- 
most to Filipinos? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Since the Committee was divided 
on this, I think this is one thing that can be brought to 
the body. 

MR. GASCON. So what does the Commissioner think 
of that particular question; should we not be more 
extracareful instead of the other way around? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would rather throw it to the body. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. 

I would like to share or echo some of my reflections 
primarily based on the good points of Commissioner 
Garcia, if I may. 

The Constitution, the fundamental law of the land, 
shall be the foundation by which all future legislations 
concerning our society shall be based, and it shall pro- 
vide the principles which should guide the actions of our 
future leaders as well as the people of the Republic. 
Hence, I believe that all the Commissioners have a 
responsibility to try their best to produce a constitution 
from which shall evolve a society that shall aim to 
ensure progressiveness or a continual betterment in the 
quality of life of the individual Filipino. 

To elaborate on this vision, we must point out 
primarily what the problems of contemporary Philip- 
pine society are and from there, what our objectives 
should be. In this Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony, we must confront the problem of under- 
development. Simultaneously, it also gives us the 
opportunity to provide the basic ingredients for a 
national development program. It would not be right to 
leave such a program totally in the hands of one govern- 
ment agency. The people must not be excluded from 
meaningful participation in the decision-making process 
that involves their interests. And I believe that is what 
we are doing now when we speak of providing greater 
opportunities for private sectors which include people’s 
organizations and people’s movements in the definition 
of our economic program. 


322 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


Hence, it is appropriate to have such a provision in 
this Constitution. 

I perceive the main problems of the economy to be: 
First, scandalous poverty for the majority of the popula- 
tion while a few hive in luxury; second, the inability to 
sustain a process of national capital accumulation; and, 
third, low development of our productive forces. 

In our analysis, massive poverty stems from the 
combination of unequal distribution of wealth and 
power, and economic backwardness. Unequal distribu- 
tion of wealth necessarily means that there is a lack of 
democratic access to the factors of production, as well 
as the means of production. Hence, basic property rights 
and regulations should be questioned. In our view, 
private ownership and exclusive rights to access to our 
resources and means of production naturally lead to 
potential abuse and, therefore, overconcentration of 
such resources in the hands of a few leaves the rest of 
society unable to accumulate their own surplus and they 
become vulnerable to exploitation by the powerful 
minority. 

Thus, both private and state capitalism can lead to 
the poverty of the majority because in both instances 
the producers are directly separated from the productive 
process which is still controlled by a few. The producers 
cannot determine what goods shall be produced. When I 
speak of producers, I speak primarily of the workers. 
^“Uid profits are utilized in a manner that only a few de- 
cide upon. Both private and state capitalism follow the 
rule of the market, meaning, they will invest in the 
production of goods which are the most profitable. 

In contemporary Philippine society, the most profita- 
ble goods are those which are demanded by the sectors 
with money. These are the local high-income market 
and the export market. Mass consumer goods are, 
therefore, neglected. Corollary to this, the majority of 
the workers are not the targeted market; they are not 
the consumers. Hence, there is no incentive to increase 
their wages. 

Our economy is also highly integrated into the world 
capitalist market. This is unhealthy for us because it 
creates unnecessary dependence on foreign markets, 
foreign capital and foreign goods. I say “unnecessary” 
because I believe we have the resources to produce our 
own; they are only untapped and wrongly allocated. 

In order to develop our productive forces or our 
capability of producing goods and services, we must 
first be able to accumulate surplus so as to rechannel it 
into further investments in the economy. 

But if ours is a dependent country, having to import 
all the time for a lot of things — especially, as Com- 
missioner Tadeo has mentioned, we have to import 
machines to produce — we should start with this pro- 
posal by really making a defmite position on industriali- 
zation so that we can begin to build machines which 
make machines. 


If ours is a dependent economy, this will continue to 
give the country a balance of trade deficits. Financing 
the deficits with massive loans compounds the pro- 
blems, and all these factors result in our surplus being 
siphoned out by the foreign investors or traders. Such a 
country that always relies on others for its own develop- 
ment will not be able to genuinely create improvement 
in its own economy when it so desires. 

What happens then to our national sovereignty? All 
economic agenda for development, if we continue to 
operate within the same dependent framework, shall 
always have to be first approved by our trading partners 
or foreign creditors. 

What type of a society do I envision, therefore, and 
from this vision, what things must we have on our 
agenda for development? 

First, let us define development. Development here is 
meant as the act of breaking away from that which 
envelops and, therefore, constrains our movement, and 
of relying principally on our latent resources and 
potentials to move towards a more advanced state. 

Bearing this in mind, we must then strive for our 
economy that is self-directed, self-sustaining and self- 
reliant. We are in favor of an economy that guarantees 
an increase in the standard of living for a majority of 
our people, but we do not want this increase to be due 
to or dependent on, decisions of foreigners or events 
outside the control of our elected leaders. A case in 
point is our current economic recovery program. Our 
country has become so dependent on foreign capital 
inflow to finance importations of basic commodities 
and production inputs that our country cannot seem to 
begin in the path towards growth without foreign in- 
vestments and debts. And, understandably, the foreign- 
ers will not invest in the Philippines merely because of 
their admiration of our revolution; rather, they want an 
assurance of profitability regardless of the socio-political 
and economic problems of our people. 

Thus, it will take time for this recovery program to 
begin, and many of our people are daily being killed 
softly by unemployment and starvation. Our task, 
therefore, in this Commission is to bequeath to future 
generations a direction for the State to create an in- 
dependent, self-sustaining, self-reliant and self- 
sufficient economy, and the sooner we explicate that 
the Philippine economy belongs first and foremost to 
Filipinos, then the better so as to reduce gradually our 
dependence on foreign capital for our development 
efforts. 

Then the producers should be given the right to 
determine what goods shall be produced. The eco- 
nomy should be receptive to the needs of the majority 
of its citizens. In order for the producers to have such 
power of self-determination, they should have direct 
access to the means of production. This is the eco- 
nomic democracy which Commissioner Garcia speaks 
of. Hence, a democratization of access to these sources. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


323 


and a more equitable distribution of wealth should be a 
priority. The owner works, and the worker owns. 

We must have an economy whose priority is the 
welfare of the Filipino. Thus, it must be independent 
and free from the dictates of trading partners and must 
uphold the interest of the Filipinos. 

However, it is not enougli merely to call for a nation- 
alization of industries. Property rights and control of 
such industries should be diffused among all Filipinos, 
and such industries must be geared not to the demands 
of the foreigners but to the needs of the Filipinos. We 
must move away from dependency on others to answer 
our unemployment or poverty problems. Therefore, we 
must tap our own resources to develop our own produc- 
tive process. We must try to wean our economy away 
from the global capitalist market so that our country 
shall become less vulnerable to world market price 
fluctuations or capital flight. 

These are some of my basic ideas in support of a 
genuinely independent and self-reliant economy and of 
the democratization of our economy. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President, just so it cannot 
be said that the Committee is not aware of the Rules, we 
would like to state for the record that we were tolerant 
in listening to the privilege speech of Commissioner 
Gascon, although we felt that it was out of order. We 
allowed him to finish althouglr it would have been 
proper to make his privilege speech simply part of the 
record. 

MR. GASCON. I would like to thank the Committee 
for its tolerance. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, considering 
that we have no more interpellators, may I be allowed 
to propound some questions to the Committee? 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. First of all, something has been 
said here by Commissioner Tingson about Proposed 
Resolution No. 432 which was filed by this Member and 
Commissioners Ople, Natividad and de los Reyes, Jr., 
limiting the practice of any profession to Filipino 
citizens save in cases of reciprocity to aliens of another 
country that pennits Filipinos to practice their pro- 
fession within its territory under conditions prescribed 
by law. A similar resolution was filed also by Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid. 

I just want to make it of record that this resolution 
which we filed is not actually our own formulation. We 
practically copied it from RA 5181; unfortunately, after 
we had filed it, we received very adverse comments. I do 
not know for what reasons, but perhaps some were 
thinking that we were not trying to protect Filipino 


citizens. Nevertheless, we will bring this up later on to 
the Committee. 

I would like to go to another point, Mr. Vice- 
President. I am not an economist, so I would like to get 
certain verifications from the Committee. I have here an 
article which says that foreign investments are con- 
centrated in each sector of Philippine economy such as 
banking, manufacturing and mining. Is this true? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Not in banking, and in manufac- 
turing it depends on which manufacturing sector. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, that is not exactly true. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Another statement here is that 
multinational corporations dominate major lines of in- 
dustry, as in drugs and pharmaceuticals, food process- 
ing, petroleum and tire manufacturing. Is this true, 
Mr. Vice-President? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In tire manufacturing, yes, but in 
drugs, the biggest market share is in the hands of United 
Laboratories. In fact, it is unique in the world. There is 
only one country in the world where 25 percent of the 
pharmaceutical market is in the hands of one company 
which happens to be a local company. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thank the Commissioner for 
that clarification. Then, finally, there is a statement here 
that foreign interests also hold sway over assembly and 
packing, export production and trading. Is this exactly 
correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Again, that depends on which 
sector. In bananas, it has been basically multinational. 
In other export crops, like coconut, it is not. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President, may I just 
clarify the statement of Commissioner Villegas with 
respect to the fact that 25 percent of drug purchases is 
concentrated on one company. We just like to state that 
this was the situation in the old dispensation, but this is 
precisely what the present Ministry of Health is trying 
to break and which, I believe, it has already broken in 
the sense that every drug purchase is now open to bid- 
ding. There are no more negotiated purchases. We just 
want to make that clarification. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 

recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. I just like to correct the information 
that there is no monopoly of the drug manufacturing 
business in the Philippines which is not controlled by 
foreign big business or multinationals. 


324 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


The Commissioner just referred to the drug distribu- 
tion which has been the monopoly of United Laborato- 
ries until the intervention of the new government. 

But insofar as the production of drug is concerned, it 
still remains in the hands of foreign big business. That is 
the reality and that is what we are trying to drive at in 
our rationalization of the drug policies of the country. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It really depends on what the Com- 
missioner means by monopoly. If by monopoly, she 
means one specific multinational firm controlling more 
than 10 percent of the market share, it does not exist. 
But if we put all multinational firms together, then we 
can say that the foreign or multinational sector has the 
biggest market share, and that is true. But there is cut- 
throat competition between them, so that is not mono- 
poly. I think the Commissioner has to define her term 
“monopoly.” 

MS. QUESADA. Perhaps not monopoly, but I refer 
to the production of very essential drugs. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, they may be producing but, as 
I said, the American and European multinational firms 
are at one another s throat competing like mad, and that 
is not monopoly in economic literature. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Vice-President, my under- 
standing of the question of Commissioner Maambong 
has something to do with foreign control or foreign 
monopoly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, my main point is to check 
the veracity of the quoted statements because I will ask 
the Committee questions in connection with Sections 9 
and 15. I am just laying the basis, and it appears to me 
that my basis is wrong because most of the answers of 
the Committee are to the effect that the one I am read- 
ing is not actually correct. Anyway, may I ask another 
question. There is a statement in this report that I have 
that nearly 40 percent of the country’s top 100 corpo- 
rations are either foreign firms or subsidiaries of foreign 
corporations or have sizeable foreign equities. Is this a 
correct statement? 


MR. VILLEGAS. If by “sizeable,” it means 15 or 20 
percent, it might be true because there is that much 
foreign equity definitely. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Maybe the next question will 
clarify it. It says here that, according to the figures 
released by the Securities and Exchange Commission, 
these corporations accounted for 40 percent of sales, 
and 70 percent of net profits of the top 100 corpora- 
tions in 1 984. Is this a correct statement? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would not be able to answer, 
because I have to look at the data. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Anyway, all these questions lead 
me to my next question. Under Sections 9 and 15, it 
appears to me that our form of control or regulation 
when it comes to foreign investments is actually in 
terms of the percentages in their interest. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And if we do not use the word 
“control,” our regulation is only up to that extent. 
When a foreign entity comes in and tries to do business 
in our country, we only check what its equity contribu- 
tion is and that is it. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, there are also other controls, 
depending on which sector of the economy the Com- 
missioner is examining. For example, in the financial 
sector, multinationals cannot borrow without limit any- 
more because of a regulation of the Central Bank coor- 
dinated with BOI that they are limited to the equity 
that they have brought in. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think I am beginning to under- 
stand. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Or they can remit profits in a 
limited way. There have been so many controls, pre- 
cisely that that is the reason why, as I said earlier, com- 
pared to Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore, foreign 
investments in the Philippines have been a pittance over 
the last ten years. 


MR. VILLEGAS. What is sizeable? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It says that nearly 40 percent of 
the country s top 100 corporations are either foreign 
fkms, subsidiaries of foreign corporations or have 
sizeable foreign equity. 


MR. MAAMBONG. So would it be more correct to 
say that we have control or regulation in terms of; first, 
when a foreign investor or foreign business firm comes 
in, we have regulations on the business organization 
itself? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. VILLEGAS. What is “sizeable 
more than 40 percent? 


foreign equity,” 


MR. MAAMBONG. I really do now know, I am just 
reading a report. Is this not also correct? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Then, secondly, when they 
conduct their business transactions, we have other forms 
of control? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


325 


MR. MAAMBONG. And when they go into some 
kind of business operations, we have other sets of 
control? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. Even their use of land is con- 
trolled. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My next point is, all these con- 
trols that we are talking about are embodied in our laws, 
and taken in totality these provisions which we are now 
discussing do not, in any way, as of this moment and 
until Congress acts otherwise, destroy whatever controls 
or regulations are existing as of now. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, they do not. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am happy to hear that. 

I am particularly interested in the nationalization 
laws that we have. Just to mention a few, we have the 
Anti-Dummy Law, which is actually Commonwealth 
Act 108, amended several times. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could tlie Commissioner please 
define his terms? By “nationalization,” does he mean 
“Filipinization”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Filipinization? Other authors 
call it “nationalization,” but let us use the Commis- 
sioner’s word. 

As I was saying, we have the Anti-Dummy Law or 
Commonwealth Act 108, amended several times; we 
have the Anti-Dummy Board or RA 1130; the Retail 
Trade Nationalization Law; and the Rice and Corn In- 
dustry Law. We have the different flag laws: the Anti- 
Dumping Law and the Filipino Retailers Act or RA 
1292. All these laws, as of this moment, are not affected 
by the present configuration of our draft Constitution? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, they are not. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This is my next point. We have 
mentioned here in one of the provisions, words or 
phrases like “monopolies,” “combinations in restraint 
of trade,” and “unfair competition.” My question is: 
Are they understood, as used in the provision, in 
relation to the definition of the same terms in the Re- 
vised Penal Code, because Article 1 86 thereof mentions 
“monopolies and combinations in restraint of trade”; 
Article 189 speaks of “unfair competition”; Article 187 
speaks of importation and disposition of falsely 
marked articles’ ? Or do these terms, as used in the 
provision of this Constitution now being formulated, 
have meanings more general than those indicated in the 
Revised Penal Code? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, we read them in the context of 
the Revised Penal Code. 


MR. MAAMBONG. They are in the context of the 
Revised Penal Code. Thank you. 

The last point is this: Under Section 7, we have here 
a provision which refers to natural-bom citizens of the 
Philippines. Would it affect the Committee’s thinking if 
this term “natural-bom citizen” were taken out and 
instead we just say “a citizen of the Philippines,” which 
means naturalized citizens would also be given the same 
privilege under Section 7? 

MR. VILLEGAS. A naturalized citizen? 

MR. MAAMBONG. We just say, for example, “Not- 
withstanding the provisions of Section 6 of this Article, 
a citizen of the Philippines who has lost his Philippine 
citizenship,” meaning, that if he was a naturalized 
citizen of the Philippines, went to the United States, 
lost his citizenship, and then came back, then he can be 
a transferee of a private land solely for residential 
purposes. Would it affect so much the thinking of the 
Committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We can bring that up in the com- 
mittee meeting. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am prompted to ask this 
because I actually received a telegram recently from a 
certain Dr. Philip Chua, President of the Association of 
Philippine Physicians in America, 1830 Mirmar Road, 
Munster, Indiana 46321, USA, and I understand the 
Committee also received the same telegram, but the 
request was more than what I am talking about because 
they are saying that this Article should allow them to be 
transferees of private lands without any mention of the 
dimensions of the land. 

That would be all for my questions. 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask and reiterate our request 
to all those who have any proposed amendments, if we 
can have them so that the Committee can have an 
emergency meeting right now in order to consider all of 
these amendments? 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Commissioner Suarez, I think, is 
going to say something. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

We would like to clarify that last proposition which 
Commissioner Maambong advanced regarding extending 
the same privilege given to natural-bom citizens under 
Section 7 of the proposed draft to naturalized citizens. 
Is the Gentleman referring to a situation where, say, one 
who was originally Chinese becomes naturalized as a 
Filipino citizen; goes back to Taipeh, then loses his 
Filipino citizenship, would be given the same right as 
that of a natural-born Filipino citizen to be a transferee 


326 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


of a residential lot equivalent to, say, 1,000 square 
meters? Is that what the Gentleman had in mind? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that was what I had in mind. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner would not want to 
make a distinction between a natural-bom citizen and a 
naturalized Filipino citizen who both lost their Filipino 
citizenship by virtue of the fact that they had gone 
abroad and had established not only residence or 
domicile abroad but also acquired the citizenship of the 
country where they have been residing. 


make an announcement in my capacity as Chairman of 
the Steering Committee. 

I know that there are a lot of us who are taking a 
break, so I know they are listenmg. When we come back 
after the break may I suggest that it would probably be 
better for us to vote on the Article on Social Justice on 
Third Reading, because the clean copy was already 
distributed yesterday. I have taken some informal sur- 
veys and polls so if we will have a majority when the 
session is resumed, then I would move for a voting of 
that Article on Social Justice on Third Reading. 


MR. MAAMBONG. No, because I am thinking purely 
in terms of logic. When one becomes a naturalized 
citizen of the Philippines, he can acquire land just like a 
natural-bom citizen. In other words, if he acquires 
another citizenship, he had that right to acquire land 
but he lost it because he lost his Filipino citizenship. My 
thinking is just to renew that kind of right under 
Section 7. If we have to give this right at all, the natural- 
bom and the naturalized citizens should be at par with 
each other, as far as the rights they originally had. For 
example, if a natural-bom citizen can mn for public 
ottice, a naturdized citizen cannot, and even if the 
latter regains his Filipino citizenship, we cannot give 
_ parity in terms of running for public office, because 
the na^rdized citizen never had that qualification in 
the first place. That is just my thinking based on logic, 

but I really do not know the thinking of the Committee 
on this regard. 


. SUAREZ. We are trying to clear up this point. 
Does not the Commissioner see any substantial dif- 
erence between a natural-bom Filipino citizen and a 
naturalized citizen going back to his old country proba- 
ly in the years to come, because of the fact that he or 
she may have acquired a piece of land of about 1 ,000 
square meters? 


MR. MAAMBONG. I really do not see any substantial 
difference because if we relate this to the purpose of 
Section 7, the 1,000 square meters will only be purely 
or residential purposes. He cannot go into business just 
because of this. So, when he comes back, the intention 
IS really to stay on his residential land. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

At the proper time, the Committee will study that 
proposed amendment if it is submitted. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is 
recognized. ^ 

MR. BENGZON. I think the Floor Leader is about to 
ask for a recess, but before he does that, may I just 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, with the 
indulgence of the Chairman of the Steering Committee, 
I would rather dispose of two pending interpellations. 
And if that is all riglit with the Chairman of the Steering 
Committee, so that we will not have any business hang- 
ing on this matter, I ask that Commissioner Foz be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recog- 
nized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Vice-President, in Sections 3 and 9, 
the provision on equity is both 60 percent, but I notice 
that this is now different from the provision in the 1 973 
Constitution in that the basis for the equity provision is 
voting stock or controlling interest instead of the usual 
capital percentage as provided for in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion. We would like to know what the difference would 
be between the previous and the proposed provisions 
regarding equity interest. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Suarez will answer 
that. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

As a matter of fact, this particular portion is still 
being reviewed by this Committee. In Section 1, Article 
XIII of the 1935 Constitution, the wording is that the 
percentage should be based on the capital which is 
owned by such citizens. In the proposed draft, this 
phrase was proposed: “voting stock or controlling in- 
terest.” This was a plan submitted by the UP Law 
Center. 

Three days ago, we had an early morning breakfast 
conference with the members of the UP Law Center and 
precisely, we were seeking clarification regarding the 
difference. We would have three criteria to go by: One 
would be based on capital, which is the capital stock of 
the corporation, authorized, subscribed or paid-up, as 
was employed under the 1935 and the 1973 Constitu- 
tions. The idea behind the introduction of the pljrase 
“voting stock or controlling interest” was precisely to 
avoid the perpetration of dummies, Filipino dummies of 
multinationals. It is theoretically possible that a situa- 
tion may develop where these multinational interests 
would not really be only 40 percent but will even 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


327 


\ 


extend beyond that in the matter of voting because they 
could enter into what is known as a voting trust or 
voting agreement with the rest of the stockholders and, 
therefore, notwithstanding the fact that on record their 
capital extent is only up to 40-percent iirterest in the 
corporation, actually, they would be managing and con- 
trolling the entire company. That is why the UP Law 
Center members suggested that we utilize the words 
“voting interest” which would preclude multinational 
control in the matter of voting, mdependent of the 
capital structure of the corporation. And then they also 
added the phrase “controlling interest” which up to 
now they have not been able to successfully define the 
exact meaning of. But they mentioned the situation 
where theoretically the board would be controlled by 
these multinationals, such that instead of, say, three 
Filipino directors out of five, there would be three 
foreign directors and, therefore, they would be controll- 
ing the management of the company with foreign 
interest. That is why they volunteered to flesh out this 
particular portion which was submitted by them, but up 
to now, they have not come up with a constructive 
rephrasing of this portion. And as far as I am concerned, 
I am not speaking in behalf of the Committee, I would 
feel more comfortable if we go back to the wording of 
the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions, that is to say, the 
60-40 percentage could be based on the capital stock of 
the corporation. 

MR. FOZ. I understand that that was the same view 
of Dean Carale who does not agree with the others on 
this panel at the UP Law Center regarding the per- 
centage of the ratio. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. Dean Carale shares my 
sentiment about this matter. 

MR. BENGZON. I also share the sentiment of Com- 
missioner Suarez in that respect. So there are already 
two in the Committee who want to go back to the 
wording of the 1935 and the 1973 Constitutions. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is good to have lawyers in the 
Committee. 

MR. FOZ. Another question. In Section 4, the size 
of the homestead for acquisition through purchase by 
an individual or citizen is only 24 hectares, which is just 
a reiteration of the previous provision of past Constitu- 
tions. But in view of the increasing population and the 
diminishing availability of alienable land, is this figure of 
24 hectares still practical and feasible? 

MR. VILLEGAS. If the Commissioner continues 
reading lines 10 to 14 of the provision, it says: “The 
Congress, taking into account . . . shall determine by 
law the size of lands of the public domain which may 
be developed, held or acquired ...” which means that 
this is really only the maximum limit and that Congress 
may determine a smaller limit. 


MR. FOZ. Congress may still delimit the size? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, exactly, depending on the 
circumstances. 

MR. FOZ. Section 1 1 , about the fonnation or organi- 
zation of private corporations, is not clear on how 
government corporations may be organized or created. 

Is the Committee saying that government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations may be created not only by special 
law but also by general law? 

MR. VILLEGAS. In fact, we are thinking of going 
back to the 1973 phraseology. 

MR. SUAREZ. By special charter; that is the meaning 
of this exercise. Majority of the committee members 
feel that we should go back to the 1973 terms and 
conditions. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

In Section 15, the equity requirement in the case of 
public utilities is two-thirds of the voting stock or con- 
trolling interest. We understand that a telecommunica- 
tion company or firm is covered by this provision 
because it is considered a public utility. Now, I remem- 
ber there is a similar provision in the report of the Com- 
mittee on General , Provisions. If this provision is 
approved along with the other provisions of this com- 
mittee report, then there would be no need for the 
counterpart provision in the Committee on General 
Provisions. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Would this be an advanced approval of 
what is contained in the Committee on General Pro- 
visions? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Are there any other in ter- 
pellators? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Mr. Vice-President. I ask 
that Commissioner Quesada be recognized for one 
additional question. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is 

recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Mr. Vice-President, I just like to 
make some clarification on one point which, if satis- 
factory , may need no amendments from this Member, 
and this is in connection with the ecological protection 
of the environment in relation to foreign investments. I 
have here with me papers on the ecological effect of the 
Dole Philippines and the Kawasaki Steel Mills, and how 


328 


I 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


these particular investments in our country have con- 
tributed to the degradation of our flora and fauna. So 
does the Gentleman think that it is proper to introduce 
a provision mandating the investors to insure some kind 
of protection for our natural resources? The mention of 
ecological consideration is only in relation to Congress 
taking into account conservation, ecological, and de- 
velopmental requirements of the natural resources when 
determining the size of the lands of the public domain 
which may be developed, held or acquired. Does not the 
Commissioner think that it is proper to introduce an 
amendment on this particular environmental concern? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We would welcome a suggested 
amendment. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Mr. Vice-President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Nativi- 
dad be recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is 


MR. VILLEGAS. In economics, definitely, there are 
never dogmas, and that is the problem with some people 
who have very closed opinions. They see things in black 
and white. And considering the present circumstances, 
we can definitely benefit from more openness to inter- 
national competition. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. More or less, would this Article 
on the National Economy and Patrimony sustain this 
doctrine of free trade? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, I think this Constitution is 
very silent on that. In fact, if, we accept the amendment 
of Commissioner Ople, it contains very specific state- 
ments on international trade. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. There will be modifications then? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right, yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. How about this matter of protec- 
tionism, how does this Article treat that subject matter? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is silent. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. I have read much about thi 
cn icisms o some economists that we ruined our eco 
nomy rom the time of the American regime up to thi 
time because of free trade. What is the Chairman’ 
opmion on this. Has our economic ruin been spawnec 
loyalty to the economic doctrine of free trad( 
and has this maintained our colonial level of economic 
situation? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. How about on our present policy 
on floating rate, is this provision silent also? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. That is a very specific tech- 
nical decision that our monetary authority should be 
given a lot of leeway. 


chr. iH 1 not think the Gentleman 

ould make a sweeping statement. Definitely, if we go 

e way back to the early 1900s and the way that 
ree ® started, certainly there were adverse effects of 
ree ra e because we really did not have any incentive 
o s art early enough in manufacturing since we were 
encouraged to be a grower of raw materials. But there 
were ree trade policies followed — as has been explained 
not°t ^'^terpellators - by Singapore, Korea, Taiwan, 
niention Hongkong, that led to the miraculous 
these countries. So it is really very 
trar\p t M ^ generalization that it was only free 

frpp traHp Other Countries that followed 

e trade benefited immensely from that approach. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. There is no hint whatsoever in 
this Article on that? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, definitely not. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, with that last 
interpellation, I move to close the period of sponsorship 
and debate on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony under Committee Report Nos. 24 and 32. 


“■■■ Vice-President, may I als. 
that if one has studied our economy since we act 

™eT,t"m;i' " thereveL“our econ“ 

those who alocarSSuoT™*"’ 
u • fr- • ^ Pi^otectiomsm now are usually 

who are inefficient, inept and, m some cases, com 

f NATIVIDAD. So this spread or article 

free trade does not, in fact, have solid basis; is th 
Commissioner s conclusion? 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Vice-President, I move to 
adjourn the session until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning to give the committee members and the Com- 
missioners time to prepare the proposed amendments. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 14, 1986 


329 


THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Does the Chairman of the 
Steering Committee agree to the motion? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Mr. Vice-President, in order to 
give the Commissioners a lot of time within which to 
prepare their amendments. As a matter of fact, for those 
Commissioners who are ready with their written amend- 


ments, I encourage them to submit the amendments to 
the Chairman or to us in the Committee. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 4:51 p.m. 



s'* , 

• I 

■'i ^ 

,1J* ; 




si 





FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


331 


R.C.C. NO. 57 
Friday, August 15, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:51 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Teodoro C. Bacani. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

BISHOP BACANI. God our Father, as we begin our 
work once more today, we ask You to give us a deeper 
consciousness of the fact that we are Filipinos, w om 
You have called not only to own our land and our 
natural resources, but to protect them not only for t e 
present generation but for our posterity. 

Grant O Lord, that conscious of this, we may enact 
in this Constitution provisions that will triily be for the 
welfare of our people, and it will not only be class in- 
terest that we will promote, but the interest of the 
entire nation and of our future generations. We ask You 
this in the name of Jesus, the Lord. Amen. 


roll call 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . 

Present* 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Alonto . . . • 

. . Present 

Brocka . . . 


Aquino .... 

. . Present 

Calderon . . 


Azcuna .... 

. . . Present* 

Castro de . 


Bacani .... 

. . . Present 

Colavco . . 


Bengzon ... 

. . . Present* 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Bennagen . . 

. . . Present* 

Davide 


Bernas 

, . . Present 

Foz 



Garcia 

. . Present* 

Reyes de los . . . 

, Present 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Rigos 

Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Absent 

Rodrigo 

. Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Romulo 

. Present 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Rosales 

Present 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Sarmiento 

Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Suarez 

. Present 

Monsod . . . . 

. . Present 

Sumulong .... 

Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Tan 

. Present* 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . Present 

Tingson 

Present 

Ople 

. . Present 

Trenas 

Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Uka 

. Present 

Quesada . . . . 

. . Present 

Villacorta 

. Present* 

Rama 

Regalado . . . . 

. . Absent 

Villegas 

. Present 


Commissioner Ahmad Domocao Alonto is on official 
mission. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 34 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


332 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


(Communication No. 555 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary -General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Guillermo A. Castasus of 127 R. 
Berroya St., San Vicente, San Pedro, Laguna, suggesting 
that in the acquisition of lands, particularly agricultural 
lands, and on retaining ownership of landholdings, 
anyone who cannot guarantee the land’s productivity 
has no reason for holding on that land, much less to 
acquire more. 

— Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patnmony. 


Letter from Mr. Luis A. Quibranza of 1564 Labra 
Street, Caballes Compound, Guadalupe, Cebu City, 
transmittmg his proposal on National Covenant for 
consideration by the Constitutional Commission. 

~ Constitutional Commission 

of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 


Communication from Ms. Marisse C. Reyes, Corn 
sp^ondence Secretary, Office of the President of th 
ilippines, Malacanang, transmitting the followin 
letters from: Mr. Prudencio S. Serrano, 748 Don V 
Marcos Ave., Mati, Davao Oriental, submitting suj 
gestions for consideration in the Constitutional Corr 
mission; Mr. Eliezer J. Fortunato, 83 Chico St., Quirin 
IS net, Quezon City, proposing a federal form c 
government; Mr. Ramon Santillan, 303 Ziga Ave 
a aco, A.lbay, suggesting inclusion of a provision in th 
^ regarding increased pension and goverr 

men ^u sidiz^ health care program for elders; an 
uentes, Immaculate Conception Parish 

school curriculum®““"® “'® 

554 — Constitutional Commissio: 
To the Steering Committee. 


Letter from Minister Candu I. Muarip of the Office of 
Muslim Affairs and Cultural Communities, N. de la 
Merced Bldg., corner West and Quezon Avenue, Quezon 
City, submitting a compilation of proposals and resolu- 
tions adopted by Muslim professionals, academicians 
and scholars, and expressing the hope that these pro- 
posals which embody the general sentiments and com- 
mon aspirations of the people be incorporated in the 
Constitution. 

(Communication No. 556 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Mr. Isabelo F. Magalit of 
KONFES, 4 Malinis St., U.P. Village, Diliman, Quezon 
City, and thirty-nine (39) other signatories, submitting a 
position paper recommending that the text of theT973 
Constitution (Art. XV, Sec. 8) on the teaching of re- 
ligion in public schools be retained and incorporated in 
the new Constitution. 

(Communication No. 557 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Eighteen letters with eight thousand eight hundred 
sixteen (8,816) signatories with their respective ad- 
dresses, all seeking to include in the Constitution a pro- 
vision obliging the State to protect the life of the 
unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 558 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Ishmael F. Mohammed of Suite 4 QB, 
ODC Bldg., Legaspi Village, Makati, Metro Manila, seek- 
ing the adoption of measures that will give the prisoners 
among the Filipino Muslims the privilege to observe 
fasting inside the prison during the month of Rahmadan, 
exempting them from hard labor for thirty days, feeding 
them at dawn and at sunset and secluding them from 
other prisoners of another faith. 

(Comm.unication No. 559 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


A. de la Cruz and thre 
others, all of Filamer Christian College Roxas Citv 

urging the Constilutional Commission to 'incorporate 
he Const, tution the inviolability of the sepaiation o 
the Church and State. 


Letter from Bishop La Verne D. Mercado, General 
Secretary of the National Council of Churches in the 
Philippines, 879 EDSA, Quezon City, transmitting the 
NCCP’s various proposals for the resolution of the 
problems and issues besetting our nation today. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


333 


(Communication No. 560 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from tlie Misaniis Oriental Public 
School Teachers and Employees Association, Inc., 
Cagayan de Oro City, requesting provisions in the 
Constitution prohibiting incumbent elective officials to 
run for any elective position unless resigned and that 
political campaigns be sponsored by the COMELEC and 
financed by the parties of the candidates. 

(Communication No. 561 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Communication with one hundred fifty signatories witli 
their respective addresses, all seeking to include a 
referendum/plebiscite on the issue of statehood U.S.A. 
in a proclamation calling for local elections. 

(Communication No. 562 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente A. Galang, Presidential Staff 
Director, Malacanang transmitting Resolution No. 3 of 
the Antique Small Landowners Association, requesting 
the Constitutional Commission to incorporate in the 
Constitution the specific number of hectares of land a 
private person or corporation may possess. 
(Communication No. 563 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 496 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take up for considera- 
tion the Article on National Economy and Patrimony 
in the period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to consider on Second Reading the proposed 
Resolution on the National Economy and Patrimony? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, in accordance with 
our procedure to enable the Commissioners who desire 
to present amendments to have a conference with the 
Committee Chairman and Committee members, I move 
that we suspend the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:02 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:40 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized to present amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I propose an amendment to Section 1. May I 
also make of note that 1 have consulted the Committee 
on the National Economy and Patrimony concerning 
this proposed amendment to Section 1, and the text 
that I will read is the negotiated result, subject to con- 
firmation by the Chairman of the Committee. It reads as 
follows: “Section 1 . The State shall develop a self-reliant, 
DYNAMIC and independent national economy. The 
goals of the national economy are a more equitable 
distribution of income and wealth, a sustained increase 
in the amount of goods and services produced by the 
nation for the benefit of the Filipino people . . 

There is a recommendation to drop the subsequent 
phrase and sentence because these will be addressed 
later in the second paragraph. May I continue reading 
the text: . . . AND AN EXPANDING PRODUCTIVITY 
AS THE KEY TO RAISING THE STANDARDS OF 
living for all especially THE POOR. 

the state shall establish POLICIES THAT 
PROMOTE NATIONAL INDUSTRIALIZATION AND 
FULL EMPLOYMENT BASED ON SOUND AGRICUL- 
TURAL DEVELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN REFORM 
through INDUSTRIES THAT MAKE FULL USE 
OF THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT IN BOTH 
HUMAN AND NATURAL RESOURCES AND WHICH 
are fully COMPETITIVE IN BOTH THE DO- 
MESTIC AND EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENTS. HOW- 
EVER, THE STATE SHALL PROTECT FILIPINO 
ENTERPRISES AGAINST UNFAIR COMPETITION. 


334 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


That is a Committee amendment to my amendment. 
The text goes on to read: “IN THE PURSUIT OF THESE 
GOALS all economic sectors AND REGIONS shall be 
given optimum opportunity to develop and a broader- 
based ownership of private enterprises, INCLUDING 
BOTH THE CORPORATE AND THE COOPERATIVE 
OR SOCIAL SECTORS shall be encouraged.” 

May I request the Committee’s consideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod will give the 
response. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Committee is 
prepared to accept the amendments of Commissioner 
Ople, but may we suggest two deletions. One is the 
word “NATIONAL” because the sentence that the 
Committee itself suggested, which is “THE STATE 

irlVicT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES 

AGAINST UNF AIR FOREIGN COMPETITION” 
^ready covers the idea of the word “NATIONAL.” 

“INCLUDING 

OR^^orrl^T COOPERATIVE 

R SOCIAL SECTORS,” we believe that many people 

may not understand what “OR SOCIAL SECTORS” 

prepared to accept the word 
COOPERATIVE or say “SIMILAR ENTERPRISES 

s all be encouraged,” if it is acceptable to the Commis- 
sioner. 


^ ^ prepared to accept the amend- 
ment of the Committee, provided it is understood that 

“NATIONAL” before “INDUS- 
TRIALIZATION,” it is still the intent of this Com- 
mission, particularly of the Committee, that Filipino 
en repreneurs and leaders of business and industry, and 
other group, shall lead in the industrialization 
ot the country which is stated here as a goal. 

•‘FSino“e°te!prises^’'’“‘ “ 

me”’! M°dam ' ““P' 


MR. OPLE. There are two contrasting examples of a 
self-reliant and independent national economy. Let us 
say, Taiwan or Korea epitomizes the first type — it is 
self-reliant and independent, but it is dynamic. The 
other group of self-reliant and independent economies 
that I have in mind, by way of contrast, is Burma. 
Burma is almost an economic autarky by policy, that is 
to say, until recently when it decided to join the rest of 
the world economy. It is static, not dynamic. 

So, you can have a self-reliant and independent 
national economy which is almost static and stagnant. 
I am for inserting this modifier of DYNAMIC to insure 
that self-reliance and independence will generate not 
less, but more economic dynamism in its interaction, 
especially with the rest of the world economic environ- 
ment. 

It is in that sense that I made the proposal. Madam 
President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, it seems that 
“DYNAMIC” is an unnecessary surplusage because the 
very last sentence, for example, of the same paragraph 
speaks of “EXPANDING PRODUCTIVITY AS THE 
KEY TO RAISING THE STANDARDS OF LIVING 
FOR ALL ESPECIALLY THE POOR,” and then the 
following paragraph further amplifies or explains the 
dynamism that is required of the national economy. 
Hence, it would seem to be unnecessary. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I will not press for the 
adoption of this amendment if it is understood that the 
vision of a self-reliant and independent national eco- 
nomy that leads this paragraph refers to a state of 
economy that is dynamic and not static; then I am will- 
ing to have this word omitted. In other words, I accept 
the committee amendment if it is a committee proposal 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, in other words, 
Commissioner Ople is amenable to the suggestion that 
we delete the word “DYNAMIC,” but with the under- 
standing that the meaning of dynamism, insofar as the 
national economy is concerned, as it is proposed and 
elaborated on this morning, would be stated in the 
record. 


BISHOP BACANI. Did the 
word “DYNAMIC”? 


Commissioner read the 


MR. OPLE. Yes, it is proposed to be inserted be 
the raodit.er “self-relianr and the phrase •hnlpe 
national economy.” ^ inaepe 


Does the Committee want 
proposal? 


a brief explanation for this 


MR. VILLEGAS. Please proceed. 


MR. OPLE. The Gentleman has described exactly my 
position. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The Committee would like to clear up certain ex- 
pressions used in the proposed amendment to Section 1 . 
For example, with regard to the phrase “EXPANDING 
PRODUCTIVITY,” does this refer to all sectors, like 
agricultural, industrial, commercial sectors of pro- 
ductivity? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


335 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. Many economic 
theories, regardless of their ideological commitments or 
lack of depth, barely converge on the perception that 
productivity is what makes the difference between a 
mediocre nation and a highly successful nation in 
economic terms. 

Productivity in Japan and in the United States is 
about 20 times higher than the productivity in the 
Philippines. This tends to be reflected in the level of 
wages and incomes. That is the reason why I think it is 
very important that we establish productivity as a 
national goal, as a key to raising the standards of living 
for all but especially for the poor and the under- 
privileged. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

My other question refers to the Commissioner’s 
reference to industrialization in relation to agrarian 
reform. Is the Commissioner thinking in terms of 
anchoring the industrialization on the agrarian economy 
and agrarian reform? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. The expectation, Madam President, 
is that agrarian reform will release tremendous new 
forces and energies and also activate idle capital that is 
locked up in an antiquated feudal system. These forces, 
therefore, will actually promote the industrialization of 
the country, restructure the social and economic frame- 
work, thereby achieving equity through social justice. 
At the same time, the process of industrialization is 
facilitated. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, this particular 
phrase is practically or substantially a transposition of 
what would have been Section 9, proposed by the 
Commissioner in the Article on Social Justice. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. The gist of the 
first two sections I presented to the Committee as new 
amendments actually had been merged into Section 1, 
with the original formulation that Commissioner Suarez 
himself introduced in a recent meeting of the Commit- 
tee on the National Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

What about the Commissioner’s explanation of the 
use of the phrase “THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT IN 
BOTH HUMAN AND NATURAL RESOURCES”? Can 
the Commissioner please elaborate? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

This supports the self-reliant and independent 
national economy set out in the first sentence of 
Section 1 in the sense that national endowment means 
what God has given us and this includes the human 
resource potential of the country. It also speaks of a 
commitment to put the process of industrialization and 
modernization in the hands of Filipino talent because 


we are called upon to make full use of the national en- 
dowment in both human and natural resources. Origin- 
ally, the reference to “natural resources” was industries 
that would optimize the use of indigenous resources. 
But I think it has now been transformed into a better 
statement in tlie sense that the “THE NATIONAL 
ENDOWMENT” which comprises all of those now 
appears here as a key clause. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, would Com- 
missioner Ople favor the deletion of the words “THE 
NATIONAL ENDOWMENT,” so that the lines will 
read, “INDUSTRIES THAT MAKE FULL USE OF 
BOTH HUMAN AND NATURAL RESOURCES,” for 
simplicity? The Commissioner’s explanation states that 
the national endowment would cover both human and 
natural resources. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but then it also helps fix human and 
natural resources in a frame, which I think is possessive, 
nationalistic, because we speak of both of these as 
“THE NATIONAL ENDOWMENT.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, will the Commissioner agree 
to the deletion of the words “THE NATIONAL EN- 
DOWMENT”? 

MR. OPLE. If the Committee makes an amendment 
out of that, I would not shed a few tears over it. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, since the Commit- 
tee is prepared to use Commissioner Ople’s proposal as 
the basis for drafting Section 1 , there is need to clarify 
the terms being used here. May I refer the Commis- 
sioner to the clause “AND WHICH ARE FULLY COM- 
PETITIVE IN BOTH THE DOMESTIC AND EX- 
TERNAL ENVIRONMENTS.” When the Commissioner 
refers to “EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENTS,” I suppose 
he is referring to industries of other countries. Is our 
understanding correct. Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Not exactly. Madam President. When we 
say that these industries are fully competitive in both 
the domestic and external environments, we want to 
emphasize again self-reliance and independence as the 
attributes of industries that should be supported for this 
purpose. Let us begin with the domestic environment. If 
they are not competitive, they will penalize the con- 
sumers with shabby products that cost too much. I 
think we are very concerned that the industries that will 
become the engines of the industrialization and modern- 
ization of this country should be fair to our consuming 
public. They should be able to offer products that are 
competitive in quality and price, since virtually under 
protected conditions our consumers have no choice. 
They can be paying for a shirt which costs 50 percent 
less in Taiwan but whose quality is higher. And so it 
refers, first of all, to the protection of the consuming 
public relative to the producers. Secondly, it also refers 


336 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


to the ability of our industries to earn foreign exchange, MR. OPLE. I will put this matter to the Committee 
where they are in a position to do so, by providing high which introduced this amendment to my amendment, 
quality, high performance, low-cost products in the mar- 
kets of the world, where the opportunities are available MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Aquino kindly 
only to those who are prepared to take advantage of restate her proposed amendment? 
them. 


MR. SUAREZ. That is the meaning the proponent 
attributes to the phrase “external environments.” 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. The last clarification question would 
be with respect to the protection of Filipino enterprises 
against unfair foreign competition. Although this is a 
Committee suggestion, would the proponent be able to 
give examples of what would constitute unfair foreign 
competition? 


MR. OPLE. Let me start with a really critical pro- 
blern. The dumping of excess goods in the Philippine 
m^ket is a form of unfair competition. For example, 
when multinationals overcharge their FUipino partners 
m terms of royalties for some of their dubious tech- 
nologies, that is a form of unfair competition. When 
npr^ technology to their Filipino part- 

discriminatory and, I think, unfair 

competition. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized to amend the amend- 


the president. Commissioner Aquino is recoi 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. Would the proponent be amenable to 
an amendment to his amendment? 

MR. OPLE. With the greatest pleasure, if I like the 
amendment. 


“TTMPA^SV*^?- t propose to delete the w( 

ANH ^ith the words CONTR' 

comnetitin COMPETITION. Madam President, £ 
and ^unemiai competition, is by itself uni 

seeks to operate™rthe Philip'' “ 

the very small size of tte 
relative level of underdteToSe'", 

^rtiri:,cirrdU°rrAZiS“t^ 

or Korea, or the United States, concedinrthat it"n 
not be nonmonopohstte in their country, once it beg 
to operate m our country is, by itself, a threat S 
danger to the possibility of growth. 


MS. AQUINO. My amendment would read; “HOW- 
EVER, THE STATE SHALL PROTECT THE LOCAL 
INDUSTRIES FROM FOREIGN CONTROL AND 
IMPORT COMPETITION.” It would, in effect, delete 
the word “UNFAIR” on the premise that any foreign 
competition is already by itself unfair and unequal 
competition. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I regret that we will not be able to 
accept that amendment because it is constitutionalizing 
a specific situation that may not last forever. 1 think it is 
also unjust to think that Filipino enterprises, even 
assuming that temporarily they are infants and they 
have to be protected, which is the constitutional hori- 
zon, will forever and ever be needing protection. For 
example, I mentioned beer on another occasion. It 
would be ridiculous to say that San Miguel beer needs 
protection from other industries abroad. So, although 
we admit that there are legitimate infants that should be 
protected and that can continue because new infants 
will arise in the local industry, I do not think we should 
include in the Constitution a statement that all imports 
would constitute unfair competition to local industries. 

MS. AQUINO. With all due deference to the position 
of the Committee and to Chairman Villegas, whom I 
believe has no peers in that field, the concern here is 
that there are certain givens that we have to assume — 
one is that we are an agricultural economy and unless 
there is complete and committed cuddling from the 
State and the government, we cannot transcend the 
limitations of an agricultural economy as evidenced now 
by our stagnant economy. My concern is that we cannot 
hope or we cannot even attempt to achieve a situation 
whereby we can gear up the cycle of the development of 
domestic surplus accumulation and investment unless 
we protect the local industry and market from foreign 
intrusion, and here I refer to import competition. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MS. AQUINO. What I am saying is that, if we allow 
untrammeled import competition, we are just institu- 
tionalizing the decided advantage of the foreign com- 
petitors already in the market. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We are not allowing untrammeled 
imports. Precisely, there is this provision that, in legiti- 
mate and meritorious cases, the State shall protect 
Filipino enterprises. But to make a sweeping statement 
that all Filipino enterprises shall forever and ever be 
protected from imports, I think, is unwarranted. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


337 


MR. OPLE. The Committee has acquired jurisdiction 
over this amendment now in the sense that they have 
accepted it except for some last minute proposed minor 
changes and, therefore, I submit to the wishes of the 
Committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. If Commissioner Aquino insists on 
the amendment to the amendment, we can throw it to 
the body. 

MR. OPLE. But before we consider that, Madam 
President, may I just say that the amendment to the 
amendment introduced by the Committee itself and 
which reads: HOWEVER, THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TECT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES AGAINST UNFAIR 
FOREIGN COMPETITION, looks to me like it is an 
umbrella statement for protecting Filipino enterprises 
against all manner of unfair competition, the exact 
forms of which may emerge later with greater clarity 
according to dynamic changes in the internal economic 
situation. But I do not put the regulation of imports as 
being beyond the pale of this protective umbrella, 
depending on the changing situations, meaning, Com- 
missioner Aquino’s own concern may already be sub- 
sumed actually in this sentence which, if I am allowed 
to read again, is as follows: HOWEVER, THE STATE 

SHALL PROTECT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES 
AGAINST UNFAIR FOREIGN COMPETITION. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Bacani. 

BISHOP BACANI. I think the position of the Com- 
mittee can be summed up in three sentences. First, that 
we are committed to the protection of Filipino enter- 
prises. Second, we are against unfair competition with 
Filipino enterprises, but we also wish to assert that not 
each and every importation constitutes unfair competi- 
tion. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I am assuming 
certain givens here, and by that I mean, no. 1, we have 
a very weak local industry that needs more than ade- 
quate and decisive protection by the State and the 
government. No. 2, the basic structures and framework 
of the local industry are wanting, sorely wanting, in 
terms of built-in and inherent machineries and frame- 
work that would allow it to fully develop. At this point, 
I am disturbed by the reluctance of the Committee. Ap- 
parently, there is a consensus on that trend already. But 
I am concerned and disturbed by the reluctance of the 
Committee to finally address the issue and decisively 
settle it in this provision. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the way the 
Commissioner puts it, she is going to prejudice millions 
and millions of consumers who may deserve lower prices 
and better qualities in instances when the infants never 


grow up. There is no questioning the legitimacy of the 
infant industry argument. But — and we would like to 
put this on record — the phrase “unfair foreign competi- 
tion” also applies to situations when a certain local 
industry is still in a fledgling stage and it would be 
unfair to subject it to competition with the Goliaths of 
international trade. And so, that is definitely part of this 
phrase “unfair foreign competition.” Even if the for- 
eigners do not practice predatory pricing, even if there 
is no dumping, there are situations when we have to 
protect local industries when they are legitimate infants. 
But if after 30 years an enterprise still claims to be an 
infant, we have prima facie evidence of child retarda- 
tion. That is exactly what we would like to prevent - 
for child retardates in Philippine industry to adversely 
affect 55 million consumers today and 70 million 
consumers in the year 2000. 

MS. AQUINO. May I be clarified on the contempla- 
tion of the phrase “unfair foreign competition”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We have enumerated them. First, in 
siuations where industries are still fledgling or are still 
legitimate infants, they definitely should be protected 
against imports from countries that are already very ad- 
vanced. Second, dumping is unfair competition, and 
there may be other areas of unfair competition which 
Congress will enumerate, and precisely these are so 
broad that there can be many other instances when fair 
competition can be proved on a case-to-case basis. 

MS AQUINO. What does the Committee contem- 
plate in terms of measures to address this problem? 

MR VILLEGAS. There are many ways of protecting 
industries - tariffs, giving them quantitative restrictions, 
prohibiting the imports of certain items completely. 

MS. AQUINO. Essentially import control. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, may I just add that 
the intent of the Article is to protect the efficient Fili- 

ino producer or the infant FiUpino producer. The 
• t nt is not to protect the market. There is a dif- 
ference, Madam President. When we protect a market, 
we necessarily have to go into import controls, licensing 
or we may even have to go into price controls because 
we are protecting a market. 

This is what happened early in our republic, and that 
is not what is contemplated. It is contemplated that 
legitimate, efficient Filipino enterprises should be pro- 
tected but there is no guarantee. They should not be 
insulated from any kind of competition in the market 
because that leads to a lot of things we know are bad for 
the country. Import controls resulted in graft and 
corruption; it resulted in enterprises that survived for 
many years on subsidy from the consumers; it resulted 


338 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


in companies that are not economic in scale, and are in- 
efficient after 20, 30 years. The people are the ones who 
pay for this protection on a permanent basis. Protecting 
the market also results in monopolies and monopoly 
profits. Madam President. If we are going to protect a 
market for certain terms that are engaged in monopoly 
prices, then we must also have price controls, we must 
also make sure that the State can nationalize these 
industries if they are inefficient or have many monopoly 
profits. Otherwise, we are penalizing the rest of the 
country. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I have no quarrel 
with healthy competition among and between Filipino 
entrepreneurs for so long as it is not cutthroat and it is 
not monopolistic. My concern is the decided advantage 
that is ^ven to a foreign corporation the minute it 
intrudes into the local industry. 

My amendment reads: “THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TECT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES FROM FOREIGN 
CONTROL AND IMPORT COMPETITION.” On the 
basis of the clarification, I am wUling to delete the word 
“import.” I would also seek to delete “UNFAIR” and 
substitute it with the word CONTROL. I submit. 
Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. How does the Committee propose 
to deal with this? 

Commissioner Villegas, may the Chair be enlightened. 
There is an open letter addressed to the Commission, 
which has been published, and I would just like to be 
informed if this Section 1 now, as proposed by Com- 
missioner Ople and, more or less, accepted by the Com- 
mittee, answers to some degree the questions proposed 
in this open letter for industrialization, protectionism, 
and economic nationalism? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. In our 
deliberation in the Committee this morning, we had 
fully considered the specific proposal. The thinking of 
the Committee is that we have definitely included all 
the considerations that were suggested. This very last 
phrase which talks about the State protecting Filipino 
enterprises against unfair foreign competition, we think, 
addresses frontally one of the issues brought up in this 
specific communication. The reference to industrializa- 
tion, which is to balance agricultural development and 
agrarian reform, also addresses the issue of industrializ- 
ing the Philippines. So, it is the thinking of the Commit- 
tee that we have fully considered all the issues brought 
up in that communication, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. “UNFAIR FOREIGN COMPETITION” 
is the exact phrase. 


MS. AQUINO. Yes. Delete the word “UNFAIR” and 
“FOREIGN” insert the word CON- 
IKOL. So, my amendment should read: THE STATE 
SHALL PROTECT TEIE FILIPINO ENTERPRISES 
FROM FOREIGN CONTROL AND COMPETITION 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask for a sus- 
pension of the session for two minutes to compose 
these differences. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:17 a.m. 


MR. MONSOD. Does the proponent realize that when 
she says “FOREIGN CONTROL AND COMPETITION,” 
she is ^so saying foreign competition which is reaUy 
protecting the market? This means protecting the 
market rather than protecting the producer. That 
is the meaning of the proponent’s amendment. Madam 
President. 


-AQUINO. There is a very clear reference to 
1 ipmo enterprises, which is direct ... in strict linguis- 
tic contemplation is local industries. 


‘he phrase “ 

EIGN CONTROL AND COMPETITION 

protecting the market. 


FROM FOR- 
” really says 


MS. AQUINO. Yes. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:31 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Please clear the session hall of non-Commissioners. 

Section 1 , as proposed, as amended by Commissioner 
Ople, has been accepted with corresponding amend- 
ments offered by the Committee. May we know from 
the Floor Leader what decision we shall now take. Shall 
we vote on Section 1 without prejudice to accepting 
other amendments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I make 
this suggestion? There is a motion that we go to a 
caucus. But before going to caucus, may I suggest that 
we hear, first of all, the amendments to Section 1 . 


THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept Com- 
missioner Aquino s proposed amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is not accepted by the Commit- 
tee, Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. The number of amendments is actually 
overstated. I do not know of any amendment other than 
that proposed by Commissioner Aquino with respect to 
the sentence, which is a committee amendment to my 
amendment, and which reads: “HOWEVER, THE 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


339 


STATE SHALL PROTECT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES 
AGAINST UNFAIR FOREIGN COMPETITION.” 
Other than that, I do not know of any other proposed 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask the Committee if 
there are other amendments to Section I ? 

MR. RAMA. There are other amendments to the 
amendment, Madam President. May I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized to present an amendment 
to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will allow the Commissioners 
who have amendments to Section 1 to submit their 
amendments so as to get the reaction of the Committee; 
or in other words, to give time to the Committee to 
deliberate on them. 

Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have a few amend- 
ments on the proposed Section 1. On line 9, before 
“income,” I seek to insert the word OPPORTUNITIES 
and add a comma (,) after. 

MR. VILLEGAS. This is line 9. 

MR. DAVIDE. Section I of the Opie amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, does Commis- 
sioner OpIe accept that amendment? 

MR. OPLE. “. . . distribution of OPPORTUNITIES, 
income and wealth”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. This is a committee formulation. My 
only amendment here consisted of deleting the phrase 
“full employment of human, pliysical and technological 
resources.” 

MR. DAVIDE. So, I submit it to the Committee since 
this is really a reformulation of the entire Section ) . 

MR. OPLE. Yes. May I suggest then that the Commit- 
tee respond to that. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the amendment 
is accepted. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the second to the last line of the 
first paragraph, I seek to delete the words “raising the” 
and substitute the same with the following- MAXI- 
MUM ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RISING, so it will 
read, EXPANDING PRODUCTIVITY AS THE KEY TO 
MAXIMUM ECONOMIC GROWTH AND RISING 
STANDARDS OF LIVING FOR ALL. Then substitute 
the word “poor” with UNDERPRIVILEGED. 


MR. OPLE. The idea of “MAXIMUM ECONOMIC 
GROWTH” is acceptable, but I would ask the Commit- 
tee to help me look for a more suitable modifier to 
ECONOMIC GROWTH and MAXIMUM. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, there is a big dif- 
ference between “RISING STANDARDS OF LIVING” 
and “RAISING THE STANDARDS OF LIVING.” I 
think the import of Commissioner Opie in using the 
word “RAISING” is wise and advisable as against the 
use of the phrase “RISING STANDARDS OF LIVING.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, we submit that 
“RISING” is better than RAISING, because it is a con- 
tinuing economic target. The standard of living keeps on 
rising; we do not just raise it from the level now. 

MR. SUAREZ. True, but the significance of the use 
of the term “RAISING” is to elevate this underpri- 
vileged class by improving their standard of living. I do 
not know if the sense of the Committee coincides with 
the sentiments and thinking of Commissioner Opie in 
this regard, but that is how we read this particular 
phrase “RAISING THE STANDARDS OF LIVING” 
against the phrase ‘^RISING STANDARDS OF LIVING.” 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the idea of economic 
growth in terms of real GNP growth is already provided 
in that clause which says: “a sustained increase in the 
amount of goods and services produced by the nation 
for the benefit of the Filipino people. . .” and, there- 
fore, to repeat “economic growth” in the context of 
productivity might be a redundancy. Moreover “RAIS- 
ING THE STANDARDS OF LIVING” is a more active 
formulation than “RISING STANDARDS OF LIVING.” 
In that respect, I support the views of the Committee as 
expressed by Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I will not insist on 
the second amendment. I will insist only on the first. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Bacani is 

recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask Commissioner Opie if 
instead of the words “STANDARDS OF LIVING” he 
will be amenable to using LEVELS OF LIVING, be- 
cause even the poorest may have very high standards of 
living which may not be attainable and which may Just 


340 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


lead to frustration. I think what the honorable Com- 
missioner wants is RAISING LEVELS OF LIVING. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, in this context they are synonymous 
and it is a choice, I suppose, for the Committee between 
“standards” and LEVELS. I would have no objection to 
replacing “standards” with LEVELS. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, may we know the reaction of the 
Committee on the first amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is the Gentleman referring to 
“MAXIMUM ECONOMIC GROWTH”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We hesitate to accept that because 
it is not the objective of the Article on National Eco- 
norny and Patrimony to maximize economic growth; 
besides, this has been an error of past development 
programs. 

I think the reference here to a sustained increase, as 
mentioned by Commissioner Ople, in the amount of 
goods and services produced by the nation for the 
benetn ot the Filipino people would capture better the 
real objective of the economy. 

MR. DAVIDE. In short, that particular phrase would 
re er to the achievement of maximum economic growth. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I wUl not insist on that clarification. 
But what about substituting the word “poor” with 
UNDERPRIVILEGED? 

MR. OPLE. I would have no difficulty about that. 
Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I would just harmonize the word 
with all the other references in the Article on Social 
ustice and 1 think this will be more a matter of style. 

MR DAVIDE. On the second paragraph, I seek for 
the deletion of the words “establish policies that” so the 

STATE SHALL PROMOTE 

MATTONAT ” 


MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment and I hope the 
C ommittee does, too. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have that again. Commis- 
sioner Davide? 


MR. DAVIDE. It is just the deletion. Madam Pres- 
ident, of the words “establish policies that.” So, it will 
read: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE NATIONAL 
INDUSTRIALIZATION.” 

MR. OPLE. The policy is actually a vow of courtesy 
to the future Congress. But I think the elimination of 
this phrase actually strengthens the paragraph. So, I 
accept the amendment. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the principal idea. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just a reminder: the Committee 
had suggested that we drop the qualifying word “NA- 
TIONAL” because it is already subsumed under Philip- 
pine enterprises. 

MR. OPLE. I had accepted that amendment in the 
context of the additional last sentence which is a 
guarantee that the State shall protect FiUpino enter- 
prises against unfair foreign competition. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, how will the sentence read 
now? 

MR. DAVIDE. It will read: “THE STATE SHALL 
PROMOTE INDUSTRIALIZATION, FULL EMPLOY- 
MENT BASED ON SOUND AGRICULTURAL DE- 
VELOPMENT ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the fourth line, after the word 
“full,” insert AND EFFICIENT, and delete the phrase 
“the national endowment in both.” So, it will read: 
“through industries that make full AND EFFICIENT 
use of human and natural resources. . .” 

MR. OPLE. I have no objection, if the Committee 
agrees. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would make a reservation for amend- 
ments to Section 2 later. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized to present an amendment 
to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I have a very 
simple amendment involving the deletion of one word, 
and that is the word “fully” on the second to the last 
line of paragraph 2, which modifies “competitive.” 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 15, 1986 


341 


MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, and I hope the 
Committee does, too. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We do. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Padilla be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. On the next Une, will the proponent 
agree to substitute “external environments” with 
FOREIGN MARKETS so that the line will read: “com- 
petitive in both the domestic and FOREIGN MAR- 
KETS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Ople 
say? 

MR. OPLE. I would not object. Madam President, to 
making the meaning more precise unless the Committee 
contemplates domestic and external environments as 
being able to encompass a wider range of factors than 
markets in which competitiveness shall be assured. 
May we hear from the Committee which has acquired 
jurisdiction over the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. “FOR- 
EIGN MARKETS” would really be synonymous with 
“external environments.” 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Garcia be recognized to present an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, actually, the basic 
thoughts that I want to incorporate have already been 
incorporated in the amendment presented on the floor; 
so it could simply be an alternative formulation. Utiliz- 
ing the original draft. Commissioner Gascon and I feel 
that it could be strengthened by putting after the phrase 
“The State shall develop a self-reliant and independent 
national economy” the following: FOUNDED ON THE 
EFFECTIVE CONTROL BY FILIPINOS, OF THE 
economy AND OF INDUSTRIES VITAL TO THEIR 
NATIONAL INTEREST. That will be in the first 
sentence. 

MR. OPLE. Will the Gentleman kindly repeat the 
amendment? 


MR. GARCIA. FOUNDED ON THE EFFECTIVE 
CONTROL BY FILIPINOS, OF THE ECONOMY AND 
OF INDUSTRIES VITAL TO THEIR NATIONAL 
INTEREST. 

THE PRESIDENT. This is a sentence of the Commit- 
tee. So, what does the Committee say? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it is a Committee formulation and, 
therefore, I would like to refer the matter to the Com- 
mittee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee ready to give its 
reaction to this proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Garcia? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we 
address a few questions to Commissioner Garcia? 

>THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May we know the meaning of 
“VITAL TO THEIR NATIONAL INTEREST”? 

MR. GARCIA. Basically, we want an economy where 
Filipinos are in full command. At the same time, there 
are certain industries that later on we will see in some of 
the other articles which we would want to be reserved 
to Filipino control. The definition of that would 
depend, therefore, on enabling legislation to be enacted 
by Congress. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May we know also the meaning 
of “EFFECTIVE AND FULL CONTROL”? 

MR. GARCIA. No, we took out “FULL.” “EFFEC- 
TIVE CONTROL” means that the decisions are in the 
hands of Filipinos who are operating with the national 
interest in mind. 

MR. SUAREZ. I take it that the Gentleman wants the 
effective control by Filipinos emphasized. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

MR. SUAREZ. But after “Filipinos,” the Gentleman 
added “OF THE pCONOMY AND OF INDUSTRIES 
VITAL TO THEIR NATIONAL INTEREST” which we 
feel may already be included in the previous phrases like 
“self-reliant and independent national economy.” So, I 
wonder whether we could just put a period (.) after the 
word “FILIPINOS” and then forget about the rest of 
the phrase such that the sentence would read: “The 
State shall develop a self-reliant and independent nation- 
al economy FOUNDED ON THE EFFECTIVE CON- 
TROL BY FILIPINOS. Would that be adequate to 
convey the Gentleman’s thoughts oH the matter? 

MR. GARCIA. Of course, I feel that it would be more 
emphatic if we underscore the vehicles by which this 


342 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


control is to be exercised, basically through the eco- 
nomic^ control of the industries. But if the Committee is 
made to understand that this would include both the 
economy itself and the economic decisions, economic 
policy and the industries themselves, then I would 
accept this amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. All the “how-to’s”— how to make 
sure that this effective control will be exercised, for one, 
will be developed in the subsequent sections of this 
Article, like the 60-40 scheme or certain areas are 
limited only to Filipinos. So, I think that would be 
sufficient. 


MR. GARCIA. So, those two other goals are ac- 
cepted. Therefore, the phrase that I would then request 
to be included would be BROADER-BASED OWNER- 
SHIP AND MANAGEMENT OF ECONOMIC ENTER- 
PRISES. 

MR. OPLE. That is acceptable to me. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where will this be inserted, 
Commissioner Garcia? 

MR. GARCIA. In the third paragraph. 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

I would like to ask the honorable Commissioner Ople 
regarding the third paragraph — “broader-based owner- 
ship of private enterprises including both the corporate 
and the cooperative or social sectors shall be encour- 
aged. This, I understand, has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President, the Committee 
accepted the phrase with just one modification: the 
phrase “or social” was deleted on the ground that there 

IS no familiarity as yet with the meaning of social 
sectors. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. So, the provision reads: “including both 
the corporate and the cooperative sectors shall be 
encouraged.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. There is a final wording that we 
would like to read: “including both corporate ENTER- 
PRISES AND COOPERATIVES OR SIMILAR OR- 
GANIZATIONS.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. Will Commissioner Garcia answer a 
specific question? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. How would the Gentleman define 
“broader management”? 

MR. GARCIA. Basically, this would mean the parti- 
cipation of the different sectors involved in production. 
As I mentioned earlier in our discussion when I was 
requested to present the alternative vision, this would 
be flexible and would develop as economic development 
progresses. The forms would vary according to our stage 
of development. 

MR. OPLE. Is Commissioner Garcia suggesting a form 
of participatory management? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. In other words, we open the field 
to further development where those who are members 
of production or those who cooperate or collaborate m 
production become participants more and more m 
decisions which somehow affect their lives. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. OPLE. This, I think, captures the essence of the 
original. So, I am willing to accept that amendment of 
the Committee. 


^'^^CIA. The reason I ask is that if I utilize 
the original draft, after the second sentence, the third 
sentence has a phrase which states: “in the attainment 
of these goals.” I suggest that after “goals,” insert the 
STATE SHALL PROMOTE THE INDUS- 
NATION, FOSTER ECO- 
and encourage 
OWNERSHIP AND MANAGE- 
MENT OF ECONOMIC ENTERPRISES. 


MR. ROMULO. I think we rejected that in the labor 
section, and we have left the participation or methods 
of participation up to Congress. As far as we are con- 
cerned, ownership implies management; and we do not 
see why we have to expand that notion. 

MR. OPLE. I am in favor of worker’s participation at 
the level of the enterprise. I spoke about work councils, 
but that is my opinion and not the Committee’s. 

MR. ROMULO. As far as the acceptable concept is 
concerned, we have accepted that in the labor section 
under the Article on Social Justice. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Those objectives were incorporated 
in the second paragraph which states; “The State shall 
promote industrialization and full employment.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. And the inclusion of the word 
“cooperative” would already introduce cooperative 
organization. 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 15, 1986 


343 


MR. GARCIA. I would like to iiisist that the im- 
portance of a broader-based ownership and management 
is essential. The fact is that we have different social 
sectors that are owners, for example, of a particular 
enterprise; they must not just be consulted but also be 
participants in charting the direction of this endeavor. 

MR. OPLE. Commissioneer Garcia is not thinking in a 
European concept of codetermination. 

MR. GARCIA. No, as I said, there are many different 
stages and levels according to the state of economic 
development. 

MR. OPLE. To reassure the Committee because I 
have already accepted it and we are now negotiating 
with the Committee, will the Gentleman give an 
example of a broader-based management in addition to 
the ownership of economic enterprises? 

MR. GARCIA. One very concrete example right 
now — we actually have it in our own experience — is 
the people’s economic councils in particular areas which 
help chart the course of economic development in a 
particular zone. I think that is part of the thrust of the 
Ministry of Trade. 

MR. OPLE. -That is different from management of an 
economic enterprise. 

MR. GARCIA. The other area, for example, is a 
newspaper business. As I mentioned in our caucus, a 
newspaper, rather than being in the hands of one 
family or one owner, should be in the hands of the 
people who produce that newspaper. Therefore, they 
should participate in the management and in charting 
the direction and the policies. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino seeks 
recognition. 

MS. AQUINO. I would only like clarification on the 
concept of management. Does that take the nature of 
codetermination in corporate management, corporate 
planning and corporate acquisition of property, for 
example? 

MR. GARCIA. Not necessarily. The point I want to 
establish is that we leave flexibility; we leave room for 
development so that when the organized associations of 
the different social sectors are more ready, they can be 
more willing participants in this effort. Then they could 
be incorporated. I feel that this provides room for that 
form of development. 

MS. AQUINO. Without preempting judgment on that 
proposal, could this not be best resolved in the tenor 
of the deliberations in the Committee on Social Justice, 
but without prohibiting and without positively giving it 
compulsory constitutional mandate, the process shall 


open the dynamics of an evolution; meaning, for so long 
as we do not make an explicit prohibition, it is part and 
parcel of the dynamics of economic growth and pro- 
cesses? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the Committee 
believes that this was fully discussed in the labor section 
and, thus, we have a provision that the labor sector shall 
also participate in policy- and decision-making processes 
affecting their rights and benefits as may be provided by 
law. 

We believe that that is a basic, conceptual decision 
made by the Commission, and all the ideas can be in- 
cluded in the phrase “as provided by law.” 

MR. GARCIA. Regardmg the discussion yesterday, I 
was made to understand that the concept of a mixed 
economy is acceptable. Therefore, I would like to 
request that the social sector idea be retained in the 
draft presented as an amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I second the suggestion in that the 
phrase is so innovative, and that it can lend itself to all 
sorts of interpretation. That is why we thought it is 
more appropriate to mention one of the examples the 
Commissioner cited so that people can immediately 
have a basis for understanding what social sectors may 
mean. 

MR. GARCIA. I would simply like to state the fact 
that yesterday when we were discussing both state and 
private, I think this polarization and dichotomy could 
perhaps be understood when we also recognized the fact 
that this sector could exist. In fact it does exist — the 
cooperative or the social sector. We can further clarify 
this in the experience of our people as more communal 
forms of ownership and participation evolve. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The inclusion of cooperatives 
already opens the way for other types of social aggrupa- 
tions. Since the Constitution has to be as clear as possi- 
ble, we thought it would be better to include the 
Gentleman’s explanation in the record and to say that 
similar organizations mean cooperatives and other forms 
of aggrupations. 

MR. GARCIA. With a very popular experience of, let 
us say, newspaper ownership ... let us say, Malaya, a 
cooperative ownership, social ownership. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. GARCIA. Does the Gentleman not think that 
recognizing it, therefore, will encourage such forms of 
broader-based ownership and the participation of people 
in economic enterprises? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Precisely, that is a cooperative; so 
it is already included in the use of the word “cc tpera- 
tive.” 


344 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. GARCIA. I feel that the word “social” would 
really give it a much broader acceptability since we 
recognize that fact. 

MR. OPLE. Would the Committee have any difficulty 
about saying “ENTERPRISES AND COOPERATIVES 
OR SIMILAR SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. An organization means social. But 
if the Gentleman wants to be redundant. . . 

MR. OPLE. I think that will help accommodate 
Commissioner Garcia’s concerns. 

MR. VILLEGAS. To have a more specific adjective, 
is the Gentleman referring to “not-for-profit organiza- 
tions”? 

MR. GARCIA. Not necessarily. For me, it is the form 
of economic organization. The problem here is when 
one uses the word “private,” as I said yesterday, nor- 
mally it tends to become very exclusive — those who are 
big and those who are strong; whereas, when one uses 
the word social,” the intent is of a much broader 
base - the association of workers, the association of 
peasants. It involves a much broader understanding and 
it IS simply enlarging that and recognizing that as a fact 
ot economic life and encouraging, therefore, that sector 
so that the conflict between private and State does not 
remain. 


be an association in a specific neighborhood; or it can be 
an association of owners of a newspaper because they 
are the workers of that concern. 

Therefore, rather than what I consider to be limiting 
in the connotation of “private,” we are expanding it to 
include a broader base of society. 

I am sorry if I disagree with that statement because I 
think “ang panlipunang kilusan” should mean that 
people understand it, especially in the economic context 
we are referring to or speaking about. 

MR. OPLE. The Committee, having the jurisdiction, 
is now invited to settle the matter. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee is of the opinion 
that a more understandable qualifier is SIMILAR COL- 
LECTIVE ORGANIZATIONS because the word 
“collective” is more appropriate in economic enterprises. 

MR. GARCIA. It is acceptable. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Then it is “SIMILAR COLLECTIVE 
ORGANIZATIONS.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. OPLE. I think that is as good as “SOCIAL OR- 
GANIZATIONS.” 


MR. OPLE. Has the Committee accepted the alterna- MR. VILLEGAS. It is acceptable, yes. Thank you, 
five wording of “COOPERATIVES OR SIMILAR 

SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS”? MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


VILLEGAS, llie Committee still hesitates, 
regretfully, to accept the amendment because it is still 
too ambiguous. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The committee report as well as the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople speaks of 
“private enterprises.”. But it seems that Commissioner 
Garcia would change the word “private” to “ECO- 
NOMIC.” I object to that change. 


MR. RODRIGO. May I comment on that? Let i 
^re drafting a Constitution whic 
^ ff to all our people, the electorate, fc 

^iJch as possible, let us use wore 
. ^ common man. Even I would nc 

scope of “social • organization, 
Pi'ase stick to wore 

understood by most people. 


MR. GARCIA. Bv the rrmtp»v+ 

. . , ^ context of economic organize 

1 w h"?'" that it is nc 

limited to a pnvate individual or a private concern the 

very often tends to enclude a very great part of ou 
society, to exclude the majonty. That is why when on 
uses the word social.” he is referring to collectiv 
communal organizations; it can be a trade union; it ca 


MR. VILLEGAS. We will retain the word “private.” 

MR. PADILLA. Probably, as a matter of form, the 
words “both the” and “and the” be eliminated so that 
the line would read: “private enterprises, including 
corporate enterprises, cooperatives and other ...” 

MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment which improves 
upon this sentence. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 15, 1986 


345 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, it is past twelve 
o’clock. I move for a suspension of the session and that 
we go to a caucus after lunch to consider all the amend- 
ments proposed by the Commissioners. We suggest that 
the Secretariat type all the amendments for our con- 
sideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty in the afternoon. 

It was 12:07 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:00 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May we call on Commissioner Villacorta 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I move that 
the record of today’s caucus be incorporated in the 
Record of the Constitutional Commission.* 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. We would like to continue the con- 
sideration of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

There are no more registered speakers to amend 
Section 1 , so I move that we take a vote on Section 1 . 

THE PRESIDENT. May we proceed to take a vote on 
Section 1, Mr. Chairman? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we would like 
Commissioner Ople to read the full text. 

MR. OPLE. Before I proceed to read the text, may I 
acknowledge the fact that the proponents of these 
amendments include th"' following: Commissioners 
Nat'vidad, de los Reyes and Maambong. Amendments to 
the amendments from Commissioners Bacani, Bennagen, 
Garcia, Gascon, Azcuna and Davide were incorporated. 
Again, with respect to the last parts of the text that I 


will read, the proponents are Commissioner Garcia and 
the Committee itself. 

So, the text reads as follows; “The State shall develop 
a self-reliant and independent national economy EF- 
FECTIVELY CONTROLLED BY FILIPINOS. The 
goals of the national economy are a more equitable 
distribution of OPPORTUNITIES, income and wealth, a 
sustained increase in the amount of goods and services 
produced by the nation for the benefit of the Filipino 
people, AND AN EXPANDING PRODUCTIVITY AS 
THE KEY TO RAISING THE QUALITY OF LIFE 
FOR ALL, ESPECIALLY THE UNDERPRIVILEGED.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just one change; I think we omitted 
“Filipino people” because it is too repetitive. 

MR. OPLE. No, I think I did mention that “produced 
by the nation for the benefit of the Filipino people.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, we remove “Filipino” so that it 
will be “for the benefit of the people.” 

MR. OPLE. The second paragraph reads as follows: 
THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE INDUSTRIALIZA- 
TION AND FULL EMPLOYMENT BASED ON SOUND 
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT AND AGRARIAN 
REFORM, THROUGH INDUSTRIES THAT MAKE 
FULL AND EFFICIENT USE OF HUMAN AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES, AND WHICH ARE COM- 
PETITIVE IN BOTH DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN 
MARKETS. HOWEVER, THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TECT FILIPINO ENTERPRISES AGAINST UNFAIR 
FOREIGN COMPETITION AND TRADE PRACTICES. 
The last sentence is an amendment by Commissioner 
Padilla. 

The third paragraph reads: IN THE PURSUIT OF 
THESE GOALS, ALL ECONOMIC SECTORS AND 
REGIONS SHALL BE GIVEN OPTIMUM OPPOR- 
TUNITY TO DEVELOP, AND A BROADER-BASED 
OWNERSHIP OF PRIVATE ENTERPRISES, INCLUD- 
ING CORPORATIONS, COOPERATIVES, AND 
SIMILAR COLLECTIVE ORGANIZATIONS SHALL 
BE ENCOURAGED. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
1, please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 33 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 1 is approved. 


♦See Appendix 


346 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have the following amendments to Section 2; The 
first is to delete the word “Since,” then capitalize the 
“t” in “the.” Then in lieu of the comma (,) following 
“function,” insert the word AND and delete the phrase 
“in the private sector.” Change “include” to INCLUD- 
ING and add CORPORATE ENTERPRISES, COOP- 
ERATIVES, AND OTHER SIMILAR COLLECTIVE 
ORGANIZATIONS. Delete “enjoy the freedom” and 
change it to HAVE THE RIGHT. After “to,” insert the 
word OWN followed by a comma (,). 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is Commissioner Davide working 
on the Ople amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, he is working on Section 2 of 
the Ople amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Then on the second from the last 
line, delete ‘ always, however.” So the entire section will 
read as follows; “THE use of property bears a social 
function, AND all economic agents shall contribute to 
the common good. Individuals and private groups, IN- 
CLUDING CORPORATE ENTERPRISES, COOP- 
ERATIVES, AND OTHER SIMILAR COLLECTIVE 
ORGANIZATIONS shall HAVE THE RIGHT to OWN, 
establish and operate economic enterprises, subject to 
the duty of the State to promote distributive justice and 
to intervene when the common good so demands.” 

MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just to harmonize with the first 
seetion, I think the enumeration would be “INCLUD- 
ING CORPORATIONS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. CORPORATE ENTERPRISES. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, but we will use “CORPORA- 
TIONS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. “CORPORATIONS,” yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, the amendment is aecepted. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is no registered 
speaker on Section 2, so I move that we take a vote. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide read 
the whole Section 2 with the proposed amendments? 

MR. DAVIDE. “THE use of property bears a social 
function, AND all economic agents shall contribute 
to the common good. Individuals and private groups, 
INCLUDING CORPORATE ENTERPRISES, COOP- 
ERATIVES, AND SIMILAR COLLECTIVE ORGANI- 
ZATIONS shall HAVE THE RIGHT to OWN, establish 
and operate economic enterprises, subject to the duty of 
the State to promote distributive justice and to 
intervene when the common good so demands.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to Section 
2"l( Silence) The Chair hears none; Section 2 is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner de los Reyes be recognized to amend Section 
3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. On Section 3, Madam Pres- 
ident, line 24, between the words “farming” and “in,” 
insert the words WITH PRIORITY TO SUBSISTENCE 
FISHERMEN AND FISH WORKERS, to make it 
consistent with the Article on Social Justice. So, the 
whole sentence will read as follows: “The Congress may 
by law allow small-scale utilization of natural resources 
by Filipino citizens, as well as cooperative fish farming 
WITH PRIORITY TO SUBSISTENCE FISHERMEN 
AND FISH WORKERS in rivers, lakes, bays, and 
lagoons.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid be recognized to present an 
amendment to Section 3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, Com- 
missioner Bacani and myself had earlier filed a resolu- 
tion which would include AIRWAVES AND RADIO 
FREQUENCIES as part of the natural resources. 

I have here a defense on why they should be con- 
sidered part of the natural resources. I will just sum- 
marize this paper and submit it for the record. 

But I just want to emphasize that broadcasting is a 
very important social force in our present life. There are 
308 radio stations in the country and 44 television 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


347 


stations, including replay and relay stations. These 
stations generated a gross billing of P812 million in 
1985. 

Most of these broadcasts reach four out of every five 
Filipuios daily, but their content generally leaves much 
to be desired which is usually soap operas and trivial 
programs. Because of this, concern has been shown by 
many sectors about the power these programs have in 
influencing the values, lifestyles and attitudes of the 
people. 

Just an hour ago, we were discussing economic 
nationalism and I submit that the important area that 
should be attended to is the area of changing our 
cultural values so that we make ourselves more national- 
istic consumers. In other words, there should be prefer- 
ence for puto and locally made products instead of 
hamburger or products of imported brands. Most of 
these influences are due to advertising and the mass 
media. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where does Commissioner 
Rosario Braid propose to insert “AIRWAVES AND 
RADIO FREQUENCIES”? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I propose to insert it on line 
5 after “energy.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We cannot accept the amendment, 
and so we would like to bring it to the floor for voting. 


past that once a broadcast station stops operating, the 
owner sells the frequency for several million pesos. This 
should not be done because, as we said, airwaves, being 
a public domain, should be given back to the State 
which then allocates them on the basis of criteria — 
based on public interest, broader-based ownership and 
management, and so forth. It is for this reason that we 
feel they should be included as a public resource and 
should fall under natural resources. I submit this is 
controversial, but I would like to get this opportunity 
to give the Committee more arguments. 

MR. VILLEGAS. There is no disagreement on the 
principle that airwaves should be regulated by the 
government, and effectively they are, by the Bureau of 
Telecommunications. There are so many regulations. 
The only bone of contention is to include them under 
the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. There 
must be a very specific way of actually measuring them 
and defining them, and tliat is where the disagreement 
lies. So, we would rather leave it to the generic phrase 
“air space” and make it clear that we want the State to 
regulate what the Commissioner is concerned about — 
airwaves, frequencies, radio frequencies. But the 
moment we start including them in the same cate- 
gory as forests or timberland, I think we will give 
our legislature a big problem, for example, in defining 
quantitatively what the term “airwaves” is. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will the Committee accept a 
provision in the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony since, I think, this would fall under that 
Article? 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rosario Braid 
insist? May we know the reason for not accepting. 
Commissioner Villegas? 


MR. VILLEGAS. We have discussed this fully in 
public hearings. Defining what airwaves are is very 
complex and technical. The consensus was that it is very 
difficult to control airwaves. There was a secondary 
reason: since airspace is traditionally included in the 
Article on National Territory, airwaves could already be 
subsumed under airspace. 


MS ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I just 
argue further. In the Batasang Pambansa, there was 
a proposed bill - Parliamentary Bill No. 5078 - which 
states that the radio frequencies spectrum being public 
property, its enjoyment is granted as a privilege by the 
State and should be administered in the public interest 
and in accordance with international agreements and 
conventions. 

Earlier, several experts have recognized airwaves as a 
social resource which should be regulated. The aim of 
this resolution is to insure that radio frequencies do not 
just get passed on from one owner to the other without 
the State providing criteria on who should be allocated 
these frequencies. It has been a common practice in the 


MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee thinks it would be 
sufficient to put on record that in talking about national 
economy and patrimony, we included airwaves without 
actually enumerating them specifically in the provision. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. On the basis of that, I 
withdraw the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I remind the 
Commissioners of our agreement in the caucus that the 
new procedure would be that if an amendment is ac- 
cepted by the Committee, the proponent need not and 
shall not argue his amendment anymore, unless he is 
asked by the Committee to explain his amendment that 
has been accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. If the amendment has been 

accepted. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

May 1 ask that Commissioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


348 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. GASCON. Thank you, Madam President. 

On page 2, line 25, in view also of my previous inter- 
pellations with regard to the issue of concurrence of 
Congress, I would like to propose my amendment now. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Com- 
missioner Villegas? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There may be a previous amend- 
ment to that. The Jamir amendment is previous to that. 

MR. GASCON. I will defer to Commissioner Jamir. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 
We are still on Section 3. 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. With respect to 
the second paragraph of Section 3, my amendment by 
substitution reads: THE PRESIDENT MAY ENTER 
INTO AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN-OWNED COR- 
PORATIONS INVOLVING EITHER TECHNICAL OR 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LARGE-SCALE EX- 
PLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION 
OF NATURAL RESOURCES ACCORDING TO THE 
TERMS AND CONDITIONS PROVIDED BY LAW. 

VILLEGAS. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. Commissioner Suarez will give the background. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Will Commissioner Jamir answer a few clarificatory 
questions? 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. This particular portion of the section 
has reference to what was popularly known before as 
service contracts, among other things; is that correct? 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. As it is formulated, the President may 
enter into service contracts but subject to the guidelines 
that may be promulgated by Congress? 

MR. JAMIR. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Therefore, that aspect of negotiation 
and consummation will fall on the President, not upon 
Congress? 

MR. JAMIR. That is also correct, Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Except that all of these contracts, 
service or otherwise must be made strictly in accordance 
with guidelines prescribed by Congress? 

MR. JAMIR. That is also correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. And the Gentleman is thinking in 
terms of a law that uniformly covers situations of the 
same nature? 

MR. JAMIR. That is 100 percent correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you very much. 

MR. ROMULO. May we suggest that Commissioner 
Jamir get together with Commissioner Sarmiento or 
maybe he can propose the amendments now. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I be recognized. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. After the words “terms and 
conditions provided by law,” may I suggest the in- 
clusion of the words BASED ON REAL CONTRIBU- 
TIONS TO THE LONG-TERM GROWTH OF THE 
ECONOMY. 

MR. JAMIR. My amendment has been accepted by 
the Committee, so I would suggest that the Committee 
answer the Gentleman’s question. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I thank the Commissioner. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the amendment of 
Commissioner Sarmiento again? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

The amendment will read as follows: “THE President 
may enter into AGREEMENTS with foreign-owned 
corporations involving either TECHNICAL or financial 
assistance for large-scale EXPLORATION, DEVELOP- 
MENT and utilization of natural resources ACCORD- 
ING TO the terms and conditions provided by law, 
BASED ON REAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE LONG- 
TERM GROWTH OF THE ECONOMY.” 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


349 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we just add the word GENERAL to 
describe “terms and conditions” because Congress 
cannot be expected to lay down detailed terms and con- 
ditions for the contracts to be entered into between the 
executive department and the foreign-owned corpora- 
tion. Congress can only lay down general guidelines. 

MR. ROMULO. The Gentleman wants to add the 
word “GENERAL”? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Does Commissioner Sarmiento 
accept that? We have no objection. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I hear the amendment. 

MR. FOZ. It merely consists of the insertion of the 
word GENERAL before “terms.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the Committee will accept 
the amendment to the amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. We accept the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I yield, Madam President, to the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Madam President. 

On Section 3, line 5, the word “forests” appear. The 
old laws used to refer to “timberlands”; forests are only 
part of timberlands and there may be timberlands with- 
out forests. So, would the Committee be agreeable to 
accepting an amendment to add after the word “forests” 
OR TIMBERLANDS? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 

Line 16 of the same section reads: “agreements shall 
be for a period of twenty-five years.” Does this mean it 
must be exactly twenty-five years or perhaps less? Is this 
merely a maximum? In other words, would the Commit- 
tee accept an amendment to insert NOT MORE THAN 
before “twenty-five years”? 

MR. SUAREZ. May we just clarify that. If we put 
that descriptive phrase to read: “for a period of NOT 
MORE THAN twenty-five years,” then how can we har- 
monize it with the next phrase which reads: “renewable 
for not more than twenty-five years”? I think we should 
harmonize the two together. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. We may say, for instance, 
NOT EXCEEDING. 

MR. BENGZON. Just to clarify. Madam President, 
when the Commissioner proposes to insert the words 
“NOT MORE THAN” on Une 16, he means he is not for 
renewal, or is he? 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. 

MR. BENGZON. So what he really wants to say is 
that in the first period it should not exceed twenty-five 
years. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Neither should the second. 
Pardon me. 

MR. BENGZON. Neither should the second, but the 
Commissioner agrees that it should be renewable for 
another period of not more than another twenty-five 
years? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Exactly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, after reflection, 
would changing the word “shall” to MAY be reflective 
of Commissioner Concepcion’s thinking? 

MR. CONCEPCION. I did not get it. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. SUAREZ. Suppose we change the word “shall” 
to MAY, will this be accurately reflective of the Com- 
missioner’s thinking regarding this matter? 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. I have no objection to it. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the sentence will 
read: “Such agreements MAY BE for a period of 
twenty-five years, renewable for not more than twenty- 
five years ...” 

MR. CONCEPCION. I accept. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. The amendment has been accepted by 

the Committee. 

the president. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted by the Committee. May we first vote on the last 
paragraph? 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, that is the point of 
my inquiry. 

the president. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


350 


/ 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. GASCON. Commissioner Jamir had proposed an 
amendment with regard to special service contracts 
which was accepted by the Committee, ^ince the Com- 
mittee has accepted it, I would like to ask some ques- 
tions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon may pro- 
ceed. 


MR. GASCON. As it is proposed now, such service 
contracts will be entered into by the President with the 
guidelines of a general law on service contracts to be 
enacted by Congress. Is that correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Commissioner is right. Madam 
President. 

MR. GASCON. According to the original proposal if 
the President were to enter into a particular agreement, 
he would need the concurrence of Congress. Now that it 
has been changed by the proposal of Commissioner 
Jamir in that Congress will set the general law to which 
the President shall comply, the President will, therefore, 
not need the concurrence of Congress every time he 
enters into service contracts. Is that correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. GASCON. The proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Jamir is in indirect contrast to my proposed 
amendment, so I would like to object and present my 
proposed amendment to the body. 

VILLEGAS. Commissioner Gascon will please 
proceed. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, can we not vote 
first on the amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Jamir since that is the one on the floor? 

MR. GASCON. Yes, but perhaps to clarify my 
option, may I at least present my amendment prior to 
our voting? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Chair thinks we should 
hear the amendment first. 

MR. BENGZON. In other words. Commissioner 
Gascon will speak en contra, because if the amendment 
o Commissioner Jamir is defeated, then the Gascon 
amendment will come in. 


MR. GASCON. Yes, it will be up to the body. 

I teel that the general law to be set by Congress a 
regard service contract agreements which the Presiden 
will enter into might be too general or since we do no 
know the content yet of such a law, it might be tha 
certain agreements will be detrimental to the interest o 
the Filipinos. This is in direct contrast to my propose 


which provides that there be effective constraints in the 
implementation of service contracts. 

So instead of a general law to be passed by Congress 
to seiwe as a guideline to the President when entering 
into service contract agreements, 1 propose that every 
service contract entered into by the President would 
need the concurrence of Congress, so as to assure the 
Filipinos of their interests with regard to the issue in 
Section 3 on all lands of the public domain. My alter- 
native amendment, which we will discuss later, reads; 
THAT THE PRESIDENT SHALL ENTER INTO SUCH 
AGREEMENTS ONLY WITH THE CONCURRENCE 
OF TWO-THIRDS VOTE OF ALL THE MEMBERS OF 
CONGRESS SITTING SEPARATELY. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, Commissioner 
Bengzon wants to say something. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The reason we made that shift is 
that we realized the original proposal could breed 
corruption. By the way, this is not just confined to 
service contracts but also to financial assistance. If we 
are going to make every single contract subject to the 
concurrence of Congress — which, according to the 
Commissioner’s amendment is the concurrence of two- 
thirds of Congress voting separately — then (1) there is 
a very great chance that each contract will be different 
from another; and (2) there is a great temptation that it 
would breed corruption because of the great lobbying 
that is going to happen. And we do not want to subject 
our legislature to that. 

Now, to answer the Commissioner’s apprehension, by 
“general law,’’ we do not mean statements of mother- 
hood. Congress can build all the restrictions that it 
wishes into that general law so that every contract 
entered into by the President under that specific area 
will have to be uniform. The President has no choice but 
to follow all the guidelines that will be provided by law. 

MR. GASCON. But my basic problem is that we do 
not know as of yet the contents of such a general law as 
to how much constraints there will be in it. And to my 
mind, although the Committee’s contention that the 
regular concurrence from Congress would subject 
Congress to extensive lobbying, I think that is a risk we 
will have to take since Congress is a body of representa- 
tives of the people whose membership will be changing 
regularly as there will be changing circumstances every 
time certain agreements are made. It would be best that 
to keep in tab and attuned to the interest of the Filipino 
people, whenever the President enters into any agree- 
ment with regard to such an important matter as tech- 
nical or financial assistance for large-scale exploration, 
development and utilization of natural resources or 
service contracts, the people’s elected representatives 
should be on top of it. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


351 


I 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Jamir to restate his amendment so we can 
vote on it intelligently. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I just reply 
for the record before we ask for a vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. First of all, I think there should be a 
presumption that we should trust Congress; second, that 
is precisely the reason we need people like the Com- 
missioner to insure that we elect the right people to 
both Houses of Congress; third, we should allow flexibi- 
lity because of changing conditions. If it turns out that 
the terms of the previous contract are not to the best 
interest of tire country anymore, then Congress can 
always change it. 

MR. GASCON. They can change the general law? 

MR. BENGZON. Certainly, they can change it. 

So with those comments. Madam President, we are 
ready for a vote. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my amendment, as 
amended by Commissioners Foz and Sarmiento, reads as 
follows: “THE PRESIDENT MAY ENTER INTO 

AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN-OWNED CORPORA- 
TIONS INVOLVING EITHER TECHNICAL OR 
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR LARGE-SCALE EX- 
PLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION 
OF NATURAL RESOURCES ACCORDING TO THE 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS PROVIDED 
BY LAW BASED ON REAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
THE LONG-TERM GROWTH OF THE ECONOMY.” 

MR. GASCON. May I ask a question? If such amend- 
ment is approved, will that be prejudicial to anyone who 
would like to seek amendment to the amendment later 
on? 

THE PRESIDENT. No, once this is approved, any 
Commissioner can again propose amendment to this 
last paragraph as approved. So it is better for us to ap- 
prove first this proposed amendment of Commissioners 
Jamir, Sarmiento and Foz. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, if Commissioner 
Gascon has any proposed amendment to the amend- 
ment, he might as well do it now before voting. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, can I ask for a 
suspension for a few minutes? 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, we do not need to 
suspend the session. If Commissioner Gascon needs a 
few minutes, I can fill up the remaining time while he 
completes his proposed amendment. I just wanted to 
ask Commissioner Jamir whether he would entertain 
a minor amendment to his amendment, and it reads as 
follows: THE PRESIDENT SHALL SUBSEQUENTLY 
NOTIFY CONGRESS OF EVERY SERVICE CON- 
TRACT ENTERED INTO IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
THE GENERAL LAW. I think the reason is, if I may 
state it briefly, as Commissioner Bengzon said. Congress 
can always change tire general law later on to conform 
to new perceptions of standards that should be built 
into service contracts. But the only way Congress can do 
this is if there were a notification requirement from the 
Office of the President that such service contracts had 
been entered into, subject then to the scrutiny of the 
Members of Congress. This pertains to a situation where 
the service contracts are already entered into, and all 
that this amendment seeks is the reporting requirement 
from the Office of the President. Will Commissioner 
Jamir entertain that? 

MR. JAMIR. I wiU gladly do so, if it is still within my 
power. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, the Committee accepts the 
amendment. 

MR. JAMIR. I join the Committee. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Will Commissioner Ople give us his 
text please? 

THE PRESIDENT. How does it read now? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Will Commissioner Ople read it 
again? 

MR. OPLE. Subject to styling by the Committee, 
it reads as foUows: THE PRESIDENT SHALL SUB- 
SEQUENTLY NOTIFY CONGRESS OF EVERY 
SERVICE CONTRACT ENTERED INTO IN AC- 
CORDANCE WITH THIS PROVISION. 

the president. Is that a new sentence? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

the president. It has been accepted by the Com- 
mittee. 

We are giving Commissioner Gascon time to complete 
his amendment. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, may I ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


352 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


SR. TAN. Am I correct in thinking that the only dif- 
ference between these future service contracts and the 
past service contracts under Mr. Marcos is the general 
law to be enacted by the legislature and the notification 
of Congress by the President? That is the only differ- 
ence, is it not? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

SR. TAN. So those are the safeguards. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. There was no law at all govern- 
ing service contracts before. 


! 

MR. GASCON. Commissioner Sarmiento will be 
presenting some amendments to the Jamir amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, after confer- 
ring with my colleagues, we decided to come up with 
these amendments mutually acceptable to all. So, after 
the words “CONDITIONS PROVIDED BY LAW,” add 
BASED ON REAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ECO- 
NOMIC GROWTH AND GENERAL WELFARE OF 
THE COUNTRY. 


SR. TAN. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I move for the suspension of 
the session for at least two minutes to consolidate the 
amendments? 

THE PRESIDENT. May I request our guests not to 
enter the session hall because the Commissioners are in 
caucus. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 3:41 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:00 p.m., the session was resumed. 


MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I have another amendment which 
was accepted by the Committee. After “COUNTRY, 
add IT SHALL BE THE POLICY OF THE STATE TO 
PROMOTE, DEVELOP AND EMPLOY LOCAL SCIEN- 
TIFIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL RESOURCES CON- 
SISTENT WITH THE PURPOSE OF CONSERVING 
THE GENERATED WEALTH FOR UTILIZATION BY 
THE PEOPLE. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Would the Commissioner repeat 
that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. It reads: “IT SHALL BE THE 
POLICY OF THE STATE TO PROMOTE, DEVEI^P 
AND EMPLOY LOCAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECH^ 
LOGICAL RESOURCES CONSISTENT WITH THt 
PURPOSE OF CONSERVING THE GENERA 
WEALTH FOR UTILIZATION BY THE PEOPLE. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Would the Commissioner explain 
what he means by “GENERATED WEALTH ? 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Gascon 
be recognized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. This is actually a provision at- 
tached to all service contracts. This is a common 
provision. It could mean conserving the 
sources. That could be the interpretation of 
ATED WEALTH FOR UTILIZATION BY THb 
PEOPLE.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Does this follow the Ople amend- 
ment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I believe there are 
some proposed amendments to the Jamir amendment 
prior to our voting on it so I would like to ask the 
Acting Floor Leader who will be presenting those 
amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. What are the other proposed 
amendments? 


MR. VILLEGAS. After the Jamir amendment. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. But there was a new sentence 
submitted by Commissioner Ople which has been 
accepted by the Committee. 

MR. OPLE. That has to do with the notification to 
Congress of all service contracts entered into under the 
provision of that Article. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


353 


But I think the Chair might be referring to an earlier 
amendment I had submitted which the Committee was 
considering favorably. It dealt with the proposal of 
Commissioner Bennagen regarding the sustained develop- 
ment of a national talent pool of entrepreneurs, scien- 
tists, managers, professionals and skilled workers or 
craftsmen in all fields, which shall be a shared responsi- 
bility of the State and the private sector. 

I do not know if Commissioner Sarmiento might 
consider combining his amendment on scientific 
manpower. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Bennagen would like 
to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I suggest that that be a separate 
section because it has a broader coverage. Whereas, if it 
would be part of the Sarmiento, et al proposal, it could 
refer in a more limited manner to the exploitation of 
natural resources. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I agree with Commissioner Bennagen. 
In this connection, we are concerned with service con- 
tracts and the exploitation of natural resources. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. And I think the amendment, where we 
have joined our formulations, would pertain to a 
broader field of activities, especially in connection with 
industrialization. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Maybe we can simplify m,y pro- 
posed amendment, so that it will read: IT SHALL BE 
THE POLICY OF THE STATE TO PROMOTE, DE- 
VELOP AND EMPLOY LOCAL SCIENTIFIC AND 
TECHNOLOGICAL RESOURCES. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that still part of Section 3? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Could it not be properly accom- 
modated either in the Article on Declaration of Princi- 
ples and State Policies or in the Article on Human 


Resources because it would not be germane to the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony which we 
are now treating? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the intention here, if I 
understand the amendment to the amendment, is to 
make sure that when these technical and scientific 
services are rendered by foreigners there would be a 
deliberate attempt to develop local talents so that we 
are not forever dependent on these foreigners. Am I 
right? 

MR. DAVIDE. So it is in relation to the service con- 
tracts? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly. I think that is the inten- 
tion, am I right? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Can it not be stated that the general 
law providing for service contracts shall give priority to 
the adjective of Commissioner Sarmiento ’s amendment? 

It should be in the law itself. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is why it says, “IT SHALL BE 
THE POLICY OF THE STATE” immediately following 
the statement about Congress. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to be 
clarified as to the amendment of Commissioner Jamir so 
that I will know whether or not I should stick to my 
position. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the Jamir amend- 
ment as amended, reads: THE PRESIDENT MAY 
enter INTO AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN- 
OWNED CORPORATIONS INVOLVING EITHER 
TECHNICAL OR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR 

large-scale exploration, development 
and utilization of natural resources 
according to the general terms and con- 
ditions PROVIDED BY LAW BASED ON REAL 
contributions to the economic growth 
and general welfare of the country, it 
SHALL be the POLICY OF THE STATE TO PRO- 
MOTE DEVELOP AND EMPLOY LOCAL SCIENTI- 
FIC AND TECHNICAL RESOURCES. THE PRES- 
IDENT SHALL SUBSEQUENTLY NOTIFY CON- 
GRESS OF EVERY CONTRACT ENTERED INTO IN 
accordance WITH THIS PROVISION. 

the president. Did the Commissioner read the 
portion “GENERAL WELFARE OF THE COUNTRY”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. “. . . CON- 
TRIBUTIONS TO THE ECONOMIC GROWTH AND 
GENERAL WELFARE OF THE COUNTRY.” 


354 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Gascon insist 
on his proposed amendment? 

MR. GASCON. I objected to that amendment and 
after listening to it again, I feel that I still object on 
basic principles, that every service contract to be 
entered into by the President should be with the con- 
currence of Congress. I had earlier presented a proposed 
amendment of “CONCURRENCE OF TWO-THIRDS 
VOTE OF ALL THE MEMBERS OF CONGRESS,” 
but at this point in time, perhaps to simplify choices, 
since basically the proposal of Commissioner Jamir is to 
set a general law with regard to service contracts, my 
proposal is to require concurrence of Congress every 
time a service contract is to be made. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is clear now. So can we pro- 
ceed to vote? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I have the per- 
mission of the Acting Floor Leader to speak for only 
two minutes in favor of the amendment of Commis- 
sioner Gascon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With due respect to the members of 
the Committee and Commissioner Jamir, I am in favor 
of the objection of Commissioner Gascon. 

Madam President, I was one of those who refused to 
sign the 1973 Constitution, and one of the reasons is 
that there were many provisions in the Transitory Pro- 
visions therein that favored aliens. I was shocked when I 
read a provision authorizing service contracts while we, 
in this Constitutional Commission, provided for Filipino 
control of the economy. We are, therefore, providing for 
exceptional instances where aliens may circumvent Fili- 
pino control of our economy. Ajid one way of cir- 
cumventing the rule in favor of Filipino control of the 
economy is to recognize service contracts. 

As far as I am concerned, if I should have my own 
way, I am for the complete deletion of this provision. 
However, we are presenting a compromise in the sense 
that we are requiring a two-thirds vote of all the Mem- 
bers ot Congress as a safeguard. I think we should not 
mistrust the future Members of Congress by saying that 
the purpose of this provision is to avoid corruption. We 
cannot claim that they are less patriotic than we are. I 
think the Members of this Commission should know 
that entering into service contracts is aji exception to 
the rule on protection of natural resources for the in- 


terest of the nation and, therefore, being an exception it 
should be subject, whenever possible, to stringent rules. 
It seems to me that we are liberalizing the rules in favor 
of aliens. 

I say these things with a heavy heart. Madam Pres- 
ident. I do not claim to be a nationalist, but I love my 
country. Although we need investments, we must adopt 
safeguards that are truly reflective of the sentiments of 
the people and not mere cosmetic safeguards as they 
now appear in the Jamir amendment. (Applause) 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed to vote. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Our guests at the gallery are re- 
quested not to applaud or do anything which will 
disturb the session of the Commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Colayco be recognized, but I would like 
to remind him that he has only one minute under the 
three-minute rule; Commissioner Nolledo has consume 
two minutes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I support in substance the position taken by 
missioners Gascon and Nolledo. Let me point out the 
original thinking of the Committee itself. The secon 
paragraph of Section 3 reads; “The President with the 
concurrence of Congress, by special law . . In other 
words, the original thinking of the Committee here 
was really to put some safeguards, but it turned aroun 
and agreed to delete the safeguards. These special con- 
tracts will probably involve oil and mineral land explora- 
tions. These will, therefore, involve millions. 

One of the reasons given for the deletion of the 
concurrence of Congress” is that it may open the 
system to payola. This fear can also be entertained the 
other way. The President acts only upon the advice of 
his advisers, and if Congress can be bribed, a group of 
people can be bribed much more easily. But I am not 
thinking of that; I am simply thinking of human error. 
Probably Congress can anticipate the period, say, that 
the exploration should not exceed a certain period, and 
set standards. But as to the share of our government, for 
instance, there can easily be a mistake of judgment. 
There is no way that Congress can anticipate the discre- 
tion that should be used or the guidelines that should 
govern the thinking or the decision of the President. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


355 


And for this reason, I believe that some kind of a safe- 
guard or mechanism should be inserted in the system to 
obviate or at least reduce the possibility that our govern- 
ment may be too negligent in accepting the tenus of the 
explorer. That is why I agree with the thinking of the 
two Commissioners who spoke ahead of me that we 
should retain the original plan of the Committee. How- 
ever, personally, I would put it at a MAJORITY of 
either the Lower House or the Upper House. 

I submit, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, just a point of 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Maybe this should be addressed properly to the 
Acting Floor Leader since he was a Member of the Bata- 
sang Pambansa. On the assumption that we will pass this 
resolution requiring the President to get the concurrence 
of Congress by special law, does it mean a special law or 
only a resolution on the part of both Houses? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I can hardly be considered an 
authority but if the Commissioner is asking for my per- 
sonal opinion, I think it should be a law. 

MR. SUAREZ. So it will have to pass through the 
presentation of a bill approving the terms and condi- 
tions of a service contract to be entered into by the 
President? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is my thinking, because the 
usage of the resolution is quite limited. 

MR. SUAREZ. Could it not take the form of a simple 
resolution passed by the majority of the Members of 
Congress approving the service contract or disapproving 
it, as the case may be? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I already gave my answer. For 
example, one usage of a resolution is to allow a certain 
person to accept a title of nobility. That is only one 
subject of a resolution, but this is a matter which is 
mandated by the Constitution so I feel a resolution will 
not do. It has to be a law. But I could be wrong; this is 
just my personal opinion. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is why we are trying to clear this 
up in the event the Gascon amendment would be 
approved by the body. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, for a point of 
order. 

We are discussing the Jamir amendment. So if we vote 
“yes” in favor of the Jamir amendment, then my objec- 


tion will become moot and academic. Commissioner 
Suarez was inquiring as to the possibilities that will 
occur with the concurrence of Congress; tliat is, if we 
vote against the Jamir amendment. So I would like to 
make a motion for a vote on the Jamir amendment with 
the clarification that if it is not approved, then we will 
go to my amendment, which requires the concurrence 
of Congress instead of a general law. 

Thank you. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, if I may just 
comment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. On the inquiry of Commissioner 
Suarez, I think this would be analogous to a grant of 
franchise by Congress. If we will recall, that has always 
been by law and it specifies the taxability, the rights 
and obligations of the franchisee. In this case, I feel a 
general law would specify the sharing and other 
pertinent terms and conditions, so it could provide 
enough safeguards. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. This is 
an amendment to the Jamir amendment and also to the 
Ople amendment. I propose to delete “NATURAL RE- 
SOURCES” and substitute it with the following: 
MINERALS, PETROLEUM AND OTHER MINERAL 
OILS. On the Ople amendment, I propose to add: THE 
NOTIFICATION TO CONGRESS SHALL BE WITHIN 
THIRTY DAYS FROM THE EXECUTION OF THE 
SERVICE CONTRACT. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say 
with respect to the first amendment in lieu of “NATU- 
RAL RESOURCES”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could Commissioner Davide 
explain that? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, with the use of 
“NATURAL RESOURCES” here, it would necessarily 
include all lands of the public domain, our marine 
resources, forests, parks and so on. So we would like to 
limit the scope of these service contracts to those areas 
really where these may be needed, the exploitation, 
development and exploration of minerals, petroleum 
and other mineral oils. And so, we believe that we 
should really, if we want to grant service contracts at 
all, limit the same to only those particular areas where 


356 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


Filipino capital may not be sufficient, and not to all 
natural resources. 

MR. SUAREZ. Just a point of clarification again, 
Madam President. When the Commissioner made those 
enumerations and specifications, I suppose he delibe- 
rately did not include “agricultural land”? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is precisely the reason we have to 
enumerate what these resources are into which service 
contracts may enter. So, beyond the reach of any 
service contract will be lands of the public domain, 
timberlands, forests, marine resources, fauna and flora, 
wildlife and national parks. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is basic to the principle of 
ownership by the individual. He can enter into con- 
tracts, however, subject to the control now of the 
State in view of social justice. 

MR. CALDERON. Frankly, I am not satisfied with 
the Commissioner’s reply because if an oil concession- 
aire, for instance, will have to enter into a contract with 
the private landowner, there will be delays in the 
development of our oil resources. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, the mineral that the Commis- 
sioner is talking about could belong to the State. 

MR. CALDERON. I am talking about oil. 


MR. SUAREZ. In other words, the Commissioner is 
limiting the extension of technical or financial assistance. 


MR. DAVIDE. Oil belongs to the State, not to any 
particular individual. 


MR. DAVIDE. Only to those resources. 


MR. SUAREZ. I thank Commissioner Davide for the 
clarification. 

• PRESIDENT. Commissioner Calderon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. CALDERON. When the Commissioner talks 
about the search for mineral oil, is he referring to off- 
shore or onshore? 


MR. DAVIDE. Both. 


MR. CALDERON. Yes. So, we follow the regalian 
doctrine. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, if there is a service contract for 
the exploration of oil, it must be with the State which is 
supposed to be allowed under the Jamir proposal. 

MR. CALDERON. Even if it covers private lands? 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, because these are minerals. 

MR. CALDERON. Yes. With that, I am satisfied. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam Presiclent. 


MR. CALDERON. Under the regalian doctrine, the 
government could grant concessions to all agricultural 
lands or any property of the public domain. 

MR. DAVIDE. The report of the Committee would 
unit agricultural land only for possible alienation which 
could only be done by leases and by homesteads. 

MR. CALDERON. Under the regalian doctrine, the 
government could grant leases to all lands, whether 
private or public, because anything under the soil is 
supposed to be owned by the State. 


MR. DAVIDE. Not of private land. 

Under the same section, in the opening paragraph, th 
Commissioner will notice that except for lands of th 
public d^omam, natural resources cannot be alienatec 
and with respect to lands of the public domain only b 
leases or homesteads not exceeding 24 hectares and o 
course, to Filipino citizens. ^ ^ 


MR. CALDERON. Because under our present laws, 

the regahan doctrine! 
In other words, the State can enter into contract involv- 
ing private lands. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May we now ask the Committee 
to respond to the amendment to the amendment of 
Commissioner Jamir? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment on the 
premise that service contracts are really primarily for 
minerals, petroleum and other mineral oils. All other 
types of public lands, whether agricultural or timber, 
and marine resources are subject to other provisions in 
this Article. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may we ask 
Commissioner Davide to read the full text including his 
amendment because there seems to be some confusion 
here? 

MR. DAVIDE. I was not able to get all the other 
amendments. But my first amendment would only be 
to change “NATURAL RESOURCES” to MINERALS, 
PETROLEUM AND OTHER MINERAL OILS. 

t 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the entire Jamir 
amendment, as amended, reads: “THE PRESIDENT 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


357 


MAY ENTER INTO AGREEMENTS WITH FOREIGN- 
OWNED CORPORATIONS INVOLVING EITHER 
TECHNICAL OR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR 
LARGE-SCALE EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT, 
AND UTILIZATION OF MINERALS, PETROLEUM 
AND OTHER MINERAL OILS ACCORDING TO THE 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS PROVIDED 
BY LAW BASED ON REAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO 
THE ECONOMIC GROWTH AND GENERAL WEL- 
FARE OF THE COUNTRY.” 

We have introduced a slight change. 

MR. DA VIDE. The proposed amendment on the Ople 
amendment would be to substitute “SUBSEQUENTLY” 
with the phrase WITHIN THIRTY DAYS FROM ITS 
EXECUTION. 

MR. OPLE. I gladly accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, to continue: “THE PRES- 
IDENT SHALL WITHIN THIRTY DAYS FROM ITS 
EXECUTION NOTIFY CONGRESS OF EVERY CON- 
TRACT ENTERED INTO IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
THIS PROVISION.” 

MR. DAVIDE. And the last amendment is just to 
delete “-OWNED” in “FOREIGN-OWNED” on the first 
line so it reads: “WITH FOREIGN CORPORATIONS,” 
because it may be a corporation with a little Filipino 
contribution or capital. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. VILLEGAS. So it reads: “THE PRESIDENT 

may enter into agreements with foreign 

CORPORATIONS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, we are ready to 
put it to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the additional sen- 
tence of Commissioner Sarmiento? Was it read? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is included, Madam Pres- 
ident. It says: “IN SUCH AGREEMENTS, THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE, DEVELOP AND EMPLOY LOCAL 
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL RESOURCES.” 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, just for clarifica- 
tion. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. We will be voting for or against, is 
that correct? 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, for or against. 

MR. GASCON. If we vote against, that means we are 
in favor of the concurrence of Congress for every service 
contract? 

THE PRESIDENT. Not necessarily. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Jamir, Sarmien- 
to, Ople, Davide, and others, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

Are there any abstentions? 

MR. SUAREZ. I abstain. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I abstain. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 21 votes in 
favor, 10 against, and 2 abstentions; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Acting Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Coirynissioner Trenas 
be recognized for an amendment on line 14. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TRENAS. Madam President, may I propose an 
amendment on line 14 of Section 3 by deleting there- 
from “whose voting stock and controlling interest,” and 
in lieu thereof, insert THE CAPITAL so the line should 
read: “associations at least sixty percent of THE CAPI- 
TAL is owned by such citizens.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

MR. TRENAS. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment of Commissioner 
Trenas on line 14 has been accepted by the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the Committee 
would just like to go back to the Jamir amendment for a 
change in style. Just for the record, it has reference to 


358 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


the amendment of Commissioner Sarmiento. We would 
like that amendment to read as follows: IN SUCH 
AGREEMENTS THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE THE 
DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF LOCAL SCIENTIFIC 
AND TECHNICAL RESOURCES. 


THE PRESIDENT. Was that included in the vote? 
MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Bennagen, our 
naturalist, has something to say. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I offer an observation. “Flora 
and fauna” is a broader term and “wildlife” would be 
included within the concept of “flora and fauna,” but I \ 
agree to the inclusion of “WILDLIFE,” specifically to 
refer to endangered species. It could be considered 
national treasure, for emphasis. 


THE PRESIDENT. Who is next? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Davide 
be recognized for an anterior amendment to Section 3 . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have a few minor amendments. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 5, after “forests” insert a 
comma (,) and the word WILDLIFE followed by a 
comma (,). And then change the “e” in “faune” to “A”, 
to read FAUNA. 

VILLEGAS. Could Commissioner Davide just 
explain why he is introducing WILDLIFE when “flora 
and fauna” are both wildlife? 

MR. DAVIDE. No, not necessarily, because it may 
also be rnarine flora and fauna, and fauna would refer 
to the animal kingdom so we have to go beyond. These 
are not the only part of our natural resources; the birds, 
and so on, are also wildlife. 

MR. VILLEGAS. All right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a moment. Madam President. 
Is that accepted? 

MR. AZCUNA. May I be recognized? 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, so the Committee accepts WILD- 
LIFE? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Let us now give that emphasis that 
is required especially with respect to endangered species. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is accepted. So let us proceed 
to vote on that Line first. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 9, Madam President, before 
the word “and” after the comma (,), insert EXPLOITA- 
TION. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, following the 
recommendation in the UP draft, we omitted “exploit^ 
tion” first of all because it is believed to be subsumed 
under “development” and secondly because it has a 
derogatory connotation. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will not insist, but this one I hope 
the Committee will immediately accept. 

On lines 14 and 15, delete the clause “at least sixty 
percent of whose voting stock or controlling interest is 
and substitute the same with WHOSE CAPITAL STOCK 
IS WHOLLY, so it will read: “associations WHOSE 
CAPITAL STOCK IS WHOLLY owned by such 
citizens.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


Madam President, I believe that fauna 
■ t H H 1 6- If the term “flora and fauna” was 
intended to replace the term “wildlife” in the 1973 
Con^itution, I fear that there might be a redundancy il 
we mention both “wildUfe” and “flora and fauna.” 1 
think we should choose between one or the other. 

.. * ^^bmit. Madam President, thal 

wildlife IS even broader, so instead of “flora anc 
fauna” we use the word WILDLIFE. 


MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee cannot accept the 
proposal precisely because we voted in favor of 60 
percent. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain the pro- 
posal? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Subject to the three-minute rule. 
Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will not take me three minutes. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


359 


. The Commission had just approved the Preamble. In 
the Preamble we clearly stated there that the Filipino 
people are sovereign and that one of the objectives for 
the creation or establishment of a government is to 
conserve and develop the national patrimony. The im- 
plication is that the national patrimony or our natural 
resources are exclusively reserved for the Filipino people. 
No alien must be allowed to enjoy, exploit and develop 
our natural resources. As a matter of fact, that principle 
proceeds from the fact that our natural resources are 
gifts from God to the Filipino people and it would be a 
breach of that special blessing from God if we will 
allow aliens to exploit our natural resources. 

I voted in favor of the Jamir proposal because it is 
not really exploitation tliat we granted to the alien 
corporations but only for them to render financial or 
technical assistance. It is not for them to enjoy our 
natural resources. Madam President, our natural re- 
sources are depleting; our population is increasing by 
leaps and bounds. Fifty years from now, if we will allow 
these aliens to exploit our natural resources, there will 
be no more natural resources for the next generations of 
Filipinos. It may last long if we will begin now. Since 
1935 the aliens have been allowed to enjoy to a certain 
extent the exploitation of our natural resources, and we 
became victims of foreign dominance and control. The 
aliens are interested in coming to the Philippines be- 
cause they would like to enjoy the bounty of nature 
exclusively intended for the Filipinos by God. 

And so I appeal to all, for the sake of the future 
generations, that if we have to pray in the Preamble “to 
preserve and develop the national patrimony for the 
sovereign Filipino people and for the generations to 
come,” we must at this time decide once and for all that 
our natural resources must be reserved only to Filipino 
citizens. 

Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Unless the Committee would like 
to respond, we ask that the matter be put to a vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Just a short response. 

This matter of ownership has been fully discussed in 
the Committee with all the public hearings possible and 
the conclusion that 60-percent Filipino ownership is a 
sufficient guarantee that the national welfare is going to 
be preserved. Secondly, when we talk about shortage of 
domestic capital, this is most acute in the exploration 
and development of natural resources because it is in 
these activities that there is very high risk, especially in 
oil exploration. It would prejudice not only the people 
who are not going to be employed by these types of 
corporations that would not be able to attract the 


necessary capital but it would also prevent the utiliza- 
tion of natural resources for the present generation in 
order to help them develop their talents and skills 
through education and other development programs. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Two points actually are being raised by Commis- 
sioner Davide’s proposed amendment. One has reference 
to the percentage of holdings and the other one is the 
basis for that percentage. Would the body have any 
objection if we split it into two portions because there 
may be several Commissioners who would be willing to 
accept the Commissioner’s proposal on capital stock in 
contradistinction to a voting stock for controlling 
interest? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The proposal has been accepted 
already. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but it was 60 percent. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, it is now 60 percent as against 
wholly owned? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner not insisting on 
the voting capital stock because that was already ac- 
cepted by the Committee? 

MR. DAVIDE. Would it mean that it would be 100- 
percent voting capital stock? 

MR. SUAREZ. No, under the Commissioner’s pro- 
posal it is just “CAPITAL” not “stock.” 

MR. DAVIDE. No, I want it to be very clear. What is 
the alternative proposal of the Committee? How shall 
it read? 

MR. SUAREZ. It will only read something like: “the 
CAPITAL OF WHICH IS FULLY owned.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Let me read lines 12 to 14 which 
state: 

. . . enter into co-production, joint venture, production 

sharing agreements with Filipino citizens or corporations 

or associations at least 60 percent of whose CAPITAL is 

owned by such citizens. 

We are going back to the 1935 and 1973 formulations. 


360 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. I cannot accept the proposal because 
the word CAPITAL should not really be the guiding 
principle. It is the ownership of the corporation. It may 
be voting or not voting, but that is not the guiding 
principle. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Commissioner is insisting on 
the use of the term “CAPITAL STOCK”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, to be followed by the phrase 
“WHOLLY owned.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, but we are only concentrating on 
the first point - “CAPITAL STOCK” or merely “CAPI- 
TAL.” 

MR. DAVIDE. CAPITAL STOCK? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, it is “CAPITAL STOCK.” 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:41 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:42 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 
Commissioner Davide is to clarify his point. 

VILLEGAS. Yes, Commissioner Davide has 
accepted the word “CAPITAL” in place of “voting 

^ 1 ^^ A controlling interest.” This is an amendment 
already accepted by the Committee. 

We would Uke to call for a vote on 100-percent 
Fihpino versus 60-percent Filipino. 

ALONTO. Is it 60 percent? 

VILLEGAS. Sixty percent, yes. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, shall we vote on 
amendment of Commissioner Davide of 
ONE HUNDRED PERCENT”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is all right. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. May I be clarified as to that portion 
that was accepted by the Committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The portion accepted by the 
Committee is the deletion of the phrase “voting stock 
or controlling interest.” 

MR. AZCUNA. Hence, without the Davide amend- 
ment, the committee report would read; “corporations 
or associations at least sixty percent of whose CAPITAL 
is owned by such citizens.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. AZCUNA. So if the Davide amendment is lost, 
we are stuck with 60 percent of the capital to be owned 
by citizens? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. AZCUNA. But the control can be with the 
foreigners even if they are the minority. Let us say 40 
percent of the capital is owned by them, but it is the 
voting capital, whereas, the Filipinos own the nonvoting 
shares. So we can have a situation where the corporation 
is controlled by foreigners despite being the minority 
because they have the voting capital. That is the ano- 
maly that would result there. 

MR. BENGZON. No, the reason we eliminated the 
word “stock” as stated in the 1973 and 1935 Constitu- 
tions is that according to Commissioner Rodrigo, there 
are associations that do not have stocks. That is why we 
say “CAPITAL.” 

MR. AZCUNA. We should not eliminate the phrase 
“controlling interest.” 

MR. BENGZON. In the case of stock corporations, it 
is assumed. 


MR. GASCON. Assuming that it 
prejudice any other Commissioner 
mendations on other percentages? 


is lost, that does not 
to make any recom- 


MR. VILLEGAS. I would cnooaoi. +v, * 

“civtv ” ; • A- suggest that we vote on 

® indicated in the committee report. 

It is the amendment of Commissionei 
Davide that we should vote on, not the commiDee 
report. 


MR. AZCUNA. Yes, but what I mean is that the 
control should be with the Filipinos. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, that is understood. 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, because if we just say “sixty 
percent of whose capital is owned by the Filipinos,” the 
capital may be voting or nonvoting. 

MR. BENGZON. That is correct. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


361 




MR. AZCUNA. My concern is the situation where 
there is a voting stock. It is a stock corporation. What 
the Committee requires is that 60 percent of the capital 
should be owned by Filipinos. But that would not 
assure control because that 60 percent may be non- 
voting. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. May we vote on the percentage first? 

THE PRESIDENT. Before we vote on this, we want 
to be clarified first. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I would suggest that we vote on the 
Davide amendment which is 100-percent capital, and if 
it is voted down, then we refer to the original draft 
which is “capital stock” not just “capital.” . 

MR. AZCUNA. The phrase “controlling interest” is 
an important consideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed to vote then. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Vice-President, Commissioner 
Padilla, is recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. The Trenas amendment has already 
been approved. The only one left is the Davide aniend- 
ment which is substituting the “sixty percent to 
“WHOLLY owned by Fihpinos.” 

Madam President, I am against the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide because that is an ideal 
situation where domestic capital is available for the 
exploration, development and utilization of these 
natural resources, especially minerals, petroleum and 
other mineral oils. These are not only risky business but 
they also involve substantial capital. Obviously, it is an 
ideal situation but it is not practical. And if we adopt 
the 100-percent capital of Filipino citizens, I am afraid 
that these natural resources, particularly these minerals 
and oil, et cetera, may remain hidden in our lands, or in 
other offshore places without anyone being able to 
explore, develop or utilize them. If it were possible to 
have a 100-percent Filipino capital, I would prefer that 
rather than the 60 percent, but if we adopt the 100 
percent, my fear is that we will never be able to explore, 
develop and utilize our natural resources because we do 
not have the domestic resources for that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
react? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am very glad that Commissioner 
Padilla emphasized minerals, petroleum and mineral oils. 
The Commission has just approved the possible foreign 
entry into the development, exploration and utilization 
of these minerals, petroleum and other mineral oils by 
virtue of the Jamir amendment. I voted in favor of the 
Jamir amendment because it will eventually give way to 
vesting in exclusively Filipino citizens and corporations 
wholly owned by Filipino citizens the right to utilize 
the other natural resources. This means that as a matter 
of policy, natural resources should be utilized and ex- 
ploited only by Fihpino citizens or corporations wholly 
owned by such citizens. But by virtue of the Jamir 
amendment, since we feel that Fihpino capital may not 
be enough for the development and utihzation of mine- 
rals, petroleum and other mineral oils, the President can 
enter into service contracts with foreign corporations 
precisely for the development and utihzation of such 
resources. And so, there is nothing to fear that we will 
stagnate in the development of minerals, petroleum, and 
mineral oils because we now allow service contracts. It 
is, therefore, with more reason that at this time we must 
provide for a 100-percent Fhipinization generaUy to ah 
natural resources. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think we are ready to vote. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, we ask that the 
matter be put to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. WiU Commissioner Davide please 
read lines 1 4 and 1 5 with his amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Lines 14 and 15, Section 3, as 
amended, will read: “associations whose CAPITAL 
stock is WHOLLY owned by such citizens.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide on hnes 
14 and 15 of Section 3, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against the amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor and 22 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized once more for further 
amendments. 


362 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

This is just an insertion of a new paragraph between 
lines 24 and 25 of Section 3 of the same page. It will 
read as follows: THE GOVERNING AND MANAGING 
BOARDS OF SUCH CORPORATIONS SHALL BE 
VESTED EXCLUSIVELY IN CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES. ^ 

MR. VILLEGAS. Which corporations is the Com- 
missioner referring to? 

MR. DAVIDE. This refers to corporations 60 per- 
cent of whose capital is owned by such citizens. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Again the amendment will read. . . 

MR. DAVIDE. “THE GOVERNING AND MAN- 
AGING BODIES OF SUCH CORPORATIONS SHALL 
BE VESTED EXCLUSIVELY IN CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES.” 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
mzed. 

RIGOS. I wonder if Commissioner Davide 
would agree to put that sentence immediately after 
citizens” on line 15. 

is ^ ^ question. Presumably, it 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. What about the 40 percent? Would 
they not be entitled to a proportionate seat in the 
board? 


MR. ROMULO. But it would be pointless to allow 
them 40 percent when they cannot sit in the board nor 
have a say in the management of the company. Likewise, 
that would be extraordinary because both the 1935 and 
the 1973 Constitutions allowed not only the 40 percent 
but commensurately they were represented in the board 
and management only to the extent of their equity 
interest, which is 40 percent. The management of a 
cpmpany is lodged in the board; so if the 60 percent, 
which is composed of Filipinos, controls the board, then 
the Filipino part has control of the company. 

I think it is rather unfair to say: “You may have 40 
percent of the company, but that is all. You cannot 
manage, you cannot sit in the board.” That would dis- 
courage investments. Then it is like having a one 
hundred-percent ownership; I mean, either we allow a 
60-40 with full rights to the 40 percent, limited as it is 
as to a minority, or we do not allow them at all. This 
means if it is allowed, we cannot have it both ways. 

MR. DAVIDE. The aliens cannot also have every- 
thing. While they may be given entry into subscriptions 
of the capital stock of the corporation, it does not 
necessarily follow that they cannot be deprived of the 
right of membership in the managing or in the governing 
board of a particular corporation. But it will not totally 
deprive them of a say because they can still exercise the 
ordinary rights of stockholders. They can submit their 
proposal and they can be heard. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, but they have no vote. That is 
like being represented in the Congress but not being 
allowed to vote like our old resident Commissioners in 
the United States. They can be heard; they can be seen 
but they cannot vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. If that was allowed under that 
situation, why can we not do it now in respect to our 
natural resources? This is a very critical and delicate 
issue. 


MR. DAVIDE. Under my proposal, they should not 
be allowed to sit in the board. 


MR. ROMULO. Then the Commissioner is really 
proposing 100 percent which is the opposite way? 


r.f Divide. Not necessarily, because if 40 pe 
^ stock wUl be owned by aliens who m 
exercise their right ; 

nosal fnr ^ ^ Submit the necessarj 

posal for, say, a policy to be undertaken by the t 


n£[lit to sit in the boBrd of directors 


MR. da vide. That may be allowed but this is a very 
unusual and abnormal situation so the Constitution 
itself can prohibit them to sit in the board. 


MR. ROMULO. Precisely, we used to complain how 
unfair that was. One can be seen and heard but he can- 
not vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. We know that under the corporation 
law, we have the rights of the minority stockholders. 
They can be heard. As a matter of fact, they can pro- 
bably allow a proxy to vote for them and, therefore, 
they still retain that specific prerogative to participate 
just like what we did in the Article on Social Justice. 

MR. ROMULO. That would encourage dummies if we 
give them proxies. 

MR. DAVIDE. As a matter of fact, when it comes to 
encouraging dummies, by allowing 40-percent owner- 
ship to come in we will expect the proliferation of cor- 
porations actually owned by aliens using dummies. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


363 


MR. ROMULO. No, because 40 percent is a sub- 
stantial and fair share and, therefore, the bona fide 
foreign investor is satisfied with that proportion. He 
does not have to look for dummies. In fact, that is what 
assures a genuine investment if we give a foreign investor 
the 40 percent and all the rights that go with it. Other- 
wise, we are either discouraging the investment altoge- 
ther or we are encouraging circumvention. Let us be 
fair. If it is 60-40, then we give him the right, limited as 
to his minority position. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, the body 
would like to know the position of the Committee so 
that we can put the matter to a vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee does not accept the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee does not accept. 

Will Commissioner Davide insist on his amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. We request a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide state 
his proposed amendment again? 

MR. DAVIDE. The proposed amendment would be 
the insertion of a new paragraph to Section 3, between 
lines 24 and 25, page 2, which reads; “THE GOVERN- 
ING AND MANAGING BODIES OF SUCH CORPO- 
RATIONS SHALL BE VESTED EXCLUSIVELY IN 
CITIZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES.” 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I just say that 
this Section 3 speaks of “co-production, joint venture, ^ 
production sharing agreements with Filipino citizens.” 
If the foreign share of, say, 40 percent will not be rep- 
resented in the board or in management, I wonder if 
there would be any foreign investor who will accept put- 
ting capital but without any voice in management.^ I 
think that might make the provision on “coproduction, 
joint venture and production sharing” illusory. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. If the Chair is not mistaken, that 
was the same point expressed by Commissioner 
Romulo, a member of the Committee. 

As many as are in favor of the Davide amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Few Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 


As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 14 votes in favor, 20 against and 1 
abstention; the Davide amendment is lost. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized to present my own amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Actually I am only pursuing the 
amendment presented by Commissioner Concepcion, 
and I have his permission to proceed with it. 

On line 16, Madam President, after the word “period” 
delete the word “of.” 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I have an anterior 
amendment. I have already informed the Floor Leader. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has an anterior 
amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. On what line would the Com- 
missioner propose his anterior amendment? 

% 

MR. GARCIA. It is actually on the same item, line 14, 
a primary amendment regarding the percentage of 
capital stock and controlling interest. It is on the same 
item where Commissioner Davide presented his amend- 
ment, but this time I would like to raise it. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, with the in- 
dulgence of Commissioner Garcia, our procedure is that 
primary amendments to approved amendments will be 
taken up later. Mine is an amendment to the provision 
which is now indicated in the committee report. So if 
Commissioner Garcia does not mind, we can take that 
up after my amendment. It is very short, anyway. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair recognizes Commis- 
sioner Maambong. He may now proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

As I was saying, on line 16, change the word “of” 
between the words “period” and “twenty-five” to NOT 
exceeding, so the whole line would read: “. . . agree- 
ments shall be for a period NOT EXCEEDING twenty- 
five years, renewable for not more than twenty-five 
years . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


364 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Ople be recognized for his amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I propose a brief new 
section after line 30, immediately preceding Section 4. I 
think we are still on Section 3, so probably I can give 
way to another proponent. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I ask that Commissioner Garcia 
be recognized. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have not yet approved the 
entire Section 3 . 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much» Madam Pres- 
ident. 

I would like to propose the following amendment on 
Section 3, line 14 on page 2. I propose to change the 
word “sixty” to SEVENTY-FIVE. So, this will read: 
“or it may enter into co-production, joint venture, 
production sharing agreements with Filipino citizens or 
corporations or associations at least SEVENTY-FIVE 
percent of whose CAPITAL stock or controlling interest 
is owned by such citizens.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. This is just a correction. I think 
Commissioner Azcuna is not insisting on the retention 
of the phrase “controlling interest,” so we will retain 
“CAPITAL” to go back really to the 1935 and 1973 
formulations. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, Commissioner 
Garcia has another amendment to Section 3. 


MR. BENNAGEN. May I suggest that we retain the 
phrase “controlling interest”? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. My amendment is on Section 3 the 
same item which Commissioner Davide tried to amend. 
It IS basically on the share of 60 percent. I would like to 
pnfc percent to SEVENTY- 

CTwc read: “SEVENTY- 

FIVE percent of whose CAPITAL is owned by such 
citizens. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 
SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

The Committee insists on staying 
with the 60 percent - 60-40. 

Madam President, may we ask for a suspension of the 
session. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, we will retain it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Garcia for 
“SEVENTY-FIVE” percent, please raise their hand. 
(Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against the amendment, please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor, 18 against and 1 
abstention; the Garcia amendment is lost. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It Was 5:07 p.m. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Foz be recognized. 


resumption of session 

At 5.31 p.m., the session was resumed. 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader Cc 
missioner Sarmiento, is recognized ^^aer, Uc 

fl ^°"'"^*ssioner Garcia still has i 

floor. May I ask that he be recognized 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is rec 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. After losing by only two votes, I suppose 
that this next proposal will finally get the vote of the 
majority. The amendment is to provide for at least 
TWO-THIRDS. 

MR. SUAREZ. It is equivalent to 66 2/3. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner repeat? 

MR. FOZ. I propose “TWO-THIRDS of whose 
CAPITAL is owned by such citizens.” Madam President, 
we are referring to the same provision to which the 
previous amendments have been suggested. First, we 
called for a 100-percent ownership; and then, second. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


365 


we called for a 75-percent ownership by Filipino 
citizens. 

So my proposal is to provide for at least TWO- 
THIRDS of the capital to be owned by Filipino citizens. 
I would like to call the attention of the body that the 
same ratio or equity requirement is provided in the case 
of public utilities. And if we are willing to provide such 
equity requirements in the case of public utihties, we 
should at least likewise provide the same equity ratio in 
the case of natural resources. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Romulo will re- 
spond. 

MR. ROMULO. I just want to point out that there is 
an amendment here filed to also reduce the ratio in 
Section 1 5 to 60-40. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The 60 percent which appears in the 
committee report has been repeatedly upheld in various 
votings. One proposal was whole — 100 percent; another 
one was 7 5 percent and now it is 66 2/3 percent. Is not 
the decision of this Commission in voting to uphold the 
percentage in the committee report already a decision 
on this issue? 

MR. FOZ. Our amendment has been previously 
brought to the attention of the body. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The Committee does not accept the 
Commissioner’s amendment. This has been discussed 
fully and, with only one-third of the vote, it is Uke 
having nothing at all in decision-making. It can be 
completely vetoed. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. This is an extraordinary suggestion. 
But considering the circumstances that the proposals 
from the 100 percent to 75 percent lost, and now it 
went down to 66 2/3 percent, we might go down to 65 
percent next time. So I suggest that we vote between 
66 2/3 and 60 percent. Which does the body want? 
Then that should be the end of it; otherwise, this is 
ridiculous. After this, if the 66 2/3 percent will lose, 
then somebody can say: “Well, how about 65 percent?” 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair was made to under- 
stand that Commissioner Foz’ proposal is the last pro- 
posal on this particular Une. Will Commissioner Foz 
restate his proposal? 


MR. FOZ. My proposal is “TWO-THIRDS of whose 
CAPITAL or controlling interest is owned by such 
citizens.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We now put Commissioner Foz’ 
amendment to a vote. 

As many as are in favor of the amendment of Com- 
missioner Foz, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 17 votes in favor, 20 against, and no 
abstention; the amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, since there are 
no more proponents of amendments on Section 3 , may 
I ask that the Chairman of the Steering Committee be 
recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Before the Chairman of the Steering 
Committee responds, may I make a manifestation that 
I have informed the Committee and the Floor Leader 
that I would like to propose an amendment by insertion 
immediately following Section 3 tomorrow morning? 

THE PRESIDENT. Would that be a new section? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, as a new section. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I remind the body that, per 
agreement, we will discuss the Article on Local Govern- 
ments tomorrow. Then we will go back to the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony on Monday. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Can we vote on the whole Section 
3? 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the Chairman 
is now requesting a vote on the entire Section 3 as 
amended. I think we have copies of the amendments. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May we ask the Chairman to read 
the entire section. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I am going to make the same 
request. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The entire Section 3 reads: “All 
lands of the public domain, waters, minerals, coal, 
petroleum and other mineral oils, all forces of potential 


366 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


energy, fisheries, forests or timber, wildlife, flora and 
fauna, and other natural resources are owned by the 
State. With the exception of agricultural lands, all other 
natural resources shall not be alienated. The explora- 
tion, development, and utilization of natural resources 
shall be under the full control and supervision of the 
State. Such activities may be directly undertaken by the 
State, or it may enter into co-production, joint venture, 
production sharing agreements with Filipino citizens or 
corporations or associations at least sixty percent of 
whose capital or controlling interest is owned by such 
citizens. Such agreements may be for a period not 
exceeding twenty-five years, renewable for not more 
than twenty-five years, and under such terms and condi- 
tions as may be provided by law. In cases of water rights 
for imgations, water supply, fisheries or industrial uses 
other than the development of water power, beneficial 
use may be the measure and limit of the grant. The 
Congress may, by law, allow small-scale utilization of 
natural resources by Filipino citizens, as well as 
cooperative fish farming with priority to subsistence 
fishermen and fish workers in rivers, lakes, bays, and 
lagoons. 

The President may enter into agreements with 
foreign-owned corporations involving either technical 
or financial assistance for large-scale exploration, de- 
velopment, and utilization of minerals, petroleum and 
ot er mineral oils according to the general terms and 
conditions provided by law based on real contributions 

to the economic growth and general welfare of the 
country. 

“The President shall subsequently notify Congress of 
every contract entered into in accordance with this 
provision within thirty days from its execution. In such 
State shall promote the development, 

Use of local scientific and technical resources.” 


president. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
e Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that the 
airmau of the Steering Committee be recognized in 
connection with the resolution for the Constitutional 
ommission to congratulate former Senator Tanada. 

president. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 


'^'-^^SIDERATION OF 

(Co^T^^^r *^^^^LUTI0N no. 538 
^ Senator Tanada for His 
Philippine Legion of Honor Award) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we consider Pr( 
Resolution No. 538. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 538 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secreta- 
ry-General will read the whole text of the resolution. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 538, entitled: 

RESOLUTION FOR THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 
TO CONGRATULATE SENATOR TANADA 

WHEREAS, the Republic of the Philippines has accorded 
Senator Lorenzo Martinez Tanada its highest award, the Philip- 
pine Legion of Honor, with the degree of Chief Commander, in 
recognition of “his uncommon wisdom and steadfast devotion 
to the principles of justice, freedom and democracy to which 
this nation was founded”; 

WHEREAS, the Constitutional Commission draws inspiration 
from the example and achievements of the “Grand Old Man of 
Philippine Politics” who has always taken the leadership in the 
movement for human rights, nationalism and social justice and 
who was one of the prime movers of the campaign that success- 
fully overthrew the dictatorship; and 

WHEREAS, the Constitutional Commission takes special 
cognizance of the distinct honor given to Senator Tanada and 
appreciates the Government’s conferment of the higliest state 
award long due him; Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Constitutional Commission in session assem- 
bled, To officially extend its warmest congratulations to Senator 
Lorenzo M. Tanada for having been conferred the Philippine 
Legion of Honor with the degree of Chief Commander, by her 
Excellency, President Corazon C. Aquino. 


(Sgd.) Wilfrido V. Villacorta 
(Sgd.) Christine Tan 
(Sgd.) Adolfo S. Azcuna 
(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
(Sgd.) Jose E. Suarez 
(Sgd.) Minda Luz M. Quesada 
(Sgd.) Lugum L. Uka 
(Sgd.) Napoleon G. Rama 
(Sgd.) Jose B. Laurel, Jr. 

(Sgd.) Teodoro C. Bacani 
(Sgd.) Florangel Rosario Braid 
(Sgd.) Teodulo C. Natividad 
(Sgd.) Felicitas C. Aquino 
(Sgd.) Jose D. Calderon 
(Sgd.) Rustico F. de los Reyes, Jr. 
(Sgd.) Jose C. Colayco 
(Sgd.) Regalado E. Maambong 
(Sgd.) Alberto M.K. Jamir 
(Sgd.) Ahmad Domocao Alonto 
(Sgd.) Bias F.Ople 
(Sgd.) Francisco A. Rodrigo 
Florenz D. Regalado 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva 
Lino O. Brock a 


(Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 
(Sgd.) Cecilia Munoz Palma 
(Sgd.) Joaquin G. Bernas 
(Sgd.) Christian S. Monsod 
(Sgd.) Bernardo M. Villegas 
(Sgd.) Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 
(Sgd.) Decoroso R. Rosales 
(Sgd.) Ambrosio B. Padilla 
(Sgd.) Cirilo A. Rigos 
(Sgd.) Edmundo G. Garcia 
(Sgd.) Efrain B. Trenas 
(Sgd.) Rene V. Sarmiento 
(Sgd.) Lorenzo M. Sumulong 
(Sgd.) Jose Luis Martin 
C. Gascon 

(Sgd.) Gregorio J. Tingson 
(Sgd.) Jaime S.L. Tadeo 
(Sgd.) Ricardo T. Romulo 
(Sgd.) Roberto R. Concepcion 
(Sgd.) Jose F.S. Bengzon, Jr. 
(Sgd.) Eulogio R. Lerum 
(Sgd.) Crispino M. de Castro 
(Sgd.) Ponciano L. Bennagen 
(Sgd.) Jose N. Nolledo 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


367 


ADOPTION OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 538 
(Congratulating Senator Tanada for His 
Philippine Legion of Honor Award) 

MR. BENGZON. 1 move that Proposed Resolution 
No. 538 be adopted in toto. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 538 is adopted unanimously. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, have we finished 
voting on Section 3? I ask because some of us wanted 
to vote and to object. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Commissioner suggesting 
that the body vote by raising of hands? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, we will cast our negative votes. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
3 as read by the honorable Chairman of the Committee, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against Section 3, please raise their 
hand. ( Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

% 

The results show 24 votes in favor, 13 against and 1 
abstention; Section 3 is approved. 

Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, may I say something? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

SR. TAN. I admire the diligence of the Committee 
and I have no doubt about their pro-Filipino attitude 
and their knowledge of economics, but what I cannot 
resolve is what happens if that 60-percent Filipino 
capital were so great and the 40-percent foreign capital 
to explore our natural resources were so great also? I 
cannot resolve why with the 60-40 we became so poor. I 
rather be idealistic by allowing only Filipinos to explore 
our seas than continue being this poor while giving 
foreigners 40 percent and allowing them to explore or 
maybe to rape our natural resources. (Applause) 

THE PRESIDENT. Mr. Floor Leader, is there any 
other business? 


MR. GASCON. Madam President, this is with regard 
to Section 1. I would like to make a motion for a recon- 
sideration of Section 1 for just one thing, nothing much 
really but maybe we can tackle it on Monday. It is with 
regard to industrialization as indicated in Section 1 (2) 
which states: 

The State shall promote industrialization and full em- 
ployment based on sound agricultural development and 

agrarian reform. 

I was thinking that we should review this in the sense 
tltat there might be some industries which are not based 
on agricultural development and agrarian reform. In that 
context, maybe just to broaden our concept of indus- 
trialization, I am filing a motion for reconsideration so 
that perhaps we could widen the concept of industriali- 
zation. We should not limit any longer. That is my only 
point, if I may reserve that right. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I think the word “industrialization” 
is not synonymous with industries. 

MR. GASCON. That is right. My point of contention 
is that when the provision says “industrialization based 
on sound agricultural development and agrarian re- 
form,” we might be limiting our industrialization to 
this. 

MR. MONSOD. No, “industrialization” is a generic 
term. It does not say “industries based on sound eco- 
nomic development.” It says “industrialization.” 

THE PRESIDENT. This was discussed during the 
caucus, was it not? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I would like to join Com- 
missioner Gascon in asking for a reconsideration of 
Section 1 for another reason. I think that during the. . . 
(Stricken off the record by the Chair on August 16, 
1986.) 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will take this up on 
Monday. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, Madam President. 

Thank you. 


368 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 15, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. There is a sug- 
gestion that there has been . . .(Stricken off the record 
by the Chair on August 16, 1986.) 

MR. VILLACORTA. . . . (Stricken off the record by 
the Chair on August 16, 1986.) 

MR. MONSOD. . . . (Stricken off the record by the 
Chair on August 16,1 986. ) 

MR. VILLACORTA. . . . (Stricken off the record by 
the Chair on August 16, 1986.) 

MR. MONSOD. . . . (Stricken off the record by the 
Chair on August 16, 1986.) 


MR. VILLACORTA. . . . (Stricken off the record by 
the Chair on August 16, 1986.) 

THE PRESIDENT. We will ask the Secretariat to have 
the proceedings of the caucus transcribed by Monday . 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I move that we 
adjourn the session unto nine o’clock tomorrow morn- 
ing. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
nine o’clock tomorrow morning. 

It was 5:52 p.m. 


t 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


369 


R.C.C. NO. 58 
Saturday, August 16, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:39 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Roberto R. Concepcion. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

MR. CONCEPCION. Dear Lord, we thank Thee for 
Thy sustained assistance in our earnest endeavors to 
draft a new Constitution for the Republic of the Philip- 
pines. 

Impart to us, our Father in heaven, the grace to 
vividly recall the fateful events of last February when 
the armed and armored forces of the tyrant confronted 
thousands of our civilian population who, armed with 
no more than their faith in Thy wisdom and their just 
cause, held their ground, seemingly doomed to complete 
annihilation, when both groups were surprised to reaUze 
that none of them were enemies, and all of them were 
and are Filipino brothers; and when exhilarated by this 
inspiring development they pledged to join hands in the 
quest for truth and justice, in the pursuit of freedom 
and equality, in the promotion of peace and progress for 
all. 

Help us, our loving Father, to draw strength from 
these meaningful tokens of Thy love to avail ourselves 
of the light of Thy wisdom to find the right path so that 
the new Constitution may ensure the stability of our 
beloved Republic, enrich human dignity in our land, and 
promote the well-being and progress of the Filipino 
people. Amen. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . . 

. Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. Absent 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo 

. Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. Present 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada 

. Absent 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. Present 

Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado 

. Absent 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present* 

Reyes de los . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Rigos 

. Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo 

. Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo 

. Present* 

Colay CO 

. Present 

Rosales 

. Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento .... 

. Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. Present* 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong .... 

. Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

Tan 

. Absent 

Guingona . . . . 

. Absent 

Tingson 

. Absent 

Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas 

. Present 

Laurel 

. Present 

Uka 

. Present* 

Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . . 

. Present* 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 

. Present 

Monsod 

. Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 28 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 

recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of th*e previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


370 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary -General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from former Justice Jose B.L. Reyes, Acting 

Committee on Human Rights, 
S ’ ^ University of Life Complex, 

of trihaf Manila, calling attention to grave violations 
Mountain ethnic minorities in the 

viZt Z saying that such 

XhTen^ ""i" the Regalian Doctrine 

Which IS enshnned m the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions 

r*’" to gia^tee 

e protection of the nghts of these ethnic minorities. 

~~ ^^^stitutional Commission 
Agencie^°”^*^^^^^^ Constitutional Commissions and 


of hy Mr. Democrito T. Mendoza 

or me trade Union Congress of the Philippines and 89 

of rti *^®^^tories, seeking inclusion in the Constitution 
Proposed provision on industrialization, eco- 
pro ectionism and Filipinization of the economy. 

~ Constitutional Commission 
Patrimony.^"'"'^^^^^ National Economy and 

IWversUv^o^^th^^v^ others of the 

term of «iiY vparc n^A officials should serve a 

not be allowed to 

nosition or anofha,- ^^®®lection, be it for the same 

position or another, except after the lapse of six years. 

(Communication No, 566 - ConstituUonal Commission 
To the Committee on Local Governments. 


Communication with 384 signatories with their re- 
spective addresses, all seeking to include in the Consti- 
tution a provision obliging the State to protect the hfe 
of the unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 567 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 470 
(Article on Local Governments) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we take up for considera- 
tion this morning Proposed Resolution No. 470, the 
revised Article on Local Governments. 

The parliamentary status is that we are in the period 
of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

We request the honorable Chairman, Comrnissioner 
Nolledo, and committee members. Commissioners 
Calderon, Tingson, Rosales, Alonto, de Castro, Benna- 
gen, Rigos, Regalado, Jamir and Ople to please occupy 
the front table. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

The revised report of the Committee on Uoc^ 
Governments is now embodied in Resolution No. 
copies of which are distributed to the Members of the 
Commission. 

Last Tuesday, the Members of the Commission met in 
caucus and discussed a prejudicial question on whether 
we should adopt a provision that will open the avenue 
towards federalism in the country. The Members of the 
Commission decided that only two autonomous regions 
shall be recognized; namely, Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras. So, the members of the Committee were 
asked to make the necessary revisions in our Committee 
Report Nos. 21 and 25 which are now consolidated 
in Resolution No. 470. I would like to explain the 
revised report of the Committee. 

We propose to include in the 1986 Constitution an 
Article on Local Governments consisting of two parts; 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 1 6, 1 986 


371 


namely, general provisions, and provisions on auto- 
nomous regions. In Section 1 of the revised committee 
report, we stated that the provinces, cities, municipali- 
ties and barrios are the territorial and political sub- 
divisions of the Republic of the Philippines. Then we 
stated that there shall be autonomous regions as here- 
inafter provided for. So, we recognized only the prov- 
inces, cities, municipalities and barrios as the territorial 
and political subdivisions of the Republic of the Plrilip- 
pines and we separated the provisions on autonomous 
regions because while we are mandating Congress to 
create autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras, the same shall be subject to certain condi- 
tions, one of which — and it is very important — is that 
the creation of the autonomous region must be 
approved in a plebiscite by a majority of the voters of 
the constituent units. 

In Section 2, we provided that Congress shall enact a 
Local Government Code and the contents of the Code 
are stated in this section. This is a substantial reproduc- 
tion of a similar provision in the 1973 Constitution, 
Madam President. 

In Section 3, we placed a provision on highly urban- 
ized cities which considers them as independent of the 
province but subject to an exception that the voters of a 
city within the province shall not be deprived of their 
right to vote for the elective provincial officials, a pro- 
vision in accordance with a resolution of Commissioner 
Napoleon Rama. 

In Section 4, we reproduced a provision found in the 
original Committee Report No. 21 that sectoral rep- 
resentation shall be recognized in legislative bodies of 
local governments as may be prescribed by law. 

In Section 5, we also reproduced a provision recom- 
mended in Committee Report No. 21 that the President 
of the Philippines shall exercise general supervision over 
local government units. 

Section 6 is also a reproduction of an identical provi- 
sion in the 1973 Constitution and in our original Com- 
mittee Report No. 2 1 that local government units may 
group themselves, consolidate or coordinate their 
efforts, services and resources for purposes commonly 
beneficial to them. 

Section 7 is actually a new provision intended to 
bring down centralized power into local governments. It 
authorizes the creation of regional development councils 
composed of local government officials with such ade- 
quate powers as may be prescribed by law, designed to 
accelerate the economic and social growth of local 
government units. This was actually recommended by 
Commissioner Christian Monsod. 

Section 8 is also a reproduction of Committee Report 
No. 21 about the taxing powers of local governments, 
and is also a reproduction of an identical provision in 
Committee Report No. 21. We separated Section 10 
from the foregoing provisions because of what we 
consider to be an important provision. So, I read: 


Local governments shall be entitled to share in the pro- 
ceeds of the exploitation and development of the national 
wealth within their respective areas. 

This was a resolution filed by Commissioners Ople, 
Maambong, Natividad and de los Reyes. 

Section 1 1 is also a reproduction with a slight modi- 
fication of a provision in Committee Report No. 21, and 
so the second part of the revised report covets the 
autonomous regions. 

Section 1 under the heading “AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS” states: 

There shall be created autonomous regions in Muslim 
Mindanao and the Cordillera consisting of provinces, cities 
and geographical areas with common historical, cultural, 
linguistic, ethnic, communal, economic or other character- 
istics within the framework of and respecting the national 
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of the 
Philippines. 

Madam President, the Members of the Constitutional 
Commission unanimously decided to Umit the creation 
of autonomous regions to Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras. So, such decision closed the door to the 
creation of other autonomous regions. Pursuant to the 
observation of Commissioner Rodrigo, if there should 
be other regions seeking autonomy, then they must seek 
such autonomy through a constitutional amendment. 

In Section 2, we substantially reproduced a similar 
provision m Committee Report No. 25 which states: 

The Congress shall enact an Organic Act in consultation 
with multisectoral bodies for each autonomous region, de- 
fining the basic structure of government for the region 
consisting of the regional executive department and region- 
al legislative assembly both of which shall be elective and 
representative of the constituent political units. 

The second sentence. Madam President, is aligned 
with many provisions in our 1986 Constitution designed 
to preserve the customs and traditions of indigenous 
communities. The second sentence of Section 2 reads: 

The Organic Act may likewise provide for courts with per- 
sonal law and property law jurisdiction within the autono- 
mous region consistent with the provisions of this Consti- 
tution on Judicial Power. 

In fact, we have already the Muslim personal law enacted 
by the deposed President as a decree, and we have also 
the creation of the Shari’a Courts. 

The last sentence is very important: 

The creation of the autonomous region shall be ap- 
proved in a plebiscite by mqority of the voters of the 
constituent units. 

I am changing my opinion in my sponsorship speech 
that the majority shall be determined with respect to 
the entire voting population of the autonomous regions. 
In our new report, it will be noticed that majority of the 
votes cast shall be determined with respect to each 
constituent unit. For example, if Iligan does not like to 


372 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


join the autonomous region based on the sentiments 
expressed by the voters therein, then Digan will not 
form part of the autonomous region. 

Section 3 states: 


MR. FOZ. May we raise some questions to clarify 
some of the provisions embodied in this new draft? 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


The President of the Philippines shall exercise general 
supervision over autonomous regions to ensure that laws 
are faithfully executed. 


This is for purposes of emphasis. 


Section 4 reproduces substantially the extent of 
legislative authority within the territorial jurisdiction of 
each autonomous region. Actually, these words were 
copies from the U.P. draft. The Committee, Madam 
President, decided to delete the provision on authority 
to establish special forces in view of the persistent 
resistance against such provision among the Members 
of the Constitutional Commission. Instead we adopted 
the amendment of Commissioners de Castro, Natividad 
and de los Reyes, now Section 5, which reads: 


The maintenance of peace and order within the region 
shall be the responsibility of the local police agencies. The 
local chief executive of each constituent unit shall exercise 
general supervision over the local police forces. The defense 
of the region against insurgency or invasion shall be the 
responsibUity of the National Government. 


With respect to Section 4 in relation to Section 6, if 
the powers of the regional autonomous region are 

noTr f understood that all 

thi«! responsibilities not granted by 

shall he autonomous region 

iust imnie ^ national government. Section 7 is 

on the^ai^^^ ^ Section 1 of the provisions 

make Section 1 more 
the elecHon Congress within one year from 

diction n? 1 Members to define the territorial juris- 
reair>n ' Organic act for, the autonomous 

Vi ^ ^ 11 mr Mindanao and the Cordilleras. I hope 
''vfi ollowed the guidelines set forth by this honor- 
able Commission in caucus last Tuesday. The Commit- 
ment t msident, is now ready to accept amend- 
ments to this revised report of the Committee on Local 
Governments. 


President, to enable the Com- 

ampndm^ Proposed amendments to discuss then 

sTsnend Committee, I move that we 

suspend the session for a few minuted 

but^tS suspend the session 

reoues? Sr ^ Therefore, we 

Commissioner Foz is recognized, 

ments? 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, after this caucus. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please pro- 
pound these questions to the Committee in caucus. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 10:01 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:16 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The Committee is now ready to accept 
amendments. 

May I ask that Commissioner Jamir be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. Madam President. 

My amendment is with respect to the second sentence 
of Section 1 . I move that it be deleted for being super- 
fluous because, at any rate, the autonomous regions are 
already named and provided for in the portion under 
the heading “Autonomous Regions.” 

In the second place, I believe that the wording of the 
first sentence is quite ambiguous in the sense th^ it 
might be interpreted to authorize the creation of addi- 
tional autonomous regions patterned after the Cor- 
dilleras and Muslim Mindanao. 

I heard the honorable Chairman state that the words 
“hereinafter provided” in the sentence I am asking to 
be deleted refers to these two regions. So, it is obvious 
that this sentence is already superfluous. 

May I know the response of the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. With due respect to the observations 
of the Gentleman, the purpose of stating “T^ere sh^l be 
autonomous regions as hereinafter provided” is to 
complete the image of the local government structure of 
the entire country. We really are manifesting that it is 
the sense of the Committee that there are only two 
autonomous regions to be recognized: namely, Muslim 
Mindanao and the Cordilleras. 

That is why we did not put that in the first sentence 
because there are certain conditions to be complied with 
in the creation of autonomous regions. 

So, the Committee regrets that it cannot accept the 
amendment because the entire image of the entire 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


373 


structured system of local governments will no longer 
be reflected. 

MR. JAMIR. If that is so, we can just add the phrase 
AUTONOMOUS REGIONS after the word “barrios” as 
they appear in the original version, without putting it in 
a separate sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Gentleman does not mind, 
the reason we did not include that in the first sentence 
is that autonomous regions are to be created by Con- 
gress, subject to certain conditions. Suppose those 
conditions are not complied with, then we do not con- 
sider the autonomous regions as political subdivisions 
of the Republic of the Philippines. 

The first sentence connotes, more or less, the regu- 
larly constituted political units. We can submit the 
amendment of the Gentleman to the body for voting. 

MR. JAMIR. All right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Madam President, the question is whether to delete 
the second sentence of Section 1 . 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Before we vote, may I ask one clarifi- 
catory question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas may pro- 
ceed. 

FR. BERNAS. Is it then the sense of the Committee 
that besides recognizing the Cordilleras and Muslim 
Mindanao as autonomous regions. Congress is prohibited 
from creating other autonomous regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. I said that 
we are adopting the Rodrigo observation during the 
caucus that if there should be other regions aside from 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras which would like 
to create themselves into autonomous regions, they 
should seek a constitutional amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. They should seek a constitutional 
amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body is now ready to vote on 
the amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The question, Madam President, 
is whether or not to delete the second sentence of 
Section 1. 


THE PRESIDENT. And this reads; “There shall be 
autonomous regions as hereinafter provided.” That is 
the second sentence, is that not correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Jamir, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor and 15 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 1 . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

My first amendment would be on the title. It is just 
to add “S” to “GOVERNMENT” and the words AND 
AUTONOMOUS REGIONS. So, the title of the Article 
will be “LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGIONS.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us put that amendment to a 
vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will not insist on my amendment to 
Section 1 because Commissioner Maambong would be 
presenting his; I will follow later. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized to amend Section 1 ? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we should ask the 
body if they have any objection to the Davide amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us proceed on that, first. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized, if he will speak on this proposed Davide amend- 
ment. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President, by changing 
the title to “LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGIONS,” it may give the impression that 
autonomous regions are not local governments. So, I 
have no objection to making “GOVERNMENT” plural 


374 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


but not to add “AUTONOMOUS REGIONS” because 
this is an Article on Local Governments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
explain? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Padilla through? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The reason we should include AND • 
AUTONOMOUS REGIONS in the title is that the title 
must embody the contents of the succeeding sections. 
Indeed, we have a new subtitle with the words “AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGIONS.” It would not necessarily follow 
that autonomous regions will not be considered political 
units. Section 1 under the general provisions defines 
what are really the general classification of local govern- 
ments. Under the subheading “AUTONOMOUS RE- 
GIONS, we especially recognize two autonomous 
regions. So, the title will not be misleading if it would 
be “LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS.” 

MR. RAMA. There are no more registered speakers 
on the same subject so we can go into a vote. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Davide 
amendment is objected to by Commissioner Padilla, and 
so it should be put to a vote. 


VUllINLr 

nJirfp As many as are in favor of th 

please raise their hand. (Severe 
Members raised their hand.) 

r^ise their hand. (Fe^ 

Members raised their hand.) 

(Three^M^^h^ abstaining, please raise their hanc 
f 1 nree Members raised their hand. ) 

abstenti^m^^th votes in favor, 9 against and 

abstentions, the amendment is approved. 

be recoim^d^t ^ Commissioner Padill 

be recognized to propose an amendment on Section 1 

niz™ P^^SIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is reco! 


The same wording was used in the committee report, 
but the clauses were merely transposed. 

Section 1 of the proposed resolution reads: 

The provinces, cities, municipalities and barrios are the 

territorial and political subdivisions of the Republic of the 

Philippines. 

So, I suggest that we readopt Section 1 of the 1973 
Constitution which is a matter of form. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we gladly accept 
the amendment because it has become more emphatic. 

MR. PADILLA. It is only a transposition, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Padilla on Section 1 has been accepted by 
the Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, the second sen- 
tence reads “There shall be autonomous regions as 
herein provided.” I suggest that it be reworded as 
follows: THE CONGRESS SHALL AUTHORIZE TWO 
AUTONOMOUS REGIONS AS HEREINAFTER PRO- 
VIDED,” instead of saying, “there are” or “there shall 
be” autonomous regions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We regret. Madam President, that 
we cannot accept the amendment because Commis- 
sioner de Castro will ask us whether Muslim Mindanao 
will constitute only one autonomous region. We made 
a statement before that there may be two or more auto- 
nomous regions in Muslim Mindanao as the Congress 
may provide. So, while we mention Muslim Mindanao as 
only one autonomous region, the meaning is that 
Congress may decide to create two or more autonomous 
regions out of Mindanao. 

MR. PADILLA. To make clear that autonomous 
regions are limited to Muslim Mindanao and the Cor- 
dilleras and not any other autonomous regions, I suggest 
that the provision will read: THE CONGRESS MAY 
AUTHORIZE AUTONOMOUS REGIONS IN MUSLIM 
MINDANAO AND CORDILLERA AS HEREINAFTER 
PROVIDED. 


m he fom of Section 1 , Article XI of the 1 973 Cor 
tution, which reads: 


The territorial and political subdivisions of the Philip- 
pines are the provinces, cities, municipalities and barrios. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I put a question to the Committee 
concerning the Padilla amendment? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16. 1986 


375 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

Is it the intent of the Committee that the creation 
of the two autonomous regions is actually delegated 
to Congress? Or is it to be done under the heading of 
“LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS” right in the Constitution, although man- 
dating Congress to pass the enabling laws and the 
organic acts to implement this action of the Constitu- 
tion? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is the understanding of the 
Committee that the Members of the Commission in 
caucus intended to mandate Congress to create the auto- 
nomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and the Cor- 
dilleras. So, the Constitution itself provides that there 
shall be autonomous regions in Muslim Mmdanao and 
the Cordilleras and that Congress shall pass the 
necessary organic acts. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but is the act or the creation by the 
Constitution denied by the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is, in effect, a constitutional 
creation because we are authorizing Congress to enact 
the organic acts for Muslim Mindanao and the Cor- 
dilleras. 

MR. OPLE. That intent seems to be clear now. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

At the start of our session this morning, I requested 
the Floor Leader that I be given an opportunity to 
speak, for the information of the body, on the matter 
of the autonomous region in Muslim Mindanao, and this 
is basic because it will run through from Section 1 up to 
the end of this committee report. Our caucus definitely 
decided that there must be autonomous regions only in 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. However, when we 
look at Muslim Mindanao, there are two regions which 
are not the same, having different dialects and some- 
times different customs; and one region would not 
like to be dominated by another region. I am talking 
of the Tausugs and the Maranaws. The Tausugs are in 
the Province of Sulu and the Maranaws, in Lanao del 
Norte, Lanao del Sur, and the surrounding areas. It will 
be very, very difficult to form only one autonomous 
region in these areas because the two Muslim areas do 
not agree with each other. So, I was recommending to 
the Committee — and I talked with Commissioner 
Alonto — that it is necessary to create two autonomous 


regions in Muslim Mindanao; one in Sulu, the Tausugs, 
and the other, the Maranaws. 

On the Cordilleras, during our meeting in the Com- 
mittee on Local Governments, it was clear to my mind 
that the Kalinga-Apayaos are not in favor of autono- 
mous region while the others are in favor. In fact, those 
we invited as our honored guests do not agree with each 
other. I do not know how the Committee came out with 
the decision to create an autonomous region in the 
Cordilleras when there are two big factions that are not 
of the same opinion. May we clarify this? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Alonto would like to 
clarify. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, the statements of 
the honorable Commissioner are both partly correct and 
partly wrong. In the case of Muslim Mindanao, the 
reason we specifically stated in this Constitution 
“Muslim Mindanao” is that these different ethnic 
groups, presently the Muslims in Mindanao, are agreed 
on one definite discipline, the discipUne of Islam. What- 
ever the tribe any of these ethnic groups in Mindanao 
belong to is completely in agreement at least on the 
basic principles of Islam. That is the reason we grouped 
them together as Muslim Mindanao. As far as grouping 
them into different territorial autonomous regions is 
concerned, that is left to Congress. So, the subsequent 
Congress will determine which of these ethnic groups 
could be grouped together by reason of geography, by 
reason of local customs or by any other reason for that 
matter. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Do I understand then that 
Congress may create two autonomous regions in Muslim 
Mindanao? 

MR. ALONTO. It depends upon Congress in the sense 
that, if it is not possible, for example, by reason of geo- 
graphy to create one solid autonomous region for the 
Muslims of Mindanao, Congress has the leeway under 
this constitutional provision to create^two or more. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is with regard to the Muslim 
dominated area of Mindanao. What about the Cor- 
dilleras? 

MR. ALONTO. In accordance with the spirit of these 
constitutional provisions, I think that will also be similar 
to the Cordilleras although I would prefer that Com- 
missioner Bennagen explain that to the Gentleman. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I brought up this matter because 
of the amendment of Honorable Padilla on the second 
sentence of Section 1 where he stated that there shall be 
two autonomous regions. This will limit Congress in 


376 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


making only one autonomous region for Muslim Minda- 
nao and one autonomous region for the Cordilleras 
when actually there are two different factions in MusUm 
Mindanao and two different factions in the Cordilleras. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair would Like to invite the 
attention of Commissioner de Castro to the fact that 
Commissioner Padilla revised his proposed amendment 
precisely to meet that particular situation. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Then I would like to ask the Com- 
mittee one more question. In a few months, has the 
quarrel between the two Cordillera groups which has 
been existing for many years been settled? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Both in the case of Muslim Minda- 
nao and the Cordilleras, the fact is that there are a 
number of ethnic groups within each region but which 
are unified by common bonds. In the case of the 
Muslims; there are at least seven ethnic groups the three 
biggest of which are the Tausugs, the Maguindanaos and 
the Maranaws. But in spite of these ethnic differences, 
they are unified by a long history of common struggle 
^d, more importantly, by Islam as a unifying factor l^n 

conteS® tL common ecology, cultural 

J common response to government neglect 

cast ff them. In the 

th/ r that there are two major factions 

whe^ T I think that was already resolved 

wS^sid St d ' CommissioLr rIos. 

one big groun wh^^if committee hearmgs, there was 
nomy I fhink T they are not for auto- 
organization, anT with“the°cSf^ the same 

reread that letter indulgence, I can 

MR. DE CASTRO. I think it may not be necessary. 

the^job ^°t our job to settle; it is 

going to read ® ^®tter that I am 

evw quarref re" • ^een settled. What- 

SlyToUr should take it as a 

agree to^whaUhl^GenSa^ 

ceedings, will the CornSj^*^' ^^'P^'^tte the pro- 
ments, when the certain amend- 

provisionsontheautonomous\';gionsf''^'°'' 1 of the 

MR. NOLLEDO. We will 

it will not destroy the essence ofTe‘’proUL” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I think the more appropriate place 
for exchanges of views on the intent of the Commission 
concerning the autonomous regions would be when we 
come to the separate article dealing with them. But 
since the issue has been raised — I would not say pre- 
maturely because we are dealing with the second sen- 
tence of Section 1 about autonomous regions — may I 
volunteer the information that on behalf of the original 
proponents of the resolution to create two autonomous 
regions, we did contemplate only one autonomous 
region for Muslim Mindanao. 

Madam President, this has been the butt of contro- 
versy for many years now, with the Philipphie govern- 
ment in the past regime setting up two autonomous 
regions which, in the view of many Muslim leaders, was 
an attempt to circumvent the obligations of the Philip- 
pine government under the Tripoli Agreement. I am not 
saying that the Tripoli Agreement binds this Commis- 
sion; it is far from that. But if we have chosen to write a 
constitution of peace, peace in the countryside through 
land reform, peace through social justice in labor, peace 
in the Cordilleras and in Muslim Mindanao, then I think 
we have to recognize that the major demand of most of 
the groups — Muslim groups in Mindanao whether or 
not this is the MNLF or alternative Muslim organiza- 
tion — is precisely to form a single autonomous region 
in what used to be the Moro homeland, consisting of 
several provinces and cities. I think if we say now that 
there shall be two autonomous regions in Mindanao 
instead of only one, we would have to face all over again 
this serious accusation of the Moro National Liberation 
Front and other Muslim groups that we are not seriously 
addressing their problem. We are dividing them instead 

of unifying them. Of course. Commissioner de Castro is 
right. There are Maranaws, there are Maguindanaos, 
there are Tausugs, there are Samals, and there are 
Yakans. But for purposes of giving Muslim Mindanao 
their autonomy for which they have waged an armed 
struggle as well as a peaceful struggle, we should not fall 
short of the minimum expectation that this shall be a 
single autonomous region for Muslim Mindanao. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would like to support that view 
because in the earlier manifestations that I have already 
made, I adverted to the fact that there have been sys- 
tematic ongoing consultations among the various ethnic 
groups unified by Islam. And it would not be fair if we 
even drop the hint that there is this overriding division 
among these various ethnic groups because the fact is 
that they are unified as a community in spite of ethnic 
differences. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we go back now to the 
proposed Padilla amendment? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 1 6, 1986 


377 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may we ask 
Commissioner Padilla if he is willing to adopt the com- 
mittee recommendation based on his amendment that it 
should read as follows: “There shall be autonomous 
regions in MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE COR- 
DILLERA as hereinafter provided.” We will accept the 
amendment if it so reads. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, that is my amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, instead of starting with “THE 
CONGRESS,” the Committee believes that it would be 
more emphatic if put: “There shall be autonomous 
regions IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE COR- 
DILLERA as herehiafter provided.” We will accept that 
amendment if it runs like that. 

MR. PADILLA. I yield. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

The Committee accepts the amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment on the second sentence of Section 
1? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. RAMA. I ask. Madam President, that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized to amend Section 1 . 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

On my own behalf “and that of coproponents who will 
be identified later, may I propose an amendment by 
inserting a paragraph in Section 1 that will run as fol- 
lows: IN ADDITION TO THE ABOVE ENUMERA- 
TION, CONGRESS MAY, BY LAW, RECOGNIZE A 
SPECIAL POLITICAL SUBDIVISION BASED ON 
METROPOLITAN AREAS, INCLUDING THE NA- 
TIONAL CAPITAL REGION, SUBJECT TO A PLEBI- 
SCITE, AND PROVIDED THAT THE COMPONENT 
CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES RETAIN THEIR 
BASIC AUTONOMY AND SHALL BE ENTITLED TO 
THEIR OWN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES; AND 
PROVIDED FURTHER THAT ANY METROPOLITAN 
AUTHORITY THAT MAY BE CREATED SHALL 
LIMIT ITS JURISDICTION TO BASIC SERVICES 
REQUIRING AREA-WIDE COORDINATION. In this 
respect, I would appreciate it if the Committee will 
allow me to give a very brief explanation for this pro- 
posal. 

Madam President, the enumeration of political 
subdivisions in Section 1 omits any mention of metro- 
politan regions and by implication obhterates Metro 
Manila and potential equivalents in the Visayas and 
Mindanao as distinct political subdivisions. 


This draft provision will rescue the existing National 
Capital Region with its population of eight million from 
the possibility of disappearing in a constitutional limbo 
or from the fate of becoming constitutional orphans. 
There is nothing here to suggest that the Metro Manila 
Commission in its present form will be preserved. It 
leaves to Congress the option of providing for a supra- 
municipal council or authority, while vesting basic 
autonomy in the cities and municipalities themselves, 
and limiting the jurisdiction of that council or authority 
to several basic services requiring area-wide coordination 
and supervision. 

These services. Madam President, shall include drain- 
age and flood control, zoning and land use, traffic and 
transport management, garbage collection and dump 
sites, and possibly, as Congress may determhie, also 
health and peace and order. 

It may be pointed out in this connection that 
although differences exist among leaders of Metro 
Manila with respect to the form of a supramunicipal 
authority, there is perfect unanimity that the right of 
Metro Manila to exist as a political subdivision should 
not be denied, especially by omission from the Consti- 
tution. It is also pointed out that there is no major 
metropolitan area in the world, including so-called 
conurbations, that is without a system of governance. 

The model of a political subdivision envisaged here 
can apply not only to the National Capital Region but 
also to potential conurbations in the south, such as 
Cebu and Davao, as they meet the standards to be 
established by Congress and subject to the preference of 
the people themselves in a plebiscite. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
propound some questions to Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Gladly, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

In the proposed amendment of the Gentleman, he is 
returning the mayor-council setup of government to 
component cities and municipalities within the National 
Capital Region? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. That intention is 
very clear and is made explicit in this draft provision. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to the phrase “SHALL 
limit its JURISDICTION TO BASIC SERVICES RE- 
QUIRING AREA-WIDE COORDINATION,” does the 
word “JURISDICTION” also refer to rules to be pro- 
mulgated by the metropolitan authority? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but only with respect to such 
spheres of competence that will be granted by Congress 
to the metropolitan authority. What this paragraph does 


378 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


contemplate, although it has been omitted for the sake 
of brevity, is that under the authority, there will be a 
council consisting of the mayors themselves who will 
make the rules for the authority with respect to what 
they hold in common. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Do I understand it right that the 
rules to be promulgated by the metropolitan authority 
should not infringe upon the provisions of the ordi- 
nances within the component cities and municipalities? 

MR. OPLE. They should not and in that sense, the 
basic autonomy is vested in the municipal councils and 
the mayors themselves. Since the mayors will, as con- 
templated here, constitute the rule-making council of 
the metropolitan authority, they wUl ensure that there 
is no inconsistency between the rules for the metropolis 
and the ordinances of the municipal councils. Madam 
President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Last question. Madam President. 

Do I understand it right from the Gentleman’s expla- 
nation that the Metro Manila Commission will continue 

under P.D. No. 824 until the same is repealed by 
Congress? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, P.D. No. 824 has been upheld by the 
Supreme Court recently as being vahd and constitu- 
tions. Therefore, until repealed or amended otherwise, 
the Metro Manila Commission in its present form wiU 
contmue and the 1 5,000 employees, some of whom are 
outside these halls right now, are guaranteed stability of 
emp oyment. Of course, the Metro Manila Commission 
IS set aside in favor of a new authority that Congress wiU 
determme. 

MIL NOLLEDO. Madam President, another question 
trom Commissioner Bennagen. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas seeks to be 
recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just a few clarificatory questions. The 
amendment uses the word “political subdivision,” the 
same word used in Section 1 . However, the amendment 
limits its jurisdiction to basic services. My question is: In 
terms of categorization in municipal corporation law, 
how would this body be categorized? There is a distinc- 
tion usually made between municipal corporations and 
quasi-municipal corporations. And quasi-municip^ 
corporations are of very limited jurisdiction on basic 
services — drainage system, education, et cetera. Is what 
is contemplated here something below a municipal 
corporation? 

MR. OPLE. It is probably located somewhat below 
the level of a municipal corporation, but at the same 
time, we wanted to leave to Congress some flexibility to 
determine, this being a sui generis situation or one of a 
kind. Probably, the prudent thing to do would be to 
leave to Congress a lot of flexibility to determine what 
kind of supramunicipal authority will be established, 
although the bias of this constitutional provision, as 
proposed, is towards limiting the powers of this author- 
ity only to the management of some basic services 
commonly benefitting the component cities and munic- 
ipalities and not a situation such as what the Metro 
Manila Commission now has, where all the legislative 
and executive powers are concentrated in a nonelective 
body. 

FR. BERNAS. As I see it, therefore, would it be 
correct to say that what the Gentleman contemplates 
here is something between what Section 1 contemplates 
and what Section 6 contemplates? 


MR. BENNAGEN. In Commissioner Ople’s listing of 
asic services are included drainage and flood control, 
zoning and land use, traffic and transport management, 
n the Gentleman’s contemplation, would jurisdiction 
also mclude the estabUshment of schools? 


ask this particularly in connection with the conges- 
lon ® t e university belt. I think there were floods 
.? ® terns of dispersal of schools which necessa- 

rily atiect traffic management and other social services 
m areas where these schools are concentrated. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, this hst of basic 
services is no selflmiting, but we wanted to point oul 
that consistent with the basic autonomy vested in the 
cities ^d municipalities, the sphere of jurisdiction ol 
the metropohtan authonty that will supplant the Metre 
Manila Commission ought to be confined just to several 
areas of basic services. Should it mclude schools even- 
tually? We will leave that to Congress, Madam President 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I said sui generis, and it will chal- 
lenge Congress to come out with the most appropriate 
form of authority. 

FR. BERNAS. As a matter of fact, there are models 
for this in other jurisdictions. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, I would like to 
strongly support the amendment of Commissioner Ople 
from experiences in other parts of the world when 
addressing the economic problems of what is not only a 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 1 6, 1 986 


379 


metropolis but a megapolis like Mexico, Tokyo and 
South Korea. It is not only expedient but imperative 
that there be some way of attaining economies of scale 
in the basic services enumerated by Commissioner Ople. 
I think a study has already been made of the i\^roblems 
of Metro Cebu and, sooner or later, it will be imperative 
to have a way of coordinating basic services for the 
benefit of the residents of the metropolis. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Will the proponent yield to a few 
clarificatory questions? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, 'to the lady. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MS. AQUINO. Am I correct in understanding that the 
Gentleman’s proposal does not contemplate the em- 
powerment to these special pohtical subdivisions with 
the pohce power and the power of taxation? 

MR. OPLE. The police power is vested in the Metro- 
politan Police Command which is part of the chain of 
command of the Armed Forces of the Philippines but 
there is nothing here to bar a future law from including 
peace and order, as the explanatory note says, or even 
certain powers of taxation. But right now, I think the 
inclination of this provision is to vest as much powers as 
possible in the local units themselves rather than in a 
supramunicipal authority. 

MS. AQUINO. But even*then, the power of this 
supramunicipal authority shall be limited to basic 
services requiring areawide jurisdiction. In that case, 
would this not more aptly belong to Section 6 of the 
proposed draft of the committee report on local govern- 
ment units grouping themselves or consolidatmg their 
efforts, services and resources for purposes commonly 
beneficial to them? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. We have given 
scrupulous attention to Section 6 as an alternative to 
this provision but we have taken counsel with a lot of 
people authoritative in this sphere. They point out that 
Section 6 was actually transferred bodily from the 1973 
Constitution to the present draft Constitution, and 
experiments conducted in the past, according to Section 
6, have not proven highly successful, the reason being 
that this imphes a voluntary association of several local 
government units. In Metro Manila they tried this before 
1975 and the results were inconclusive and disappoint- 
ing; so the Metro Manila Commission was established. 
On the other hand, it was an overreaction to the insuffi- 
ciency of the experiments conducted under Section 6; 


it became too powerful. We are now correctmg both 
through this draft provision. Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, the problem seems 
to be tlie anticipation of the powers that might be 
vested in this political subdivision which is essentially in 
the nature of a geopolitical subdivision. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. By that, it would necessarily cover the 
requirements of contiguity, adjacency and accessibi- 
lity to each other. When they are grouped together as a 
geopolitical subdivision, necessarily, the subdivision 
carries the juristic personality of a municipal corpora- 
tion which carries with it the inherent powers and juris- 
diction of police power and taxation. However, if it is 
delimited as provided in the last proviso of this pro- 
posed Article, then I am apprehensive of the possibility 
of confusion in terms of putting together the concept of 
a geopolitical subdivision with the limited powers as the 
Gentleman intends. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I have already described the situa- 
tion in Metro Manila as sui generis or one of a kind and, 
therefore, we leave as much flexibility as possible to 
Congress who will, in fact, provide both the structure 
and the powers of this Commission consistent with the 
broad outline of this draft provision. I think the 
Congress will have to find a sort of middle band be- 
tween a full-pledged municipal corporation with all its 
inherent powers and the provisions of Section 6. Why 
do I mention Section 6? Because in this case, the metro- 
politan rule-making council, according to the con- 
templation of this provision but it is not made explicit, 
will consist of the mayors of the component cities and 
municipalities themselves. Therefore, this is reminiscent 
of a kind of loose confederacy where the municipalities 
and the cities - and that is what they agree on now - 
retain their autonomous powers as much as possible but 
have to recognize the fact that, as Commissioner Ville- 
gas earlier said, there are common basic services to them, 
all of which are better undertaken on a regjonwide basis. 
In that respect, the supramunicipal authority will have 
the competence and the jurisdiction. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, may I suggest to the 
proponent that he be more explicit in his clarification of 
the concept of supramunicipal authority because to me, 
it is some kind of a hybrid or a mongrel that does not 
belong to Section 1 . If we adopt it and it attains to the 
level of Section 1 , specifically defining what are the 
municipal corporations, with the absence of juris- 
prudence on this matter, it might be unsettling not only 
to jurisprudence but also to the laws on municipal 
corporations. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I call attention to 
the fact that what is central here is that we authorize 
Congress to recognize a special political subdivision 


380 


SATURDAY. AUGUST 16, 1986 


based on metropolitan areas, in addition to those that 
are enumerated in the first sentence of Section 1. I 
think that is the most fundamental so that they are not 
consigned to a constitutional limbo. And having pro- 
vided for that, meaning, by an act of Congress a metro- 
politan area can be recognized as a special pohtical sub- 
division, I think we empower Congress to provide that 
kind of a suitable structure which will address problems 
of economies of scale for the entire region, but which 
still provide and vest basic local autonomy in the 
component cities and municipalities. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


SET FORTH IN SECTION 1 1 HEREOF. THE COM- 
PONENT CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES SHALL RE- 
TAIN THEIR BASIC AUTONOMY. IT SHALL BE 
ENTITLED TO THEIR OWN LEGISLATIVE ASSEM- 
BLIES., THE METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY THAT 
MAY THEREBY BE CREATED SHALL LIMIT ITS 
JURISDICTION TO BASIC SERVICES REQUIRING 
COORDINATION.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session for 
a few minutes before hearing Commissioners Colayco 
and Bemas. 

It was 11:07 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 11:25 a.m., the session was resumed. 

, THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Opie be recognized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I made a reservation with the Chair- 
man for a possible clarification. I think it can also be 
answered by Commissioner Ople. 

What would be the effect of this provision on the 
allocation of separate seats for the Lower House of 
Congress as now defined and prescribed in Section 5 of 
the proposed Article on the Legislative? Under said 
section, the congressional districts or the legislative seats 
are to be apportioned among cities and provinces. Since 
we recognize now a “supramunicipal,” geopolitical 
subdivision, is it our understanding that the areas com- 
posing a metropolitan authority will be entitled to 
separate representation in the Lower House of 
Congress? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople 
mzed. ^ 


IS recog- 


MR. OPLE. I have agreed to a rewording of th 
proposed amendment concerning metropolitan areas 
the tmal draft text now being in the hands of the Com 
^ acknowledge the other contributor 
to this draft provision, Madam President; namely. Com 
missioneis Nolledo, Azcuna, Bennagen, Alonto, Calde 

r *^’i- Aquino, Bernas and Presiden 

Ceciha Munoz Palma. 

th the Chairman c 

th^ is proposed to be relocated to what a 

erees here thought was the more appropriat 
^®^^tion 6, rather than as part c 
thp pvT • with that. Madam President, may 1 as 

nrnnn Committee to read the text of th 

proposed amendment as finalized. 

Commissioner Nolledo may pleas 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

After coijsidering the refinements suggested by Con 
missioned Davide and Monsod, the Ople amendmei 
shall read as foUows: “THE CONGRESS MAY B 
LAW, CREATE A SPECIAL METROPOLITAN POLL 
ICAL SUBDIVISION INCLUDING THE NATIONA 
CAPITAL REGION, SUBJECT TO A PLEBISCITE A 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I reply to that on 
behalf of the Committee. 

The answer is “yes.” I think we should note that the 
original contemplation of the Committee on the Legisla- 
tive allowed for the return, for purposes of redistricting, 
of ten towns of Rizal to the old mother province mid 
one town of Bulacan to the old mother province. I think 
it is now clear that the ’’intention is to preserve the 
territorial integrity under this section of what is known 
as the National Capital Region or the Metropolitan 
Manila Region and, therefore, the redistricting, now 
being undertaken by the Committee on the Legislative 
with the help of the COMELEC, should take proper 
account of that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Does it mean, therefore, that an 
approval of this amendment would necessarily result in 
the amendment to the proposed Section 5 of the Article 
on the Legislative? 

MR. OPLE. Section 5 of the Article on the Legislative 
pertains to the apportionment of the seats. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. So that in concrete teims. Madam Pres- 
ident, my own reading of the situation is - and I hope 
the Committee supports this — that the Committee on 
the Legislative may proceed to redistrict on the basis of 
the existence of an entity known as the National Capital 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


381 


Region. Valenzuela, for example, in the original redis- 
tricting plan of the COMELEC submitted to the Com- 
mittee on the Legislative, was returned to Bulacan for 
purposes of redistricting. I think that is now no longer 
necessary. And in the case of the ten towns of Rizal, I 
think tliis will save Senator Sumulong the pain of having 
to attend to the redistricting of the ten towns that were 
of Rizal origin. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I have to express 
this view because upon its approval, the Committee on 
the Legislative will be compelled to request the re- 
opening of Section 5 of the proposed Article on the 
Legislative. 

Thank you. 

MR. SUMULONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sumulong is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUMULONG. May I address a few clarificatory 
questions to Commissioner Ople? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. Madam President. 

MR. SUMULONG. In the apportionment scheme 
being discussed by the Committee on the Legislative 
with the assistance of the COMELEC, the Province of 
Rizal was given ten districts and these include the twelve 
municipalities of Rizal which were integrated into Metro 
Manila. What then will be the fate of this understand- 
ing? 

MR. OPLE. This was precisely the nub of the ques- 
tion put by the Chairman of the Committee on the 
Legislative and my answer was that it will no longer be 
necessary. 

MR. SUMULONG. How would that effect also the 
redistricting in the Province of Bulacan? 

MR. OPLE. I have made a manifestation to the 
Committee on behalf of Commissioner Natividad and 
myself — and I hope that Commissioner “Soc” Rodrigo 
also shares this — that if we cannot be responsible for 
Valenzuela in Bulacan, since it will not be part of the 
political subdivision known as the Province of Bulacan, 
then why should Valenzuela be incorporated into Bula- 
can just for purposes of redistricting? And so, in that 
respect, we do not mind Valenzuela being redistricted 
within the context and framework of the existing entity 
known as the National Capital Region. 

MR. SUMULONG. But Valenzuela can no longer be 
considered as integrated into Metro Manila because 
Metro Manila has disappeared now by virtue of Section 
1 of the Article on Loc^ Governments. 


MR. OPLE. The draft provision that is now pending 
before the Commission, Madam President, precisely 
seeks to rescue Metro Manila from constitutional limbo 
by providing for its existence as a special geographical 
political subdivision. However, it will be relocated ac- 
cording to the consensus on the floor from its place now 
in Section 1, following the enumeration of political 
subdivisions, to Section 6 which deals with the power of 
local government units to group themselves, if Aey con- 
sider this beneficial for their common good. So, in 
effect, I see the legal situation as one where, as the 
Chairman of the Committee on Local Governments 
pointed out, the law creating the Metro Manila Com- 
mission, P.D. No. 824, having been sustained by the 
Supreme Court as being constitutional just very recent- 
ly, the Metropolitan Manila government will continue to 
exist under a valid law until this is amended or repealed. 

MR. SUMULONG. Metro Manila has ceased to exist, 
but we still have the National Capital Region. So, would 
it not be better, and I think it will be more in accord- 
ance with the facts, if in Section 5 of the Article on the 
Legislative Department we say that the apportionment 
of districts will cover not only the provinces and cities 
but also the National Capital Region, that will cover 
Valenzuela and the 1 2 municipalities of Rizal integrated 
in Metro Manila? 

MR. OPLE. The Commissioner is also prepared to 
make the supreme sacrifice of allowing towns of Rizal 
origin to be redistributed within the context of the 
National Capital Region. 

MR. SUMULONG. May I just ask one more question. 

I understand that the Commissioner is of the opinion 
that Metro Manila, as created by P.D. No. 824 of 
President Marcos, no longer exists. 

MR. OPLE. It continues to exist until the law is 
deemed repealed or amended. Madam President. I am 
not quoting my own views but the interpretation of this 
legal situation made by the Chairman of the Committee 
on Local Governments, meaning that Metro Manila con- 
tinues to exist until the law creating it, which has been 
upheld as constitutional by the Supreme Court, is 
deemed superseded, repealed or amended. 

MR. SUMULONG. So, until Congress takes action on 
the Gentleman’s amendment by enacting a law recogniz- 
ing special political subdivision in metropolitan areas, 
what will be the situation of the 12 municipalities of 
Rizal aiTid one municipality of Bulacan? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, they will remain, 
according to this interpretation, in that entity known as 
the National Capital Region or Metropolitan Manila. 

MR. SUMULONG. So, in the interim, is it still the 
opinion of the Commissioner that we have to follow 
P.D. No. 824 of President Marcos? 


382 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. OPLE. I am sustaining, on my own account, the 
interpretation of the Qiairman of the Committee on 
Local Governments, that that is so. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I intervene. I 
think the Committee on Transitory Provisions has 
adopted a provision that all existing presidential decrees 
shall be valid until set aside by Congress. In view of that 
provision, P.D. No. 824 shall continue until repealed or 
amended by Congress. 


from tacking, let us say, a provisional remedy to this 
problem to the Article on Transitory Provisions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. SUMULONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

I also thank Commissioner Ople. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
gladly accepts the amendment. 


MR. SUMULONG. If the opinion of the Committee is 
that P.D. No. 824 is still in existence and should be 
followed, we should note that it provides for a com- 
mission form of government in Metro Manila. But there 
has never been a commission. P.D. No. 824 was never 
implemented correctly because instead of creating a 
commission to govern Metro Manila, there was only one 
person who governed Metro Manila, and that was the 
former First Lady, Mrs. Imelda Marcos. So if we are 
going to follow that decree until Congress enacts this 
law mentioned in the amendment of Commissioner 
Ople, then Mr. Lina, who was appointed by the new 
government as Officer-in-Charge or Acting Governor of 
Metro Manila, has no legal basis for acting as such 
ecause under P.D. No. 824 there should be a com- 

mission, not a governor. Are we going to allow that in 
the meantime? 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I have some clarificatory questions. 

Will this entity have legislative authority? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, it is not made explicit 
in the draft provision but the contemplation of the pro- 
ponents is really to have Congress enact a law creating a 
quasi-legislative assembly consisting of the mayors of 
the component cities and municipalities themselves who 
will then be in a position to enact rules that will be con- 
sistent with the ordinances that their own municipal 
councils shall provide. 


MR. NtULEDO. Madam President, may I agai 
mteivene. TJere is a provision embodied in the ne^ 
IV 0 e that the disuse or nonapplication of any la' 
does not repeal the same. So, the fact that it is nc 
implemented does not mean that P.D. No. 824 
already repealed. Now, considering that Mr. Lina is th 
fv. then he is deemed, for legal purpose 

me Metro Manila Commission until the incumber 
resident appoints the members of the commission. 


FR. BERNAS. So, it could be empowered to exercise 
the usual general police power, the power of eminent 
domain and the power to tax for purposes of supporting 
the basic services? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I think that is a very splendid 
interpretation of the intent of the proponents. 

FR. BERNAS. I thank Commissioner Ople. 


MR. SUMULONG. Upon what basis is Mr. Lina 
occupying the position of Acting Governor of Metro 

according to P.D. No. 824 the 
missk»n?^ Metro Manila should be a com- 

Chair supposes we are not 
at least nnp ^iscussing the authority of Mr. Lina but 
and the tw seems to bother the Commission 

there Can thk admit that it is still 

.he le^slative 

Local Governments? I think u/hoft, Article on 

ahniit what we Whatever we may think 

thZ as me ° settled 

mere as a temporary measure, as a compromise. 

• President, that that 

IS a posability. If we want to do so, there is nothing in 
this draft provision that will prevent the Commission 


THE PRESIDENT. So, how wUl it read now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, it reads: ‘‘THE 
CONGRESS MAY, BY LAW, CREATE A SPECIAL 
METROPOLITAN POLITICAL SUBDIVISION IN- 
CLUDING THE NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION, 
SUBJECT TO A PLEBISCITE AS SET FORTH IN 
SECTION 11 HEREOF. THE COMPONENT CITIES 
AND MUNICIPALITIES SHALL RETAIN THEIR 
BASIC AUTONOMY AND SHALL BE ENTITLED TO 
THEIR OWN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES. THE 
METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY THAT MAY THERE- 
BY BE CREATED SHALL LIMIT ITS JURISDICTION 
TO BASIC SERVICES REQUIRING COORDINA- 
TION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this part now of Section 1 or of 
Section 6? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It will be the first part of Section 6, 
Madam President. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


383 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmien to is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Before we vote on this refor- 
mulated section, may we request a clean copy. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I second the suggestion that we ask 
for a clean copy; but meanwhile, I would like to ask the 
Committee if they will agree to some modifications and 
amendments. From what I heard, the wording says: 
“THE CONGRESS MAY, BY LAW, CREATE A 
SPECIAL METROPOLITAN POLITICAL SUBDIVI- 
SION ...” Why is that singular? Does it mean that this 
authorizes the creation of only one political subdi- 
vision? I heard Commissioner Ople mention that a 
similar subdivision may be created in Cebu or in Davao. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, is Commissioner 
Rodrigo suggesting that we convert this singular word 
into plural? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. We accept the amendment, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. RODRIGO. I thank Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. So, instead of “A SPECIAL METRO- 
POLITAN POLITICAL SUBDIVISION,” it becomes 
plural. We add an S to “SUBDIVISION” and eliminate 
“A.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have another question. I think the purpose of the 
proposal is to maintain the powers of the mayors. But 
the wording, as read, mentions only legislative assem- 
blies. Should we not add LOCAL EXECUTIVES so this 
part reads: “SHALL BE ENTITLED TO THEIR OWN 
LOCAL EXECUTIVES AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEM- 
BLIES.” 

MR. OPLE. That is indeed the purpose, so we want to 
thank Commissioner Rodrigo for making up for that 
omission. So “LOCAL EXECUTIVES” will be intro- 
duced. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The proposal now reads: “THE 
CONGRESS MAY, BY LAW, CREATE SPECIAL 


METROPOLITAN POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS IN- 
CLUDING THE NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION, 
SUBJECT TO A PLEBISCITE AS SET FORTH IN 
SECTION 1 1 HEREOF. THE COMPONENT CITIES 
AND MUNICIPALITIES SHALL RETAIN THEIR 
BASIC AUTONOMY AND SHALL BE ENTITLED 
TO THEIR OWN LOCAL EXECUTIVES AND LEGIS- 
LATIVE ASSEMBLIES. THE METROPOLITAN 
AUTHORITY THAT MAY THEREBY BE CREATED 
SHALL LIMIT ITS JURISDICTION TO BASIC 
SERVICES REQUIRING COORDINATION.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, just a minute. I think 
the Munoz Palma amendment is not reflected here, so 
instead of “INCLUDING” before “THE NATIONAL 
CAPITAL REGION,” we place “SUCH AS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I propose to delete “INCLUDING 
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION” because we 
recognize the possibility of the creation of more than 
one metropolitan authority. 

MR. OPLE. No, it reads “SUCH AS THE NATIONAL 
CAPITAL REGION.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Even then, because that would not be 
necessary. It would be superfluous. 

MR. OPLE. For purposes of enlisting the support of 
eight million Metro Manilans behind this Constitution... 

MR. DAVIDE. They would be happy already if we 
have this provision, even if we do not mention “THE 
NATIONAL CAPITAL REGION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So long as the National Capital 
Region is recognized in a transitory provision? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. In that context, I think we have no 
difficulty. Madam President; we accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee also accepts the 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


384 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. May we just clarify one point from 
the distinguished Gentleman, Honorable Ople. When he 
mentioned the creation being subject to a plebiscite, was 
he thinking in tenns of a plebiscite for the whole 
country? 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes, thank you. Madam President. 
MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. No, Madam President, this contemplates 
a plebiscite for all the qualified voters of the National 
Capital Region. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman was not thinking in 
terms of, say, seeking the decision of the people in the 
whole province in the case of Rizal but only in those 
municipalities affected. 


MR. OPLE. It is a matter of time perspective, I 
believe. In 1975, the National Capital Region was 
created partly out of the towns of Rizal and Bulacan. 
Since then, how many years have elapsed? Eleven 
years, and according 'to some of the mayors I met this 
morning, that was a shotgun wedding in 1975 to which 
they had to submit since they had no choice. But they 
have enjoyed their liye-in status among themselves since 
1975, and now, having gotten so accustomed to each 
other’s company, they would rather retain, they would 
rather live under the same roof at this time. So, I think, 
considermg the time that has elapsed since 1975, the 
plebiscite can justifiably be confined to what is now 
known as the National Capital Region. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, if we confine our 
S® National Capital Region, the Com- 

r fnrth submitting the matter to 

Ri^^i plebiscite to the provinces of Bulacan and 
Kizal who would be vitally affected? 

^ ^ political revanchist, I would 

i including Bulacan and Rizal, but I 

y o the realities of history. Madam President. 

when the Commissioner speaks 

I).® excluding the possibility that the 

Rizal ought not to be con- 

Nati ^ continued operation of the 

National Capital Region? 


whprp could be a highly distortive situati' 

vears of are allowed to vote after 

years of separation. Madam President. 

and wives? Prescription period for missing husban 

MR. SUAREZ. I think it is seven years. 

MR. OPLE. In the CivU Code, I think it is seven yea 
Here the separation has been 1 1 years. Madam Pr 
ident. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Suarez through? 


MR. FOZ. May we also ask some questions for clarifi- 
cation? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. I am not sure whether this point has been 
touched on before by other Commissioners, but I just 
would like to be clarified on this. 

What exactly is the relation between the component 
cities and municipalities of the region and such metro- 
politan authority? Is it a relationship of principal and 
agent? 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think what is new 
about this concept is that the municipalities and cities 
retain basic autonomy. We will recall that in 1975 the 
legislative power was taken away from all the cities and 
municipalities by the Metro Manila Commission. They 
also lost a lot of their powers, not only of passing their 
own ordinances but also of exercising autonomy over 
their own budget which must be ratified by the Metro 
Manila Commission although they are dealing 
their own internal resources. And so, I would hesitate 
to describe them as agents of the Metropolitan Ma- 
nila Authority. On the other hand, the Metropolitan 
Manila Authority in this case emanates from the collec- 
tivity of the cities and municipalities which are the 
component units. Madam President. 


MR. FOZ. I thank the Commissioner. 

Here, he enumerated some of the services which such 
a Metropolitan Manila Authority may provide or take 
charge of, and these include drainage, flood control, 
zoning and land use, traffic and transport management, 
garbage collection and dump sites and, possibly, as he 
also said, health and peace and order. As I see it, this 
Metropolitan Manila Authority would be exercising 
most, if not all, of the functions regarding the basic 
services of component cities and municipalities. So what 
else would be left to the cities and municipalities to 
exercise? 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, these basic services will 
be neatly segregated in the law that Congress will pass. 
We merely provided in the explanatory note examples 
of such services that may be coordinated under the 
Metropolitan Manila Authority. Let us take garbage 
collection and dump sites. Between Rizal and Manda- 
luyong, if they do not have this coordination under a 
metropolitan system of governance, the Municipality of 
San Juan can construct an abattoir right on the border 
of Mandaluyong or Pasig where there is, let us say, a 
first class residential subdivision. Or in the case of flood 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


385 


control, drainage systems, we can have one town 
unloading its water on another town without even being 
aware of it. Instead of easing up a flood situation, this 
can actually aggravate the problem. So it is in that sense 
that we cited examples of basic services where supra- 
municipal coordination is necessary in order to avoid 
absurdities, conflicts, wastes and even, let us say, waste- 
ful conflicts in jurisdiction among the component cities 
and towns. 

MR. FOZ. Does the Gentleman envision that the 
governing body of the Authority itself will be composed 
of the mayors of component cities and municipalities? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, that is the contemplation of this 
provision. Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. And I understand that the Committee has 
accepted this amendment to be the first portion of 
Section 6. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. FOZ. The difference between this amendment 
and the former provision of Section 6 is that while this 
amendment would mandate that such an Authority be 
created by Congress, in the second portion of Section 6 
now, this pooling of resources, coordination and 
cooperation in the provision for services is to be 
voluntary on the part of local government units. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. So, in Section 6 now, if this is 
approved by the body, the first part will consist of an 
aggroupment of municipalities and cities by law and, in 
the second instance, it will be a voluntary mode of 
association among like-minded local government units 
for their common benefit. 

MR. FOZ. Would the Commissioner say that Section 
7 is also somewhat related, not only to his amendment, 
but also to Section 6? 

MR. OPLE. Section 7, Madam President, if I read this 
section right, refers to regional development councils 
composed of local government officials with such ade- 
quate powers as may be prescribed by law. And I think 
this has been introduced in the context of the existing 
regional development bodies of the National Economic 
and Development Authority, which are really coordinat- 
ing bodies for the purpose of allocating infrastructure 
budgets to provinces and municipalities within a region 
without giving them any higher status than as regional 
development councils, the planning and recommenda- 
tory bodies in the chain of command of the National 
Economic and Development Authority. 

MR. FOZ. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In the li^t of the Suarez inter- 
pellation and clarificatory questions, and in the light of 
the Rodrigo amendment, will Commissioner Ople yield 
to some minor amendments? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. For instance, on line 4, after the 
phrase “SUBJECT TO A PLEBISCITE,” will Com- 
missioner Ople be willing to accept the addition of the 
words IN THE POLITICAL UNIT OR UNITS DIRECT- 
LY AFFECTED? This is an offshoot of the interpella- 
tion made by Commissioner Suarez. 

MR. OPLE. May I refer that to the Committee which 
has now acquired jurisdiction over the amendment. 
Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That amendment. Madam President, 
is no longer necessary because we have placed the words 
“AS SET FORTH IN SECTION 11 HEREOF” and, 
referring to Section 1 1 , we say “in a plebiscite in the 
political unit or units directly affected.” So by referring 
to Section 11,1 think that will be a superfluity. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I withdraw my amendment. 
Madam President. 

Now, in view of the Rodrigo amendment, will Com- 
missioner Ople be willing to include the word DEPART- 
MENT after “EXECUTIVE,” so it will read: “SHALL 
BE ENTITLED TO THEIR OWN LOCAL EXECUTIVE 
DEPARTMENT AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES”? 
This was not included when the Committee Chairman 
read the entire section. 

MR. OPLE. May I refer this to the Committee, 
Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will Commissioner Sarmiento repeat 
the question please. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am proposing 
the inclusion of the word DEPARTMENT after “EXE- 
CUTIVE,” so that it will read: “SHALL BE ENTITLED 
TO THEIR OWN LOCAL EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 
AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES.” If we will note, 
other sections include the word “department” after 
“executive.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. But what we have here is the word 
“EXECUTIVES” — plural — so that the phrase reads: 
“TO THEIR OWN LOCAL EXECUTIVES AND LEGIS- 
LATIVE ASSEMBLIES.” This is to separate “EXECU- 
TIVES” from the word “ASSEMBLIES,” Madam 
President. 


386 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. I thank the Commissioner for 
that clarification. 

And one last point: Will Commissioner Ople be 
willing to delete the word “BASIC” before “AUTO- 
NOMY,” so that the proposal reads; “SHALL RETAIN 
THEIR AUTONOMY AND SHALL BE ENTITLED TO 
THEIR OWN LOCAL EXECUTIVES AND LEGISLA- 
TIVE ASSEMBLIES.” 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I would have difficul- 
ties about omitting BASIC because I think we want to 
build a bias into this provision against the possible 
undue encroachment of a metropolitan authority on the 
autonomous powers of the component cities and 
municipalities. 


MR. DA VIDE. It says: THE COMPONENT UNITS 
OF THE METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY SHALL RE- 
TAIN ALL THEIR POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND PRE- 
ROGATIVES AS REGULAR POLITICAL UNITS. 

MR. OPLE. I have no objection to having this in- 
cluded unless it unduly clutters the sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
regrets that it cannot accept the amendment, and we 
join Commissioner Ople in his observations. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the body now have a clean 
copy of the Ople amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President, for 
the clarifications. 

I will not insist on my proposed amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. There had been amendments regard- 

“• • • executives and 

I^GISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES.” May I propose a 

PONFNirTfiSxroS^* the COM- 

retain THEIR POWERS, 

POiSaV prerogatives AS REGULAR 

UNITS. So it win encompass everything. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

President, as far as I am 
j ^Wnk the present words are more emphatic 

that all component units of 
TL ^ a area had lost their legislative assemblies, 
blies reinstate their legislative assem- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to make a statement 
that the words “BASIC AUTONOMY” can be con- 
sidered substantially equivalent to the words “as regular- 
ly organized or as regularly established.” 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. While waiting for the text to be dis- 
tributed, I ask that Commissioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I rise on a question 
of privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, what is the question of 
privilege of Commissioner Monsod? 


because thpn» ' regular political unit! 

included in th functions which are nc 

point of executive and the legislative bodies. Th 

some others buUf w^JefSTth?® '' t^here may b 

oreropativpc oo i ^ ^etam their powers, functions an 

back to them. Political units, we give everythin 

on'^retaS^LSlT' 

TIVE ASSEMBLIES. wS, 

phrase or a clause that wUl comS^t^t^ 

the local component units autonomy c 

his™™^"- restaf 


MR. MONSOD. Yesterday, there was an accusation 
here that I made a misrepresentation. I believe I am 
entitled to a quick resolution of that accusation now. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER MONSOD 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the Journal says: 

Thereupon, Mr. VUlacorta advised that one misinforma- 
tion given to the Members was that Minister Jose Concep- 
cion is against constitutionalizing protectionism. He stated 
that he would like to get hold of the advertisement alluded 
to by a Member who said it, in reply to which, Mr. Monsod 
stated that he was the one who issued the statement. Mr. 
VUlacorta suggested that the matter be discussed in a 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


387 


caucus on Monday because there were other matters men- 
tioned that were contrary to economic facts. 

Mr. Monsod contended that the record of the caucus 
which was already incorporated in the Record of the Com- 
mission would bear out that all he said was that Minister 
Jose Concepcion was against constitutionalizing protection- 
ism in Section 1 of the Article which statement was based 
on his personal interview with the Minister. He also urged 
that a public apology be made by those who said they were 
misled by him, if it would be proven that he was correct. 

Now, quoting myself, the minutes of the caucus states 
on page 4: 

Secondly, I want to tell you that this morning, I think. 
Minister Jose Concepcion has been quoted or has been men- 
tioned in the ad. I talked to Minister Jose Concepcion this 
morning, and he said he is against constitutionalizing per- 
manent and absolute protectionism in the Constitution 
because that is bad for Philippine industry because he is in 
favor of the program. He just wants to give time for the 
industry to recover, which is what we are putting here, 
when we say that they should be protected from unfair 
competition. It would be unfair at this time if they are not 
given protection when they are recovering from the eco- 
nomic debacle. 

I would like to read a letter dated August 16, 1986, 
Madam President, for the record. It was typed with dif- 
ficulty because I believe it was typed personally by the 
one who sent the letter since he said he wanted me to 
have it this morning and he had no time to go to his 
secretary. The letter says: 

Dear Chris, 

I refer to our conversation yesterday regarding the ad 
by the Coalition addressed to the ConCom. 

This will confirm my statement to you that I did not see 
the ad before it was published. 

I am in favor of a statement incorporating in the Consti- 
tution the responsibility of the State in promoting the 
industrialization of the economy. 

I am in favor of also incorporating a provision that 
promote the viability and growth of domestic industries. I 
do not subscribe to an indefinite protection of industries to 
be incorporated in the Constitution. We should leave to the 
Legislature the responsibility of enacting the necessary 
legislation given the situation and circumstances. A direct 
statement in our Constitution regarding protectionism may 
not provide us with the necessary flexibility as we pursue 
our programme to gain market access for our exports 
during this period of reconstmction where we do not have 
the purchasing power to buy the products to be produced 
by the domestic market. It may invite unnecessary retalia- 
tion. Besides, Philippine industries are in agreement that 
our final objective is to look at the world as our market; 
and given an increased purchasing power to our people, our 
large domestic and ASEAN markets, and the Philippine 
entrepreneurial drive, we shall be another Japan. This 
strategy requires reciprocity. 


We also agreed that Filipino enterprises are entitled to 
protection such as against dumping, when they are in their 
infant stage and when they need temporary relief from 
recession until they reach normal capacity utilization such 
as the present time. 

I hope this serves as a useful clarification. 

Regards, 

Jose Concepcion, Jr. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. When I arrived two hours ago, I 
talked to Commissioner Villegas, with a request that 
there be a more civil manner of resolving this question 
possibly in a caucus involving a small number of Com- 
missioners- 

I was caught by surprise. I am not prepared to answer 
Commissioner Monsod because I was hoping that this 
matter would be resolved. 

And so, may I request a suspension of the session 
for a few minutes. Madam President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 12:14 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 12:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, 1 ask that Com- 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I would like 
to mention that my statement yesterday was based on 
the understanding that Minister Concepcion’s view was 
contained in an ad. Now that the matter had been 
clarified, then for the sake of the unity of our Consti- 
tutional Commission, I would like to withdraw my 
statement. 

Tliere was no intention at all to impute deception to 
Commissioner Monsod, and I am sorry for having 
attributed to him misinformation. (Applause) 


388 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I thank Com- 
missioner Villacorta for his graciousness; and in the 
same spirit of unity and goodwill of this Commission, 
I accept his statement. (Applause) 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, consistent with 
what had been expressed by Commissioners Villacorta 
and Monsod, I move that the manifestations yesterday 
which became the source of the happy settlement this 
morning be stricken off the record. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I ask that the 
matter be closed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The matter is closed. 

MR. UKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, just one statement. 

I thai^ Oim Monsod because he is living up to his 
name — Christian, which is forgiveness. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

With respect to the final text of the amendment to 
Section 1 which the Committee has approved and we 
will recommend for approval by the Commission in a 
few minutes, may I move that this amendment be trans- 
ferred to a separate section immediately preceding 
Section 6 of the draft Article? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We have no objection. Madam Pres- 
ident. We accept the amendment. 


mis^Lef President, I ask that Com- 

pjSMoner Saimiento be recognized for an important 


the PRESIDENT, 
recognized. 


Commissioner Sarmiento 


is 


MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we proceed now to vote on 
this? 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 


respect President, with due 

the cimmT Chairman, the members of 

monv Z th Economy and Patri- 

my * respectfully reserve 

respect to ^ ^°r reconsideration with 

respect to some items m Section 1. 

Tliank you, Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. That is all right. 
mhfionefGaretaber«Tg„fe"i^^^ ' 
ni2™ ’’■resident. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. This is one simple amendment 
which I have cleared with the Chairman of the Commit- 
tee. The last sentence of the amended proposal reads as 
follows: “THE METROPOLITAN AUTHORITY THAT 
MAY THEREBY BE CREATED SHALL LIMIT ITS 
JURISDICTION TO BASIC SERVICES REQUIRING 
COORDINATION.” 

My proposed amendment will read like this: THE 
JURISDICTION OF THE METROPOLITAN AUTHO- 
RITY THAT WILL THEREBY BE CREATED SHALL 
BE LIMITED TO BASIC SERVICES REQUIRING 
COORDINATION. 


Garcia. Madam Prpei/-iQ * 1 
ask very respectfully for a tpp ” ’ i 
items particularly regarding comDerr^^^^-^^^ 
the Article on NaUonal Economy anVpatSnony.™ 
Thank you very much. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
gladly accepts the amendment. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
new section as proposed by Commissioner Ople and as 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


389 


amended by Commissioner Colayco, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 3 1 votes in favor, none against and 
no abstention; the amendment is approved. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is just a brief manifestation for the record. The 
authors of this amendment besides myself are Com- 
missioners Nolledo, Calderon, Tingson, Rosales, Alonto, 
de Castro, Monsod, Davide, Bennagen, Rigos, Regalado, 
Jamir, Munoz Palma, Aquino. Bemas, Rodrigo and 
Colayco. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. I move that we suspend the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It M>as 12:50 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 1:52 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is just one more 
amendment to Section 1 . 

May I ask that Commissioner Maambong be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

I am hoping that the honorable Chairman of the 
Committee on Local Governments will just accept my 
very simple amendment so that I do not have to explain 
it. Anyway, the proposed amendment is on line 8, and 
this will also affect Section 1 1 on the word “barrios.” 
We propose to change it to BARANGAYS. May we 
know the reaction of the Committee, Madam President? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I deeply regret. Madam President, 
that I cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case. Madam President, 
within my time limit I will have to be a little bit ex- 
pansive on my explanation why I am proposing the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may please pro- 
ceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the first place, the use of the 
term “barangay” has a historical significance. In the 


book of Mr. Onofre D. Corpuz, entitled The Philippines, 
published by Prentice Hall in 1976, he said, and I quote: 

The community was called “barangay” named after the 
boat that brought the original migrants from their homes in 
Malaysia and Indonesia. Each boat carried an extended 
family group consisting of the head and his immediate 
family, as well as the famUies of his children, his brothers 
and sisters, and the aged kinfolk. From the year 1565 to 
1898, the headman in the Philippines was called the cabesa 
de barangay. He was the lowest but a cmcial administrative 
figure. 

Yesterday, Madam President, the Manila Bulletin 
front-paged the picture of an ancient boat above the 
story “Balanghays Found in Butuan.” The story goes: 

This boat, believed to have been used by early Filipino 
traders between 320 A.D. and 1250 A.D., were discovered 
in swampy areas in Libertad about five kilometers from the 
city. The boats are three to fifteen meters long, officials 
at the National Museum said. Six more of the ancient boats 
used by early Filipinos have been found in the area. The 
modem-day term “barangay” is derived from the name of 
the boat. 

Now the Committee does not seem to agree with the 
word “barangay” because it has some Marcos connota- 
tion. I think we are carrying this Marcos bogey a bit too 
far. Madam President, because we seem to see Marcos in 
everything we do in this Commission. The reality about 
the origin of this word is from a purely historical point 
of view and it would be good advice to settle the appro- 
priateness of this amendment in that context. 

Secondly - and this is more important - all our laws, 
like P.D. No. 1508, establishing a system of settling 
disputes at the barangay level, approved June 11, 1978; 
and the Local Government Code, BP Big. 337, approved 
in 1983; and other laws, not to mention the tons of 
textbooks and commentaries on these laws, have always 
used the word “barangay.” 

The word “barrio” has become a thing of the past. It 
is already buried and there is no sense of reincarnating 
it. The Committee suggested instead a change of the 
nomenclature in the existing laws. Why do we have to 
make our life harder than it already is. Madam Pres- 
ident? This is unwise because then we will have to call 
our “punong barangay,” “punong baryo,” the “Kataru- 
ngang Pambarangay Law,” “Katarungang Pambaryo 
Law,” which are not very nice to hear. All the imple- 
menting forms of the barangay justice system will have 
to be changed, and the Ministry of Local Governments 
and the Ministry of Education and Culture will have 
tremendous paperwork because all books and even cir- 
culars will have to be rewritten, all because of a single 
word. I do not think it is worth the change. 

Finally, Madam President, if we read the news reports 
on the political situation in the Philippines firom foreign 
publications like Time, Newsweek, Asiaweek, Far 
Eastern Economic Review, etc., it will be readily no- 


390 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


ticed that reference is always made to “barangays,” not 
“barrios.” 

I think I have said enough. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, will the Commit- 
tee please be allowed to react. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee will please go ahead. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I give the reasons why the 
Committee objects to the use of the word “barangay,” 
it is not true that “punong barangay” will become 
“punong baryo”; it will be “punong nayon”; “Kataru- 
ngang Pambarangay” will be “Batas ng Katarungang 
Pangnayon.” So “nayon” seems to be more beautiful. 
If the Commissioner will ask Sister Christine Tan, she 
will tell him that she dislikes the word “barangay” be- 
cause according to her, the heads of the barangay - I do 
not know how she equates it that way — are the mer- 
cenaries and those who were highly subservient to 
Ferdinand Marcos without thinking of the interests of 
the populace of their respective barangays. 

But my reasons. Madam President, are the following, 
based on consultations with persons in different parts of 
the country; 

(1) The word “barrio” appears in old titles in 

wS and documents from th” 

SpajKh regme up to the present, even in titles known 

“ voluminous 

PresidtTMami; " 

Darts of that the names of various schools in many 
w^d ‘^airto»°'‘" President, still carry the 

nf unanimous decision of the League 

should Mayors that the word “barrio” 

mavors th ^ niet those governors and city 

Calderrm courtesy of Commissioner Jose 

City and wife. Governor Calderon, in Quezon 

Ma^dam^rLi^’ I ^hink, a very important argument, 
“barrio” wa the 1973 Constitution, the word 

the Article Declaration of Principles and in 

!he ms Governments. Without amending 

the word “bamngav”’ ^^^ued decrees using 

Freedom ^ instead of “barrio.” Even the 

some portions (rf the°^1973‘’r“"I ’^ reproduced 

carried the word “barto.”^^^ Constitution which stUl 

is J crnsttefonaYh""? Pv“Ment, 

CoLruS,rd^oru?nor;,V^^^^^^ 'T 

a cStnSond 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, that is pre- 
cisely why we are trying to correct this mistake where 
we use the word “barangay” in all our laws while we use 
“barrio” in our own Constitution. 

But if it is not asking too much. Madam President, 
may I ask Commissioner Bennagen to comment at least 
on the historical context of my discussion on the word 
“barangay,” because I am looking at this from the 
historical point of view. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized, if he desires to answer. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Let me say that I shall speak as an 
anthropologist and not as a Commissioner, and the cita- 
tions given by Commissioner Maambong are correct in 
relation to the origin of the word and the substantive 
meaning of “balangay.” These are really the same 
cognate words, like “balay” and “bahay.” “Barangay’ 
is the same word except that there are some shifts in 
linguistic terms. 

But I think that is a different consideration altogether 
from the issue that was raised by the Chairman of the 
Committee on Local Governments. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I think the amendment has been suffi- 
ciently debated on, so may I ask for a vote. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Before we vote, may I ask the 
Chairman of the Committee to answer a few questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Is the Chairman aware of the 
fact that the poblacion itself is divided into several 
barangays? In other words, “barangay” does not 
necessarily mean “nayon” or “barrio,” but within the 
heart of the poblacion, there are several barangays. The 
purpose is to have a headman there which helps in 
keeping peace and order, in collecting taxes, in seeing to 
it that the youth do not become victims of drugs, and 
all those things. So there is really nothing wrong with 
the word “barangay,” if we will only just remove our 
prejudice against the Marcos era. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As the Gentleman knows, perhaps 
we have different political persuasions, so the answer is 
obvious. 

I submit to the body. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


391 


MR. RODRIGO. From what I know, our political 
subdivisions are provinces, municipalities, barrios and 
sitios. Barrios are subdivided into sitios. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that we take a vote. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is clear; 
it is just to change the word “barrios” on line 8 of 
Section 1 to BARANGAYS, is that correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President, and it will 
also affect the same line of Section 1 1 . 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Maambong, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 14 votes in favor and 12 against; so 
the amendment is approved. (Applause) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rodrigo be recognized to amend Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. On Section 2, line 13, I propose to 
place a period (.) after the word “structure,” then delete 
the words “with an effective system of recall.” So the 
first sentence of Section 2 will read: “The Congress shall 
enact a local government code which shall provide for a 
more responsive and accountable local government 
structure, allocate among the different,” et cetera. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we hear the Commissioner’s 
reasons for this amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, we have reduced 
the term of office of local officials to only three years. 
Now, if we will have a system of recall, I think a three- 
year term is too short to still interrupt it in mid-term, 
by using the reserve power of recall, and have a snap 
election to elect an official for the remainder of the very 
short term. 

If we remember, the system of recall calls for an 
election which is expensive and divisive. Furthermore, 
the elected government official will be under continuous 
harassment. In municipalities, there are ward leaders, 
not to say “warlords,” who can easily muster 20 per- 
cent of the votes, which is all that is needed to initiate 
a recall. It is even possible that within three years, there 
might be two “recalls.” 


Even if the people made a mistake, and they find out 
after one or two years that they had made a mistake in 
electing a certain municipal mayor or even a certain 
councilor, they would have only one more year to wait 
until the next election to right the mistake that they 
had committed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
has decided to leave the question to the body. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May I address a few questions to the distinguished 
proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 
Commissioner Rodrigo will answer Commissioner 
Suarez. 

MR. RODRIGO. Gladly. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

I suppose the Commissioner is aware of the fact that 
under Section 2, Article XI of the 1973 Constitution, 
the same phrase “with an effective system of recall” 
appears. Is the Commissioner aware of that situation? 

MR. RODRIGO. Not at the moment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under Section 2, Article XI of the 
1 973 Constitution, exactly the same phrase is contained 
which reads: “and accountable local government struc- 
ture with an effective system of recall. 

Is the Commissioner also aware of the fact that a 
Local Government Code has been enacted by the Bata- 
sang Pambansa which is known as Batas Pambansa Big. 
337? 

MR. RODRIGO. I am not, at the moment. 

MR. SUAREZ. To my knowledge, under Batas Pam- 
bansa Big. 337, there is no provision on an effective 
system of recall. Does not the Commissioner think that 
it is best that we should continue to retain this particu- 
lar phrase only as a safeguard for possible situations 
where local public officials would become highly 
abusive immediately after taking office? 

MR. RODRIGO. That would be most rare. I think the 
evil that “recall” may produce will be greater than the 
benefit that can accrue from it. But let me differentiate 
the 1973 Constitution from the proposed Constitution. 
Under the 1973 Constitution, the term of office of local 


392 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


officials was four years. Now we are reducing it to only 
three years. 

May I add also that I do not remember the particular 
provision of the 1973 Constitution about “recall,” nor 
do I remember that it was ever used. It is a dead letter. 
So, either it is used or it is not used. If it is not used, 
like it was not used under the 1 973 Constitution, then it 
is a dead letter. Why place it here? But if it is used, I will 
say that it can be abused. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, if the Committee on the Legisla- 
tive would finally decide to give a four-year term to the 
local officials, would the Commissioner still insist on his 
proposal to eliminate the said phrase? 

MR. RODRIGO. That is a hypothetical question. . . 
but my objection would be less. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you, Madam President. 


The results show 7 votes in favor and 13 against; so 
the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Foz be recognized to amend Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, this amendment is 
actually not mine, but I was commissioned by a Com- 
missioner to submit this on his behalf. At any rate, this 
has been cleared with the Committee. The amendment 
is on page 1, line 17 of Section 2. After the word “offi- 
cials,” add the phrase INCLUDING A PROVISION 
AGAINST POLITICAL DYNASTIES to be followed by 
a comma (,). This is an amendment submitted by Com- 
missioner Cirilo Rigos which I would like to cosponsor 
on his behalf. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee gladly accepts the 
amendment. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I speal 
against the proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes i- 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The thrust of the argument o) 
Commissioner Rodrigo is that inasmuch as the term ol 
office of local officials will only be three years, there 
will be no need for recall. From my experience it takes 
hie ^ bad mayor to make a mess out of 

^ used to be 

bewL^e.'^H ■ gambling and no 

beerhouses. However, m a two-month period, since this 

mayor was supported by people who m^^aintain tWs Idnd 

beerhouses, dancing 

wfth tv 1 flourished in the town 

With this kind of local officials, I think three years is 

long enou^ to do harm to his constituency and, there- 

rS* ®*^ould retain this provision on 

'hat we vote 




mem *1”“* 'h' amend- 

Dhrase “with m '^‘"'ngo, which is to delete the 

to a rate '3. 

As many as are in favor of this proposed amendment 


As many as are against the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is 
recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Will the Gentleman yield to a few 
questions. 

MR. FOZ. Gladly. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I cannot recall this phrase 
“POLITICAL DYNASTIES” being defined in this 
draft Constitution. I am in favor of banning this practice 
in our political life, but for record purposes, what does 
the Commissioner mean by “POLITICAL DYNAS- 
TIES”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I answer that question? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. It is a delicate question because 
the people are the ones electing. This is a diminution of 
the power of the people to elect, so we must be circum- 
spect with regard to this matter. I say so because, for 
instance, a son does not even go home to the residence 
of his father, an incumbent, but he wins on his own. 
The mere fact that he has blood relationship with his 
father is a liability instead of an asset. There are in- 
stances of this nature. Would this mean relationship 
with the incumbent? If he is no longer an incumbent, 
would the members of his family still be disqualified to 
run for public office? How far laterally should we rule 
that they are disqualified to offer themselves for public 
office? 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, may I now respond to 
the Commissioner’s questions? 

The basic proposition is that in a democracy such as 
ours, nobody is indispensable as far as public service is 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


393 


concerned. It is true that certain persons may possess 
the necessary capabilities and special qualities to per- 
form good deeds in the public office, but that does not 
rule out the possibility that others may have similar 
capabilities to serve the public good. So we cannot say 
that a relative, let us say, of an incumbent is deserving 
of succeeding his relative because of his special qualities 
and his capabilities or his qualifications. The idea of a 
prohibition against the rise of political dynasties is 
essentially to prevent one family from controlling 
political power as against the democratic idea that 
political power should be dispersed as much as possible 
among our people. And the evils brought about by 
political dynasties are so well-known to us, because they 
happened in the recent political past. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. But what are the parameters? This 
is a constitution and this will be the mandate to our 
Congress to promulgate the laws. Would a parameter be 
the name of an incumbent? Are we referring to an in- 
cumbent whose sons or daughters or wife will not be 
able to run? Or once a person is no longer an incumbent, 
may he still run? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, precisely the provision 
says that Congress shall enact a Local Government 
Code. We are giving Congress the authority to spell out 
how such a prohibition should be written into the Local 
Government Code. It is up to Congress then to provide 
what the extent of the prohibition would be. We cannot 
write into this provision just how the prohibition will go 
or how far it is going to extend. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Nevertheless, before we vote on 
this amendment, we would like to be informed of its 
concept because if the proponent of the amendment is 
going to be unjust, then we have the right to vote 
against it. If the concept being offered to us is just and 
fair, I think we have also the basis for asking a clarifica- 
tion on this matter. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I comment on that. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There is a similar resolution that I 
filed before the Committee on Preamble, National Terri- 
tory, and Declaration of Principles which recommended 
that the prohibition shall not extend beyond the third 
degree of consanguinity or affinity. It does not prohibit 
the son or the daughter of the relative within that 
degree to run later on. It is only a matter of immediate 
succession. An example is, if a governor has already run 
for reelection and he could no longer run because there 
is already a prohibition his son wants to run. Then the 
son can run. We will only prohibit the son while the 
governor is incumbent. That is the concept. It is not an 
absolute prohibition. We want to widen the political 


base to give a chance to poor but deserving candidates. 
We want to avoid the possibility of taking advantage of 
the position of the father. So that is the recommenda- 
tion to the Congress. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, I would like to 
draw that as an explanation because if a person is no 
longer incumbent and the heirs will be forever banned 
from running for public office, I do not think that will 
be fair, constitutionally or statutorily. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, there is no everlasting ban. So 
I agree with the Commissioner. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to express an observation 
that this proposed amendment really goes to the basic 
question of who has the right of choice in a democracy. 
If indeed the electoral laws can be enforced with a good 
COMELEC and so on, a provision in the Constitution 
that is based on a policy of exclusion so that the ulti- 
mate choice is not left to the people but that there is a 
prescreening process so that we tell the people: “You 
can only vote for certain people we want you to vote 
for” seems to me to be going against the very principle 
of democratic elections. If we are seeking to be restric- 
tive and have an exclusionary provision in the Constitu- 
tion, we have to be very clear on what we mean and not 
just have a provision that can be interpreted in a very 
wide latitude. I say so because this is a restrictive pro- 
vision. It excludes and it disqualifies. We should think 
very hard about this before we put things in the Consti- 
tution that will deprive the people of the right to a full 
choice as to who should be their local leaders. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I react to 
that. On the contrary, I think it widens the political 
base. If we adopt a provision against political dynasties 
as defined by Congress, we widen the political base or 
the political opportunities on the part of poor but de- 
serving candidates to run for public office with a better 
chance of winning. In our country, we cannot deny that 
there are many political dynasties and their existence 
has restricted the political opportunity of young but 
deserving candidates. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to note that the ultimate 
objective in cleaning the election process is to make sure 
that an elective office is accessible to all, whether rich or 
poor. If we are going to say that in order to democratize 
we will have to disqualify somebody, this does not 
sound right. Suppose there is a qualified and deserving 
person, we are already instituting in the Constitution a 
restriction on consecutive terms. We have these kinds of 


394 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


restriction. We do not have to go into this because I feel 
that this is too much of a restriction and disqualification 
for deserving people. In the name of democratization, 
we are really doing an undemocratic act. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we put 
this amendment to a vote. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Like Commissioner Natividad, we are a little dis- 
turbed about the parameters of this prohibition against 
the so-called “political dynasties.” So may we seek some 
clarification because, in answer to Commissioner Nativi- 
dad’s queries, I think the matter was limited to suc- 
cession to an incumbent. May I give some examples 
which may fall within the prohibition? Let us take the 
case of Tarlac. We have a President who is from that 
place and she has very many relatives who might be 
interested in running for political positions in the 
Province of Tarlac, say as congressman, as governor, or 
as rnayor. Under this proposed prohibitory resolution, 
would her brothers, sisters, in-laws, or relatives by af- 
timty or by consanguinity be precluded and prohibited 
irom aspiring for those positions? 


far as I am concerned, we an 


MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. If there are no further comments, 
we will put it to a vote. Will Commissioner Foz repeat 
his amendment please? 

MR. FOZ. On line 17, after the word “officials,” add 
the following words: INCLUDING A PROVISION 

AGAINST POLITICAL DYNASTIES. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular amendment, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( Two Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor, 1 9 against, and two 
abstentions; the amendment is lost. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 2. 

-• 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


who ha<! o take, for example, a govemo: 

nermittpH^h^'+j! two reelections a 

rnntin + ^ the Constitution, but now wants his son tc 

rail ° same position. That is what w< 

call political dynasty.” 

Commissioner would not thinl 
* appened during the last regime where we had i 
Tlnrnc^w’ f Manila Governor, a Governor o 

woman Governor of Leyte and an Assembly 

terms like th^se^.^’ Commissioner is not thinking ii 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The first amendment is submitted jointly with 
Commissioner Monsod which is to insert after the word 
“structure” on line 13, the following: INSTITUTED 
THROUGH A SYSTEM OF DECENTRALIZATION. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is there a comma after the word 
“DECENTRALIZATION ”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, there is. 


is MWng°aboufScm^ Commissio: 

r TSver.: ■ 

.he Committee 00 “^ 




MR. NOLLEDO. No. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. ^ 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the same line 13,1 move to delete 
the word “an” and to change the words “system of” to 
MECHANISM FOR. Then on line 14, after the word 
“recall,” insert the following: INITIATIVE AND 

REFERENDUM and a comma (,), so the two Lines will 
now read as follows: “able (as a continuation of ‘ac- 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


395 


countable’) local government structure INSTITUTED 
THROUGH A SYSTEM OF DECENTRALIZATION, 
with effective MECHANISM FOR recall, INITIATIVE 
AND REFERENDUM, allocate among the different 
local government units.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the proponent please explain 
why he believes that “INITIATIVE AND REFER- 
ENDUM” should apply to the local government units? 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, it should apply because in the 
last section of the Article on the Legislative, the Com- 
mittee on the Legislative incorporated therein the 
system of initiative and referendum, not only to be 
made applicable to the National Assembly or the Lower 
House and the Senate, but also to local legislative 
bodies. This was also later on approved by the Com- 
mission. It is necessary that to give meaning to it and to 
mandate now its incorporation insofar as its application 
to local governments is concerned, the same be now 
mandated to be incorporated in the Local Government 
Code. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With the word “mandated” it is 
mandatory on the part of Congress to insert provisions 
on initiative and referendum in the Local Government 
Code. Am I right? 

MR. DA VIDE. Yes, that is in line with the acceptance 
of the system of initiative and referendum, not only for 
Congress but also for all other legislative bodies. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Do I understand it right that it shall 
be in the concept of initiative and referendum as under- 
stood with respect to the Congress? 

MR. DA VIDE. That would be practically the same in 
the matter of the people enacting legislations or reject- 
ing or approving laws enacted by the different local 
legislative bodies. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide. 

Is Commissioner Sarmiento going to say something? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I address a 
few questions to the proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Does not Commissioner Davide 
think he is weakening the local governments or the local 
bodies by instituting the system of recall, initiative and 
referendum? 

We must remember that the local executive has to 
serve for three years. With this system of recall, initia- 


tive and referendum, does not the Commissioner think 
we are virtually paralyzing our local executive and 
legislative bodies? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, on the contrary, it 
will even strengthen the democratization of the govern- 
ment. Besides, with a provision on referendum and 
initiative, we can be assured of responsive, accountable 
and responsible local elective officials. There is always a 
sword of Damocles hanging over their heads, so they 
will always do the best they can because of the fear that 
the public may preempt any particular act, if the local 
officials will not perform such an act. If we have 
allowed it to the Congress of the Philippines, there is no 
reason why we should not allow it to the local govern- 
ments which are really directly in touch with the 
people. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Davide must 
remember that in the Article on Social Justice, we ap- 
proved a section on popular organizations; that is, 
virtually giving strength to people’s power. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. That is precisely why 
we have to give some political vehicle or instrument for 
it. How can these sectoral groups be heard unless they 
will also be allowed initiation or rejection of laws 
through the system of initiative and referendum? In 
short, that particular provision in the Article on Social 
Justice would only be complemented by this specific 
political vehicle for a more effective expression of their 
goals, desires or objectives. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Are we not multiplying the 
effects of people’s power? I ask so because here we have 
to balance the strength of the local government and 
people’s power. Does not the Commissioner think we 
are giving more power, more punch to people’s power, 
thereby weakening the local government? 

MR. DAVIDE. We should always remember that in a 
republican government, sovereignty resides in the people 
and all government authority emanates from the people. 
Hence, with that provision in the Article on Social 
Justice, we are really strengthening people’s power. With 
this provision I am proposing, we would provide the 
political weapon or the political vehicle, not just a 
pressure group. This is a genuine exercise of people’s 
power. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponents are 
beginning to repeat themselves, so I ask that we take a 
vote. 

MR. RODRIGO. May I just ask a question for clarifi- 
cation? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


396 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. When I presented an amendment 
opposing “recall,” it was on the basis that Congress was 
empowered to legislate a system for it. From the answer 
of Commissioner NoUedo, it seems that the puipose is 
not only to empower Congress but to mandate it. Do I 
get it ri^t? 

MR. DAVIDE. It was used in the sense that the Local 
Government Code may provide for an effective mechan- 
ism. It is no longer an effective system, but an effective 
mechanism for initiative, referendum or recall. 

MR. RODRIGO. But is this mandatory? 


really no harm making it applicable even to the 
barangay officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is not the point. I am just 
trying to follow up the trend of questioning of Com- 
missioner Rodrigo, because when we say “Congress shall 
enact a Local Government Code,” and then we talk of 
the different local government units, it would seem to 
me that Congress under this provision should enact a 
law with a provision for effective mechanism for recall, 
initiative and referendum in all the local government 
units. But now, the Commissioner is saying that Con- 
gress may or may not enact. 


MR. DAVIDE. It may be included in the Local 
Government Code. 

MR. RODRIGO. “It may be”; meaning, it is not 
mandatory. 


MR. DAVIDE. We leave it to Congress, but we musi 
remember that under the Article on the Legislativ« 
eyecially on mitiative and referendum, pursuant tc 
^«"dment, the Congress shall, as soon a; 

of Wtiative anc 


MR. DAVIDE. The answer was not with reference to 
that. My answer was with respect to the effective 
mechanism for recall, initiative or referendum, but I 
would consider the power and the authority of Congress 
to enact a Local Government Code precisely to give the 
details on our perception of the local governments. 
Without that particular law, I wonder how the local 
governments can perform their functions. In short. 
Congress must take it upon itself to institute or pro- 
mulgate the necessary laws to govern precisely the 
powers, responsibilities, functions and duties of the 
different local government units. 


answer ^ a categorical 

wer. Is this provision directory or mandatory? 

^ authority granted 
to the Congress of the PhiHppines. 


MR. RODRIGO. So, it is not mandatory? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is an authority and a power. 
MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


reco^ed*^^^^^^^^' ^°"^"^^®sioner Maambong is 


cation for cl 

Section 1 X V. proponent. We have just appr 
of nrovinrp defined the political subdivii 

we^sav barangays. V 

municipalities? Is that it? provmces, cities 


MR. MAAMBONG. Maybe my question is not very 
clear. What I am trying to ask is: When Congress enacts 
a Local Government Code, should Congress, in that 
Local Government Code, provide an effective mechan- 
ism for recall, initiative and referendum for a barangay? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would not be able to state now 
whether it will, but I would suppose that it must, in 
order to make effective the decentralization and also 
what is provided for in the last section of the Article 
on the Legislative regarding initiative, recall and refer- 
endum. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is precisely the point of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. It is either that Congress is 
mandated to enact that mechanism of recall, initiative 
and referendum or it is not. So when Congress enacts a 
Local Government Code should it enact an effective 
mechanism for recall, initiative and referendum for a 
province, city or municipality? Probably the barangay 
will not be included. What I mean is, it should be uni- 
form and we should be very categorical about it, that 
the exact mandate of the Constitution is to provide an 
effective mechanism for recall, et cetera, for all local 
government units without exception. 


the Local Go,eL.erCodriMs uo ToTr 
decide later whether this would be made appuS 
the barangays. But insofar as I am concerned, tl 


MR. DAVIDE. I would suppose so, because the Local 
Government Code will be a general law applicable to all. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then I am satisfied with that 
answer. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


397 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, the body is now ready 
to vote. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide on line 14 is to add the words 
INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM after the word 
“recall.” 

As many as are in favor of this proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(Two Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 17 votes in favor, 4 against, and 2 
abstentions; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner de Castro be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

Madam President, my amendment is very simple. On 
line 16 of Section 2, I move that we delete the word 
“term” because we have already approved that the term 
of office of the local officials shall be for three years. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
regrets that it cannot accept the amendment because the 
word “term” in relation to appointment may cover not 
only elective positions but also appointive positions. 
Likewise, when we talk of local government officials, we 
do not necessarily circumscribe the term to elective 
officials. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The formulation here is that the 
Local Government Code which Congress will pass shall 
provide for a term. What other appointive officials will 
these be? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Appointive officials will include the 
provincial assessor, provincial treasurer, provincial 
auditor, municipal auditor, municipal assessor, city 
assessor, and other administrative officials. Besides, even 
if there is already a term in the Article on the Legisla- 
tive, the Local Government Code will just repeat the 
term stated therein to attain symmetry. So, the term is 
with respect to appointive and elective officials. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Will the provincial treasurers, 
municipal treasurers and municipal assessors be ap- 
pointed by local officials? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily; it will be the Local 
Government Code that will indicate the appointing 
power. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am already clarified; I withdraw 
my amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the last registered 
speaker is Commissioner Rodrigo. This amendment is on 
Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, for the record, I 
just want to ask a question on the last sentence which 
states: 

No change in the existing form of local government shall 

take effect until ratified by a majority of the votes cast in a 

plebiscite called for the purpose. 

This refers to changes in the form of local govern- 
ment made by Congress, does it not? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is the plebiscite here nationwide? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think so because the structure of 
the government should be uniform in ail local political 
units. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, any change in the form of local 
government in a law enacted by Congress wiU not take 
effect until it is submitted and approved in a nationwide 
plebiscite. Is that it? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but that is without prejudice to 
the pertinent provisions on autonomous regions. Those 
autonomous regions have different provisions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR, RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
proponents of amendments to Section 2. I move that 
we approve the entire Section 2 after it is read by the 
Chairman of the Committee. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I hate to 
interrupt but in view of the question of Commissioner 
Rodrigo, I have to stand up and ask further questions on 
the last sentence of Section 2, regarding the change in 
the existing form of local government. 

I think- the Commissioner is aware that in the present 
formulation of the Local Government Code, when we 
create a barangay, merge it or consolidate it with others, 


398 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


or abolish the same, it is not done by Congress but, 
according to the provisions of the Local Government 
Code, by an ordinance either of the sangguniang pan- 
lungsod in a city or the sangguniang panlalawigan 
of the province. Will that provision be affected by this 
particular provision of Section 2? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No. The Commissioner is talking of 
boundaries; we are talking here of the form of local 
governments like city mayor, council, et cetera. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My point is this; I will repeat the 
premise. In the case of barangays, when we create, 
abolish, merge or do whatever with them, under the 
present formulation of the Local Government Code, it is 
not done by Congress but through an ordinance of the 
sangguniang panlungsod of a city or the sangguniang 
panlalawigan of a province. 

My question is: When we approve this last sentence, 
will it affect that provision of the Local Government 
Code? I am afraid of what might happen once the Local 
Government Code is done away with. We can no longer 
change, merge, abolish a barangay unless through a law 
passed by Congress. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I insist that in the Commissioner’s 
case. Section 1 1 applies. The provision that he adverted 
to in the Local Government Code still exists in ac- 
cordance with the criteria established therein, but 
always subject to approval by a majority of the votes 
cast in a plebiscite. 

I really believe that there seems to be a misunder- 
standing or misapprehension of the situation. So I 
believe that Section 1 1 specifically covers the situation 
the Commissioner mentioned. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, as far as the exist- 
ing forms of local government are concerned — and I 
will particularize the barangay — they can still be 
created, abolished, or merged through an ordinance of 
the sangguniang panlalawigan or the sangguniang pan- 
lungsod under these provisions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Subject to the provisions of Section 

11 . 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. Thank you very much. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


Commissioner refer to 
statw: ' referring to Section 11 which 

No province, city, municipality or barangay may be 

l-oun’daiyU! 

estahr h accordance with the criteria 

apDroi?J government code and subject to 

approva by a m^onty of the votes cast in a plebiscite in 
the political unit or units directly affected. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Precisely. 

situation^thP - provision covers the 

situation the Commissioner mentioned. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, I am aware of that. 

here*^of^th^^^^?' ^ talking 

dicated in government as in- 

abolish wp a ^ sentence of Section 2. When we 

the existencf»° f anymore. We talk of 

ries. ^ government with respect to bounda- 

Buf when^'^n?^?' * ^ Section 1 1 . 

2, the saneeuniana^ lonalize the last sentence of Section 

lawigan of the prScf ^1?’' f 
change, create or aboHsh a tT effectively 

the province because this orovk"®^ h 
the form of local gover^m^nTn 

present law this can only take effe!^t’ 
hv a mainritv r»f tho , + effect Upon ratification 

by a majonty of the votes cast in a plebiscite called for 
that purpose. This is my only concern. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I would like the pro- 
ceedings abbreviated especially since I see urgent signals 
from the Floor Leader, but it is impossible for some of 
us to vote intelligently on this question without some 
urgent clarification of meanings of key words in the last 
sentence. 

I am aware that this was borrowed from the 1973 
Constitution, and since 1973 to date, there have been 
presumably some concrete experiences of the nation on 
how this last sentence has, in fact, operated. 

Is the Committee aware of any instance when the 
existing form of local government has been changed 
since 1973, so that it has required a national plebiscite? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We will notice that Mr. Marcos 
interpreted this provision in a different way. For 
example, when he decreed P.D. No. 824, he abolished 
the legislative councils in the constituent units of Metro 
Manila, and he submitted the same — allegedly — to a 
referendum only within the metropolitan area. So, in 
this case, we are not talking actually of the structure of 
government affecting the entire country. 

So the interpretation then of Mr. Marcos is that only 
the people of Metro Manila area should participate in 
the plebiscite. I remember very well a news item to that 
effect, because somebody was questioning that that 
should be submitted to the entire Filipino nation. But 
Mr. Marcos, in consultation with his Minister of Justice, 
said that the existing structure referred only to the City 
of Manila and did not refer to all other political units. 

1 think, although the referendum was rigged, there 
was assumed existence of good faith. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


399 


So the Commissioner’s question is adequately 
answered. 

MR. OPLE. We are not called upon to judge that 
plebiscite at this time, but is the Chairman saying that 
this plebiscite actually took place in comphance with 
this provision of the Constitution of 1973? Did it take 
place in Metro Manila? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Now, outside of that limited and local- 
ized experience of the Metro Manila form of govern- 
ment, there was no other change of government that 
required a national plebiscite? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I cannot remember, but if the 
Commissioner knows, will he kindly enlighten the body. 

MR. OPLE. Actually, I am seeking some illumination 
on this point because I am not aware that there has been 
any change in the form of local government applicable 
to all local governments since 1973. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say something, if the Com- 
missioner will permit me. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Should Congress, for example, 
abolish the municipal council, that means abolishing 
municipal councils in all political units known as 
municipalities, then that should be ratified by the entire 
electorate in the country because it affects the munici- 
palities of the entire country. 

MR. OPLE. That is a good concrete illustration of the 
sort I was looking for. Madam President. 

Just one last question. My concern is: Is there a 
quantum of change in the form of local government that 
rises to a standard that will require a national plebiscite 
in the absence of more concrete experience? This leads 
to the question: Will the lawmaking power of Congress 
be subject to unusual restraint in the light of what I 
would call “imminent threat” from a constitutional pro- 
vision that if they do amend the Local Government 
Code to a degree that can be deemed substantial, then 
that law will have to be submitted to a nationwide 
plebiscite? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Perhaps the Committee will enter- 
tain a move to delete this provision. 

MR. OPLE. I move for its deletion right now because 
since 1973 it has not proved useiul enough to be availed 
of by the Congress of the Philippines or by other law- 
making bodies. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Commissioner does not mind, 
it was President Marcos who placed it there. As a former 


member of the 1971 Constitutional Convention, I 
cannot remember whether that provision really formed 
part of the report of the Committee on Local Govern- 
ments. 

The purpose of Mr. Marcos in placing that provision is 
that if the form of government is in his favor, he wanted 
that it should not be changed anymore. His intention 
was to discourage the Batasang Pambansa, which may 
prove to be not too subservient to him, from changing 
the structure of local government so soon. 

MR. OPLE. If the Chairman believes that this vitiates 
the lawmaking power of Congress, then I move for its 
deletion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is that in the form of an amend- 
ment? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not in the form of a motion 
because a motion must be duly seconded and shall still 
be submitted to the floor. 

If the Commissioner puts that as an amendment, the 
Chairman gladly accepts the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. It is an amendment, and I thank the 
Commissioner for accepting it. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the last sentence is deleted, is it 
possible for Congress to provide a parliamentary form of 
government for the local government units? I believe 
that the consensus of the Commission is to adopt the 
presidential system. The existing local government units 
are patterned after the presidential system. If we delete 
the last sentence now, can the provision grant Congress 
the authority to adopt the parliamentary system for the 
local government units? 

We go further. Can it also allow a sort of a federal 
system for the local government units like the provinces 
and the cities? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, this is extending the 
horizons of possibilities to their farthest limit. I think 
we should be able to trust the sense of proportion of the 
Congress that will be elected under the aegis of this new 
Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. In which case, I would strongly object 
to the amendment, because there might be the possibi- 
lity that Congress will adopt another type of govern- 
ment for the local government units which would be 


400 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


against the presidential form. I am in favor of the par- 
liamentary system, but I have to respect the decision of 
the Commission to adopt, in effect, the presidential 
system. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I react to the 
statement of Commissioner Davide? 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 


MR. NOLLEDO. We will find in the first portion of 
Section 2 that Congress is mandated to enact a Local 
Government Code which shall provide for a more 
responsive and accountable local government structure. 

So even under that authority, Madam President, the 
legislature can also adopt a parliamentary system if we 
follow the argument of Commissioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. In which case that would be a pre- 
judicial question. The prejudicial question which the 
Commission will have to decide is whether or not to 
adopt a parliamentary system of government for the 
local government units. 


fh ^*^ 1 , President, I do not think 

mat mat rs a prejudicial question. We are tying the 
an s of Congress in determining the form of govern- 
ment that should be provided for in the Local Govem- 
ment Code. We do not have the facilities here to con- 
duct pubhc hearings in order to determine what form 
of government the Congress should provide for. 


MR. DAVIDE. Precisely. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think Congress wiU be guided by a 
m sense of patriotism, including knowledgeability, in 
e eminrng the structure of government that should be 
provided for in the Local Government Code. 

Besides, pending the enactment of a new Local 
Government Code under the report of the Committee 
on Amendments and Transitory Provisions, the former 
Code, which is Batas Pambansa 
continue to be effective until repealed 
by the Congress of the Philippines. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the reason there is the 
necess^y of the last sentence. If the new Local Govem- 
ment Code will adopt a system other than what is now 

^ Local Government Code, a plebiscite 

will be necessary. 

I would state that it is wiser to retain the last sen- 
tence Let us not engage again in another “constitu- 
lon a ventunsm, to quote Commissioner Aquino. 

adventurism but superfluity, 

Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Local Govern- 
ment Code will not be submitted to a plebiscite. What 
should be decided is whether the Congress shall enact a 
Local Government Code with the provisions stated and 
authorized by Section 2 without the need to submit the 
same to a plebiscite. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. That is the problem that is con- 
fronting us. The committee report, as is, requires a 
plebiscite for a change. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, that is only after the Congress 
has fixed a form of government for local government 
units, and then there is a need to change the same. In 
which case, the second act of Congress must be ratified 
under this last sentence of Section 2, which Com- 
missioner Ople amended by way of deletion which I 
accepted on behalf of the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. I want to be clarified on the 
matter that requires a plebiscite. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The change of the local government 
structure would require a plebiscite. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Committee Chairman 
please clarify this? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I have a question. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in response to the 
question of the Chair, may I reiterate the proposed 
amendment. This pertains to line 19 of Section 2, page 
1 of the Article. I propose to delete the sentence which 
says: “No change in the existing form of local govern- 
ment shall take effect until ratified by a majority of the 
votes cast in a plebiscite called for the purpose.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
make a very important argument in favor of the Ople 
amendment because if we do not delete this, then 
Congress cannot even change the present form of 
government as now embodied in the Local Government 
Code. There are many petitions that we have received 
asking the Congress to return to the old form of govern- 
ment with a mayor and council, particularly to political 
units within Metro Manila. Mr. Marcos has changed 
drastically the form of government of the local govern- 
ment units. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that aU that is 
to be decided is whether or not to submit to a plebiscite 
any change in the existing form of government. 


MR. FOZ. I think it is settled in some jurisprudence 
that the presidential form of government and the par- 
liamentary system are not applicable to local govern- 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


401 


ment systems. As a matter of fact, in the existing local 
government setup, there is a mixture as it is. The provin- 
cial governor sits in the provincial board which is the 
legislative department of the provincial government, and 
this example is extended to some other forms of local 
government where the mayor sits as chairman or presid- 
ing officer of the city or municipal council. So, the 
question of whether this is parhamentary or presidential 
does not apply, does not come into play at all. So, the 
form of government as used in the provision involves the 
question of whether it is a mayor-council type of 
government or a manager type of government as far as 
local government is concerned. So the parliamentary 
and presidential systems are not at all involved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
has accepted the amendment of Commissioner Ople. I 
think there is an objection from Commissioner Davide, 
and so we submit this to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall now submit this to a 
vote. 

VOTING 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on Section 1 and Section 2 as entire texts, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Committee Chairman 
read Section 1 with the amendments so that we can 
vote separately. 

MR. NOLLEDO. “Section 1. The TERRITORIAL 
AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS OF THE REPUB- 
LIC OF THE PHILIPPINES ARE THE PROVINCES, 
CITIES, MUNICIPALITIES AND BARANGAYS. 
there SHALL BE AUTONOMOUS REGIONS IN 
MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE CORDILLERA AS 

hereinafter provided.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Before we vote on Section 1, may 
I just ask the Chairman to reiterate his answer to my 
query as regards the “subprovinces” which are local 
government units existing under our present laws but 
are not mentioned here. I would like the Chairman to 
articulate before the Commission what is his thinking 
about the subprovinces which seem to be in limbo up to 
this present time. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I said before. Madam President, and 
reiterate now, that subprovinces, because of their 
temporary status, are extensions of the mother prov- 
inces and, therefore, they can be considered in the 
redistricting system for purposes of representation in 
the Congress. 


MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, as far as Section 
1 is concerned, the Constitution does not acknowledge 
the existence of the subprovinces. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As separate political units, because 
they are, to my mind, extensions of the mother prov- 
inces. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Would the Commissioner perhaps 
suggest that I formulate another provision, probably to 
be given to the Committee on Amendments and Transi- 
tory Provisions or to the Committee on the Legislative? 

MR. NOLLEDO. To what effect? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The proposed provision shall 
cover the subprovinces. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have no objection. 

MR. OPLE. May I support this proposal. Madam 
President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of 
Section 1 as read, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 1, as amended, is approved. 

May we ask the Chairman to read Section 2, as 
amended. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 2, as amended, now reads: 
“THE CONGRESS SHALL ENACT A LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT CODE WHICH SHALL PROVIDE 
FOR A MORE RESPONSIVE AND ACCOUNTABLE 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE, INSTITUTED 
THROUGH A SYSTEM OF DECENTRALIZATION, 
WITH EFFECTIVE MECHANISM FOR RECALL, INI- 
TIATIVE AND REFERENDUM, ALLOCATE AMONG 
THE DIFFERENT LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS 
THEIR POWERS, RESPONSIBILITIES AND RE- 
SOURCES, AND PROVIDE FOR THE QUALIFICA- 
TIONS, ELECTION, APPOINTMENT AND REMOV- 
AL, TERM, SALARIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS 
and duties of local OFFICIALS, AND ALL 
OTHER matters RELATING TO THE ORGANIZA- 
TION AND OPERATION OF THE LOCAL UNITS.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
2 as read by the Committee Chairman, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 


402 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 2, as amended, is approved. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I think Metro Manila is excluded, as 
I understand from Commissioner Rama, who is the 
proponent of this provision. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Metro Manila is excluded from this 
provision. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am prepared 
to present my amendment to Section 3. As a matter of 
fact, I have submitted or caused the distribution of my 
comments on my proposed amendment. However, I 
would hke to call the attention of the Chair that my 
proposed amendment will affect two things. It will 
settle probably, once and for all, the status of highly 
urbanized cities, and will also affect the right of suffrage 
of the voters in highly urbanized cities. 

So, may I ask the indulgence of the Chair if I would 
rather reserve my right to present this at some later 
date, because these issues are very vital and we do not 
have a full complement of Commissioners right now. I 
would rather that this be decided when there are more 
Membeis present. Madam President. So, I reserve my 
nght to present my amendment to Section 3 later. 


Se^ion any other amendment to 

^ tJiat Commissioner Colayco be 
recognized to amend Section 3. 

nizl™ ^^^SIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you very much. 

MaTmhnnl reservation of Commissioner 

tions T inp’ 0 ^ ask two clarificatory ques- 

citiTs ^ ^Shly urbanized 

ScTto reasonable standards.” I would 

reasonable Committee has in mind what these 

Congress ^ would be, for the guidance of the 


Gowmnllnt^rn?^! provided in the L 

mine the reasonable stmLds. 


“city^’‘ S^toe^4 use^^arh question is, is th 

“highly urbanized cities”? '' 

a city ■ iJSthw hkhi^® 4 n 

a city, whether highly urbanized or not as lone 

a component part of the province. ’ ® 


MR. COLAYCO. I would like to caU the attention of 
the Gentleman to existmg practice. For instance, Pasay 
City is inside Rizal. ^ 


MR. COLAYCO. But there is no distinction here in 
this definition. 

MR. RAMA. Then I would suggest that Commissioner 
Colayco propose an amendment to the effect that cities 
in Metro Manila are not included in this provision. 

MR. COLAYCO. I will make that amendment when 
Commissioner Maambong is ready with his own in 
connection with Section 3. 

MR. RAMA. May I explain the rationale for this 
second sentence in this section. This is an antiwarlord- 
ism provision. In the past regime, the warlords who 
normally would live in some benighted places in the 
province were able to disenfranchise the cities’ voters 
who had been voting for the provincial officials ever 
since. And with that kind of scheme, they were able to 
control the provinces and get themselves entrenched. As 
a matter of fact, this had been a very big issue in many 
cities down South because of the disenfranchisement of 
the voters who are normally more informed for they live 
in the cities and are normally less vulnerable to the 
maneuvers and manipulations and intimidations of the 
warlords. I think it is a more democratic system to allow 
the city voters, most of whom come from the to\yns or 
provinces, to vote as they have always been voting in the 
past. That is the reason for this second sentence in 
Section 3 . 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, since there was 
a question by Commissioner Colayco which was not 
completely answered, I would hke to put on record 
that as of this moment under our Local Government 
Code, we have a provision in Section 165 which classi- 
fies cities into two kinds. It says: 

A city may either be component or highly urbanized. High- 
ly urbanized cities, as herein provided, shall be independent 

of the province. 

The question of Commissioner Colayco is: What is a 
highly urbanized city? Section 166 of the Local Govern- 
ment Code states highly urbanized cities are the cities 
with a minimum population of 150,000 as certified by 
the National Census and Statistics Office, and with the 
latest annual income of at least P30 million as certified 
by the Minister of Finance; and that cities which do not 
meet the above requirements shall be considered com- 
ponent cities of the province in which they are geo- 
graphically located. 

Section 167 of the Local Government Code will 
answer the question of Commissioner Colayco as to how 
we elevate a component city into a highly urbanized 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


403 


city. Section 167 says: “A component city may become 
a highly urbanized city if it meets the criteria specified 
in the preceding section.” That is precisely the point 
which will be the subject matter later on of our amend- 
ment, because as of this moment we have highly urban- 
ized cities whose inhabitants are not allowed to vote 
logically for the provincial elective officials in the same 
way that the inhabitants and the voters in the province 
are not allowed to vote for the election of city of- 
ficials in the highly urbanized cities. That will be the 
subject matter later on of my proposed amendment to 
Section 3. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. So as a consequence. Commissioner 
Monsod wishes to be recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to ask a question. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. If I understand correctly, the reason 
for the sentence is to prevent warlords in the province 
from dominating the countryside. Is it not possible that 
there will be a warlord in the city also, so that the city 
will then dominate the countryside? 

MR. RAMA. Our experience. Madam President, is 
that the warlords normally do not have their political 
bailiwicks in the cities because the cities are enlightened 
voters. It is in the towns in the provinces where the war- 
lords thrive because they can terrorize and buy voters 
there. It is not so easy to buy voters in the cities. That 
has been our experience, so that this provision also tries 
to correct an evil because there has been gerrymander- 
ing. This is trying to do justice to those people who have 
suffered injustices under the aegis of some warlords. 

MR. MONSOD. My solution in that case where there 
is gerrymandering is to prevent the gerrymandering, not 
to solve it by offsetting a wrong in the first place. 

I have another question. Madam President. In the case 
of the city residents voting for the province, let us say 
that their votes make the difference. Would the provin- 
cial governor have any power or any authority within 
the city? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, many of the inhab- 
itants or dwellers in the city come from the towns. 
Their families live there. As a matter of fact, they just 
go to the city to find work. But for purposes of their 
livelihood they have to transfer their domicile in the 
city, and it is more convenient for them to stay in the 
city and vote in the same place. But the majority of 
those people in the city come from the towns, and their 
families come from the towns. The gerrymandering that 
I was referring to has already been committed and I 


want to correct this. The warlords have already gerry- 
m andered by disen franchising the city voters. 

MR. MONSOD. I find it very hard to conceptualize 
the principle that a group of voters may determine the 
government of the province when there is really no juris- 
diction over the province. To me, the parallel to this is 
in the 1984 Election Code, where transient workers 
were allowed to vote in cities of their place of work. We 
saw many instances where the laborers of a construction 
company, for example, had a very big vote in Pasay 
City. I was wondering whether there is really a principle 
involved here on who are the people who are going to be 
governed by the officials who are being elected. I am 
only trying to reconcile whether that principle is 
superior to the principle of trying to constitutionalize 
the prevention of warlordism. We are trying to put a 
negative constitutional provision to solve the warlord 
system, but we may be opening up another avenue of 
injustice where people are governed by those who really 
were not voted by them into office. 

THE PRESIDENT. Amendments to this Section 3 
have been reserved for Monday or any other day when 
the Article on Local Governments is scheduled. I sup- 
pose additional manifestations on this can be postponed 
to that time when the amendment of Commissioners 
Maambong and Colayco will be considered. Can we 
proceed now to Section 4? 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

My proposal is to delete the word “sectoral” on line 
8, and to insert after “representation” the phrase FROM 
THE PARTY LIST. And on line 9, after the word “law,” 
add the following: IN ACCORDANCE WITH TIffi 

STANDARDS SET FORTH IN SECTION OF 

ARTICLE _ OF THE CONSTITUTION. The “Article” 
here refers to the .Article on the Legislative/National 
Assembly. I understand that the idea of the Committee 
is only to carry over to the local legislative bodies 
sectoral representation under the party list system as 
mandated in Section 5 of the proposed Article on the 
Legislative/National Assembly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee ready to react 
to this? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


404 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Just a point of information. Madam 
President. How laige are the legislative bodies at the 
provincial and municipal level? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The legislative body is composed of 
eight members. 

MR. MONSOD. The reason for my asking is I would 
like to raise the point of whether proportional rep- 
resentation which is really the party list system lends 
itself to application in small bodies like those because I 
remember the discussion on the Senate where we were 
talking about 24 Members of which 1 2 would be elected 
at any one time, assuming 6 years and 3 years. But when 
we put a slate of eight people to run for the municipal 
council, under a party list system, we are sure that not 
all of those eight will be elected, unlike in a system that 
we have installed in the Article on the Legislative/Na- 
tional Assembly where there is a hmit of about 50 seats 
and anybody who gets more than 20 percent of the 
votes can have all the Uneup elected. With this we are 
sure that not all of them will be elected because it is 
stnctly proportional, and I am not sure that the party 
thisSystem lends itself well to a small body of eight like 

why we^ wS?' President, that is the reason 

y are rejectmg the amendment. 


applicable to five seats out of the eight; and about a 
situation where there are permanent sectoral seats and 
where some people who belong to favored sectors 
would again have two votes, and the rest have only one. 

So, I do not know whether we should provide here an 
exception to the deliberations where the Commission 
has voted in principle on the question of whether re- 
served seats are really a democratic type of legislature, 
and we only have here a council of eight people. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Incidentally, Madam President, we 
used the words “as may be prescribed by law.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I address a few questions to 
the Chairman of the Committee? May I know the 
sectors referred to in Section 4 which will have rep- 
resentation in the local governments? In the Article on 
the Legislative/National Assembly we mentioned sectors 
like youth, women, indigenous cultural communities, 
urban poor, peasants and others, even women and other 
sectors, as may be provided by law. Are we carrying 
over those sectors in this Article on Local Governments? 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we did not 
discuss those sectors in the Committee. Commissioner 
Bennagen would like to answer the question of the 
Gentleman. 


democratbino th Pressing imperative 

ments by way of seSoml ^ ^he local gov( 

would be ^\^®P^®^®”tation IS more tha 

through a 1 + f national government. We have g^ 
whelming hearings and there is an o' 

governmLt ^h ^ sectoral representation in the Ic 
Ss Te believe that their 

governments. Besidw^'^h ^ responded to by the Ic 
feasibilitv of ^i- ^ senous doubts about 
.oca, svs,e. ,n 

on^^ohit?^^^^^’ President, may I just n 


irl?^ president. Commissioner 


nized. 


Monsod is recog- 


MR. MONSOD. I believe that u . 
discussion on the floor reg ^e had a very lenj 

manent seats. Here we are 

council and I do noT kuTw 

Committee but, certainly the memh 

1 • u members are prob^ 

thmkms about two or three reserved seats; aCut 
municipality where universal and equal suffmge is c 


MR. BENNAGEN. Earlier, during the deliberations, I 
answered that because of the wide variations of sectors 
in the regions, we cannot specify precisely what sectors 
will be represented in all of the local districts. I would 
imagine there will be areas with at least two sectors — 
peasants, maybe youth, and even women — and in other 
areas, there will be a lot more. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I fully endorse Section 4 on 
sectoral representation. This will bolster the claims or 
the statements of Commissioner Davide about people’s 
power. As a matter of fact, this will supplement the 
mechanisms of recall, initiative and referendum. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I understand 
from Commissioner Davide that he is withdrawing his 
amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because of the problem on 
sectoral representation and because of the enlighten- 
ment of Commissioner Aquino. 

MR. MON SOD. Madam President, in that case, I 
would like to make an amendment. I believe that this 
section is difficult to operationalize and that it is 
against the system of universal and equal suffrage. I 
would like to propose that Section 4 be deleted. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 1 6, 1 986 


405 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
does not accept the amendment and would prefer that 
the question be submitted to the floor. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colay co is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. May I give my reaction. I support 
the stand of Commissioner Monsod, because the legisla- 
tive bodies in the local level will deal only with local 
problems. I do not see how the sectoral area or sectoral 
representatives can be of any special help in protecting 
the rights of the parties represented by them. For that 
reason, therefore, I do not see any reason nor justifica- 
tion for Section 4. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I object to the 
motion of Commissioner Monsod and proceed precisely 
from the argument of Commissioner Colayco. Regional 
and other local governments have specific idiosyncracies 
that are addressed more decisively by their particular 
legislative assemblies. These would require specific at- 
tention to the particular configuration of their problem. 
When we respect the idiosyncracies of the region, there 
is likewise a necessity to consider that in certain regions, 
there are some critical problems that can be best ad- 
dressed by a definitive configuration in their legislative 
assembly. 

For example, if we speak of the legislative assembly 
in Central Luzon where the critical mass belongs to the 
peasant sectors, there is need therefor for the peasant 
sector to be represented in the legislative assembly, as a 
definitive and significant sector. In other words, I would 
use the same argument to support the retention of this 
section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I object as well to the 
proposed amendment that would delete sectoral rep- 
resentation in local legislative bodies for the simple 
reason that this is already an earned right. May I volun- 
teer the information that right now in the municipal 
councils or sangguniang bayan all over the country, the 
farmers and the workers and also the youth are already 
represented. There are usually eight (8) seats in the 
municipal council or sangguniang bayan, and in the 
sangguniang panlungsod. In addition to that, these are 
elected within their political subdivision and each coun- 
cil usually has a member representing the youth sector. 
Yes, all the barangay associations in the town are 


represented through the Chairman of the Association of 
Barangay Captains, and the youth are represented. 
Optionally, the workers of the trade unions may also be 
represented in the case of the more economically ad- 
vanced municipalities where there are industries and, 
therefore, trade unions. Therefore, if we now delete 
sectoral representation in local bodies, then this is a step 
backwards fi’om what these mass organizations already 
enjoyed under the old Constitution. 

I would have no objection to a review of the nature 
of the sectoral representation that will be considered by 
Congress. I would have no objection to guiding Congress 
on what this Commission would like to denominate as 
its own preferences for sectoral seats, but I appeal to the 
Committee to preserve the principle of sectoral rep- 
resentation in local bodies because it is already a work- 
ing principle which has been proven by experience to be 
useful and to be desirable for a community. 

Thank you. 

MR. COLAYCO. One last reaction. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. We are speaking here of reserved 
seats, in other words, to guarantee that these sectoral 
areas shall be insured of their representation. But in the 
local bodies, these sectoral areas or persons can fight it 
out on an equal basis. Everybody knows everybody in a 
municipality. The idea of sectoral representation was 
important in the higher provincial and national levels 
because they are at a big disadvantage. Here, they do 
not need this protection. Secondly, what are the issues 
covered by the legislation in local matters? Licenses, 
probably, minor violations, that is all. The personal 
rights as a social member of a unit are not involved 
in local legislation. Madam President, I do not think 
there is need, really, for providing special sectoral 
representation in the municipal level at least. 

MR. OPLE. I just wanted to point out that the range 
of lawmaking duties at the municipal level is much 
wider than what Commissioner Colayco had suggested. 
There are social and economic development programs 
covered by appropriate legislation at the municipal level, 
and it is in this respect that sectoral representation be- 
comes very important. There are problems of fishermen 
and of farmers in a locality. There are the problems of 
market vendors and of peace and order. If the level of 
peace in a remote barangay is substandard, then they 
cannot go out to plant; they cannot harvest when the 
rice ripens. So, there is a whole range of legislative 
services now being provided by the sangguniang bayan. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we listen to Commissioner 
Bengzon. 


406 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I have a question 
to ask the Committee, but before that, with the little 
experience I have gone through and have had in dealing 
with local governments, I fully agree with the comments 
of Commissioner Ople in his explanation and I share 
those views. In Section 4, when we say “legislative 
bodies of local governments,” I assume that the term 
refers to the governor, the vice-governor, the members 
of the provincial board, the mayor, the vice-mayor and 
the members of the municipal council. Is that correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


WHICH SHALL BE DETERMINED BY LAW, SHALL 
BE THREE YEARS AND NO SUCH OFFICIAL 
SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN THREE CONSE- 
CUTIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RENUNCIATION OF 
THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH OF TIME SHALL 
NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN INTERRUPTION IN 
THE CONTINUITY OF HIS SERVICE FOR THE 
FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS ELECTED. This is 
in accordance with the mandate of the Commission 
when we voted on the terms of officials up to local 
officials, excluding the term of barangay officials which 
was a very specific exception. 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. One clarificatory question. Madam 
President. What will be the term of the office of baran- 
gay officials as provided for? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I briefly say something on 
sectoral representation. I have been to a number of 
places and I observed that many of those in the bodies, 
legislative bodies, belong to the middle and upper classes 
of our society . In the province where I come from, the 
council is occupied by those who belong to the middle 
class or upper class. I, therefore, support that the mar- 
ginal sectors be represented in the bodies so that their 
needs and grievances will have a chance to be heard. 


MR. DAVIDE. As may be determined by law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As provided for in the Local 
Government Code. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We accept the amendment. The 
Committee accepts the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 


MR. RAMA. Madam Presider 
ment to delete the entire Section 


the Monsod amend- 
is ready for a vote. 


VOTING 


proposed amendment befor 
the body is that of Commissioner Monsod’s, to delet 
the entire Section 4. 


As many as are in favor, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As as are against, please raise their hand. 

(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor, 19 against; the 
amendment is lost. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 


THp PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nizeja. 

DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

After Section 4, I propose to insert a new section to 
be denominated later as Section 5. It provides as fol- 
lows: THE TERM OF OFFICE OF ELECTIVE LOCAL 
OFFICIALS, EXCEPT BARANGAY OFFICIALS, 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the proponent accept an 
amendment to the extent that the second sentence, 
which he just read, should be the first sentence, and the 
present first sentence should be the second sentence 
because it would be an improper sequence for 
executive to be on the first sentence and the legislative 
on the second sentence. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we have the wording under the 
proposal? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It has the same wording as Com- 
missioner Davide has proposed. We only transpose the 
amendment, which he just read, as the first sentence of 
Section 4 and the present formulation of Section 4 as 
the second sentence. 

MR. DAVIDE. I think that will be the sequence. I do 
not know if the Committee also has the same percep- 
tion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We have no objection. Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Do we have copies of this new 
section? 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


407 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, it is included 
in the omnibus amendments introduced by this Rep- 
resentation. That is (Roman numeral) VI, page 2, of the 
omnibus amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the reaction of the 
Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, as amended, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May we ask the Committee to read the 
proposed amendment now. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we ask Commissioner Davide 
to read the new section. 

MR. DAVIDE. THE TERM OF OFFICE OF ELEC- 
TIVE LOCAL OFFICIALS, EXCEPT BARANGAY 
OFFICIALS, WHICH SHALL BE DETERMINED BY 
LAW, SHALL BE THREE YEARS AND NO SUCH 
OFFICIAL SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN 
THREE CONSECUTIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RE- 
NUNCIATION OF THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH 
OF TIME SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN 
INTERRUPTION IN THE CONTINUITY OF HIS 
SERVICE FOR THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE 
WAS ELECTED. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? Is 
there any objection to this proposed new section as sub- 
mitted by Commissioner Davide and accepted by the 
Committee? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, does this prohibi- 
tion to serve for more than three consecutive terms 
apply to barangay officials? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the voting that we 
had on the terms of office did not include the barangay 
officials because it was then the stand of the Chairman 
of the Committee on Local Governments that the term 
of barangay officials must be determined by law. So it 
is now for the law to determine whether the restriction 
on the number of reelections will be included in the 
Local Government Code. 

MR. RODRIGO. So that is up to Congress to decide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. I just wanted that clear in the 
record. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that it was decided 
by the proponent and by the Committee that this should 
be a new section, I will vary my proposed amendment a 
little bit to the effect that this present formulation 
should now become Section 4 and the present Section 4 
should be Section 5 so that we can have the proper 
sequence of the executive and the legislative, if that is 
acceptable to the Committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman of the 
Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I suggest. Madam President, that 
adjustments be made later on when Commissioner 
Maambong shall have presented his amendment. That is 
with respect only to the numbering. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I think the best 
way is for us to renumber as soon as the body approves 
the Maambong amendment, because there may be forth- 
coming amendments later on. 

MR/ilAAMBONG. Yes, as long as the sequence that 
I printed will be followed. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, I just wanted to call 
the attention of the Committee, if this is welcome, to 
a prior decision taken by the Commission to relocate, 
to allocate a new section to the amendment concerning 
metropolitan areas that was approved this morning. May 
I leave it to the Committee to find the correct and most 
appropriate place in these series of sections for that. 

Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We will do that. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Laurel be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel is recog- 
nized. Is this on the Davide amendment so we can vote 
on it? Is this a new matter? 

MR. RAMA. This is a new matter, Madam President. 

-9 

THE PRESIDENT. Ihen let us vote first on the 
Davide amendnfent. 


408 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


Is there any objection to this new section proposed 
by Commissioner Davide which has been read to the 
body? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the proposed 
section is approved. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 541 
(Protecting the Dignity and Integrity 
of the Commission) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
consider Proposed Resolution No. 541. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Commissioner Laurel is recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT, 
nized. 


Commissioner Laurel is recog- 


SPONSORSHIP SPEECH 
OF COMMISSIONER LAUREL 

MR^. LAUREL. Madam President, I would like to 
read before this body a resolution which some of our 
colleagues have signed. It is a resolution expressing the 
operative of protecting the dignity and the integrity of 

interference by lobbyists 

witnin the session hall. 

an tacMenn.S*'*'"' there was 

onir^e orSSl “ **'' of not 

including ,h. ^esidS OfterT^ 

Tefaif S « hecaus^rXe^m 

recall that at that time, the session was simply 7m- 

adjourned. In other words 
^at took place was part of the proceeding of thh 
aainber and therefore, if anyone wants to commit a 
disorderly behavior in this Chamber only the Member* 
c^ violate the Rules and face the risk of investigatior 

fOTe h waf “1 Committee on Privileges. And, there- 
fnr th t proper for any outsider or any lobbyists 

a Member ol 

tinoiikhpH know who he is. It was a dis- 

improper called names, and that was 

Mpmhpr rvi there is no one who is not a 

^iv ^hP ahr! '^ho can pretend to have nol 

behavior ^ ^ commit disorderly 

If any outsider should do that, he should have beer 
silenced then and there, and he should have beer 
ordered out of the floor. Kahit pa igapos para palayasin. 
hindi dapat ipinahintulot na lumalabas tayong hinihi- 
yang lahat dito. Ang bagay na ito ay hindi dapat mang- 


yari, at kung nangyari man noong araw ay ipagpatawad 
na natin na may nangyaring ganoon; ang nais ko lamang 
Sana ay huwag nang maulit pa ito. 

There are lots of controversial matters that will be 
discussed, not only now or tomorrow, but until the day 
we adjourn; therefore, let us not allow this to happen 
again. Madam President and my dear colleagues, may I 
read Proposed Resolution No. 541 : 

RESOLUTION EXPRESSING THE IMPERATIVE OF PRO- 
TECTING THE DIGNITY AND INTEGRITY OF THE COM- 
MISSION AGAINST UNDUE INTERFERENCE BY LOBBY- 
ISTS WITHIN THE SESSION HALL 

WHEREAS, during the suspension of the plenary session of 
the Commission in the morning of Friday, 15 August 1986, and 
while the Commissioners discussed their proposed amendments to 
the proposed Article on National Economy and Patrimony with 
the members of the Committee on National Economy and Patri- 
mony, lobbyists rushed into the session hall and ^proached 
Commissioners and committee members with the intention of 
presenting their own amendments; one of the lobbyists, who was 
insistent on having his own or his group’s proposals incorporated 
into Section 1 of the proposed Article publicly and openly in- 
sulted, and his brother challenged. Commissioner Christian 
Monsod; unfortunately, however, one newspaper erroneously 
made it appear that it was Commissioner Monsod who provoked 
the altercation; 

WHEREAS, the Commission had taken aU steps to hear the 
views of all sectors; nationwide pubhc hearings were conducted; 
the different committees conducted their own hearings; and the 
Commission and its members have received, and continue to re- 
ceive, proposals and recommendations from individuals, groups 
and associations; with utmost patience the Commissioners 
listened to all views; 

WHEREAS, the Commission, as a constituent assembly, and 
its members are entitled to respect; the session hall of the Com- 
mission is not any ordinary place for any person or group of 
persons to freely use to disrupt or interfere with the delicate 
work of the Commission; 

WHEREAS, the incident above-described constituted an 
assault on the dignity of the Commission; Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved, as it is hereby resolved by the Commission, to direct 
the Sergeant-at-Arms to always maintain order and security 
within the session hall, or in any manner disrupting the Com- 
missioners thereat. 

Resolved, further, to condemn as undue and unwarranted 
interference of the proceedings of the Commission the action of 
the lobbyists involved in the incident in question. 

Kahit na sinabi ng peryodikong ang pinanggahngan ay 
si Mr. Monsod, hindi naman iyon totoo. Kung totoo 
man iyon, papaano naging Member of this body iyong 
pumasok na taga-labas upangmag-participate during the 
suspension of the session. Kahit ang session ay sus- 
pended lamang, ang ginagawa natin dito ay part of the 
proceedings. Suspendido ang session upang alamin kung 
ano ba ang diperensiya — entre nosotros — na puwede 
namang ayusin. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


409 


Ngunit hindi maaaring pumasok dito sa session hall 
upang magyabang ang sinumang lalaki. Kung kaibigan 
ko man — at kaibigan ko namang talaga iyong mga 
dumating dito — at hinahangad na tayo’y sundaluhin, 
hindi iyon ang pinag-uusapan. Dapat namang bigyan ng 
halaga ang ating trabaho rito sapagkat ito naman ay 
ginagawa natin para sa kanila na mga kababayan natin. 

Katulad noong araw na ako ay Speaker pa sa Camara 
de Representantes, mayroong mga teenagers na gustong 
magtaJumpati roon sa session hall. Ang sabi ko sa kanila, 
“Hindi naman kayo qualified even to run for public 
office. Maghintay kayo.” “Darating ang panahon ninyo 
that you would be qualified to run. At kung kayo ay 
manalo, saka lamang kayo makakadiskurso lito. Ni hindi 
kayo maaaring magkandidato, pagkatapos ay gusto 
ninyong makapanayam kami rito. Ano ang saysay ng 
pagpupulong namin dito kung ganyan ang mangyayari?” 

Mabuti pa ay pumunta na lamang sila sa Pangulo 
natin, kay Ginang Aquino, at doon sila magpanombra at 
kung makursunadahan sila, makakapagbusisi na sila rito. 
Ngunit hindi sila maaaring magyabang dito dahil hindi 
naman sila kaanib dito. At huwag naman nilang hiyain 
ang mga Commissioners sapagkat ang hinihiya nila ay 
hindi naman tayo lamang kundi pati ang bay an at pati 
na ang Pangulo na nagpadala sa atin dito. Kay at hindi na 
dapat maulit iyan. Nangyari na at ayaw ko ng ganoong 
marami pa sana tayong pag-uusapan dito ay basta 
pupuntahan tayo at ang gusto nilang mangyari ay ang 
kanila. At pag hindi tayo sumang-ayon ay mabubusisi 
tayo rito at sasabihin pa ang kanilang palagay sa atin. 

Tayo ay nakikinig at kung gusto nilang makinig, 
humarap sila sa mga committee meetings. Mayroon 
naman tayong mga pinagpupulungan; pati saprobinsiya 
ay nasuot tayo upang madinig kung ano ang kagustuhan 
ng mga kababayan natin. Ngunit hindi tarn ang sila ay 
magdidiskurso o manggugulo rito. Alam naman natin 
kung ano ang gusto ng mga tao. Tayo naman ay nakild- 
nig; bagamat alam na natin ay pinakikinggan pa natin 
ang mga tao because we have to disagree from time to 
time. Ano ba naman kung mapakinggan natin ang gusto 
ng tao? 

Ngunit kasalukuyang mayroong session dito sa 
Con-Com, kaya bakit naman pakikialaman ang ating 
ginagawa gayong hindi naman sila kaanib? 

Ang mahalaga ay hindi lamang pagbibigay-galang sa 
atin kundi pagbibigay-galang sa nagpadala sa atin dito. 
At ang nagpadala sa atin dito ay ang ating Pangulong 
kinikilala ng maraming kababayan natin. Mayroon pa 
riyang ang gusto ay maging Pangulo. Mayroon pang 
naging Pangulong malapit din sa akin at tatlumpu’t 
pitong oras na naging Pangulo; mayroon ding nagsasa- 
bing tatlumpu’t anim na araw daw. 

Tayo’y ipinadala rito upang magtrabaho, pagkatapos 
ay h^adlangan pa tayo ng ating mga kababayan na mga 
nagdudunung-dunungan. Hindi tayo ang kawawa; ang 
kawawa ay ang bayan na naghihintay sa atin na tayo ay 
makatapos dito sa ating katungkulan. 


Kung may nagkamali ay ipakiusap lang nating huwag 
nang uulitin iyon. Ito naman ay hindi patama lamang sa 
kung sinuman, at kilala ninyong lahat kung sino iyong 
nasasangkot sa paggawa noong hindi natin nagugustu- 
han. Ninanais lang nating ipaalam sa kapwa rin nating 
Pilipino na tayo ay magpupulong-pulong tungkol sa mga 
iba’t ibang bagay at marami pa tayong pagpupulungang 
mga bagay na hindi tayo maaaring magkasundo-sundo o 
magkasama-sama. 

Kung tuwing tayo ay may pag-uusapan at hindi 
magkakasama-sama ang lahat ng delegado rito at kung 
paparito lang ang mga taga-labas para manggulo ay 
huwag na silang pumarito. Aming pinakikiusapan at 
tinatawagang-pansin ang mga nanunungkulan dito, lalo 
na ang ating Sergeant-at-Arms. I repeat, the session was 
only suspended. What we were doing was part of the 
proceedings of this Chamber at that time. 

Ipinakikiusap ko po, sa ngalan ng mga kasamahan ko, 
na wala naman tayong kasali dito na pinararatangan 
natin. Sapagkat dito sa session hall, only the Members of 
this body can commit disorderly conduct. At kapag 
naman nangyari iyan, hindi na baleng tayo ay ikulong o 
palayasin dito. Kung sinuman dito ang kaanib ay siya 
lamang ang may karapatang mag-alsa rito at gumawa ng 
mali, tulad noong ginawa ng iba. Ngunit iyong mga hindi 
taga-rito’y . . . ipagpatawad naman rtila. 

We pretend to be in a position to prepare the draft of 
a Constitution which will later on be submitted to the 
people. 

Nakapirma naman dito sa resolusyon ang mga panga- 
lan ng mga authors ngunit hindi ko na babasato 
sapagkat sa aking palagay wala namang kaanib dito 
sa Con-Com na hindi sasang-ayon dito sa resolusyong 
ito. Kaya sa halip na basahin ko ang mga pangalan nila 
ay ipalalagay ko na lamang na lahat ng naririto ngayon, 
pati wala ritong mga Members ng Con-Com, ay sang- 
ayon dito sa resolusyong ito. Kay at, Madam President, 
aking hinihingi ang unanimous approval of this resolu- 
tion. 

Salamat po. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I have no objection. Madam President, but 
I just would like to make certain statements in connec- 
tion with the resolution. I think that at all times, we 
should not give any impression that we are not open to 
any suggestions or views from the public or from the 
people. We should, as a matter of fact, welcome all 
views, all shades of views. As a matter of fact, we have 
just gone through a series of public consultations pre- 
cisely to hear the views of the people from as many 
representatives, from as many sectors as possible, in as 
many places as possible. And having heard them, we are 
not, of course, bound by their views, but we have to 
consider them in making decisions as to the specific 
provisions of our new Constitution. 


410 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz, I think 
everybody is aware that we have welcomed organiza- 
tions, individuals whom we have entertained at the 
South Wing lobby, even listened to their programs. We 
never intended or we have never had up to now any 
occasion to deny any one from expressing his views, but 
as the resolution calls for, this must be made outside of 
the session hall, and not while the Members of the 
Commission are deliberating over the resolutions that 
are before the body. 

MR. FOZ. That is right. Madam President, but I just 
want to make the statement that we should not give any 
impression, that we do not want to listen to anybody, 
be he a public official or a private citizen. I am referring 
particularly to the impression created by another in- 
cident in the South Conference Room where a public 
official was embarrassed because one of us practically 
stopped him from delivering his statement in connection 
with another issue. 

So, I am appealing to our Members not to make any 
step or to adopt any measure that would give the im- 
pression that we do not welcome any view from the 
public at all. That is all my concern, but I support the 
proposed resolution of Commissioner Laurel. 


kaanib dito na hindi sasang-ayon sa resolusyong ito. 
Hindi naman para sa akin sapagkat ito ay para sa ating 
bayan. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May we just ask one clarification of the distin- 
guished Commissioner Laurel. I did not get very well 
the last condemnatory portion of the resolution. I fully 
support the Commissioner in his undertaking and I 
think it is a noble undertaking to uphold the hitegiity 
of this Commission. I am only a Uttle wary about the 
condemnatory portion. May I have the pleasure of the 
Commissioner’s reading it again for the benefit of the 
other Members? 

MR. LAUREL. The last paragraph of the resolution 
says: 

Resolved, further, to condemn as undue and unwar- 
ranted interference of the proceedings of the Commission 
the action of the lobbyists involved in the incident in 
question. 


MR. LAUREL. Madam President, I read that para- 
graph of the resolution which refers to the steps taken 
by this body to receive the comments and the opinions 
expressed by other people. I am not saying that my dear 
colleague is going to vote against this resolution. If there 
IS any one of those who came over and said things on 
the floor at a time when we were in session, and who 
wants to participate here, I am even willing to resign 
and ^ve way to him provided the President is willing to 
appoint hhn. At kung kailangan pa, I know there will be 
Members of this Chamber who are willing to give up 


But what I want is to preserve the dignity and th 

mtegnty of this Chamber. I am not doing this fo 
myselr. 


. . PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz has expressed 
his full support for the resolution. 

laurel. Maganda ho naman. Magbotohan na 
g ayo. At ako’y hindi naman umaasang mayroon 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 541 
(Protecting the Dignity and Integrity 
of the Commission) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
approve Proposed Resolution No. 541. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Proposed Resolution No. 541 is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for adjourn- 
ment until Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 4:11 p.m. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


411 


R.C.C. NO. 59 
Monday, August 18, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:56 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Hilario G. Davide, Jr. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. DAVIDE. Almighty and eternal God, through 
Your Son Jesus Christ, You said: 

Ask, and it shall be given you; 

Seek and you shall find it; 

Knock, and it shall be opened to you. 

For everyone who asks, receives; 

And he who seeks, finds; 

And to him who knocks, it shall be opened. 

During the past seventy-seven days of our sacred 
work to write the fundamental law, we had asked for 
Your guidance; sought Your wisdom; knocked at Your 
heart for love not only here but everywhere, during 
waking hours or sleeping moments, in the quiet of 
aloneness or in the midst of noise. 

You never failed us.Your patience was endless. 

As the end of our work draws near and the issues 
become more complex and complicated, debates more 
intense and even winded, we need You more. 

We need You for strength to walk the last mile; for 
courage to resist pressures and the intimidation of the 
crowd; for humility to accept defeat of our pet pro- 
posals; for patience to listen to the words of others; for 
peace of mind and soul. 

Above all, we need Your wisdom; so that the Consti- 
tution we shall prepare will come from You — and no 


one else — for the Filipinos of all generations to love, 
cherish and share. 

Be with us then always. Amen. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I call the attention of our 
Commissioners and everybody in this hall that we are 
starting today the celebration of Peace and Freedom 
Week under the auspices of the Ninoy Aquino Move- 
ment and SERVE. And so, let us all join in expressing 
the hope that peace and freedom will always reign in 
our country, in our communities, in our families and 
homes, and also here in this august assembly. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will please 
call the roll. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 


Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada .... 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 


Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Brocka 

. Present* 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 


Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 


Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 


Davide 

, . Present 

Suarez 


Foz 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 


Gascon 

. . Present 

Tan 


Guingona ... 

. . Present* 

Tingson . . . . 


Jamir 

. . Present 

Trenas 


Laurel 

. . Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

VUlegas 


Monsod .... 





The President is present. 

The roll call shows 37 Members responded to the call. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


412 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the J oumal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of last Saturday’s 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF THE JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of last Saturday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

Thlf^ f resident. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
the Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Reference of 


reference OF BUSINESS 
references: ^ * making the correspondim 


COMMUNICATIONS 

from°U Gunzon and sixteen (16) oth< 

f 11 ■ ■ Quezon City, proposing 

six-yr^^teril- officials will hav, 

tion or tn n ’ allowed to seek reel 

six-vear elective positions only afte 

that first-flpo served by a successor; and 

(Communication No. 568 - Constitutional Commissi 
To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Movement, sign 

Sion m the Constitution of the foUowing proposals: 
that election to public office should not involve a 
expense whatsoever on the part of the candidat 


political parties, voters and others, except on the part 
of the government, and (b) that m the administration of 
justice, litigants should not incur any expense in the 
procurement and/or availment of anything which may 
affect a just and fair decision. 

(Communication No. 569 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Edmundo H. FuUeros of Buhang, Bulu- 
san, Sorsogon, urging the dismantling of the two U.S. 
military bases come 1991, and thereafter, no foreign 
military bases be allowed in our country. 

(Communication No. 570 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Position paper of the Association of Baptist Churches in 
Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao, Inc., 32 Road 2, Project 
6, (Quezon City, signed by its Chairman, Rev. Edwin T. 
Ormeo, supporting the retention of the provisions up- 
holding the principle of the separation of Church and 
State in the new Constitution of the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 571 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Philippine Association of Colleges and 
Universities (PACU) signed by its President, Ms. Jose- 
phine C. Reyes, submitting proposed amendments on 
the resolution incorporating in the Constitution an 
Article on Education, Science, Technology, Sports, Arts 
and Culture, embodied in Committee Report No. 29. 

(Communication No. 572 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Benigno Jaleroso of Camming, Tarlac, 
expressing concern over the proposed creation of the 
Cordillera and Muslim Mindanao as autonomous regions, 
saying that this might lead to the creation of other auto- 
nomous regions hke the Ilocos region, Bicol region, the 
Southern Tagalog provinces, and others. 

(Communication No. 573 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

^tter frc^ Mr. Faustino Ruivivar, Jr. of Every Home 
Ciusade Philippines, Inc., P.O. Box 50, Valenzuela, 
recommending that the provision of the 
1973 Constitution on the separation of the Church and 
State be incorporated in the new Constitution; that the 
teaching .of religion in the public schools should be 
optiond md without cost to the government; and to 
allow the U.S. military bases to remain after 1991. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


413 


(Communication No. 574 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication with seven hundred seventy-seven signa- 
tories with their respective addresses, seeking to include 
in the Constitution a provision obliging the State to 
protect the life of the unborn from the moment of 
conception. 

(Communication No. 575 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 496 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. RAMA. Up for consideration this morning 
would be the resolution to incorporate in the new 
Constitution an Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony, and also later in the morning we propose 
that we take up the resolution on the Article on Local 
Governments. 

Madam President, in view of the motion for the 
reconsideration of Section 1 of the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony, I move that we take up for 
consideration the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The body will proceed to continue the discussion on 
the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. The 
Chair requests the honorable Chairman Bernardo 
Villegas, Vice-Chairman Jaime Tadeo and the members 
of the Committee to please occupy the front table: 
Commissioners Gascon, Bennagen, Romulo, Monsod, 
Sarmiento, Bengzon, Jr., Maambong, Suarez, Uka, 
Bacani, Natividad, Foz and VUlacorta. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, under our Rules, a 
motion for reconsideration has to be voted upon before 
the proponents can suggest amendments. May I, there- 


fore, propose, in fairness to the proponents, that they 
be given a chance to explain the basis for which they are 
seeking a motion for reconsideration of Section 1 so 
that when the Commissioners vote, it will be meaning- 
ful. I believe it is necessary that the proponents do so 
because we have discussed in detail and at great length 
all the major concepts involved in Section 1; namely, 
the concept of a mixed economy with the private sector 
predominating, the concept of industrialization, the 
concept of protection against unfair foreign competition 
and, finally, the concept of a broad-based ownership. 
These have been discussed in the Committee, on the 
floor, and in caucus. Inasmuch as these have taken 
place, the proponents for a motion for reconsideration, 
in a manner of speaking, have the burden of proof to 
show that their request for reconsideration is merito- 
rious. That is why I believe that in fairness to them, we 
should allow them some latitude in explaining their 
position on why they are requesting a motion for 
reconsideration as well as for permission to amend 
Section 2. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I understand there are three or 
four Commissioners intending to propose amendments 
or to say something on Section 1 . I move that they be 
allowed to finish their comments and explanations first 
before the interpellations for order and facility. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The motion is granted. 

Who will be our first speaker today? 

MR. RAMA. I call on Commissioner Sarmiento to be 
the first speaker on the motion for reconsideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, members of 
the Committee and my fellow Commissioners, I rise this 
morning to express my reservations and apprehensions 
with respect to Section 1 . 

With due respect to my Committee, to the members 
of the Committee and to the Members of this august 
body, allow me to share with everybody the reasons for 
my reservations and apprehensions. The fundamental 
objection to this section is that it constitutionalizes 
the development philosophy prescribed by the IMF- 
World Bank group. This means that the Constitution 
will stand committed to a development philosophy 
characterized by the following components: 


414 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


1 ) minimal protection for domestic industries with an 
economy liberally opened to import competition; and 


2) an industrialization program characterized by an 
emphasis on industries geared to foreign markets and 
based on exploitation of the nation’s agricultural 
resources and cheap and ample labor supply. 


In essence, the new Constitution would incorporate 
the notorious labor-intensive, export-oriented develop- 
ment strategy which the IMF-World Bank group 
imposed on the Marcos government, and which has been 
adopted by the Aquino government in the guise of the 
economic recovery program. Far from accomplishing a 
self-reUant and independent national economy, which 
the section proposes in its opening sentence, the man- 
date and directive embodied therein will operate to 
perpetuate an import-dependent type of industrializa- 
tion and industrialization based on exploitation of our 
agricultural resources and labor supply and which is 
geared to the agricultural markets. 


Furthermore, Madam President, the section b> 
necessary implication, commits the State to a policy oj 
protection only in those cases where foreign competi 
is proved unfair, obviously rejecting the motior 
at t e domestic market should be preserved and 
secured for domestic industries as a matter of principle 
irrespective of whether or not import competition is fan 
or unfair. Operatively, this means a poUcy of minima 
domestic industries. This developmen 
philosophy has not only been proven a failure in th( 
but also elsewhere. The Economic anc 
(ScA^ the United Nation; 

veloome^nt^tL^® labor-intensive, export-oriented de 

everv devpin • been proven a failure in virtualh 

^ery developmg country where it has been tried As i 

blen that such a strategy ha 

been a failure m the PhUippines. This statemen 
chahenges the Comrnmee on the National Economy an. 
Patrimony to deny that what has been intended by thi 
section IS to mcorporate the failed labor-intensive 
export-onented approach to development into no lec 
than our new Constitution. 


Our assessment of the subject session must be under- 
taken from the perspective that a poUcy of intense 
domestic industries not only through 
an s but also and more emphatically through direct 
an ou nght control of our imports is not only neces- 
^^^^^P^^sable to the development of an 
m cpen ent and self-reliant economy. Such a rigorous 
pro ec lonism continues to be practised even by highly 
eve ope states, the most notorious of which is Japan, 
n er sue a policy, protection to domestic industries 
IS exten e regardless of whether or not import 
competition is fair or unfair. 


Madam President, my thoughts and reflections this 
morning are best stated by our esteemed colleague, 
Commissioner Jose B. Laurel, in his sponsorship speech 
of the Magna Carta of Social Justice and Economic 


Freedom in 1969, otherwise known as House Joint 
Resolution No. 2. He said in his sponsorship speech: 

Many of our social problems stem from an archaic eco- 
nomic structure that is unable to meet the employment 
requirements of 37 million people, growing at a rate of 
almost 3.5 percent a year. It is an economic structure 
marked by the conspicuous absence of significant manu- 
facturing capabilities and dependent mainly on agricultural 
pursuits as the largest source of the country’s income and 
employment opportunities. Only by industrializing the eco- 
nomy through the establishment of basic industries, parti- 
cularly those that will utilize indigenous raw materials, can 
we hope to resolve the perennial problem of mass unem- 
ployment and marginal incomes that haunt the lives of our 
people. 

Speaking of protectionism, he remarked: 

If we are to induce Filipino capitalists to invest in 
desirable industries, we must assure their products of an 
effective and controlling share of the domestic market. All 
other considerations are secondary. And we can assure our 
entrepreneurs control over the domestic market for their 
products only if they are effectively protected against 
foreign imports. This is the primary purpose of tariffs and 
of import and foreign exchange restrictions. 

I would like to close by quoting the words of a man 
whom we honored a few days ago. I am referring to 
former Senator Lorenzo Tahada, who said: 

It is only economic nationalism, sustained by solid sub- 
stance in the form of control by our own entrepreneurs of 
the basic industries and facilities all over our broad land, 
which will ensure the achievement of a lasting and effectual 
solution to the problems of mass poverty, high cost of 
living and increasing unemployment. It is the only philoso- 
phy of economic development which will insure for us and 
perhaps, for our region, the permanence of individual 
freedom and parliamentary institutions. 

Thank you. Madam President, and I thank the Chair- 
man and the members of the Committee on the Nation- 
al Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Tadeo wishes to be recog- 
nized, Madam President. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


iviiv. Kaisa po ako sa sinabi 

Rene Sarmiento. Gusto ko lang basahin sa inyo ang 
sinabi ni Alexander Padilla doon sa promotion of 
Church People’s Response, Philippine Society in Per- 
spective, a National Situationer, tungkol sa economic 
protectionism. He says on page 2, paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 
thereof: 


In 1909, the United States forced the Philippines into 
an economic relation called the “free trade.” Essentially, 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 8, 1 986 


415 


this meant that our government will be prohibited from 
imposing any tariff, and other restrictions on American 
goods exported to the Philippines. Free of tariff and duties 
and without limit, cheap manufactured goods flooded the 
Philippines. More than any single factor, this law which 
forced our agricultural economy to trade freely with a 
highly industrialized America entrenched and sohdified the 
colonial pattern of our economy. Our country became an 
exporter of raw materials and a consumer of finished 
products. This inhibited our manufacturing and industrial 
sectors from expanding since it was highly prohibited to 
compete with imported, cheaper and better quality manu- 
facturers. This free trade policy, to this date, is still being 
practiced through its modern and various guises such as the 
decontrol program of 1962, the floating rate of 1970, and 
through most of the entire period of martial law, the export- 
oriented, labor-intensive development strategy introduced 
in 1972 at the behest of the International Monetary Fund- 
World Bank financial institution. 

It is significant to note that over 200 years ago, when 
the United States had just fouglit and won their indepen- 
dence from England, this very theory of “free trade” 
espoused by Adam Smith was itself repudiated by the 
newly born democracy througli US Finance Minister 
Alexander Hamilton. The simple reason being that a coun- 
try to be strong economically must be capable of pro- 
ducing its own means of production and industries. With 
free trade, a developing and agricultural country (like the 
United States then) would be flooded by cheap imported 
manufactures and thus hinder her from developing her own 
industries. 

Unless such a country begins to impose tariffs and quota 
limitations on imports, encourage domestic industries 
through subsidies, she would forever remain an agricultural 
country dependent on her industrial partner^ s) for essential 
imported materials. By practising protectionism (then 
known as mercantilism), the United States became not only 
industrialized but even the most powerful country in the 
entire world, fast outpacing its colonial mother country. 
Great Britain. To this day, the United States practices pro- 
tectionist policies by imposing tariffs, quota limitations and 
other measures to prevent the influx of cheap imported 
products; but ironic as it may seem, through her controlled 
international financial institution(s), she imposes the policy 
of an open economy on developing and highly agricultural 
countries and thus perpetuating countries like the Philip- 
pines a perennial market for manufactured goods and a 
cheap source of agricultural products, foodstuffs and raw 
materials. The United States would grant us loans provided 
that we keep our economy open to imports and foreign 
investments, and not restrict the remittance of profit and 
outflow of capital. In other words, free enterprise was prac- 
ticed on a global level with developing countries simply 
treated as markets. In essence, this established a neocolonial 
relationship and a Third World country that stagnated in 
the semifeudal backward, agricultural economy. 

Ninanais po namin sa Section 1 ng Article on Na- 
tional Economy and Patrimony ang self-reliant and 


independent economy under the effective control of 
Filipinos kaya nagkaroon kami ng motion for recon- 
sideration. Gusto naming ang Constitution na gagawin 
natin ay mag-uutos mismo ng tariff and nontariff 
protection sa domestic industry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, we appreciate 
the decision of the Chair to reopen the discussions on 
the basic premises and philosophy of the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony which is the basic 
foundation of the new social order that our Commission 
is trying to introduce. I am also thankful that our fellow 
Commissioners are willing to listen to new arguments 
which were generated by the newly amended section, 
meaning the first section of this Article. 

Madam President, although there were some incidents 
in the past week that clouded the position paper that 
was presented by the Coalition for Constitutional Pro- 
vision on Industrialization, Economic Protectionism and 
Filipinization of the Economy, I submit that we cannot 
ignore this position paper because it was given by a 
broad-based coalition in which different sectors were 
represented — labor, farmers, cause-oriented groups, 
youth organizations, business organizations, industry 
associations, the private business sector, and the local 
governments. No less than Justice J.B.L. Reyes, Raul 
Concepcion, Ramon Tuazon, Felix Maramba, Aurelio 
Periquet, Honorable Bren Guiao, Honorable Jejomar 
Binay, and several other known personalities were 
signatories to this position paper. Of great significance 
is the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry’s 
participation in this position paper. I believe that since 
we are a deliberative body committed to hearing the 
opinions and recommendations of all sides, I think the 
paper should be heard. It says that the signatories have 
a particular reason for making their appeal. There are 
powerful forces that have vested and historical interests 
in seeing our country preserved as a nonindustrial eco- 
nomy. As long as industrialization and economic pro- 
tectionism are not elevated to the status of constitu- 
tional mandates, these forces will continue to suc- 
ceed, as they have long succeeded, in suppressing our 

industrialization. 

The position paper further states, Madam President, 
that the central question is whether we wish to remain a 
nation of importers, compradors, and consumers, or do 
we wish to transform ourselves into a nation of pro- 
ducers? The truth is that we have no choice, if we are to 
survive with dignity, but to transform into the latter. 
But we cannot do so unless we industrialize. 


416 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


I would just like to highlight the fact that this is the 
demand of local business organizations and our own 
businessmen who are beseeching the Constitutional 
Commission to give them the necessary protection. 
And we know from history. Madam President, that the 
more protectionist a country is, the better its capacity 
to engage in international trade, the reason being that 
protectionism generates the necessary economic activity 
and motivation to increase production and to improve 
the trade capacities of domestic economic and business 
entities. 


The Honorable Villegas, during the caucus, said that 
this humble Representation should read closely the 
debate on the textile bill in the United States. And I 
would like to quote ixom. Asiaweek, issue of August 17, 
which summarized the developments that followed the 
defeat of the Jenkins bill, and I quote: 

Jenkin s defeat left intact MFA-4 (and this refers to the 
Multi-Fiber Arrangement, which is a protectionist measure 
to protect the American textile industry). The pact will set 
standards for bilateral agreements and unilateral restric- 
tions on textile trade among contracting parties for the 
next five years. Aside from the present cotton, wool, and 
synthetic fiber goods, it will control yarn, fabric and ap- 
pMel made of blends containing silk, ramie, linen, jute, and 
other natural fibers, a U.S. demand. In the future, quotas 

f item if the value or weight of its 

natural fiber content is more than half its price or weight. 

that^^soite”tJ^^f point out. Madam President, is 
protecS^^^ protectionist bill, 

ministrativelv anrt °f state policy continues ad- 

SeTy the United States, 

newly industrialized o '^®toped countries as well as the 
woui^d I 

nnposed by Japan on prodLts ofeTorUnL^rth^ 
Phihppmes. This is page 111 , Appendix i of the Lok 

Development. And ilS 
fmnnS K ® numerous protectionist measures 
unposed by Japan on the products of the Philippines. 
The source IS the NEDA Subcommittee on GATT mat- 

K thts xeroxed. Madam President, for 

distribution to the Commission. 

mentioned. Madam President, that in 
^ in the 1950s, local industries 

WoHH°R I would like to quote from the 

World Bank report on the PhUippines, December 1963: 

The progress of the Philippine economy during the 
eca e o t e Os was one of the more impressive records 
of economic gains among the less developed countries. 

I repeat: 


... one of the more impressive records of economic 
gams among the less developed countries. 

In more recent years, the conditions for expansion have 
been less buoyant and the pace of economic growth more 


sluggish than during the decade. Toward the end of the 
decade, over-expansion was becoming evident in some lines 
and the system of controls was creaking from various 
abuses and administrative difficulties. 

The system was replaced in 1959 by a gradual decontrol 
program, involving rising exchange rates which culminated 
in 1962 in a virtually unrestricted trade and free exchange. 
This marked increase in the peso costs of exchange over 
this period was undoubtedly an important factor in the 
sharp sag in industrial profits. The expansion of manu- 
facturing slowed down, and with it, the growth of the 
economy as a whole. 


This report of the World Bank illustrates that as a 
result of decontrol, there was a marked increase in the 
peso costs of exchange which was undoubtedly an 
important factor in the sag of industrial profits. 


I do not need to read from the entire report because I 
know time is limited. I shall have this xeroxed also for 
distribution to the Commission for purposes of record. 

Suffice it to say. Madam President, that when the 
U.S. government and other governments restricted the 
importation of items like textile, steel and cars into 
their economy, they do so irrespective of whether the 
foreign competition is fair or unfair; that the primary, i 
not the only, criterion is that imports stunt the grow 
of domestic industries which are sources of employm®(* ' 
In fact, the whole point of protection is to restn 
imports in order to give domestic industries a con r 
ling share of the domestic market. 

When one, for example, imposes a protective tariff, 
that tariff applies on an absolute basis, and is not se 
tively apphed only to such imports as this represen 
unfair competition. 


The fundamental flaw in the subject section, whic is 
Section 1, is that by constitutional mandate, it wou 
limit the protection of domestic industries only to cases 
where unfair competition is deemed to exist. By neces 
sary implication, it ties the hands of the State, an 
would preclude or inhibit it from protecting domes ic 
industries for reasons other than unfair competition. 


There is nothing novel about protecting domes ic 
industries from unfair import competition. One does 
not have to elevate it to a constitutional principle 
except where the intention is to confine the State s 
power of protection to such cases only which seem to 
be what the section intends. If so, then the subject 
section would constitutionally mandate a policy of 
minimal protection. Furthermore, by experience, we 
know that applying protectionist measures in cases of 
unfair cornpetition is a process which entails considera- 
ble administrative difficulties. Unfair competition must 
be proved by the party invoking the government’s 
protection which is not easy to do. 


Antidumping cases, for example, are difficult to 
establish and time-consuming. And dumping is one of 
the more familiar modes of unfair competition. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


417 


Lastly, Madam President, we beg to disagree with the 
statement of the Honorable Villegas that the constitu- 
tional mandate that protects local industries and busi- 
nesses against foreign competition would discourage 
imports. 1 have named the protectionist countries, such 
as Japan, South Korea, even the United States, but they 
have importations. So, there is necessarily no direct cor- 
relation between protectionism and the ban against 
imports. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the next speaker? 

MR. RAMA. 1 ask that Commissioner Garcia be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Madam President. 

What deeply disturbs us is that, as worded, the 
section in question virtually leaves the government 
under no mandate or directive whatsoever to apply 
direct modes of protection, even if such modes exempli- 
fied by outright import controls have become obviously 
necessary. This is exactly the problem which the indus- 
trial sector faces. The government under IMF prodding 
would limit and confine its protective action to tariffs 
which are ineffectual and may easily be circumvented 
when what the objective condition dictates is that the 
government avail of all protective weapons, particularly 
direct import controls which virtually every government 
in the world today practices. 

What the new Constitution should mandate is that 
protection should be extended to domestic industries 
regardless of whether or not foreign import competition 
is fair or unfair. And that the State should not confine 
its act of protection to any one particular mode or 
method of accomplishing it. Why should this be? This 
should be so because what we are really protecting in 
protecting domestic industries is the domestic market 
itself. That market is an integral part of the national 
patrimony because it is the ultimate source of wealth. It 
is through the market, through the profits that one 
makes from the market, that capital accumulates and 
expands. 

Unless domestic industries are able to control the 
domestic market, capital expansion and accumulation 
will be severely restricted and impaired. This is why the 
most progressive economies in the world today are eco- 
nomies characterized by a policy of intense protection- 
ism, chief among these being Japan and the new tigers 
of Asia; namely, Taiwan and South Korea. 

Communist China has a closed market, having closed 
it since the advent of the communist revolution in 1949. 
That is why it is now a highly industrialized state, 
having accomplished the status within a period of less 
than forty years. 


In the case of the Philippines, it is proven and esta- 
blished that it was during the import control decade of 
the 1950s that the economy experienced rapid strides 
towards industrialization with unprecedented growth 
rates. This has been confirmed by no less than the World 
Bank itself. 

It is very important in this Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony that we defend basically our 
sources of wealth as a nation, our natural resources in- 
cluding the domestic market which is a source of our 
wealth as a people. In many countries of Southeast Asia 
(SEA), there is very strong pride and effort to protect 
the resources of one’s nation. We, Members of the Com- 
mission, should not find ourselves on the defensive 
when we are protecting our very wealth, our very re- 
sources as a nation. And I think this is what is mandated 
of us at this moment. These Sections 1 and 3 are pre- 
cisely the reasons for our effort to reopen the debate. 
We should be very clear that we only have one market. 
If we do not protect the Filipino market, who else will? 
Those of us who have had experience with other 
nations, other governments, other economies, realize 
that it is basically the responsibility of the nation, of its 
people to protect their market. And yet here we have 
to find ourselves on the defensive when we are protect- 
ing our very own natural resources and our very own 
market which, in the last analysis, remain the basic 
source of our wealth as a people. And in the face of 
what we have just discussed, especially in the Article on 
Social Justice, we realize more and more now that all 
our efforts to bring about social justice will come to 
naught unless we, at the same time, have a strong, self- 
reliant, self-sustaining, productive economy. And this is 
our appeal to our companions, our colleagues in this 
Commission, that we should come together and close 
ranks in the protection of our own economy, our own 
market and our own natural resources because they are 
the only ones we have. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. Thank you very much. 

I just have to speak up. Madam President. When 
Commissioners Villegas and Monsod explained to us 
the provisions in the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony, we listened. 

As a matter of fact, we had caucuses to discuss it 
where they explained it to the laymen, particularly the 
noneconomists in the Commission. The explanations 
that were given were all on record. I wish I could take 
their word for it. I am not an economist; definitely I am 
not versed in economics. As a matter of fact, I must 
make a confession that I did not prepare for thjs Article. 


418 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


I was concentrating on the work of the Committee on 
Social Justice to which I belong, particularly on arts and 
culture, which we were expecting to be discussed this 
week. As I said, I wish I could take their word for it, but 
something bothered me and I spent an agitated weekend 
thinking about all the explanations. Last week, when 
the coalition of businessmen presented their paper, I 
read it and I thought their espousal of industrialization, 
protectionism and economic nationalism made sense. 
Last week also, when we were arguing for the percent- 
ages of 60-40 — where from 100-percent Filipino con- 
trol we went down to 60-40 and then there was another 
proposal for 2/3-1 /3 and it lost — a Commissioner said 
that it was ridiculous that we were fighting percent for 
percent in going down and that probably, since 66 2/3 
percent or 2/3 lost, we will go down to 65 percent. I 
wanted to answer and say that it was not ridiculous, 
that it was pathetic that we were fighting inch by inch, 
percent for percent, and that it did not matter whether 
it was one percent or .5 percent. The point is I found it 
pathetic that we were fighting for one percent more in 
tavor of less control of foreign capital insofar as Filipino 
business is concerned. And so, this morning I would like 
to speak and add my two-cents’ worth not as an econo- 
ir ^ filiTi maker. I am not an economist; I do 

economic theory and prac- 
sion^ lii understand the proposed provi- 

f ^ ^ National Economy and Patri- 

avera"geKS;inX^^ 

St^e ^ dealings with both the 

ExXTmentd 

and tax-free movies provided unfair competition to local 

a- I not be opposed to 

me Mate providing grants, subsidies and tax incentives 
or the making of quality movies that the commercial 
movie industry would not venture into by itself. 

tn worked for private enterprises; that is 

inHife^’ producers, the capitalists in the movie 

Drodii^rc I know from experience that the movie 
would hp themselves as a general rule. They 

because nothing but sex and violence movies 

7"'^ They do no. ca.e 

ferential concert for me nn^ 

All they care about is rakfne the undeipnvileged. 
the form of profits. ® 

The point is that we are not proposing state capital- 
ism. socialism or communism, but at the same tLe do 
not want unscrupulous capitalists running rougl^shod 
over the rest of the impoverished population. There 
should be some form of state regulation to balance the 


legitimate business demands of private enterprise with 
the urgent social needs of the poor. 

One of the criteria in appointing the Members of this 
Constitutional Commission was nationalism. In the 
Philippine context, I would expect nationalism to mean 
preferential concern for Filipinos — giving Filipinos a 
better deal in their own country. However, from what I 
have read and heard so far as a Member of this Constitu- 
tional Commission, I get the impression that we are 
paying lip service to nationalism and, at the same time, 
making it extremely difficult for Filipinos to survive in 
their own country. 

The Ople amendment is so vaguely and ambiguously 
worded that it seems to be taking with the right hand 
what it is giving with the left hand. For instance, it pro- 
poses “unfair foreign competition;” but let us face it, 
the Philippine economy is in such a terrible state right 
now that any form of competition is bound to be 
unfair. If we allow cheap foreign sardines from Taiwan 
to come in without limitation, we will be driving our 
own fishermen out of business. If we allow cheap rattan 
furniture from Korea to flood the domestic market, we 
will ultimately be killing our own furniture industry. 
Sure, we will be getting cheaper goods in the short run. 
This was what Commissioner Villegas said: “Fifty-five 
million Filipinos will be buying cheaper 
goods.” That should make consumers happy- Tha 
should make everybody happy, but let us not 
that consumers are also producers of goods. When t e 
fishers can no longer fish and furniture makers can no 
longer make furniture, they would not have any money 
to buy anything, not even cheap foreign goods. 
will have no income, and they and their children will go 
hungry; and very soon we will be faced with more 
poverty than we started out with, and more mass unres 

The domestic market should be considered an integral 
part of the national patrimony. It should be preserve 
for Filipino producers who should be protected by 
direct and indirect measures from all forms of foreign 
competition. We have heard all these arguments before— 
that foreign investments and foreign loans are good for 
the economy. In the past, we constitutionalized parity 
and investment incentives, service contracts and 
things that allowed foreign control of our economy. We 
have had all that before, but to echo Commissioner 
Tan’s question last week: “Why are we still so poor?” 

So, Madam President, this is too much to bear and 
I plead with this august body for a reconsideration of 
Section 1 of the Article on the National Economy 
Patrimony. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


419 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you, Madam President. 

Members of the Commission, I also would like to 
express some of my own thoughts. I did not prepare any 
position paper but this is just a reflection of what I had 
gone through after last Friday’s session. I recognize that 
there are so many people here waiting probably to hear 
the discussion on the Article on Local Governments. 
Our Muslim brothers and sisters here probably want to 
know the fate of the autonomous region for the Bangsa 
Moro people. But I think it is just as important for them 
to know just what our position is on the issue of 
national economy which is vital not only for the Bangsa 
Moro people but for the rest of the country. 

During the weekend it appeared in the papers that 
two of us revealed or commented to the press people 
who heard us during that encounter shortly after we 
voted unanimously for Section 1 that we did not realize 
the impact, the real import, of what we had approved, 
because after having gone through the caucus, I thought 
I fully understood when I listened to our experts in the 
Committee. Considering that I am not an economist — I 
am from the health sector and I have not gone through 
any rigorous course in economics — on my part it was 
plain understanding of an ordinary housewife, an 
ordinary citizen. 

So when the people who felt very strongly about this 
came over — and with reasons I suppose because it 
meant something very important to them — I had to 
think. We have heard people in the public hearings, but 
we have not really come across such a broad coalition 
that wants to let us know its position at this point in 
time. Maybe at the time when we had the public hear- 
ings, our Members have not realized the impact or the 
import of what we will provide in the Constitution. So 
when they came asking us to give them due hearing, we 
said that we cannot do that because it might open the 
floodgates to many people coming here and asking us to 
listen to them also. But we did open our session hall; 
the women’s group came over here, had their scroll 
presented to us, and we had a picture taking with them. 
They came down to our desks and everybody enter- 
tained the lobbyists, as we call them. 

For the pro-life people we had a special time; they 
herded us from the lounge to listen to them and to sit 
through their presentation. When the Cordillera people 
came in their G-strings and costumes and all that, they 
came knocking at our hearts to listen to their plea for 
an autonomous region, so did the Bangsa Moro people. 

But when the businessmen who felt very strongly 
about these sentiments did come, I think we did not 
give them just as much time as we gave others. As a 
matter of fact, it resulted in that kind of reaction - 
heated exchanges. But I suppose that they have just as 
much right to come and appeal to us because what we 
will be putting down in this particular section and 
article will mean a big difference on whether they are 
going to survive in their own land. And I also felt, as a 
member of the Committee on Social Justice, what good 


all these provisions on social justice will do, if there will 
be no mass employment and no economic recovery? 

So, even among us who pride ourselves in having 
accomplished something, we will not really find any 
translation or implementation as long as we remain 
poor. But why do we remain poor? 1 think all of us have 
heard the arguments of why we remain poor in spite of 
all the wealth or richness of our country. 

I believe that we know how it is when the Members 
of this Commission have set their minds to. It is very 
easy to just vote down an article especially if they are 
convinced that theirs is the right decision. But who is to 
say that theirs is right and ours is wrong? I think we 
have often asked ourselves: Are we responding to the 
people’s needs? And who are these people that we 
should respond to? Are these the people who come 
here and really present their plight? Are these the silent 
majority, or are these just a few people who come to us 
and ask us to pressure the body for the passage of a 
provision? So I feel that even if it is a losing battle — I 
have realized that in this Commission, it is a numbers 
game — I would like to put on record what I have gone 
through agonizingly, realizing that probably I made a 
mistake in having voted for Section 1 . 

The people who signed this resolution have so 
rationally presented this to us so that it would become 
part of the Journal of this august body. I think that all 
of us have copies of this. We have seen this published in 
the newspapers. Since it has not been fuUy registered in 
the Journal, I would Uke to go through some of the 
important points which convinced me that probably I 
really did commit a wrong to the people who have 
wanted so much that economic protectionism, Filipini- 
zation and industrialization be the pathway, the under- 
lying direction for our national development. So I will 
start with the points that they have so strongly stated; 

Only through a full and rapid industrialization (of our 
economy). . . can we create, in a massive scale, the work op- 
portunities that will absorb the millions of unemployed and 
underemployed; (the unemployed who have to go to dif- 
ferent countries to sell themselves, their labor power, even 
their bodies, to work in many other parts of the world, and 
the underemployed here who have to work just to survive 
day to day), and that corollarily, only by a rigorous system 
of economic protectionism similar to that in force in vir- 
tually every nation in the world, both the developed and 
newly industrialized countries, can we foster the indus- 
trialization of this country. 

We specifically refer to the recent study of the 
political economist, Alejandro Lichauco. Copies of that 
study have been distributed to the Members of the Com- 
mission along with this letter that they have sent us. 

Industrialization and economic protectionism, as an 
indispensable means to industrialization, are of vital im- 
portance and urgency to warrant their incorporation in the 
new Constitution. 


420 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


If social justice is significant enough to be incorporated 
into the Constitution as an objective of state policy, with 
more reason should industrialization and economic pro- 
tectionism be similarly incorporated. 

There can be no meaningful program of social justice 
as long as mass unemployment exists, and as long as our 
economic system is unable to generate massive work op- 
portunities, which it can only do through industrialization. 
History has shown no other way. 

They have a particular reason for making this appeal; 
and this is — I think this has been mentioned already by 
Commissioner Viilacorta — that the industrialization of 
this country has been delayed far too long. They con- 
tinue: 


Unless we industrialize, by the end of the century, which 
will come in less than 15 years, we will be the most back- 
ward and the most impoverished nation in Southeast Asia. 

And the most exploited. Every nation in Asia is fast indus- 
trializing. 


• 7^? down on time, I move. Madam President, fc 
mLn coalition’s petition (the entire doci 

rnP. L R registered communications in the Refe; 

generations^^m Journal, so that futui 

Soun r businessmen, worker; 

Sti^?m the ordinar 

Constitutional r” ad said to the 48 Members of th: 
cem so I sav '"^th them this cor 

tion’ then I^do not wan^ t^ the impUc; 

provision which ^ 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 


Commissioner Quesada tLt ^ r , ^ statement 

recognize the group of businessi^en that" waf^re” 

re xacr^who’’” ''"l" 

Charito Planac ^ there but I remem 

newspaper publkation^®"^® ~ attention t 

And I infoLied theil^ ’ that°rh ^o 

that, in fact I have ^ i received a copy ; 

publication to be di«t copies of this newspa 

Then when "> Commission 

regular session breaking all 

of a parliamentary asstmhi! 

refrain as much as possible the President 

discussion - the ChaiV T Participating in ; 

attention of Chairman initiative, called 

tha, open letter arTevafrwIu 

letter. The Chair inquired from t 

whether the allegations and ^atem^"l^^^^°"®’^ 

letter were considered in L ^ ' 

cussion and in the finalization of the report,’ because ' 


ideas there are not new; actually, as stated, they are 
old ideas. And Chairman Villegas said that they were 
considered. 

And so, it is only on that point that the Chair wants 
to clarify to our guests that there has never been any 
attempt on the part of the head of this Commission |to 
deny anybody. In fact, I had been criticized because I 
have been quite liberal; I have allowed people to occupy 
portions of this building to express their views. Indi- 
viduals and groups have been welcomed but, as stated in 
our resolution, we also have to respect the dignity of 
our proceedings. 

And so, I just want to assure everybody here that 
everybody is free to come, discuss and submit their 
proposals but within the Rules of the Constitutional 
Commission. 

Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you very much for that 
information. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SUAREZ. May I ask for a two-minute suspen- 
sion of session. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 11:03 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:08 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Gascon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Thank you. Madam President. I will 
be very short. 

For the reasons and interpellations already expressed 
and without prejudice to further elaboration of the 
points raised, pro or con, and the other points which 
may also be raised, I believe that we should continue 
our discussion on the floor on this crucial issue of 
Section 1 . I hope the body will agree to a reopening and 
reconsideration of its approval that all the issues will be 
expressed and all the points will be raised. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


421 


From my own point of view, I believe that what is 
involved here is basically a question of economic sover- 
eignty. We really have to go into a further discussion of 
our concept of industrialization, protectionism and 
degree of participation of the people, and I hope that 
we will come into some agreement as a whole body. 

I think Section 1, as approved, operates to curtail 
the sovereign power of the State to protect its most 
important economic resource, the domestic market for 
the nation’s output of goods and services. We cannot 
stress the supreme and paramount importance of the 
issues raised by our fellow Members and colleagues in 
this Commission, and our people will never forgive us 
should we fail to give this subject the thorough and 
extensive deliberation which it deserves. So, I would like 
to reiterate the request. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Villegas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, first, 1 would like 
to make some general statements presenting a frame- 
work through which members of the Committee and the 
one who proposed the specific amendment. Com- 
missioner Ople, can follow me. Taking the lead from a 
very important question asked by Commissioner 
Quesada, “Who is to say who is right?” in the specific 
question, I would like to remind all in this body that 
economics is a very inexact science, and I think all of us 
have been witnesses to its inexactness. As I said in one 
of the debates concerning the bicameral versus uni- 
cameral form of government, in trying to define the 
common good and especially in this specific case, there 
is always a mosaic of legitimate vested interests that 
have to be recognized. And the most serious error in 
economics, in fact, in all of political life, is never an 
absolute falsehood but an oversimplification, being 
obsessed with partial truth and equating it with the 
whole truth. 

Now, the Committee could have been perfectly 
within reason if it insisted on its original view that all 
these requests for industrialization, protectionism and 
economic nationalism could have been completely sub- 
sumed by the original statement that all economic 
sectors shall be given optimum opportunity to develop. 
In the spirit precisely of constitutional language being 
as succinct as possible, we could have insisted on that 
view that all of the very legitimate requests from legiti- 
mate vested interests and policy-oriented views that we 
are getting would have been sufficiently covered by that 


omnibus statement that all economic sectors shall be 
given optimum opportunity to develop. But precisely 
in the spirit of reconciliation, in the spirit of open- 
mindedness and accommodation, we agreed to risk the 
danger of introducing policy-oriented terminologies 
into the Constitution. And let me set the record very 
straight. All the arguments that have been presented by 
our esteemed colleagues have been eloquently stated 
and summarized in one of the public hearings by pro- 
bably one of the most convincing proponents of pro- 
tectionism, nationalism and industrialization. Economist 
Hilarion Henares. I am sure the committee members 
will attest to the fact that he made a presentation to the 
whole Committee. And we heard all the views that have 
been presented today. Again, let me set the record 
straight — Mr. Henares is one of the most eloquent 
proponents of the views of the coalition; and he was 
given full hearing by the Committee. 

Now, let me make it very clear that when we decided, 
precisely in the spirit of open-mindedness, to introduce a 
word like “protect,” we were clearly including the defi- 
nition of protection, quota restrictions, tariffs, non- 
tariff, subsidies, the whole works, as the legislature will 
see fit. And I do not think there is any quarrel about the 
sovereignty of the Philippine government to introduce 
any form of protection that it may deem due. 

Just to give the body a very graphic example of the 
dangers of oversimplification, the dangers of being ob- 
sessed with partial truth to the exclusion of the whole 
truth, let me use the very same article that was given to 
us by the coalition in support of their views. I am very 
flattered, so to speak, that this specific article was dis- 
tributed, because the author, a top Korean economist 
who heads the Korean Development Institute of the 
Korean government, is a good friend of mine and we sat 
in the same Board of Economists for Asia-Pacific. I do 
not know if all of the Commissioners had the patience 
to read through this article that was distributed to all of 
us, together with the declaration that Madam President 
Munoz Palma also asked to be distributed. This was an 
article by Dr. Suh Sang Mok, a Korean economist, 
entitled “Stemming the Tide of New Protectionism.” It 
is amusing but also, of course, understandable that the 
coalition decided to underline very select paragraphs in 
this article. And those select paragraphs highlighted 
what is already well-known — that in all countries, 
whether industrialized or nonindustrialized, developed 
or developing, there are always legitimate vested 
interests asking for protection; that in many of these 
industrialized countries, like the United States and 
Japan, there are dying industries like textile that are 
singing their swan song and making last-ditch efforts in 
complete opposition to the common good, to the 
common economic good, to save their industries. 

If the body will note and will read it through, the 
whole article of my colleague. Dr. Suh Sang Mok, is an 
eloquent appeal to the whole world to reject protec- 
tionism. In the very same article that was distributed, to 


422 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


indicate that there are some last-ditch attempts all over 
the world to save protectionism, there was a very 
dramatic appeal. And let me read the parts that were 
not underlined. He said: 


Despite the worsening of the trade environment, Korea 
has undertaken a comprehensive import liberalization 
program. The number of Korean import, subject to quanti- 
tative restriction declined to 12% this year, from 32% in 
1977, while the average nominal tariff rate fell to 20% from 
36% during the same period. 

Declining oil prices and the recent alignment of curren- 
cies make this an opportune moment to reverse the pro- 
tectionist trend, with improved prospects for economic 
recovery, both the industriahzed and developing countries 
should accelerate their efforts to achieve a freer trade 
environment. 

And, finally, he concludes the article. This last para 
graph is the punchline. He says: 

In the struggle for free trade, concerted action by all 
involved parties is vital. By definition, trade involves inter- 
dependence. If some nations failed to support free trade 
by maintaming protectionist barriers and defying the rules 
established by GATT, retaliatory spirals can lead only to an 
eventual coUap^ of the global trade environment (And I 
must say, to a ‘ no-wm situation” for all). Clearly no one 

Telr; 'r ^ The industried Ld 

rise to DroVr^^ cooperate to reverse the recent 

nse to protectionism. The best time to act is now. 

world appealing to the whoI« 

matter who mly SeVc^T^!? nc 

.iv^ is the road to mternational econS ‘suSde“‘"“= 
Comrtaionlr'vrnacom aboufthe'l' 

magazine for the layman in the whole world. If we an 

read this ”1°^* informed economic information 
Ss So, in an editorial o 

s^s: ’ ^ “Routing Protectionists,” i 

million of them work 

which is more profitabk AaV clothing industry 

mainly situated in the States witf^ri “ 
ment. The mUls are still shedH'^ ^ unemploy- 

foreign competition They ar? because of 

higher than those ^or Ameri 

is the productivity 

which is helping them to in ^ "lodem equipment 
workers. ““‘P*" »«h fewer 

So, I do not quarrel with the verx, a, . 
of Commissioner Villacorta that dSpite^th! 
the Jenkins bill, this dying industry in the StateJifsth 


being protected. There is no quarrel. But the point is, 
the whole world is precisely condemning that protec- 
tionist move. And it is hurting the Americans themselves 
and hurting the whole world. 

The editorial continues: 

To be so close to such foolishness is yet another sign 
that America is slouching towards protectionism. The ad- 
ministration’s commitment to free trade has wobbled sadly 
in the past month. 

Why is this nonsense happening? Remember, this is 
written by an economics journal in a country, Great 
Britain, that started the whole question of protection- 
ism 200 years ago. And they have learned from their 
own mistakes. So why is this nonsense happening? 
Mainly because it is easy for pohticians to buy votes by 
blaming imports for every layoff in the heartlands, and 
easier still to indulge in Japan-bashing. Free trade is a 
doctrine supported by the weight of history and 
wisdom, but without a pohtical constituency, consumer 
groups have proved too small, too busy or just too 
chicken to take on union bosses and businessmen who 
have vyrapped themselves in the stars and stripes. The 
editorial ends: 

Closet free traders in Congress have no reason to be em- 
barrassed by their views. The statistics do not lie. Ameri- 
cans are importing $370 billion worth of goods a year 
which does not suggest a burning hatred of all things 
foreign. 

And I completely concur with Commissioner Villacortas 
statement that the Americans are very open to imports. 
And that is exactly the point that it is false to say that 
the Americans have been systematically and deliberately 
keeping underdeveloped countries as hewers of wood 
and drawers of water. That is the biggest inaccuracy. 
Precisely, as Commissioner Brocka said in our caucus, 
one who goes to the United States cannot buy anything 
made in the U.S. Everything is made in Korea, in 
Taiwan, in Japan and in the Philippines which is the 
most eloquent evidence that the U.S. developed mostly 
because of openness to trade, and protection is the 
exception that proves the rule. 

Finally, let me answer the very moving question that 
has just been asked by Commissioner Quesada that was 
asked previously by Commissioner Tan, “Why do we 
remain poor?” By the way, in a private conversation, 
when I was asking Commissioner Tan about how it is in 
Leveriza, she said it would be paradise if we have more 
jobs available. I am now giving my explanation why we 
are poor; and this is my economic opinion which I do 
not, in any way, dogmatically defend. I am hstening to 
all sides. But after studying the economic problems over 
the last 20 years, there are three main reasons why we 
are not in paradise — to use the phrase of Commissioner 
Tan; 

First, precisely over the last 30 years, from the 1950s 
to the early 1980s, we encouraged the growth of very 
capital-intensive industries that did not contribute at all 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


423 


to the creation of employment opportunities. Not only 
through tariff protection, through completely over- 
valuing the peso for years and years and through giving 
all of these industries access to artificially cheap capital, 
we encouraged industries that completely glossed over 
our tremendous pool of unemployed workers. And does 
the body know what is the summary of all those 
policies? The summary is called “protectionism.” We 
overly protected capital-intensive industries and they 
did not contribute at all to the generation of millions 
and millions of jobs that were necessary in order to 
employ the more than 700,000 new workers that appear 
in the labor force year in and year out. 

The second explanation for our mass poverty is what 
Commissioner Tadeo has been reminding this body from 
the very beginning. We completely neglected agricultural 
productivity. There is a whole world of difference 
between agricultural production and agricultural 
productivity. Sure, we expanded rice production; sure, 
we expanded sugar production; sure, we expanded coco- 
nut production; but how? Through expanding hectar- 
age. Our means of production got more and more 
unproductive and the yield per hectare in all of these 
agricultural sectors declined year in and year out. That 
is why the poor farmer was not making the necessary 
income. 

And the third explanation is rather very obvious: 
Twenty years of a corrupt and a repressive regime 
looted billions and billions of dollars away from this 
economy. I do not have to elaborate. 

Those are, from my standpoint as a student of eco- 
nomic development of the Philippines, the three main 
reasons why we are not in economic paradise, and the 
first one of which is precisely protectionism. 

I would like to ask Commissioner Ople to add some 
remarks especially concentrating on the formulation 
of his amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

I suppose I have a duty to speak in defense of that 
portion of the section, the authorship of which is at- 
tributed to me, although I must make it clear that this 
was one of the most amended provisions of Section 1. 
This has to do with the statement on industrialization 
based on sound agricultural development and agrarian 
reform and, of course, there is a last sentence in that 
paragraph, one of the nubs of the ongoing controversy, 
which states that “the State shall protect Filipino enter- 
prises against unfair foreign competition and trade 
practices.” That last sentence, I gather, was negotiated 
earlier from the Committee by no less than Com- 
missioner Suarez who was in the situation of extracting 
blood from a turnip. If I understood that situation 
correctly just so, there would be a statement that would 


emphasize the obligation of the State to protect Filipino 
enterprises against unfair foreign competition and trade 
practices. Now, I think some of us on later reflection 
thought that the word “unfair” was very limiting and, 
therefore, would consider it a matter of honor and of 
life and death that this word should be expunged from 
that sentence. I did not author that sentence. It was 
Commissioner Suarez and the Committee that agreed 
on it but I thought it was a very worthwhile addition to 
that paragraph on industrialization. 

To drop the word “unfair” would have two conse- 
quences, I believe: It would build permanent “Great 
Walls of China” around the Philippine economy which 
no Congress in the future could dismantle because it is a 
constitutional mandate and within those walls in effect, 
we are sanctioning forever a regime of shabby products 
exorbitantly priced and the cost of which is lodged 
forever on the back of the common man. That is what 
that will mean. It will then deprive the future Congress 
of any element of flexibility to deal with volatile 
domestic and international situations. It is a mandate 
that once and for all, and today and forever, the Philip- 
pine market is surrendered as a captive market to some 
of our own industries that will, therefore, lack the 
impulse and the impetus for improving their own effi- 
ciency, their own competitiveness for delivering 
products to the Filipino consumers that will combine 
good quality with lower cost. And it is in fact going to 
be a sentence of permanent economic stagnation for 
the Philippines. 

In addition to that, I am repelled by the thought that 
some of our own industries will perpetually be excused 
from rendering their own patriotic service to their own 
country by becoming the true anointed arm of the 
Filipino nation, for taking advantage of the dynamism 
of the entire international market environment so that 
we can earn the hard currency to finance our indus- 
trialization. Where are we going to get the money to 
finance our industrialization? It cannot come from 
perpetual subsidies. Part of that subsidy comes from the 
State through tax exemptions, but most of the subsidy 
comes from the common man, because these tariff walls 
of 30 years standing have insulated the manufacturer 
from the risk of competition and, therefore, of be- 
coming more efficient, and have denied to the Filipino 
consumer, the common man, the right to be served with 
better products that cost less. 

To equate an absolute protectionism with patriotism, 
I think, would be the greatest and the most dangerous 
of fallacies. I think the task of this Commission is not to 
shut off the Philippine economy from the rest of the 
world to become a hermit economy, to shut off all 
windows so that no bracing winds of competition would 
ever touch the shores of the Philippine economy, 
because if they are allowed to come in, even in the most 
deliberately measured doses, even a whiff of such winds 
would collapse the shaky pillars of some of our own 
industries. 


424 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


I have nothing against Philippine industry. I do not 
own a single share of Philippine industry. But, at the 
same time, as a Filipino, I would like to put our indus- 
tries to high standards of patriotic duty that would not 
consist of demanding a closed market parceled out 
among themselves, that would perpetuate the profits 
that they are making through monopoly control. 

Let me single out one of them: the FILSYN. FILSYN 
is a monopoly. The reason the cost of the shirt to the 
average worker in Manila is two-and a-half times that of 
Taiwan and Hongkong is precisely these irrational blind 
protectionist policies have insured to this monopoly, 
25% of whose stocks are Taiwanese, complete domina- 
tion of the local textile field, charging, I gather, twice 
the price of comparable yam that one can bring 
in. And that is what I mean: the burden of that policy 
ultimately rests on the back of the common man, the 
worker who rnust pay exorbitant cost for a shirt that, 
suffer still by comparison with that 
whKh manufacturers in our own neighborhood can 
iri3.K6. 


President, I rise in opposition tc 
the motion for reconsideration. It is not because I dc 
not welcome freedom of debate. The record shows ] 

there 

inteS^v tW independence and even 

integnty that are at stake in this issue. 

idem whL^il®'' berative assemblies. Madam Pres 
thl f^ V ^ together with the mlings o 

Rule?H ’is?''?.? of ou 

Sd?ation??^^^ f. ^ "potion for recon 

even suspended the Rules to allow reconsiHprati..r,o ^ 
previous decisions beyond the limit of 48 hours 

has"’eLm?hfie?tSl in all her rulings 

let us stTrt S It very spint of liberality itself. Bu 
Friday all m? unadorned fact that las 

thiS thfReLrH uuanimously for this section, 
show that ° Constitutional Commission wil 


dec?ion 

reconsideration I t^® reason for the motion 
the fullest possible Chair has alio 

procedure but on tht ^ the motion itself 

tulate the And 1 cor 

seeking a ^r?onSarion'^'^^” the avowed reason 

sought to be reconsidered by^?xtJm?^" 
openly and brazenly exerted anH ^ pressure: 
edged by some Members of this ^ 

this Commission should draw ihe line. We'S^ot sp 
mg of belated illuminations from heaven or of the g 
of a sudden revelation from sustained ’analysis of 
facts or the evidence. The provision targeted by 
motion - Section 1 of the draft Article - was subje 


to the most exhaustive debates and one of the most 
demanding amending processes ever experienced on the 
floor of this Commission. 

The proponents of the motion not only vigorously 
and forcefully took part; they have enriched and 
strengthened this particular section with their own 
amendments. Perhaps, the illumination, at the last 
minute, may have come from the position paper of the 
Coalition for Protectionism in the Constitution. But at 
that time, this document was already fully available. It 
became, as a matter of fact, a valued input into the 
debates and the process of amendment. It was not 
ignored; it was seriously and sympathetically con- 
sidered. But there is certainly no call, I submit, to con- 
sider this external document — whatever its merits — as 
a controlling and binding guide for this Constitutional 
Commission. 

I submit that because of these amendments and 
probably because of the help from this document that 
I had mentioned, this section has become so strong that 
the Minister of Trade and Industry, the Honorable Jose 
Concepcion, was quoted as saying that this formulation, 
as it now stands, might repel foreign investors and the 
trading partners of the Philippines. On one hand. Minis- 
ter Concepcion says by this section we are scaring badly 
needed investments so critical to our economic re- 
covery. On the other hand, we are warned by some of 
the lobbyists — whose behavior on the floor was cen- 
sured by this Commission last Saturday — that in 
approving this, we, the entire Commission that voted 
unanimously for this provision, had committed treason, 
and I repeat, treason. This accusation against the Conv 
mission published by the Philippine Daily Inquirer and 
attributed to Mr. Alejandro Lichauco has never been 
denied. 

Therefore, Madain President, even as the motion for 
reconsideration stands here, we are all stigmatized as 
traitors to our country and people, and the proponents 
of the motion seem to act as though we could remove 
this stigma from our collective reputation by recon- 
sidering our unanimous approval of Section 1 . 

May I remind the Commission that treason is a capital 
offense punishable with death. Perhaps, it was used 
lightly, metaphorically, cavalierly; but I submit this is a 
serious, irresponsible and damaging charge against this 
Constitutional Commission and every Member thereof. 
And I am not about to ratify this indictment against 
this body by voting for the motion for reconsideration. 

As a Member of this Commission, I am proud of this 
draft section that we have together approved, especially 
as it was amended, including those who now seek to 
reconsider it. This is a formulation that bears the stamp 
of our own authentic and independent will of a Consti- 
tutional Commission — a prescription for an indepen- 
dent and self-reliant economy under effective Filipino 
control (‘‘under effective Filipino control” — that came 
from Commissioner Garcia); a mandate for industrializa- 
tion and protection of Filipino enterprises from unfair 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


425 


competition and trade practice, and a fiat for new and 
innovative corporate forms of economic participation 
by the people themselves (that was again an amendment 
from my friend. Commissioner Garcia). 

A burden of proof to show that this is an inadequate 
and even a treacherous document rests not upon this 
Commission but on those who have maligned us and 
who have been uttering threats to punish us by 
campaigning against the new Constitution. To vote for 
this motion is not only to admit the charge against us by 
indirection but to complete our humiliation by an act of 
capitulation and surrender. 

I, therefore, urge the Commission, Madam President, 
to vote against this motion for reconsideration. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman yield to some 
questions. Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I heard the Commissioner say “absolute protection- 
ism.” Where did he get the idea of “absolute protection- 
ism”? 

MR. OPLE. I was making that remark on the basis of 
a hypothetical omission or dropping or deletion of the 
term “unfair” preceding “competition” in the last 
sentence of the paragraph on industrialization. Madam 
President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I understand that Commissioner 
Ople is the author of the amendment asking for the 
adoption of a policy of industrialization, but without 
mentioning protectionism, am I right? 

MR. OPLE. That is true. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would the Commissioner agree with 
me if I say that the Constitutional Commission, after 
adopting the policy of industrialization, should likewise 
adopt a companion policy of selective protectionism? 

MR. OPLE. “Selective protectionism” is not 
abandoned by the adoption of unfair competition. 
Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If we pursue the policy of indus- 
trialization, in accordance with the Commissioner’s 
amendment, is it not true that there will be new indus- 
tries to be set up and just like babies, they should need 
nourishment through protectionism? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I believe that we should protect our 
infant industries. 


MR. NOLLEDO. And that when some well-meaning 
Members of this Commission advocate protectionism as 
a matter of policy in the Constitution, we do not 
necessarily advocate absolute protectionism. Congress 
itself may fix a period during which some policies or 
some provisions on protectionism should be adopted in 
order to protect newly established industries; would the 
Commissioner agree with me? 

MR. OPLE. The paragraph as written will not fore- 
close the option of Congress to do that. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would the Commissioner agree with 
me if I say that competition is not the only factor that 
should be considered in order that we may have good 
products or high quality products? He stated absolutely 
that without competition, our local industries would 
have no means of improving their products. Would the 
Commissioner agree with me if I say that there should 
be incentives on the part of the government to be 
granted to these new industries and that the govern- 
ment itself is expected to adopt or set forth rules of 
standards that should be observed to attain high quality 
products? 

MR. OPLE. The government has not been wanting in 
incentives for domestic industries. As a matter of fact, 

I think Commissioner Monsod will confirm that the 
NEDA and even the Ministry of Trade and Industry feel 
that we may have to review some of these incentives 
which have not certainly provided an impetus for our 
industries to be more efficient and more competitive. 
So, I agree with these incentives. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Does the Commissioner agree with 
me? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, but the industries can have an excess 
of incentives that practically teach them not to be self- 
reliant but to be forever dependent. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That what the Commissioner is 
fearful about is an irrational protectionism? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And, therefore, protectionism as 
recommended by some Commissioners is not exactly 
rational. 

MR. OPLE. We can debate about the extent to which 
the present policies are rational or not, but certainly in 
this paragraph, and especially in the last sentence, what 
we are trying to do is to give Congress the flexibility 
that it will need to enact laws that wUl put this mandate 
into operation. But if we remove the qualifier “unfair” 
from the phrase “competition and trade practices,” that 
is what I would call an absolute protectionism. I am not 


426 


MONDAY. AUGUST 18, 1986 


against “protectionism” where it is rationally utilized, 
for example, to protect fledgling industries, but I am 
against a theory of perpetual infancy, according to 
which all of them forever must be subsidized and 
protected for their own good. 


MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. To my mind, whether the Com- 
missioner agrees with me or not, by providing for indus- 
trialization without protectionism, there is created a 
lameduck provision. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. We will correct the hiatus in the Com- 
missioner s perception when given the opportunity in 
the future. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized. ^ 

nke™ ^^^^SIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

Commissioner 

sentence^of authorship of the last 

particular sentence f did bifomT? genesis of this 
that T xiroo * 4 . ’ ^ iniorm Commissioner Ople 

LIL Bu.“dST 

there was a hue and rrv hearing, when 

terms ‘Votec^ of the 
Committee was put in a auanH;. P^'^tectionism,” the 
in order to reach n r' ^ ^ lawyer, and 

sentence: “The State suggested the 

Pino enterprises tt 

committee discussions the ’ohrac^^ 

competition” was included TherafterS1h/°"®'®" 

“ thelommitt “unfair ”l"o 

level, m order that we could at least 

Sh hf proposition, we came up Sy 

with the sentence “The State shall protect Filipino 

the Slonaf competition” without 

a debate Td ^ h'' Practices.” There was 

“unfair ” The iscussion on the use of the term 

sh“o"uri„cta^“r:r 

floor. submit it for discussion on the 

only explahdng to the*^ho^^ Paternity is correct. I am 
happened that the authn Commissioners how it 

humble RepreselVorrw'LTfT'’“*'l‘° 
was only partial In faim» + parenthood. It 

missioner Ople “L 

five minutes to have the word w I'^^rity or twenty- 

you better include it in your proD^oSiJ 

your proposed amendment.” 

That is exactly how it happened. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. TADEO. Gusto ko lang pong hnawin ang sinabi 
ni Commissioner Villegas tungkol sa “agricultural 
productivity” na humihina daw sa kasalukuyan, na para 
bang ito ang dahilan ng kahirapan ng mga magbubukid. 

Noong wala pa ang IRRI sa Pilipinas ay umaani 
lamang tayo ng 30 kaban sa bawat ektarya. Nang duma- 
ting ang IRRI sa Pilipinas noong March 8, 1960, umani 
naman tayo ng average of 46 cavans per hectare. Ngunit 
tayo pa rin ang may pinakamaliit na ani sa buong 
mundo. Suriin natin ang mga pangyayari. Nang durna- 
ting ang IRRI sa Pilipinas, nakita ng kaibigan nating 
siyentipiko sa Los Banos na ang IRRI ang didikta sa 
ating pamahalaan kung ano ang programa sa produksi- 
yon ng bigas. Nang dumating ang IRRI, ipinakilala sa 
atin ang high-yielding varieties na matakaw sa pataba at 
pestisidyo. Kapag binhing ito ang itinanim, siguradong 
gagamit ng chemical fertilizer. Kapag gumamit tayo ng 
chemical fertilizer, lalambot ang palay natin at magiging 
fibrous. Kapag hindi naman tayo gumamit ng pesti- 
sidyo, aatakihin ng peste at sakit ang palay natin. Kapag 
gumamit na tayo ng pestisidyo, tiyak na hindi lamang 
iyan. Ang palay na ito ay matakaw sa patubig, kaya 
kinakailangang umutang tayo sa ADB, sa World Bank o 
sa IMF, kaya ang irrigation system sa Pilipinas ay 
na pag-aari ng Pilipino; ito ay pag-aari na ng ADB, IMF 
at ng World Bank. Dati ang bayad lamang sa patubig ^ 
P60 bawat ektarya, ngunit nangmangu tang tayo sa AD , 
World Bank at IMF, ang bayad sa patubig ngayon ay 
P875. Hindi lamang iyan. Nasira ang bayanihan spin . 
Dahil ang binhi ay short-maturing varieties, wala na ang 
panahong magbayanihan; gumagamit na lang tayo ng 
makinarya sa pagsasaka. Dati ang upa sa makinarya ay 
PI 50 lamang. Noong kalabaw ang ginagamit sa pagsa 
saka, hindi nga kami gumagamit ng makinarya. 

Sa Bulacan, 90 porsiyento ang gumagamit ng maki 
nary ang puro produktong dayuhan. Ang bayad noon sa 
makinarya ay PI 50 per hectare; ngayon ay PI, 050 na. 
Dati ang fertilizer ay P30 per bag, ngunit ngayon ay 
P200 na. Dati PI 6 ang per quart ng insecticide ngunit 
ngayon ay P200 na. Tumaas ang produksyon ng palay. 
Mula sa 30 cavans ito ay naging 46, ngunit napunta ba 
ang pagdami ng produksyon sa bulsa ng magbubukid. 
Hindi. Napunta ito sa bulsa ng multinationals. 

Sasabihin ko sa inyo. Ang IRRI ay 25 taon na sa 
Pilipinas. Itinatag ito noong March 8, 1960, kaya’t silver 
jubilee nila noong 1985. Ngunit tingnan ninyo ang kala- 
gayan ng magbubukid sa Pilipinas. Alam ba ninyo na sa 
pamamagitan ng chemical fertilizer, nalalason at nagi- 
ging maasim ang ating lupa kayat hindi na ngayon ito 
productive? Ang kailangan natin ay organic fertilizer, 
compost-making. Ang IRRI ba ay gumawa ng organic 
fertilizer sa loob ng 25 taon sa Pilipinas? Hindi. Ang 
itinuro nila ay ang pagkontrol ng mga insekto o mga 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


427 


peste ng mga halaman. Dalawang klase ang mga insek- 
tong iyan: beneficial insects and harmful insects. Sa 
tinatawag na ecological balance kailangang talunin ang 
harmful insects at paramihin ang beneficial insects. Ito 
ang paraan ng biological control. Darating ang panahong 
mawawala na ang mga harmful insects. Hindi na tayo 
gagamit ng pestisidyong nilikha ng IRRI sapagkat kung 
gagamit tayo nito, mamamatay ang beneficial insects. 
Magiging perpetually dependent na tayo sa produkto 
nila. Ibig kong sabihin kay Commissioner Villegas na ang 
ating manok, the one developed by IRRI, ay tinatawag 
na Los Banos Cantonese. Walang maipaparis na ibang 
manok na native sa Pilipinas dahd wala itong proteksi- 
yon. Ano ang sinabi ng ating mga technocrats? Mas 
magaling pa ang sabi nila na umangkat tayo ng breeding 
stock sa labas ng bansa kaysa tayo ang magpalahi sa 
Pilipinas. Bumagsak ang Lorenzo Farm, ang panguna- 
hing mag-iitlog sa Nueva Ecija noon. Naging perpetually 
dependent tayo sa IRRI. 

At alam ba ninyo ang paraan ng U.S.? Bibigyan tayo 
ng babae at lalaki ng A and B lines, halimbawa, lalaki ng 
A at babae ng B, pero hindi tayo bibigyan ng pure A and 
B lines o ang babae’t lalaki ng A or B, Sapagkat alam 
nilang kapag ginawa nila iyon, hindi na tayo aasa sa 
kanila. Ang ibinibigay lang sa atin ay laging isa upang 
maging perpetually dependent tayo sa kanila. Kapag 
inangkat natin ang breeding stock, kailangang angkatin 
rin ang environment at ang technology kung paano 
sUa palalakihin. Sinabi mismo ito ng Animal Science 
Director ng UP Los Banos. Mayroon tayong baboy na 
tinatawag na Berkjala at ito’y hindi rin binigyan ng 
proteksiyon. 

Tutol ako kay Commissioner Villegas sa sinabi niyang 
wala tayong magagawa kung bakit 90 porsiyento ng mga 
sanggol sa Pilipinas ay kinakailangang umasa sa dayu- 
hang gatas, sapagkat ang ating niyog ay mayroong 20 o 
21 porsiyento ng protinang katulad ng gatas na kung 
pauunlarin natin ay makalulutas ng 70 to 78 porsiyento 
ng malnutrisyon sa kanayunan. Pero iyan ba ay 
binigyan ng proteksiyon? 

Tungkol naman sa self-reliant, independent economy, 
ang ibig sabihin nito’y nasa kontrol ng Pilipino ang 
ekonomiy^. Pero nang surim namin ang probisyon, 
nakita naming mayroon itong mga loopholes. Katulad 
din ito ng probisyon sa agrarian reform na binotohan ko 
rin sa dahUang hindi ako abogado at hindi ako econo- 
mist. Ngunit matapos namin itong suriin, nakita naming 
naipasok nga ang “agricultural lands” ngunit tadtad na 
tadtad naman ng mga loopholes. Itong Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony ay ganoon din. Ito 
ang aming ipinakikipaglaban, Ang sabi ninyo: “Jimmy, 
hindi ba matagal na naming ibinigay sa inyo? Dapat 
sana’y pinag-aralan na ninyo.” Ngunit tanggapin naman 
Sana ninyong hindi pa dapat pag-usapan ang Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. Ang dapat pag- 
usapan ay tungkol sa local governments. Ibinibigay nga 
ninyo sa amin ang proposal sa Artikulong nabanggit 
pero tinatalakay natin noon ang Article on Social 


Justice, na pinag-aralan din namin. Ang ibig ba ninyong 
sabihin, kapag ibinigay ang proposal sa National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony, tututukan na namin kaagad iyon 
at kalilimutan na namin ang Social Justice? Tanggapin 
nating nagmamadali tayo sa ating gawain; halos hindi na 
natin ito mabasa. Ngunit ang Article on National Eco- 
nomy ay totoong napakahalaga at dapat pag-aralan 
sapagkat 55 milyong Pilipino ang umaasa sa atin dito. 
Pero ang sinabi ni Commissioner Ople na ang “perpetual 
infancy” ay para na ring “treason” ay lubhang nakasakit 
sa akin. Gusto ko lang sabihin kung paano natin inaayos 
itong ating Saligang Batas. Ayon sa Section 4 ng Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony: 

The President with the concurrence of two-thirds vote of 
tire National Assembly, by special law, shall provide the 
terms and conditions under which a foreign-owned corpora- 
tion may enter into agreements with the government in- 
volving either technical or financial assistance for large- 
scale exploration, development, and utilization of natural 
resources. 

Nawala na ang pariralang “two-thirds vote.” Ano ang 
tinanggap ninyong amendment ni Commissioner Jamir 
tungkol sa concurrence of Congress o National Assem- 
bly? Ano ang ginagawa ninyo sa ating Saligang Batas? 
Nakapagtataka, ang ipinasok ni Commissioner Felicitas 
Aquino ay ito: “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT FILI- 
PINO ENTERPRISES FROM FOREIGN CONTROL 
AND COMPETITION.” Pumayag ba kayo? Kapag ang 
interest ng mga multinationals ang ilalagay, payag agad 
kayo, ngunit kapag interest ng mga Pilipino, hindi kayo 
pumapayag. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request our guests in the 
gallery to please refrain from making any disturbance or 
observation? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Romulo is asking for 
recognition. 

MR. ROMULO. May the Committee be allowed to 
complete its reaction. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. This is very brief. Madam President. 

Commissioner Sarmiento, whom I respect greatly, 
referred to the sponsorship speech of a distinguished 
colleague, former Speaker Laurel, and 1 just wish to 
expand on that reference because that was a very his- 
toric event. Under the leadership of former Speaker 
Laurel, and this was in 1969, for the first time, both 
Houses of Congress passed a joint resolution, entitled: 
“Joint Resolution Establishing Basic Policies To Achieve 
Economic Development And Attain Social Justice.” 


428 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


Let me read relevant portions from that resolution of 
Congress in 1 969 which, if the body will notice, reflect 
the basic concepts of our Section 1 . This is now a direct 
quote: 

Within the context of what is socially desirable, every 
effort shall be exerted to persuade and encourage private 
capital to invest in enterprises that can operate with maxi- 
mum efficiency in providing quality goods and services 
using domestic raw materials at competitive prices to the 
national and foreign markets. 

Does that not harken to Section 1 and the Ople amend- 
ment? 


The second sentence of that paragraph of Joint 
Resolution No. 2 states and I quote: 

However, in their infant stages, (may I repeat that — in 
their infant stages) products of domestic industries and 
agricultural enterprises shall be given competitive ad- 
vantages in the national market through direct measures, 
and foreign markets for those products and others that can 
be produced at competitive cost shall be fully explored and 
developed. 

Again, that reflects the Committee’s position. 

Finally, Madam President, with regard to agricultural 

^ quote again from that 

are realiv 

are really very few thmgs new under the sun; 

The government shall actively plan and promote the de- 

sector in harmony with the 
produchv-r^^°'^^”^ achieve increased agricultural 

Lples “ self-sufficiency in the basic 

Does that not also reflect parts of Section P That is all 
I wish to say. Madam President. ^ ^ ^^^t is all 


MR. VILLEGAS. We have the 
her to speak. 


next committee mem- 


spo^fe Madam President, this is in r 

Roniulo.TwintvTi^S^ 

niz™ ***^ESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recoj 


to Joint Resolution N Romulo adverte 

Social Justice and Fr ° ^’."'hich is the Magna Carta c 
explanation this brif 

ship speech of Comm’ ^ cited was the sponso 

tion No. 2. In SuTirh.'l,"'*’ 

and industrialization. ’ ^ ^‘^'^ocated protectionisi 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President t r n 
Commissioner Sarmiento. I did not 'wish to Syft 
he was quoting from Jomt Resolution No. 2 but pn 


cisely, the sponsorship speech of Speaker Laurel was 
endorsing Joint Resolution No. 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod would like 
to speak. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized 

MR. MONSOD. I just want to put on record certain 
quotations from the study called “Economic Recovery 
and Long-Run Growtn Agenda for Reforms” which has 
been approved by the government. I would like this 
body to note that among the authors of this study are 
economists Romeo Bautista, whose name was men- 
tioned earlier this morning, and Mahar Mangahas, who 
cooperated and worked with us on the Article on Social 
Justice that has been recently approved. The latter has 
a passionate sentiment for social justice and agrarian 
reform. According to him, his view is that equity is 
important but, as we will note from this book, there is 
also a need for efficiency. May I read from this some 
quotations: 

Agriculture and Rural Development — Despite the rapid 
growth of agricultural output in the 1970s, incomes of the 
rural population had been falling behind and by the early 
1980s, production of major crops has stagnated. The rural- 
urban income ratio has declined from 75 percent to 50 
percent in the 1980s and the prices of agricultural products 
have all dropped. 

The heart of the efficiency problem in agriculture and 
overall income distribution are both in the macroeconomic 
and agricultural policies. 

In the area of macroeconomic policies, the industrial 
protection system has not only raised prices of manufac- 
tured goods to agriculture, but has also reduced the peso 
prices of exportable agricultural crops by defending a lower 
value of foreign exchange. 

Likewise, exchange rate policy itself has, in the past, 
failed to make the necessary adjustments to avoid pro- 
longed overvaluation of the peso culminating in a balance 
of payments crisis and the need for sudden d^aluation. 
This failure has further served to keep agricultural prices 
low over long periods of time. At the same time excessively 
capital-intensive character of industrial growth has meant 
an inadequate rate of labor absorption, depressing rural 
wages. 

May I also just continue here on Industrial Policy 
with the Chair’s indulgence? 

One of the requirements of our proposed development 
strategy is a liberalized trade regime that would foster com- 
petition and provide a set of market prices closely reflect- 
ing social opportunity costs and benefits. That kind of en- 
vironment has eluded us through most of the postwar 
period, causing the country’s scarce resources to be allocated 
inefficiently and constraining the growth of national 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


429 


income and foreign trade. The price distortions created by 
the past trade exchange rate policies also discriminated 
heavily ^gainst agriculture in favor of manufacturing. But 
within the manufacturing sector, the protection structure 
strongly favored import substitution over export produc- 
tion as well as finished consumer goods over intermediate 
and capital goods. 

There are two themes to which our recommendations 
for trade liberalization are indicated. One is the significant 
reduction of trade taxes and the complete elimination of 
quantitative restrictions. The second relates to the adoption 
of a flexible exchange rate policy that will maintain a 
realistic valuation of the peso. The principal objective of 
our suggested policy measure is to make the incentive 
structure as neutral as possible. 

Concerning industrial policy, we are cognizant of the 
efforts to offset the price distortions due to trade and ex- 
change rate policy by protection through BOI-administered 
fiscal and other incentives. There is a high degree of selec- 
tivity, however, in the granting of such incentives. 

A very prominent historical feature of our economy is 
the recurrence of balance of payments crisis every ten 
years. We had one in 1949, another in 1960, another in 
1970 and one in 1983 that is still with us. Unless one 
breaks the cycle, the late 1990s is likely to usher once more 
a familiar visitor. With it will have been half a century of 
mediocrity in the country’s economic performance. 

Although this phenomenon could be partly attributed to 
external shocks, much of the blame could be laid squarely 
on our own trade and domestic policies, particularly our 
effort to defend a fixed exchange rate until it is no longer 
possible to borrow; and our continuing policy of protection 
via tariffs and import controls. We have a system of pro- 
tection which rewards inefficient import substitutes (made 
profitable only by import and tariff restrictions) and 
generally penalizes exports and efficient import substitutes. 
As a result, in the 1980s, further import substitution has 
become more and more costly and difficult to achieve, 
while much of the potential for export growth has 
remained unrealized. 

What most people overlook is that protecting one sector 
means penalizing another. Protecting PICOP by restricting 
paper imports means that education for our children will 
be costlier and our export publishing industry dies. It also 
means the rapid exploitation of our forests. The idea that 
we, therefore, have to produce our own steel means that 
consumers pay more for downstream product lines which, 
being high in cost, cannot be sold abroad. The main instru- 
ment of protection to date is the battery of quantitative 
restrictions on imports either through outright banning or 
quantity ceilings. 

In view of the above, we propose the removal of all 
quantitative restrictions on imports including licensing. We 
endorse the original intent of the Ministry of Trade and 
Industry of liberalization of quantitative restrictions. They 
should be removed in one year’s time. 


There are many more on this paper which I would 
like to endorse to my colleagues to read because it is a 
very disciplined way of studying this issue. But I would 
like also to close that I have talked to some of the 
experts in the more efficient industries, one of whom is 
Dante Santos of Philacor. Phhacor has a very good 
record of labor relations. Mr. Dante Santos is for import 
liberalization. He said it is difficult, but it forced him to 
be efficient and he is exporting. 

Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I speak in support of the motion 
to reconsider the approval of Section 1 . I think part of 
the confusion has something to do with the unequal 
grasp of the issues and the unequal access to informa- 
tion. That is expected, of course, from a group as 
diverse as the Commission because even in the social 
science disciplines, economics is increasingly becoming 
unreachable by the other social scientists. There are pros 
and cons to all views, and over the weekend, I saw ano- 
ther view from a former Dean of the School of Eco- 
nomics which I think supports a selective approach to 
protectionism but also links up the liberalization move 
to the policies of the World Bank and the IMF. So, with 
the Chair’s indulgence, let me read this article by former 
Dean of the UP School of Economics, Amado A. Castro. 
It is entitled: IMF Theology Part II: 

At the Bretton Woods Conference in July 1944, the 
Allies met to plan the post-World War II economic order. 
They agreed to set up three organizations: the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), the International Bank for Re- 
construction and Development (World Bank) and the Inter- 
national Trade Organization (ITO). 

By design, there was to be specialization among the 
three institutions: the IMF was to take care of monetary 
matters and short-term finance; the World Bank would con- 
centrate on the rehabilitation of the war-tom industrial 
nations mainly in Europe, and the long-term economic 
development of underdeveloped countries. The ITO was to 
assure orderly international trade. 

The World Bank was established in 1946; the IMF, in 
1947. The ITO was slated to be organized at the Havana 
Conference in 1947. The spokesmen for the underde- 
veloped countries, prominent among them the late Central 
Bank Governor Miguel Cuaderno, denounced the proposed 
ITO as a device being foisted by the advanced nations to 
preserve the status quo of world trading. The ITO was 
scuttled. 

Today, however, by a strange twist, the IMF is carrying 
on a large part of the ITO’s original mission to liberalize 
world trade. Under the guise of promoting sound national 
currencies, the IMF tackles balance of payments problems 
which cause foreign exchange and currency difficulties. 


430 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


And one of its theologies is that free trade leads to eco- 
nomic efficiency and sound balance of payments situations. 

In principle, free trade is, indeed, as Adam Smith 
pointed out in 1776, the economists’ ideal. By giving full 
play to competition, free trade leads to international 
division of labor and therefore economic efficiency. Na- 
tional economies should become stronger for it. But as 
often happens, between the theoretical ideal and the real 
world, many factors come into play which can justify 
departures from the ideal. 


One of the justifications for a paced trade hberalization 
program is infant industry and even infant economy pro- 
tection. A free trade regime freezes the trade situation. It 
gives an advantage to those industries which are already 
established. The successful industrialization of Germany, 
Japan and other latecomer countries and now Korea and 
Taiwan which protected their budding industries demon- 
strate that up to a point, infant industry and infant 
economy protection have historical vaUdity. 


Furthermore, long-run solutions inevitably involve 
short-run adjustment difficulties for sectors adversely af- 
fected. These should be sorted out before full trade liberali- 
zation can take place. Finally, a depression is a poor time to 

preach free trade; adjustment is less painful in an expan- 
sionary economy. 


And to conclude, the last 
ment; 


paragraph is 


a sober state- 


Is it the understanding that domestic industries would 
include also foreign companies located in the Philip- 
pines? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes. That is why I disagreed 
with some of our colleagues that protectionism will 
necessarily kill foreign investment. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. 

MR. VILLACORTA. As a matter of fact, it will have 
the effect of protecting foreign investment in the Philip- ^ 
pines. 

MR. BENNAGEN. In other words, we are saying that 
we are not closing the doors completely to foreign 
participation. 

MR. VILLACORTA. We are not closing the door to 
foreign participation. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. We just want to clarify that in the 
sentence of the second paragraph — we do not want to 
protect multinationals; we want to protect Filipino 
enterprises. 


siderate not 7^"' inteUigent and con- 

trade Ubewrl t mention compassionate, apphcation ol 
traae liberalization prescriptions. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


mu^^ VILLEGAS. I thank the Commissioner vei 
Madam President, I just would like to respond t 

oaDeT^rf^ glad that Commissioner Bennagenread th 
supportive Castro, because it is really full 

definitely in f paragraph of Section 1 . We ai 

regard^ fnfrn 7 ^°t selective protection especially i 

other unfair trade pfa^ticeTso^^fi ts^ ■ ^d “ 

of the section. So, it is, indeed, a suppoi 

brought thit oufbewu?the^ ^ 

wards reducing the issue in 10^7^7^ ^ 

debate, mention was made of 

be both tariff and nontariff ^ 

competition. barners with respect 1 

MR. VILLEGAS. Which we fully support. 

MR. BENNAGEN This is just a point of clarificatioi 
May I ask either Commissioner Villacorta or Con 
missioner Sarmiento. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, but what I am saying is 
that some of our colleagues are implying that the 
protection against foreign competition would ban 
importation and foreign investment. That is the im- 
pression being given. 

MR. MONSOD. Then maybe we should read again 
the second paragraph. 

MR. VILLACORTA. We have read it very carefully, 
and the interpretation is very clear to us. 

But I would just like to reply to Commissioners 
Villegas and Ople. 

First of all, I would like to ask Commissioner Villegas 
if he knows of any protected industry in the Philippines 
that has lower prices compared to those prices offered 
by foreign producers. In other words, would the Com- 
missioner be able to cite some cases of protected indus- 
tries which have lower prices compared to imported 
goods? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Precisely they are protected 
because they do not have lower prices. I think it is a 
contradiction in terms. They were looking for pro- 
tected industries that have lower prices. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Are there protected industries 
right now in the Philippines? Could the Commissioner 
enlighten us and give us examples of protected indus- 
tries? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


431 


MR. VILLEGAS. Of course, FILSYN was mentioned 
as one of them, all industries in which there are still 
quotas in our list of restrictions of import, and all tire 
industries with 30 to 50 percent tariff rates. 

MR. VILLACORTA. What about the case of rice? 
Would the price of rice be higher or lower compared to 
rice that we would have imported? 

MR. MONSOD. I am glad the Commissioner raised 
that point because the liberalization program does not 
include rice and corn. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I raise this question because 
the Honorable Villegas always cited the textile industry 
and the implications of its protection on the American 
consumers, as if to say that anything that serves to 
protect certain local industries would necessarily entail 
higher prices for the consumers and would be bad for 
the economy, unless Commissioner Villegas would want 
us to import from Thailand and the United States where 
the price of rice would be much cheaper for our rice 
eaters. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Precisely, there are situations like 
that in the rice industry where whatever happens, we 
protect it. So that is a possible situation. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If the Commissioner can protect 
the rice-producing industry, why can we not extend the 
same protection to all other industries? 

MR. MONSOD. If we do that, then where will we get 
our foreign exchange in order to finance our imports? 
Japan has always been cited as providing very high 
protection to its agriculture but forcing its industry to 
be competitive. 

On the question of import liberalization, I want to 
mention also that products for national security, health, 
and safety are not included in the import liberalization. 

MR. VILLACORTA. If that is the intendment and 
contemplation of the Committee with respect to the 
* idea of protection against foreign competition, can that 
not just be placed on the record? Can we not then just 
remove the term “unfair” because it is very clear. . . 

MR. MONSOD. It is the reverse. It is already on 
record five, six, or seven times that dumping constitutes 
unfair competition; that we have to protect our infant 
industries; that in order to recover from recession, we 
should allow industries temporary relief until they can 
go back to normal levels. It is very clear on record. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I am dis- 
turbed by the double standard applied to the insertion 
of certain words in the Constitution. It seems that on 
many occasions when we are clear about the intention 
of a certain provision, many of our colleagues insist on 


not putting that word because anyway the contempla- 
tion and intendment are supposed to be clearly regis- 
tered in the record of the deliberations. On the other 
hand, it seems that when it works against their favor, 
then they insist on the insertion of a certain word. I just 
would like to put on record that I see this as a very 
transparent attempt at legal necromancy. Madam 
President, I would like also to respond to the Honorable 
Ople. During the caucus and in the last session we had 
last Saturday, and consistent with the ethics of par- 
liamentarism, I thought we were not going to impute 
motives on the actions and motions of our colleagues. 
And for that reason, I was constrained to make an 
apology for the sake of the unity and integrity of this 
Commission. 

The Honorable Ople, whose eloquence we neophytes 
cannot match, in his speech imputes ulterior motives to 
us, and accuses us of succumbing to undue pressure and 
influence coming from an outside bloc. 

First of all, what is so wrong with this coalition? Why 
is it being presented in this body as if it were a monster, 
as if it were a group of subversives and hotheads? I have 
just named the signatories of that position paper, who 
included respectable people such as Justice J.B.L. Reyes 
and others. What is particularly wrong with its compo- 
sition? What is fundamentally defective about their 
position? If we can quote from Londoners who wrote 
The Economist, if we can quote from Koreans, then 
what is wrong with quoting from the position paper of 
a coalition composed of our own countrymen, from 
among the ranks of businessmen, laborers, farmers, 
professionals and others? Just because of a seemingly 
unfortunate incident last Friday, the coalition is being 
projected as if it is such an objectionable organization. 

And, moreover, I would like to mention to the 
Honorable Ople something that perhaps the Com- 
missioner is not aware of. I did not exercise my right to 
vote when Section 1 was voted upon, precisely because 
I did not think that I could vote intelligently on the 
subject inasmuch as only one side was presented. If the 
Honorable Ople would remember, in the caucus that we 
had that noontime, I precisely raised certain questions 
to the Committee. At that time, I had not met any 
member of the coalition. It is true that in the afternoon 
we consulted certain economist-members of that 
coalition, which is perfectly legitimate because we are 
not economists. 

So, I deplore this post hoc ergo propter hoc policy. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Just because one action pre- 
ceded another action does not imply that there is 
necessarily a causal relationship between these two 
events. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


m 


432 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recog- 
nized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. We would like to have the vote, 
Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. I appreciate the candor and vigor with 
which Commissioner Villacorta made his comment, by 
way of reply to some points I had made earlier. I do not 
think that I was in any manner degrading the motives 
of those who are seeking a motion for reconsideration 
now. I spoke of certain facts; that on Friday, as the 
records will show, there was a unanimous vote. I was 
not aware that some Members of the Commission did 
not participate in that voting and we have to go by the 
official record of the Constitutional Commission. I have 
no quarrel with the coalition of business leaders, labor 
leaders and sectoral leaders that have been constituted 
in order to make proposals to the Constitutional Com- 
mission. There are so many other groups that in the 
exercise of their civic duty have made proposals to the 
Constitutional Commission, but I must admit that upon 
reading the Philippine Daily Inquirer issue of Saturday, 
August 16, page 1, I thought that the statement that 
was attributed to Mr. Lichauco constituted an offense 
to the entire Commission. 


Madam President, may I read just two paragraphs o: 
this news article under the by-Une of Marlen Ronquillo 

A broad coalition of local industrialists, peasants 
workers and professionals threatened yesterday to cam- 
paign for Ae repudiation of the Charter now being drafted 

economic policy unanimously 
passed by the Constitutional Commission. 

s™ple treason,” said econo- 
reaction tf™ ^ 

NatiollP ^ the Article on 

National Economy and Patrimony. 


impose upon the Con 
said some^fai news story, but if 

S^ed on ?b which I am not accu 

it ^ th^lil? ^ everybody will understan 
I ° t^^t'tion as a Member of th 

us I did°not° recusation of treason against all c 
reserve that fn/th^ r remedy of reparation for this, 
wanted to nut future. Madam President, but IJu! 

not accuse anyone in'this ^ ^ 

to his dutv hnt Commission of lacking fidelit 

denied and,^^ffect quotation which was nevt 

myself but for the m’anv k 

when I articulated that protesT ' Commissio 

Thank you very much. 


THE PRESIDENT. The matter p u 
explained, and I would like to sufficieni 

Leader if the body is ready to vote^ 


MR. RAMA. The body will take a vote now. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I just have two 
minutes in support of the motion for reconsideration. I 
must begin by saying that I myself am not in favor of 
absolute protectionism. I have listened carefully to all 
the speakers, and what I perceive is that there is no 
absolute irreconcilability in what they are saying. But 
what I do perceive is that there are differences in the 
reading of the second paragraph of Section 1, and I 
think that we should make an effort to remove these 
differences in reading. There are references to the 
records. I think we should make an effort to see if we 


can improve the language of paragraph 2 so that it can 
reflect more accurately what are contained in the 
record. So in asking for a reconsideration, I am quite 
aware of that hyperbolic statement referred to in the 
Daily Inquirer. But I think that for the sake of clarifying 
this very important point, we should be able to tran- 
scend such hyperboles and face this as dispassionately 
and as cooly as possible because it is quite clear that we 
have here men of goodwill and intelligence who read the 
paragraph dtfferently. I think we should make an effort 
to see if we can do something about it because this para- 
graph will be used in the future by legislators and by 
jurists. If we can help lessen their work by clarifying it 
some more now, then I believe we will be doing a service 
to our nation. 


Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, the Committee 
would like a vote now. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. We will proceed to vote 
on this particular matter. 

MR. BROCKA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Brocka is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BROCKA. May I request a nominal voting. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. JAMIR. Madam President, under our Rules, 
Section 39 has this provision; 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


433 


. . . Nominal voting on questions not connected with consti- 
tutional proposals or the text of the Constitution itself shall 
not be allowed, except when it involves the discipline of a 
Member. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I think this 
matter involves a constitutional proposal. Therefore, the 
motion for nominal voting is proper. I will object to the 
manifestation of Commissioner Jamir. 

MR. ROMULO. The Committee will accept nominal 
voting just to finish this matter. 


NOMINAL VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair rules that nominal 
voting is in order. So, the issue before the body is 
whether or not to reconsider the decision of the Com- 
mission handed down last Friday appro vmg Section 1, 
as amended, of the proposed Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized . 

MR. ROMULO. This requires a little clarification. 
The motion before us is a motion for reconsideration. 
Therefore, if we vote yes, we are voting to grant the 
motion for reconsideration; if we vote no, we are voting 
not to grant the motion for reconsideration. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair precisely was about to 
state that. If we vote naturally, we want to recon- 
sider the approval of Section 1 ; and if we vote no, then 
we uphold the decision of the Commission effected last 
Friday. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on the 
motion for reconsideration and the Secretary-General 
will call the roll. 

the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar No Bacani No 

Alonto No Bengzon No 

Aquino Bennagen 

Azcuna Yes 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am in favor of the motion for 
reconsideration. Let me explain very briefly. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen has three 
minutes. 


COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BENNAGEN. As indicated in my earlier mani- 
festation, I think there is still some confusion as to the 
clarification of the key terms, and I feel that a recon- 
sideration wUl open the avenue for greater clarity so 
that future legislators will truly understand that the 
intent of the Commission is for a national economy that 
truly serves the interest of the Filipinos. - 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bernas Yes Calderon No 

Rosario Braid Yes Castro de 

Brocka Yes 

COMMISSIONER DE CASTRO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE CASTRO. My vote is no. 

We have discussed Section 1 in the caucus and in the 
session hall for two days. I am not an economist but I 
understand the whole thing through the explanations of 
the members of the Committee, the Members of this 
Commission and those who seek for reconsideration. In 
fact, I have an amendment to emphasize more the 
“Filipino First” policy. Hence, I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Colayco No Gascon Yes 

Concepcion No Guingona 

Davide Yes Jamir No 

Poz Yes Laurel 

Garcia Yes Lerum 

COMMISSIONER LERUM EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. LERUM. Madam President, I am voting for the 
reconsideration of the motion because I believe that 
there is still a middle ground between those who are 
against this proposal and those who are in favor. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Maambong . . . 

No Reyes de los 

... No 

Monsod 

No Rigos 


Natividad .... 



Wtpva 

... Abstain Romulo . . . 

No 

Nolledo 



Qpl0 


Yes 

Padilla 



Quesada 



Rama 

No Tadeo . . . 


Regalado 




COMMISSIONER TAN EXPLAINS HER VOTE 
SR. TAN. I vote yes^ 

I feel we are becoming hysterical over the lobbying of 
the coalition group. If the members of this coalition 


434 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


group felt fiercely about their stand, perhaps they have 
a good reason to feel impassioned. While their manner 
was perhaps not parliamentary, I never felt threatened 
by this group and certainly they were nothing compared 
to “the right to life” group which carried me physically 
to the floor to listen to their program. Why should we 
look at a vote for reconsideration as a weakness just 
because we might be accused of treason? Has not 
Marcos threatened us for at least twenty years not only 
of treason but subversion, sedition and even death, but 
'we never succumbed? Could we not change our minds 
because we learned something we did not know before? 
Only a fool does not change his mind. Can we not 
change our minds because what we learned in economic 
language confirmed what our farmers and workers have 
been crying out for twenty years? How quickly we 
forget. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Tingson No Villacorta Yes 

Trefias No Villegas ; . 

Lka No 


COMMISSIONER VILLEGAS EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

} vote no because I believe that 

remed.-pH h ^ the language that cannot be 

remedied by the Committee on Style. 


voting? Is Madam President 


The results show 1 7 votes in favor of the motion for 
reconsideration, 25 against, and 1 abstention; so the 
motion for reconsideration is lost. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for the sus- 
pension of the session until two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for lunch 
until two- thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:51 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 470 
(Article on Local Governments) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we con- 
sider Proposed Resolution No. 470 on the Article on 
Local Governments. 


THE PRESIDENT. No, unless there is a tie. 
SECOND ROLL CALL 

duc/*a sec^H^^^^n Secretary-General will cc 

their votes. ^ those who have not register 

Guingona Natividad 

Laurel " " ’ Rosales 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

So the body will proceed to continue its deliberations 
on the proposed Article on Local Governments. 

May we request the honorable Chairman and mem- 
bers of the Committee to please occupy the front table: 
Commissioners Nolledo, Alonto, Bennagen, Calderon, 
Tingson, Rosales, de Castro, Regalado, Rigos, Jamir and 
Ople. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 


respect to M^dam^P^?^^^ President, with du( 

this issue? know her vote or 

there is a ti^R^the bodrieS * 

Does the ConrmissL?del^^^^^^ -- 

r^iZur does n^oi 

or ^legislative Ltion,T'^nd^^^^^^^^ ^eTsu?^s 
protect Filipino enterpnses. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In our last session, we deferred 
action on Section 3 of Resolution No. 470 which is a 
consolidation of Committee Report Nos. 21 and 25. 
Commissioner Maambong now seeks to amend Section 3 
of the said resolution. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I be given 
a few minutes? It is still being reproduced so that all the 
Members will have copies of my amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, can we proceed to the next? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


435 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rama, the Floor Leader, is recommending to the body 
that we consider immediately the topic on autonomous 
regions. So if there is no objection on the part of any 
Member of the Commission, the Committee has no 
objection to the request of Commissioner Rama. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Before we take up the autonomous 
regions, will the Committee consider a short section 
after Section 2 to read as follows: THE TERRITORIAL 
AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS UNDER THE 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE SHALL CONTINUE 
TO ENJOY LOCAL AUTONOMY? 

The reason I propose this simple section is that there 
is no specific statement that all these local government 
units, the provinces, cities and municipalities, are also 
entitled to local autonomy. I suppose some would say 
that it is taken for granted or that it is conceded, but 
there is no clear statement or express statement that 
these political units should continue to enjoy local 
autonomy. 

When we go to the autonomous regions, they would 
have local autonomy, but it does not mean that only the 
two autonomous regions, Muslim Mindanao and Cordille- 
ra, will have local autonomy. All the other provinces, 
cities and municipalities as political units will also enjoy 
local autonomy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think that amendment is unneces- 
sary in the light of the provision in the report of the 
Committee on Transitory Provisions that all presidential 
decrees, executive orders, et cetera, shall continue to 
exist until repealed or amended by the regular Congress. 
The Local Government Code, which is Batas Pambansa 
Big. 337, is deemed included under that provision. That 
is aside from the fact that m the Commissioner’s ab- 
sence, Section 2, line 13, was amended by Com- 
missioners Monsod and Davide where they added the 
words “instituted through a system of decentralization.” 

In view of these reasons, the Committee regrets that 
it cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. The Transitory Provisions has 
reference to existing laws, particularly presidential 
decrees, executive orders, letters of instructions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Including Batas Pambansa. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. As a matter of fact, I am not 
very much in favor of a provision that will make opera- 
tive and continuously enforce these unilateral decrees 
during the Marcos regime. In some instances, I tried to 


make a distinction between a Batas or a Republic 
Act or a Commonwealth Act, passed by the Legislative 
Assembly and approved by the President, and -these 
presidential decrees, executive orders and letters of 
instructions which were issued by the deposed Pres- 
ident. In the exercise of Amendment No. 6, the latter 
were all unilateral acts. The Local Government Code is 
a Batas Pambansa. So the local autonomy that is 
enjoyed by our political units, which is decentralization 
of central authority and which is recognized in the 
Local Government Code and, I suppose, in many other 
provisions of law, should not depend upon the Transi- 
tory Provisions. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, will Commissioner 
Padilla yield to a question? 

MR. PADILLA. Gladly. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

I want to know more precisely the intention behind 
the proposal for a new section. Does the Commissioner 
think of creating a new section right in the forefront of 
this Article on Local Governments which is in the 
nature of a philosophical statement to the effect that all 
local governments shall enjoy autonomy? 

MR. PAWLLA. Yes, not only philosophical; it is 
actually the situation and perhaps we can even increase 
the local autonomy of these political units: the prov- 
inces, cities and municipalities. 

We speak of the autonomous regions of Muslim Min- 
danao and Cordillera, well and good. But with regard to 
the political units, I suppose it is taken for granted that 
they also exercise local autonomy. There is no specific 
statement in the committee report. 

MR. OPLE. In other words. Madam President, 
although the Committee insists that the whole Article 
operationalizes the concept of decentralization of 
powers and local autonomy for all, the Commissioner 
would like to make this a more explicit statement in one 
separate section, maybe ahead of the other sections? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, I was suggesting after Section 2. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I think Com- 
missioner Ople has a misapprehension of the recom- 
mended provision because there is the word “continue.” 
As Chairman of the Committee, may I be allowed to 
explain further. The recommended provision reads: 
“THE TERRITORIAL AND POLITICAL SUBDIVI- 
SIONS UNDER THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE 
SHALL CONTINUE TO ENJOY LOCAL AUTO- 
NOMY.” 


436 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. We can eliminate the words “CON- 
TINUE TO,” if that will be one of the Commissioner’s 
objections. Hence the phrase will read: “SHALL 
ENJOY LOCAL AUTONOMY.” 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the phrase “SHALL ENJOY LOCAL 
AUTONOMY” will reflect the intent of the proponent 
much better, since to merely continue an existing policy / 
for local autonomy might be inconsistent with the spirit 
of this new Article which is for increasing local auto- 
nomy. 


I believe it is important to stress also that all these 
political units such as the provinces, cities and munici- 
palities should enjoy local autonomy. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I offer an amendment to the 
amendment? 


MR. PADILLA. I agree. 

MR. OPLE. So if that is the intent of Commissioner 
Padilla, I think that statement will not be superfluous. 
It can elevate to a statement of philosophy the intent 
of the whole article for decentralizing governmental 
powers in favor of the local units. So if the Com- 
missioner can formulate that amendment, I would like 
to express my support for it, Madam President. 


+ AA ^ stated earlier, I was suggesting 

to add after Section 2 a separate section which will read 
as follows: THE TERRITORIAL AND POLITICAL 
SUBDIVISIONS UNDER THE LOCAL GO VFR^^ 
MENT CODE SHALL ENJOY LOCAL AUTONOMY 

menfnf^?^r President, as the last state 

on 1 Monsod-Davide amendment 

“instituted through 
a system of decentralization,” would reil^er the pra 
posed amendment of Commissioner Padilla a superfluity, 

THE PRESIDENT. Chairman Nolledo will state that 
particular amendment being referred to. 

in Monsod-Davide amendment is 

includino th’ ^ portion of Section 2. 

Tnact a P°«ions: “The Congress shall 

more re^nn code which shall provide for a 

structure accountable local government 

t!r » Ann f ^ through a system of decentraliza- 
TORTAI here that “THE TERRI- 

ENJOY LOCAt SUBDIVISIONS SHALL 

superfluity. TONOMY” would seem to be a 


THE PRESIDENT. What 

say? 


does Commissioner Padilla 


MR. 


loc^'autonomy 

govemmenl’s central powers and ^uth^ f ‘ 
to emphasize local autonomy rather^tS’ ” ‘ 
tralization, especially because in i! ' 

portions of this Article, we are talking of autom 
regions. It might give the wrong imp^ion tha 
these wo autonomous regions of Muslim Mindam 
Cordillera enjoy local autonomy. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. After the word “decentralization” as 
earUer read by the Chairman, add the following words: 
“AND LOCAL AUTONOMY,” so it will now read: 
“instituted through a system of decentralization AND 
LOCAL AUTONOMY.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So there will be no need for a new 
section? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, there is no need for a new 
section. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Padilla 
say? Is that satisfactory? 

MR. PADILLA. I believe that a very simple statement 
as I proposed would be better. It will be clearer. 
perhaps it can even be after Section 1 instead of Section 
2 . 


MR. NOLLEDO. We would like to submit the ques- 
tion to the floor. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Maybe we do not have to mention 
the Local Government Code, because we are contern- 
plating not only the present autonomy being enjoyed, 
but also some more or increasing local autonomy. So, 
my proposal would read, and I suggest that it be plac^ 
after Section 1: THE TERRITORIAL AND POLIT- 
ICAL SUBDIVISIONS SHALL ENJOY LOCAL 
AUTONOMY. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Those in favor of the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Padilla will please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

Those against the amendment will please raise their 
hand. (No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor, none against 
and no abstention; the amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, it will now be Section 3, Madam 
President. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 8, 1 986 


437 


MR. OPLE. It is placed before Section 3; hence it 
would be numbered Section 2. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we agree to make 
it Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next proponent? 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Maambong has an amend- 
ment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Maambong’s amend- 
ment will be on Section 4 now. Section 3 has become 
Section 4, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we have copies now? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong may 
proceed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The amendments which are being 
proposed by this Representation, Commissioners 
Bengzon, Ople, Natividad, de los Reyes and Colayco in 
Section 3, which is now Section 4, consist of the follow- 
ing: Before the sentence, insert the word EXISTING, 
then delete the first part of the sentence which reads: 
“The local government code may provide that”; then 
after the word “cities,” delete the word “as” and sub- 
stitute the words AND THOSE; and after the word 
“standards,” insert the phrase ESTABLISHED BY 
LAW. 

In the second sentence, delete the words “a city” and 
insert COMPONENT CITIES; then after the word 
“within,” substitute the article “A” for the word “the”; 
after the words “vote for,” delete “the”; after the word 
“officials,” insert a comma (,) and the phrase UNLESS 
THEIR RESPECTIVE CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHER- 
WISE; and after that, insert a new sentence which is 
indicated in our formulation. The whole Section 4 
would now read: “EXISTING highly urbanized cities, 
AND THOSE determined by reasonable standards 
ESTABLISHED BY LAW, shall be independent of the 
province. However, the voters of COMPONENT CITIES 
within A province shall not be deprived of their right to 
vote for elective provincial officials, UNLESS THEIR 
RESPECTIVE CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHERWISE.” 

The second paragraph, which is a new one, reads: THE 
ELECTORATE OF HIGHLY URBANIZED CITIES 
SHALL NOT VOTE IN THE ELECTION FOR 
PROVINCIAL OFFICIALS OF THE PROVINCE IN 
WHICH IT IS LOCATED: PROVIDED, HOWEVER, 
THAT NO COMPONENT CITY SHALL BE DE- 
CLARED OR BE ENTITLED TO A HIGHLY URBAN- 
IZED CITY STATUS WITHIN NINETY DAYS PRIOR 
TO ANY ELECTION. 

We respectfully present this to the Committee, 
Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will this be Section 4? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will Commissioner Maambong 
yield to just one question? I just want to be enlightened 
as to the distinction between “highly urbanized cities” 
and “component cities.” Will the Commissioner please 
tell me the precise distinction between the two? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. The present Local Govern- 
ment Code, specifically under Section 165 thereof, 
classifies cities into component or highly urbanized. 
Section 165 provides: 

Cities Classified. — A city may either be component or 
highly urbanized. Highly urbanized cities, as hereinafter 
provided, shall be independent of the province. 

I understand that as of this moment, there are some 
13 highly urbanized cities in the whole country. And in 
highly urbanized cities so organized, their voters are not 
allowed to vote in the election of provincial officials 
in the province where the city is situated. This question 
was raised before the Supreme Court in the case of 
Ceniza vj. COMELEC. The position of the petitioner 
was that the voters of highly urbanized cities should be 
allowed to vote for their elective provincial officials 
otherwise this will violate the principle of republicanism. 
But in resolving the issue, the Supreme Court said that 
whether the prohibition imposed on voters of highly 
urbanized cities from voting in provincial elections sub- 
verts the principle of republicanism by depriving them 
of the right to participate in governmental exercise of 
suffrage, still there is no violation of the principle be- 
cause provinces have no jurisdiction over highly urban- 
ized cities. It is for this reason that the configuration 
which we, together with Commissioner Bengzon and 
others, are presenting is to the effect that voters of 
highly urbanized cities should not be allowed to vote for 
the election of provincial officials. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I know who determines that 
a particular city will be classified as a highly urbanized 
city or just as a component city? Is it the charter itself 
of the city or is it through some other legislative enact- 
ment? 

MR. MAAMBONG. There are criteria specifically 
indicated in the Local Government Code. It is indi- 
cated in Section 167, and I will read so that it will be 
very clear: 

Criteria for elevation of a component city to a highly 
urbanized city - A component city may become a highly 
urbanized city if it meets the criteria specified in the 
preceding section. 


438 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


Section 166 says: 

Highly Urbanized Cities. — ' 

(1) Cities with a minimum population of 150,000 as 
certified by the National Census and Statistics Office, and 
with the latest annual income of at least P30 million as 
certified by the Minister of Finance, shall be classified as 
highly urbanized cities. 

(2) Cities which do not meet the above requirements 
shall be considered component cities of the province in 
which they are geographically located. If the component 
city is located within the boundaries of two or more 
provinces, said city shall be considered a component of the 
province of which it used to be a municipality. 

BISHOP BACANI. So a component city can become 
automatically a highly urbanized city once it reaches a 
certain population and income level? 


is a component city and we apply the provisions of the 
Local Government Code, there is a supervisory control 
of the province over component cities. Let us take, as an 
example, an ordinary municipality. All ordinances of a 
municipality or a component city will have to be ap- 
proved by the province. So, in effect, it is treated as if it 
is a mere municipality. All ordinances go to the Sanggu- 
niang Panlalawigan. That is as far as the Local Govern- 
ment Code is concerned. Unfortunately, the provisions 
of the Local Government Code have not been fully 
implemented. The Chairman of the Committee on 
Local Governments will note that the said provisions 
have not been fully implemented. 

When I was a member of the Provincial Board of 
Cebu, we never approved ordinances of component 
cities because at that moment, the provisions of the 
Local Government Code were not fully in effect. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Under the Local Government 
Code-, it is not automatic. The city itself has to apply. 
Under the present system now the application will go 

through a process through the Ministry of Local Govern- 
ment. 


MR. TRE5IAS. Is it not a fact that most of the in- 
habitants especially in small cities have properties or 
interest in the province? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that is true. 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 
MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 


MR. TRENAS. Following that admission, is it not 
more logical for the residents of the city to be allowed 
to vote for the officials of the province? 


may I ask a fe 

ni^THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Trenas is reco 

highly difference between 

8n y rbanized city and a component city? 

con''cemeT^^''''''• P«-onality 

becauS as we an I 

be sued and ^ the right to sue ai 

tion is actuallv^H^ main difference in classific 

l^el. To ^ population Ifevel and the incor 

the comnonent a main difference betwe 

me component and highly urbanized cities. 

MR. TRENAS f 

difference between ’ purposes, there is i 

component city accordin^f^ ^u 

the population and income? Commissioner, exce 
MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 


MR. TRENAS. Is there 
becomes highly urbanized as 
component city? 


benefit when a city 
contradistinguished from a 


MR MAAMBONG. There is a difference becai 
under the present configuration of our laws, if the ci 


MR. MAAMBONG. It would be a bit logical because 
if we allow the voters of highly urbanized cities to vote 
for provincial officials, then it goes without saying that 
residents of the province should be allowed to vote for 
the election of city officials. It would not look good 
because at present, these people who are voters in the 
province are not really allowed to vote in the election 
of city officials. 

MR. TRE5IAS. The Commissioner mentioned as a 
basis for his argument the case of Ceniza vs. Com- 
mission on Elections; that is, Vol. 95, SCRA. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. Is it not a fact that that case was 
decided on the basis of Batas Pambansa Big. 5 1 provid- 
ing local elections for January of 1980? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

MR. TRENAS. Therefore, it does not necessarily 
follow that if in our present Constitution we allow the 
residents of the city within a province to vote, it will be 
contrary to this particular jurisprudence that the Com- 
missioner has cited? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let me put it this way. The 
Commissioner was referring to Batas Pambansa Big. 5 1 . 
But the Commissioner should pay attention to the 
provisions of the 1973 Constitution itself. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 8, 1 986 


439 


MR. TRENAS. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Article XI, Section 4 (1) of the 
1973 Constitution provides: 

. . . provinces with respect to component cities and 
municipalities, and cities and municipalities with respect to 
component barrios, shall ensure that the acts of their com- 
ponent units are within the scope of their assigned powers 
and functions. Highly urbanized cities, as determined by 
standards established in the local government code, shall be 
independent of the province. 

The keywords to the whole thing under the 1973 
Constitution are the words “shall be independent of the 
province.” This phrase has been repeated several times 
in Sections 15 and 165 of the Local Government Co^e 
to the extent that this provision in the 1973 Constitu- 
tion and the provisions of Sections 15 and 165 of the 
Local Government Code actually jibe with the deci- 
sion of the Supreme Court in the case of Ceniza vs. 
COMELEC. 

MR. TRE5JAS. Precisely, those articles or provisions 
were mentioned, first, because of the existence of 
Section 4(1), Article XI of the 1973 Constitution and 
Batas Pambansa Big. 5 1 . Am I right? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. TRENAS. My last question is: Would it not be 
fair for the inhabitants or residents of a city, especially 
a small city, to allow them to vote for the province 
since they have already been voting for the provincial 
officials for many years? 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the case of highly urbanized 
cities, considering that the province itself has no more 
supervisory jurisdiction over them or there is no more 
umbilical cord connecting the highly urbanized city and • 
the province, in contradistinction to component cities, I 
feel that it is only logical that the voters of a highly 
urbanized city should not be allowed to vote for the 
election of provincial elective officials and vice-versa. 

MR. TRENAS. But a city, whether highly urbanized 
or not, has its own organic act. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. All of them are covered by 
charters or special laws. 

MR. TRE5JAS. And those should govern. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, those should govern. 

MR. TRENAS. Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask a clarificatory question 
of the proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Commissioner 
Maambong stated that the highly urbanized city shall be 
independent of the province. Is that right? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is not according to me; that 
is according to the 1973 Constitution as also provided 
in Section 15 and Section 165 of the Local Government 
Code. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Section 166 of the Local Govern- 
ment Code states that urbanized cities with a minimum 
population of 150,000 shall be classified as highly 
urbanized cities. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that is the minimum popula- 
tion requirement to qualify as a highly urbanized city. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If the urbanized city has less than 
200,000 population, will it be entitled to one Congress- 
man? 

MR. MAAMBONG. As far as the provisions of the 
Legislative Department are concerned, the ratio is one 
representative for a 200,000 population of a legislative 
district. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So that a highly urbanized city 
with a population less than 200,000 shall not be entitled 
to one seat in the Lower House. Am I correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. From my understanding during 
the discussion of the Committee on the Legislative, a 
highly urbanized city is entitled to one seat. I just want 
to correct that. According to the Chairman of the Com- 
mittee on the Legislative, even if it is a highly urbanized 
city, if it has a population below the requirement of 
200 000, the city will not be entitled to one seat in the 
House of Representatives. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, a highly urbanized city shall 
be part of the province in the election for Congress if its 
population is less than 200,000. Is that correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I feel that it would have to be 
computed that way. 

MR. DE CASTRO. And in Commissioner Maambong’s 
proposed amendment, the highly urbanized city shall be 
independent of the province in the election of provincial 
officials. Am I correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, because we have to dis- 
tinguish between the election of local officials and the 
electibn of national officials. 


440 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. It will then appear that a highly 
urbanized city with less than 200,000 population shall 
be part of the province in the election for Congressmen, 
whereas it is independent in the election for provincial 
officials. Am I correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I cannot argue against that state- 
ment. But please take note that the standard of 1 50,000 
population set by the Local Government Code may be 
subject to amendment in order that it will jibe with the 
present configuration as proposed by the Committee on 
the Legislative. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, may I ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. According to this proposal of Com- 
missioner Maambong, voters of component cities may 

vote for elective provincial officials if their charters so 
provide. Am I right? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

ratifiLion’^nf;h^°r ’ supposing that at the time of th^ 
Smnon^ Constitution, the charter of a certah 

provincial offiK that each voter can elec 

tended 

-«ve “ s ireitirr? 

all kn''ow“tte“anyordintfl^^^^^^ 


MR. JAMIR. That is right. 


rep'^ded^alid'^^^^^' modified, amend 

basic Dowers soirie powers may be taken out except i 

amended bv r^ ^^e charter will 

will have to^prevaf amendatory provisi 


MR. JAMIR. I see 

right to vote deprived of the 

to They will be deprived of the right 


MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. May I ask one question‘d The la 
clause of the first paragraph of Commissioner Maan 
bong s proposed amendment says “UNT thfi 
RESPECTIVE CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHERWISE 


Why would the proponent allow the legislature to 
deprive the voters of the right to vote in provincial 
elections when component cities are under supervision 
of provinces? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am not going to shed tears over 
the clause “UNLESS THEIR RESPECTIVE CHARTERS 
PROVIDE OTHERWISE,” because even before the 
Gentleman can give me his reason, I can already see the 
rationale there. I am even thinking that voters of com- 
ponent cities be allowed to vote for elective provincial 
officials even if their charter disallows them to vote at 
the present time. In other words, the charter of that 
particular component city which does not allow them to 
vote for elective provincial officials will have to be 
aligned to be consistent with the provisions of the 
Constitution. 

FR. BERNAS. I wonder if the proponent would 
entertain an amendment to drop that clause because the 
very concept of a component city is that the city, 
although it has its own juridical personality, is called 
component precisely because it is still part of the 
province. And because it is still part of the province, its 
inhabitants will have a say in the election of the officials 
of that province. So, for as long as the city is merely a 
component city and not a highly urbanized city yet, its 
inhabitants should not be deprived of the right to vote 
for the provincial officials. So, my proposed amendment 
is to drop the last clause. 

MR. MAAMBONG. If the Gentleman’s amendment to 
my amendment in Section 3 is to delete the second 
sentence of the first paragraph starting with the word 
“However” up to the last word “otherwise,” I airi 
willing to accept the amendment. 

^ FR. BERNAS. No, Madam President. My amend- 
ment would read as follows; “However, the voters of 
THE COMPONENT CITIES within the province shall 
not be deprived of their right to vote for elective provin- 
cial officials.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a moment. I mentioned 
earlier that I am not the only proponent here; Com- 
missioner Bengzon is also a proponent. With the per- 
mission of the Chair, I would like to turn over the 
lectern to Commissioner Bengzon. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENGZON. One of the principal reasons 
why the clause “UNLESS THEIR RESPECTIVE 
CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHERWISE” is included here 
is that the basic principle in providing in their charters 
that they- should not elect provincial officials is that, 
by sheer number, they would be able to dominate the 
provincial government. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


441 


FR. BERNAS. But we are talking here of component 
cities; we are not talking about highly urbanized cities. 
Besides, the very concept of component cities is that 
they still form part of the province although juridically 
distinct, and are still subject to the jurisdiction of the 
province. If they are subject to the jurisdiction of the 
province, then they should have a say on who should 
govern the province. 

MR. BENGZON. No, but there are component cities 
which are independent of the province by the very 
nature of their charter. They elect their own mayors and 
city officials, and the provmce does not really have 
anything to do with them. But they are not qualified to 
become highly urbanized, precisely because they are 
unable to meet the standards. 

# 

FR. BERNAS. Then I would have a quarrel with the 
word “component,” because if they are totally indepen- 
dent of the province, then they are not component 
cities. “Component” really has reference to the relation- 
ship to the province. 

MR. BENGZON. They are component in the sense 
that they are part or geographically part of the province. 

FR. BERNAS. No, I think it is because they are juri- 
dically part of the province. 

MR. BENGZON. Then there is a difference of 
opinion on the definition of ’ “component.” For 
example, in my Province of Pangasinan, we have two 
cities, San Carlos City and Dagupan City, whose charters 
specifically prohibit the voters from electing provincial 
officials because these two cities could dominate the 
provincial seats from governor all the way down. Re- 
sidents of these two cities could combine and would 
have a very undue advantage of dominating the elec- 
tions for the seats in the provincial government. How- 
ever, they are not qualified to become highly urbanized 
and, therefore, in their charters it is so stated that they 
cannot vote for provincial officials. 

So they are at that particular level, and this is what I 
mean when I insist on inserting this clause: “UNLESS 
THEIR RESPECTIVE CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHER- 
WISE.” 

Conversely speaking, in the case of San Jose City in 
Nueva Ecija which is a component city, it is a small city 
and yet it is a city, and it is within the jurisdiction of 
the province. 

FR. BERNAS. Do I take it therefore that there are 
actually three kinds of cities now, not just highly urban- 
ized cities and component cities, but we also have highly 
urbanized cities, component cities which are under the 
jurisdiction of the province and nonhighly urbanized 
cities which are not component cities? 


MR. BENGZON. It comes out to that because these 
highly urbanized cities just came later on. Actually, 
there were really two kinds of cities before — the com- 
ponent cities and those cities whose charters prohibit 
their voters from voting for provincial elective officials. 
This term “highly urbanized cities” just came in lately 
within the last twenty years. 

FR. BERNAS. I quite realize that there is a variety in 
the provisions of the various charters of the cities, but 
even before we started talking about highly urbanized 
cities, there were differences in these charters as to 
whether or not they provide that residents of a city 
could vote in a province. That is a fact. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. What I am trying to say is that perhaps 
we should try to make uniform rules for these non- 
highly urbanized cities. In all fairness, because they are 
subject to the jurisdiction of the province they should 
have a say on who should rule the province, otherwise 
we will have to face the problem of equal protection. I 
quite realize that the Ceniza case faced the issue of 
equal protection but in a very unconvincing way, I must 
say. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, but then if we are going to 
eliminate this clause which I am talking about, we will 
give way to an anomalous situation where residents of 
these big cities which, under definition, are still not 
qualified as highly urbanized will be able to dominate 
the provincial seats. Perhaps, we could keep these three 
categories and face the facts and recognize that until 
such time as these cities whose charters prohibit them 
from voting for the provincial elective officials shall be 
qualified to become highly urbanized cities and, there- 
fore, become totally independent, then they should 
remain as such because these cities by their very charters 
are also independent of the province, like Dagupan, for 
example. 

FR. BERNAS. I would go along for a uniform classifi- 
cation where we have highly urbanized cities which are 
independent of the province and, therefore, do not vote 
in the province; nonhighly urbanized cities independent 
of the province by reason of their charters; and then 
component cities. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. So, with that concept, I would 
be willing to reword Section 4. 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, component cities, 
precisely because they are component, should always 
have the right. And though not highly urbanized, 
they are independent cities, would they not be con- 
sidered component anymore? 

MR. BENGZON. I would be willing to go along with 
that concept, with that interpretation and, therefore, let 


442 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 8, 1 986 


us craft it in such a way that there are really three kinds 
of cities. 

FR. BERNAS. I would go along with that, if that has 
to be the case but the only thing I would be against is 
having a city that is under a province but deprived of 
the right to vote for the officials of the province. 

MR. BENGZON. And is not independent. 

FR. BERNAS. And is not independent. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. My question will be propounded to 
the main proponent, Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


Will Commissioner Maambong agree 
with me that in the exercise of its broad and plenary 
povvers m enacting a Local Government Code, Congress 

manner of the election of the 
relaSrtf units and all other matters 

anote loc* ““ 

relationship between 
power- but u Congress has the 

election of i mode or procedure in the 

C^ei alL hr« concerned, 

und5 ih ^ that would properly fal 

under the provisions of the Election Code. 

Co^e^ about the Local Government 

Code’ itself ^ Gentleman not agree with me that the 

cities cannor that voters in highly urbanized 

provincTwh^ provincial elective officials in the 

ere the highly urbanized city is located? 

le^lation^a"^^^^^^’- can provide for such 

of the ConstitSn^^ consistent with the provisions 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely. 

Wh^ Con^gfe??n?; H to explain that. 

which provides for ^ Local Government Code 

I ^ Provmcial and city relations as well 
as that the electorate of hiehiv 1 ,,-K • rfianons as wen 

vote in the r ^ urbanized cities shall not 

this legislation becaus^WsTa^^ 

Constitution under Article XI, Section 4(1). ^ 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, without Section 2 
Article XI of the 1973 Constitution, it was well with^ 


the plenary power of the legislature to provide a restric- 
tion against city voters voting for provincial elective 
officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let me put this properly in its 
historical context. At the moment when there was yet 
no provision in the 1973 Constitution which I adverted 
to, the basic criteria used by Congress in its provisions 
in the Election Code was the individual charter of the 
cities concerned. For example, if the charter of the city 
provides that the city voters should not vote for the 
provincial elective officials, then Congress was guided by 
this charter. In the case where the charter was silent on 
that kind of provision, then Congress took it to mean 
that the voters in that particular city are allowed to vote 
for elective provincial officials. The guideline then was 
based on the charter of a particular city, in the absence 
of the previous guideline now indicated in the 1973 
Constitution. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, without the proposed 
Section 4 now. Congress would have the ample flexibil- 
ity to determine, in the creation of a city, whether or 
not the voters in that city can vote for the provincial 
officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I agree wholeheartedly. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, without the proposed 
Section 4, it would be proper now for the Local Govern- 
ment Code to make such a provision or not to make any 
such provision. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

MR. DAVIDE. Therefore, we can now delete Section 
4, because we still leave it to Congress to determine 
whether or not the voters in a particular city may be 
allowed to vote for the provincial elective officials. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would not agree with that, 
considering that even in our configuration of Section 2, 
we had that provision, but which was already deleted, 
that there will be no change in the existing form of local 
government units. The Gentleman might think that 
when we change a highly urbanized city to a component 
city, this does not affect the form. I feel that this affects 
the form, and I think the highly urbanized cities now 
existing have already acquired some vested rights on 
this matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. The deletion of the second paragraph 
of the original Section 2 precisely broadens the authori- 
ty of the legislature. At any time it can change; even the 
Local Government Code can change the existing form of 
the local government. That was debated upon last 
Saturday, I guess. That was the amendment of Com- 
missioner Ople. I objected to it because it would now 
allow the Local Government Code to adopt any other 
kind of structure of government for the local officials. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


443 


With the deletion, it would necessarily mean that 
Congress now has a much wider prerogative to establish 
a system of local governmental units, to establish the 
relationship between a city and the mother province, 
regardless of the classification of the city — whether it is 
highly urbanized or component. The point is. Section 4, 
as now sought to be amended, is not necessary. It is a 
superfluity if we take into account the totality of the 
original Section 2, without the last paragraph. 

Does not the Commissioner believe so? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I do not believe so. I still main- 
tain that logic demands, if not the law itself, that there 
should be some kind of classification of cities. Let us 
take the case of Bais City, which looks like a barrio 
to me, without any offense meant, of course. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly the point. If we want 
to have logic, we should leave it to the Local Govern- 
ment Code because it is only the Local Government 
Code that could probably harmonize. With the provision 
now, as the proposed amendment is worded, there will 
be a lot of confusion. We will be classifying cities not 
only into two, but possibly three or four. In addition to 
what has been admitted regarding the question of 
Commissioner Bemas, not only do we have a highly 
urbanized city, a component city, but we will also have 
a highly urbanized city which is at the same time a 
component city, because according to the apportion- 
ment provided in Section 5 of the Article on the Legis- 
lative/National Assembly, we actually increase the 
requirement of population as one of the bases for 
classifying a city into a highly urbanized city. 

In addition to these, we might have a less urbanized 
city. Therefore, if we have to harmonize everything or 
if we have to attain logic, we better delete this particular 
section and leave it to the Local Government Code to 
provide for the proper approach to this very illogical 
siuation. Does not the Commissioner believe so? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I do not believe so. Let me give 
my reason why we should make a classification in the 
Constitution itself. The reason why there are chartered 
cities where voters are allowed to vote for provincial 
elective officials, and there are chartered cities where 
voters are not allowed to vote is that before there 
were no guidelines provided in the Constitution. So 
what was the result? We had served the Members 
of Congress who are politicians. If there is no guideline, 
politicians always try to protect their self-interest, and 
that is why we do not have uniform charters of our 
cities. 

If we do not provide certain forms of criteria, the 
same thing will happen where a very small city will be 
granted or denied rights which are only proper to be 
granted or denied a highly urbanized or a bigger city. 
Another point is, this Article on Local Governments 
makes liberal use of the Local Government Code. As I 


understood from the Chairman of the Committee, he 
said that under the present configuration of the Transi- 
tory Provisions, ail the laws are supposed to be valid. In 
this Article, Section 1 1 , for example, says “established 
in the Local Government Code.” There are already 
criteria, so why do we have to disturb these? What could 
be our reason for disturbing these criteria? 

MR. DAVIDE. There are several reasons why we must 
disturb the criteria. First of all, the Local Government 
Code as presently worded does not actually vest real 
autonomy on the local governmental units. The Com- 
missioner will notice m the provision of the Local 
Government Code that the local governmental units are 
all linked to the so-called national agencies having 
offices within the local governmental units. So, in short, 
since the idea now is to provide for a more decentralized 
government of the local governmental units and greater 
local autonomy pursuant to the Padilla amendment, the 
entire Local Government Code as now existing needs 
reassessment, total review, total surgery, as a matter of 
fact. 

On the matter of existing charters of some cities 
which specifically provide that the voters in that par- 
ticular city cannot vote for elective provincial officials, 
the determination thereof was based on a specific 
criteria then existing at the time. It was the collective 
wisdom of the Congress to determine whether for a 
particular city to be granted a charter, it also pro- 
vides for the disenfranchisement of the voters of that 
city in the matter of the election of the local provincial 
officials or otherwise. 

But under the proposal of Commissioner Maambong 
to incorporate the clause “UNLESS THEIR RESPEC- 
TIVE CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHERWISE,” we are, 
in effect, making it difficult or impossible for the suc- 
ceeding Congress to even repeal or modify the charters 
of existing cities where the voters are not allowed to 
vote for provincial officials. This will be a class legisla- 
tion of the highest order because for these cities now 
where voters are not allowed to vote for the provincial 
officials, the charters can no longer be repealed, modi- 
fied or amended by Congress because we are already 
putting it here. We are, in effect, institutionalLzmg the 
disenfranchisement of the voters of this particular city 
from voting for the provincial officials pursuant to their 
charter, whereas new cities will be created, with flexibi- 
lity given to Congress. But I am more concerned with 
the existing cities with such charters. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May we invite the three Cebuanos on the 
floor who are apparently exporting some of their 
problems to the Constitutional Commission so that we 
can understand the problem better and how these 
concepts apply to Cebu. 


444 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would say that the 
problem in Cebu has not been taken into account in my 
interpellations. And that is the reason why I propose to 
delete the section and leave it to the Local Government 
Code to decide on harmonizing conflicting charters. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to speak against the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Maambong. The major premise, 
Madam President, is that this provision now existing as 
proposed in the Local Government Code is an anti- 
warlordism provision — that is a reality that we have to 
address. There are evils in this government which cannot 
be solved in the vacuum of theories and philosophical 
arguments. Let us go into the history of these cities 
whose voters had been disenfranchised. 

The history is this. All these cities were allowed to 
vote for their provincial elective officials. Now, came 
the warlords, particularly during the time of Mr. Marcos. 
Their ploy was this: They disallowed these centers of 
population and centers of media and schools from 
voting because they could not establish their political 
voters, who are more informed, 
were allowed to vote. That is the history of all the cities 

be^hest of the " ‘^'s^^^franchised. It was at the 

that thev ^ in order to entrench themselves 

Sis that r d^^^^fr^nchised. Reality and the fact 

themLll ifS^ r^''^'^ entrench 

tnemselves if the cities were allowed to vote. 

onf°tha/ waS^sft argument contra was the 

Monsod Whv h Commissioners Bernas and 

for thel; the city voters be allowed to vote 

itself does nnt^h^ Provincial officials when the province 
tmUM 1 the city? That is a 

ment an ’ th^^^tical, constitutional argu- 

elelon of ar^ment. But the fact is that the 

affects thp °^d chieftains as heads of the province 

Idltand m'h hi the cities. We all 

lovllf ^ President, that the cities in the 
beyond the inri areas. Although the cities are 

resident of the p Province, when one is a 

is affected bv * 1 ,^ wishes to go out of that city, he 
lords For instan^ Provincial government of the war- 

Cebt, pa°iSrNAMF'RET' "r*' “ 

go to a certain^ tin wanted to 

control over the provinr^ warlord had 

could not get ouf ofl^ terrorized; they 

certain towns. And yet citvVl 
their interest and Properiies are there. 

wariorts.“ThrrayrdTcontro?^^^^^^ 

they dtsenfranchise the voters who c'an‘’norb"e“er™"ed 
because they are better infomied and are lareer in 
number. This will allow the warlords to thrive and 
to survive and terrorize the whole province. 


We are talking about the jurisdiction of the province. 
It is true the province has no jurisdiction over the city 
nor the people in a city. But the seats of government of 
the provinces are in the cities. When we allow the war- 
lords to win because they had gerrymandered these 
voters out of the provincial election, they control even 
the cities to a certain extent that they bring their 
g^Dons into the cities and the peace and order condition 
there, particularly cities which are the seats of provincial 
governments, is affected. That is why the voters in the 
City of Cebu have been crying for and demanding their 
right to vote so that they could have a say as to who are 
going to be the heads of the province. This is because 
the provincial government or the officials of the 
province affect their lives. As a matter of fact, their 
righit to vote is affected also. And in the case of the last 
election, for instance, we could not go to certain towns 
because the warlords had control of the province and 
we could not campaign for our presidential candidate. 

So, this is a very real problem that cannot be solved 
by just going into the vacuum of constitutional or philo- 
sophical arguments. The main thrust of the provision 
now is to try to solve this great evil of warlordism which 
has thrived and is still existing up to this time. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I really would have wanted to 
discuss this proposed amendment without any reference 
to a particular province or a particular city because we 
are talking here of a constitutional provision. If we start 
relating a constitutional provision, which is supposed to 
set up certain standards and guidelines to particular 
problems, we are going to get lost. 

The honorable Floor Leader talked of warlordism. I 
do not want to waste the time of the Commission, 
Madam President, but may I just remind Commissioner 
Rama that during the time of Senator Sergio Osmefia, 
Jr., he used the City of Cebu to control the whole 
province. He ran for city mayor; after two years, he ran 
for Congress; after two years, he ran for senator; then, 
he went back as city mayor and assigned a vice-mayor. 
Why? The theory was this: Whoever controls the City of 
Cebu controls the whole Province of Cebu. And now, 
the present officer-in-charge, who has the namesake of 
former Senator Osmena, Jr., I think, has the intention 
do the same thing — control the City of Cebu so that 
the Province of Cebu can be controlled. However, I 
would like to discuss this provision not on those terms. 
Madam President. I would like to discuss this in a very 
logical and dispassionate manner. 

Commissioner Davide said that Congress can no 
longer revise charters of the cities because we inserted 
here the clause “UNLESS THEIR RESPECTIVE 
CHARTERS PROVIDE OTHERWISE.” I think we are 


MONDAY. AUGUST 18, 1986 


445 


reading different laws on statutory construction. 
Congress can always revise laws, whether it is a charter, 
a resolution, an ordinance or whatever. As long as it is a 
law, it can be revised, amended, repealed by Congress. 
And so, there is no fear. Commissioner Davide also 
mentioned the charters of different cities. I will repeat 
my argument here. The reason why the charters of dif- 
ferent cities have different provisions is precisely that 
there were no criteria or standards set in the 1935 
Constitution. We already started this in 1973. It is 
already incorporated in the Local Government Code. 
Why do we not leave it at that. Madam President? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, just one statement. 
Could Commissioner Tingson allow me just one state- 
ment? 

It was mentioned here by Commissioner Maambong 
that Sergio Osmena, Jr. abused or took advantage of the 
situation then, where the city voters were allowed to 
vote. But it must be realized. Madam President, that 
precisely, thanks to the voters in the City of Cebu, 
Sergio Osmefia, Jr. was able to end a reign of terror at 
that time. Now, if the City of Cebu voters were not 
allowed to vote, he could not have ended a reign of 
terror in 1949 or 1950. That was the reason why the 
Cebu voters would like to vote, so that they would fight 
the terrorists in the province. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, warlordism can 
be discussed from the standpoint of th§ person who is 
accused of being a warlord. I served under Senator 
Osmena. I was one of his campaign managers way back. 
I have nothing against him. He was one of the heroes of 
our country, but let us look at it in this manner. When 
he was holding on to the reins of power in the City of 
Cebu, he had control of the Province of Cebu. He dic- 
tated everything. He ran for mayor; he ran for Congress, 
went back to being mayor, became senator, came back 
as mayor, why? It was because the power situs was in 
the City of Cebu. Now, if we are talking of warlordism 
from the side of the Province of Cebu, the same argu- 
ment can be used; but I will not go on with this. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Let us listen to Commissioner 
Tingson. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I hate to mention 
this but these fellow Cebuano Commissioners are 
exactly and specifically expressing the predicament in 
which we find ourselves in Negros Occidental. 

Madam President, in that small Province of Negros 
Occidental, we have San Carlos City, Talisay City, Silay 


City, Bago City, Bacolod City and La Carlota City. If we 
eliminate all these people and do not allow them to 
select the governor, who will be voting for the governor? 

I mean, literally, nobody. Another interesting thing is. 
Madam President, the lives of these people in these cities 
are so intertwined with the whole province that it is 
almost ridiculous not to allow these people to vote for 
the person who will be ruling their lives. I hate to 
mention Negros and the local political situation we have 
there. That is why sometimes I think I am in favor of 
the amendment of Commissioner Davide to delete 
Section 4 and then just give it to the local charter and 
let the local assembly decide on it. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I hate to interrupt. Madam 
President, and forgive me. Commissioner Tingson, I 
think the Gentleman was following very well the dis- 
cussion. We were talking about highly urbanized cities 
and component cities. We are not going to disen- 
franchise the component cities in his province because, 
precisely, they are component cities. If the component 
cities will be disenfranchised, there will be nobody to 
vote for the governors — the Gentleman is correct there. 

But we are talking here of two different things. We 
are talking about classifying cities into component cities 
and highly urbanized cities. 

the PRESIDENT. What does th^Committee say? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I ask 
some questions of Commissioner Maambong. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Commissioner Maambong, is it 
not a fact that the money collected by highly urbanized 
cities cannot be spent for public works improvement in 
the province? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. And vice versa, the money in 
the province cannot be used for expenses for the public 
improvements in highly urbanized cities. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. So for all practical purposes, 
they are independent of each other; they have nothing 
to do with each other. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is precisely why the 1973 
Constitution says “shall be independent of the prov- 
ince.” The Local Government Code says “shall be inde- 
pendent of the province,” It is precisely because of that 
principle. 


446 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. DE LOS REYES. For example, someone from a 
highly urbanized city won in an election for a provincial 
office, he can divert some of the funds from the 
province for the highly urbanized city to the prejudice 
of the province, can he not?^ 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, he cannot. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
has not reacted yet. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the reaction of the Com- 
mittee? 


MR. NOLLEDO. We would like that the question be 
resolved on the floor, but as Chairman of the Commit- 
tee, I would like to express my support for the provision 
of which Commissioner Rama mentioned the laudable 
arguments. 


Madam President, going over the provisions of Title 
^ree of the Local Government Code will reveal thal 
there ^e no special provisions on highly urbanized cities 
aside from the provisions on income level and popula- 
ion eve . So, I find no fundamental difference between 

urbanized cities aside from 
wovin?e« ^^ H unalterably located in the 

othl^ sn ^'^.^®n'5^airs are interlinked with each 
essential m coordination on 


Thank you. Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

sld^ president. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 


word “cities,” insert the words AS WELL AS THOSE 
CITIES WHOSE CHARTERS PROHIBIT ITS VOTERS 
FROM VOTING FOR PROVINCIAL ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIALS, to be followed by a comma (,). 


MR. NOLLEDO. What draft is the Gentleman using? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The one I presented to the Com- 
mittee. Let me repeat. Madam President; EXISTING 
HIGHLY URBANIZED CITIES AS WELL AS THOSE 
CITIES WHOSE CHARTERS PROHIBIT ITS VOTERS 
FROM VOTING FOR PROVINCIAL ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIALS, AND THOSE DETERMINED BY REASON- 
ABLE STANDARDS ESTABLISHED BY LAW SHALL 
BE INDEPENDENT OF THE PROVINCE. HOWEVER, 
THE VOTERS OF COMPONENT CITIES WITHIN A 
PROVINCE SHALL NOT BE DEPRIVED OF THE 
RIGHT TO VOTE FOR ELECTIVE PROVINCIAL 
OFFICIALS. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, before we vote, I 
think there are some grammatical defects in the pro- 
posal. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, I suspect so. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With regard to the phrase “AND 
THOSE DETERMINED BY REASONABLE STAN- 
DARDS ESTABLISHED BY LAW,” to what cities is 
the proponent referring? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. I beUeve that there is need to 
suspend the session for a few minutes to clarify this 
matter. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 4:01 p.m. 


we are eoinu t vote, may I ask whether 

paraeraDh<! Section 3, the two 

whether when ^^88®sted amendment; and, second, 
that the amenHm^ understanding 

are already includTd^ suggested by Commissioner Bernas 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 
recoSfized.*^^^^^^^^' ^^"^"^issioner Maambong is 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 4:54 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Maambong be 
recognized. 


CommissfonM^BS; My “opropL^ C® 

Bengzon has just given me a refonnulation roTer th 
the problem conmmplated by Commissioner Bemas w 
be solved. And m the draft amendment that we ha' 
presented to the Committee, we would like to propo 
the following: On the second line of Section 3, after tl 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, so that we will 
not lose time, I suggest that we take this up step by 
step. I have talked to Commissioner Davide and I agree 
with him that the prejudicial question is whether we 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


447 


should delete the whole of Section 3, including the 
proposed amendments, because if we decide to delete, 
there will be nothing to talk about and we will not lose 
time. On the other hand, if the deletion will not be 
approved by the body, I will present a reformulated 
amendment, minus the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Bengzon. We will separate that. And if my 
reformulated amendment will be approved, it will be 
the turn of Commissioner Bengzon to insert the form of 
amendment that he has in mind so that that would be 
voted on. So, the first issue is whether or not we are 
going to delete Section 3, including the proposed 
amendments. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Davide 
say? 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree that the deletion is an anterior 
amendment and I seek for the deletion of the original 
Section 3, now Section 4, for the reason that I had 
respectfully submitted, to the Local Government Code 
in the light of what is provided for in Section 2, as 
follows: 

The Congress shall enact a local government code which 
shall provide for a more responsive and accountable local 
government structure instituted through a system of decen- 
tralization with effective mechanism, recall, initiative, and 
referendum, allocate among the different local government 
units their powers, responsibilities and resources and pro- 
vide for the qualifications, election, appointment and re- 
moval, term, salaries, powers and functions, and duties of 
local officials, and all other matters relating to the organiza- 
tion and operation of the local units. 

The provision is broad enough to allow Congress to 
provide that highly urbanized cities shall be independent 
of the province. As a matter of fact, in the proposed 
Section 4, the clause “The Local Government Code may 
provide” is directory in character. This means to say 
that we concede to the plenary authority of the 
Congress to provide in the Local Government Code 
everything related to decentralization and local auto- 
nomy and their respective relation, not only with the 
different local units but also of its inhabitants with the 
other units, for instance, cities in respect to the province. 
In short. Section 3 is a superfluity. It is not necessary. 
So, my proposal is to delete the whole of Section 3 
or 4. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am, of course, against the 
deletion because as I have mentioned earlier, it is 
necessary that the Constitution should provide a classifi- 
cation of cities into highly urbanized cities and com- 
ponent cities; otherwise, if we rely solely on the prero- 


gative of Congress, what happened in the past. Madam 
President, will happen again. If there is a politician who 
is strong enough, he will sway Congress one way or 
another to allow one city to vote, while another 
politician would not allow another city to vote, depend- 
ing on the winds of politics. So, I feel — and I would 
agree with the statement of Commissioner Bernas — that 
there should be some form of classification, but it 
should be limited to two classifications — highly urban- 
ized cities and component cities. 

I oppose the motion to delete. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I ask a ques- 
tion? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Commissioner Davide’s proposal to 
delete the proposed Section 4, if it is carried out, means 
that all those cities whose charters prohibit the voters 
from voting for provincial elective officials and charters 
that allow their city voters to vote for provincial elective 
officials will remain as they are. Is this correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. They will continue to do so until a 
new Local Government Code shall have been enacted or 
until Congress shall have repealed these particular 
charters. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee regrets that it 
cannot accept the amendment. We prefer that it be sub- 
mitted to the floor. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. We are now ready to vote on the 
pi*Qposed amendment of Commissioner Davide. 

As many as are in favor of the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Davide that the proposed Section 4 
now be deleted, please raise their hand. (Few Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 7 votes in favor and 12 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I will now 
propose the amendment, as reformulated, but as I 
mentioned earlier, with the indulgence of my copro- 
ponent, Commissioner Bengzon, I will not include his 
proposed amendment. However, Commissioner Bengzon 
is always free to present his own primary amendment 
later on. 

My amendment reads: “Sec. 4. Highly urbanized 
cities, as determined by LAW, shall be independent of 


448 


MONDAY, AUGUST 1 8, 1 986 


the province. However, the voters of COMPONENT 
CITIES within A province shall not be deprived of their 
right to vote for elective provincial officials.” We 
deleted the clause “unless their respective charters 
provide otherwise” in the first paragraph. The second 
paragraph is also entirely deleted. I would like to know 
from the Committee if this formulation is acceptable. 


ment is foreclosed. So, I would like to propose this 
amendment to Commissioner Maambong’s amendment 
so that this can be voted upon. If my amendment wins, 
then it will be included. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
agrees with Commissioner Bengzon. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we regret that we 
cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then I ask that it be put to a 
vote, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. What happened to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Bernas? Has it been 
incorporated? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It has already been incorporated. 
Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, may I just say 
something? 

In effect, the amendment means that there will only 
be two kinds of cities — highly urbanized cities and 
component cities. Highly urbanized cities are indepen- 
dent of the provinces. Component cities are precisely 
component portions of the province and entitled to vote 
^ province and may not be deprived of the 
n^t to vote. The effect of this on existing charters 

the right to vote would be the 

highly urbLnSed 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I was about to 
say that the voting of my proposed amendment will not 
foreclose Commissioner Bengzon from presenting one 
sentence or two so that the proposed amendment will 
be included, but the Committee has already made a 
stand on this point and I am not about to question the 
Committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, the amendment 
to the amendment will be inserted after the word 
“cities,” so that it will read: “Highly urbanized cities, 
AS WELL AS THOSE CITIES WHOSE CHARTERS 
PROHIBIT ITS VOTERS FROM VOTING FOR PRO- 
VINCIAL ELECTIVE OFFICIALS, shall be indepen- 
dent of the province.” 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the right to vote? 

MR. BENGZON. “However, the voters of COMPO- 
NENT CITIES within A province shall not be deprived 
of their right to vote for elective provincial officials.’ 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by Commissioner 
Maambong? 


proviSoTfeiS * vote for tl 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, 
nize^^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 


am^ndnfen^^t^^^h should vote first on n 

amendment amendment, because once th 

nresentine ^ foreclosed fro 

presenting another amendment. 

menfLf bee^*^^^^' Commissioner’s amen 

mSoneJ SnZg'?"™'’'' “ of Cor 


MR. BENGZON No, Madam President, because n 
amendment would include cities whose charters prohil 
their voters from votmg for provincial elective officia 
As Commissioner Bernas said, if this amendment 
Commissioner Maambong is approved, then my amen 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, it is all right 
with me, but I was thinking that the phrase which Com- 
missioner Bengzon proposes to insert should be after the 
word “LAW” in the third sentence, so it will read. 
“Highly urbanized cities as determined by LAW, AS 
WELL AS THOSE CITIES WHOSE CHARTERS PRO- 
HIBIT ITS VOTERS FROM VOTING FOR PROVIN- 
CIAL ELECTIVE OFFICIALS, shall be independent of 
the province.” 

MR. BENGZON. I accept. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted by 
the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
regrets that it cannot accept the amendment, because 
this will prohibit Congress from amending the charter 
when exigencies so demand. 

THE president. Is there any other comment? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


449 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I offer a different interpretation? 
This amendment does not fossilize the charters. For as 
long as the charters are just charters, they are amend- 
able. The moment, therefore, that the voters are given 
the right to vote in a province, then their cities become 
component cities. Their cities become component cities 
or these could graduate into becoming highly urbanized 
cities. They have two options — Congress can either 
make their cities highly urbanized cities or component 
cities. 

MR. BENGZON. That is right. Madam President. We 
do not fossilize the charter. May we now ask for a vote? 

MR. RODRIGO. Before voting, may I have one 
question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. How about the present highly 
urbanized cities? Let us say that Congress decides to 
change the definition of highly urbanized cities, may 
Congress enact a law to the effect that an existing 
urbanized city no longer is considered an urbanized 
city? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But there is a constitutional provi- 
sion that urbanized cities can no longer be deurbanized 
by Congress. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I think the amend- 
ment removed the word “existing.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Was the word “existing” removed? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, that was removed. 

FR. BERNAS. It just says “Highly urbanized cities as 
determined by LAW.” Therefore, a city which is pre- 
sently considered highly urbanized can still be demoted 
if the standards of law change. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I seek one simple clarification. 
What about cities whose original charters allowed the 
voters therein to vote for provincial elective officials, 
but later on became highly urbanized and, therefore. 


their voters were no longer allowed to vote for the 
provincial officials? Which will prevail insofar as the 
cities are concerned — their original charters or their 
having been declared highly urbanized under the Local 
Government Code? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. As I mentioned earlier, charters 
can be amended by law. In the case of cities whose 
charter allowed their voters to vote for provincial 
elective officials, there were some charters which were 
amended by law or by decree. And because of the 
criteria under the Local Government Code, many of 
those cities which qualified filed their petitions to 
convert themselves into highly urbanized cities and were 
declared highly urbanized cities. So, in answer to Com- 
missioner Davide, I would like to venture an opinion 
that these cities whose original charters allowed the 
voters to vote but had been converted into highly urban- 
ized cities under the provisions of the Local Govern- 
ment Code or some other presidential decree, and 
because they complied with the criteria are now 
considered highly urbanized cities. 

Madam President, that is precisely why in our original 
formulation of our amendments, we placed the word 
“existing” but we were convinced by the Committee 
that we do not have to use the word “existing” so that 
Congress will be given the leeway to determine whether 
these highly urbanized cities declared as such are really 
qualified. 

MR. DAVIDE. Another question. A component city 
became highly urbanized after the ratification of this 
Constitution - with this provision now. But under the 
^j^2rter of that component city, as of the date of the 
effectivity of the new Constitution, its voters can vote 
for the provincial elective officials. Would it mean that 
subsequently, because of its having satisfied the require- 
ments for a highly urbanized city, despite its charter, 
the voters therem can no longer subsequently vote for 
the provincial elective officials? 

MR. BENGZON. That is correct; provided that they 
have complied with the procedural requirements of the 
law - they applied; they are processed and are found to 
be truly highly urbanized. That means they have 
graduated to that level. 

MR. DAVIDE. Would it therefore be the position of 
the Gentleman that a charter can be amended by merely 
qualifying, to a higher category of a city? In short, it is 
an implied amendment to an original charter. It will not 
require any amendatory act. 


450 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. BENGZON. There is, in effect, a legislative act 
because there is already a law that is passed. 


shall not be deprived of their right to vote for elective 
provincial officials.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. But we know for a fact that a law 
or a charter can only be repealed, amended or modified 
by another law. In this particular case, it is the mere 
graduation that the Gentleman is talking about that 
would now repeal or amend the provision. 

MR. BENGZON. But once it qualifies and it proves 
to have been qualified, then there is no bar from its 
being declared to be a highly urbanized city. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Maambong, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hmdJFew 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 16 votes in favor and 10 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That will be Section 4, Madam 
President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 


MR. AZCUNA. May I ask Commissioner Maambong 
a few questions? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 


MR. AZCUNA. Under the amendment of Com- 
missioner Maambong, there are, in effect, two kinds 
~ cities and component cities. 

urbanized cities 

not allow^h • ^ cities whose charters do 

officS Tip!"" "®s'd®nts to vote for provincial elective 
oiiicials. rhey are mdependent. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Section 5 was already approved and 
then Section 6 is the Davide amendment. Section 7, 
which reads as follows, will be under consideration now: 
“The President of the Philippines shall exercise general 
supervision over local governments to insure that laws 
are faithfully executed.” 

Madam President, before we proceed to Section 7, 
the Committee would like to request the Floor Leader 
to make a motion that Sections 4, 5 and 6 be consi- 
dered approved and closed to amendments. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


other kind of cities is the so-caUi 
arfh " "ities because they are parts of the provinc 
and they can elect the provincial elective officials. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 


MR. OPLE. May I remind the Commission that when 
we approved the amendment pertaining to metropolitan 
areas, the understanding then was that this would be 
relocated to a section immediately preceding Section 6. 


MR. AZCUNA. In the highly urbanized cities as 
determmed by law, if the Commissioner’s amendment is 
passed. Congress will have no power to allow them to 
vote for provincial elective officials. A law allowing a 
y , *^^t»anized city to vote for provincial elective 
otficials would be unconstitutional. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Maambong 
please read the particular paragraph that we will vote 
on, just to be clear on this. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The original Section 6 is now Sec- 
tion 9. 

MR. OPLE. Is that now Section 9? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is why the Committee has 
followed the instruction of the Commission — that we 
should relocate it immediately preceding Section 9, 
formerly Section 6. There is no violation in that 
section. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, in that case, I agree 
with the specific place in which that has been located. 


MR. MAAMBONG Sec. 4. “Highly urbanized cities 

THOSE CITIES 
VOTERS FROM 

VOTING FOR PROVINCAIL ELECTIVE OFFI- 
CIALS, shall be independent of the province However 
the voters of COMPONENT CITIES within A province 


MR. NOLLEDO. Before we go to Section 7, we 
would like the Floor Leader to please file a motion that 
the Padilla amendment on Section 4 be closed to 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Section 4 has been just approved. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


451 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes; we now go to Section 5 and 
put this to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Nolledo please 
read Section 5? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Sec. 5. “Legislative bodies of local 
governments shall have sectoral representation as may 
be prescribed by law.” 

VOTING 

. THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
5, as worded by the Committee, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

Will Commissioner Nolledo please read what is 
Section 6 now. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 6 is the 
Davide amendment which was approved in the last 
session. It reads: “THE TERM OF OFFICE OF ELEC- 
TIVE LOCAL OFFICIALS EXCEPT BARANGAY OF- 
FICIALS WHICH SHALL BE DETERMINED BY LAW, 
SHALL BE THREE YEARS AND NO SUCH OFFI- 
CIAL SHALL SERVE FOR MORE THAN THREE 
CONSECUTIVE TERMS. VOLUNTARY RENUN- 
CIATION OF THE OFFICE FOR ANY LENGTH OF 
TIME SHALL NOT BE CONSIDERED AS AN INTER- 
RUPTION IN THE CONTINUITY OF HIS SERVICE 
FOR THE FULL TERM FOR WHICH HE WAS 
ELECTED.” 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular Section 6 as read by the Chairman, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor and none against; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we shall read 
Section 7, formerly Section 5, and which will be subject 
to amendment if there is any: 

The President of the Philippines shall exercise general super- 
vision over local governments to insure that laws are faith- 
fully executed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. BENGZON. A point of clarification, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. BENGZON. Considering that we have granted 
autonomous governments the freedom to pass their own 
laws, is my understanding correct that the President will 
insure that the national laws are faithfully executed in 
the local government units? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is a settled rule; it applies 
to national laws. But the President is not prohibited, in 
my personal opinion and without binding the Commit- 
tee, from seeing to it that laws passed by the regional 
legislative assemblies should also be complied with, 
because they have also the force of law based on these 
constitutional provisions. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we have the official interpreta- 
tion or sense of the Committee so that that would be 
very clear on record? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is my personal opinion. 

MR. OPLE. I think the Chairman speaks for the 
Committee in this case. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I have a few questions for the Com- 
mittee. In the spirit of local autonomy, would it not be 
better if we were to retain the hierarchy of supervisory 
powers which were found in the 1973 Constitution - 
the municipality supervises the barrio; the province 
supervises the towns and component cities; and then the 
President supervises the provinces and highly urbanized 
cities and independent cities. That would seem to be 
more in keeping with our desire for decentralization. I 
am referring to the text of Article XI, Section 4 (1) of 
the 1973 Constitution which says that: 

Provinces with respect to component cities and munici- 
palities, and cities and municipalities with respect to com- 
ponent barrios, shall ensure that the acts of their com- 
ponent units are within the scope of their assigned powers 
and functions . . . 

In other words, there is a hierarchical gradation as 
far as supervisory authority is concerned. The President 
need not directly bother himself or herself with the 
lower political units, but rather the President must 
attend to supervising the highest political units below 
the national government. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I find no incon- 
sistency between my previous statement and the theory 
of Commissioner Bemas which, besides Section 7 here, 
talks of local governments. And so the term “local 
governments” should cover all local governments from 
the barangay up to the provincial level and even up to 


452 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


the highest position in the autonomous region. How- 
ever, the hierarchical way of supervision can still be 
observed by the President. 

FR. BERNAS. Is it the intention of the Committee 
that although only the President is mentioned, what is 
intended is a hierarchical system of supervision? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 


the power of the President over local government is “as 
may be provided by law” because the power and control 
over local governments was completely in the hands of 
the legislature. 

However, with decentralization and local autonomy 
now, that complete control of the legislature over local 
governments is broken. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. On that understanding, I would 
perhaps suggest that we drop the phrase “to insure that 
laws are faithfully executed” because that is what 
general supervision means anyway. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Would Commissioner NoUedo be 
amenable to just dropping that last phrase and putting a 
period (.) after “government”? ' 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee 


ment. Madam President. 


accepts the amend- 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 


MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I raise a point of clarifica- 
tion in connection with the question of Commissioner 
Bengzon regarding the autonomous regions in relation 
to the power of general supervision of the President over 
local governments. 

I notice that in the creation of the present regional 
governments in Regions IX and XII, Section 35 of 
Presidential Decree No. 1618 provides that “The Pres- 
ident shall have the power of general supervision and 
control over the autonomous regions.” My question is: 
Under the present thinking of the Committee, this 
power of the President will be limited only to general 
supervision, and this power of control is already taken 
out, am I correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 


1935^ CnnS^t'^' under the 

separate concepts given to the President vis-lvS’lS 
government based on the 1935 Constitution: a power ^f 
general supervision, and a power to take care that 
laws are faithfully executed. In the CommSee dr ft 
these were combined to state that the President shall 
have general supervision over aU local governments to 
insure that laws are faithfully executed, and the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Bemas, as accepted by the Com- 
mittee has now dropped that second part. So, we wUl 

only have the power of general supervision over local 
governments. 

^ functions in the 1935 

ns 1 u ion are subsumed in the general phrase 
general supervision.” 

th President, may I also observe 

th ence read by Commissioner Azcuna 

with respect to local governments under the 1935 
Constitution two powers are really mentioned there; 
the power of general supervision of the President and, 
in effect, the power of control of the legislature over the 
local government. That is why in the 1935 Constitution 


MR. MAAMBONG. I would also like to put on record 
Section 3 of Presidential Decree No. 1618 again in rela- 
tion to the regional governments, and it reads: 

Within the framework of the national sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines and 
its Constitution, internal autonomy shall be established in 
the autonomous regions with legislative and executive 
machinery to exercise the powers and responsibilities herein 
specified in accordance with the provisions of the Constitu- 
tion and the laws of the Republic of the Philippines. 

My question is: Would this Section 3 still be in keep- 
ing with the thinking of the Committee in the formula- 
tion of the autonomous regions? 


MR. NOLLEDO. We are granting only general super- 
vision with respect to autonomous regions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but the reference to the pro- 
visions of the Constitution and the laws of the Repubhc 
of the Philippines would still be equally valid. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That seems to create some con- 
fusion. So, we are not bound by the provisions that the 
Gentleman has cited. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, my thinking 
with regard to autonomous regions is that the Constitu- 
tion of the Philippines and the laws of the Republic of 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


453 


the Philippines are still applicable to autonomous 
regions because with respect to legislation as pointed 
out under Presidential Decree 1618, national laws shall 
be supreme vis-a-vis regional laws enacted by the 
Sangguniang Pampook. In other words, in the hierarchy 
of laws, the Constitution and the laws passed by the 
Republic of the Philippines are still above everything 
else. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What Constitution is the Gentleman 
referring to? 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Constitution of the Republic 
of the Philippines, the present Constitution we are 
drafting; but in the case of the regional government, the 
Constitution of 1973, because this has reference to the 
previous Constitution. But I was thinking of the auto- 
nomous regions which will still have to follow the 
Constitution of the Republic of the Philippines we are 
now drafting. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I agree with you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to call attention to the 
fact that in the Article on the Executive which we 
already passed on Second Reading and copies of which 
have already been distributed for Third Reading, we 
have a provision exactly the same as this. Section 17 of 
the Article on the Executive reads: 

The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus and offices. He shall exercise general 
supervision over all local governments as may be provided 
by law and shall take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed. ' 

So, there is a duplication. As Chairman of the Com- 
mittee on Style, I would like to know if we have to 
delete. 

MR. OPLE. We must admit a bias in favor of keeping 
this provision in the Article on Local Governments. 

MR. RODRIGO. In the 1935 Constitution, this 
power of the President was also in the Article on the 
Executive Department. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case. Madam President, after 
our attention has been called by Commissioner Rodrigo, 
I think the best way is to align this provision with what 
has been approved on Third Reading. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MS. AQUINO. It is my submission that in the spirit 
of recognizing autonomous regions which is a break- 
through — it is a new provision in this new draft Consti- 
tution — the provision should be retained. It will better 
allow for a more thorough consideration of the concept 
of autonomous regions in the context of the general 
supervisory powers of the President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Section 1 7, under the Article on the 
Executive, makes a distinction between the authority of 
the President over departments, bureaus and offices and 
his power over local governments. Let me read it again. 
“Section 17. The President shall have control of all the 
executive departments, bureaus and offices.” Then it 
makes a distinction: “He shall exercise general super- 
vision over all local governments ...” 

Commissioner Guingona is here and this is more his 
line because he is the Chairman of the Committee on 
Sponsorship. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo, there is 
no word “control” in that last sentence over local 
governments. 

MR. RODRIGO. There is none, precisely. 

THE PRESIDENT. It just says “supervision.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, if we transfer this 
to the Local Governments, Section 17 will only read: 
“The President shall have control of all executive 
departments, bureaus and offices.” We remove the next 
sentence and transfer it to the Article on Local Govern- 
ments. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I vaguely recall, and perhaps, we can 
check this in the record, when we were discussing that 
particular provision on the Executive Department, 
somewhere along the line someone adverted to the fact 
that this may have to be modified depending on what 
we decide on local autonomy. So, if there is a necessity 
for a reformulation of the Ajrticle on the Executive, the 
Article on the Executive must yield to the general spirit 
of what we might have on the Article on Local Govern- 
ments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I remember it 
was Commissioner Quesada who raised the question. 
That was the agreement we had to finally decide in the 
Committee on Local Government. 


454 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. That is a matter for the Committee 
on Sponsorship which has the function of seeing to it 
that there is no duplication or overlapping of articles. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, it is not just a ques- 
tion of overlapping, but it is a question of real contra- 
diction. It is not so much a conflict between the power 
of the President and the power of local governments as 
between the power of local governments and the power 
of Congress because the President will have general 
supervision as may be provided by law. The implication 
is that Congress has blanket authority to provide any 
law with respect to local governments as it had under 
the 1935 Constitution, and that is not our intention 
anymore. That is why in my earlier remarks T said that 
under the 1935 Constitution, the President had general 
supervision over local governments and Congress had 
control. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that whatever 
is provided for in that Article on the Executive should 
be adjusted to what will be approved here with respect 
to local governments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is correct. 


THE PRESIDENT. In other words, this should govern 
GovS^!!,!f IS decided on the Article on Local 

important is for us to decide 

?Xove~,“' over 


as may be provided by law and shall take fare thTt Tl 
laws be faithfully executed, whereas in this section v 
are dealmg with now, under the Article on Loc 
Governments, Section 7 reads; 


The President of the Philippines shall exercise general 
supervision over local governments to ensure that laws are 
faithfully executed. 


MS. AQUINO. That was deleted. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment is to 

eliminate that last clause and put a period (.) after 
Local 


HpWp AQUINO I was supportive ^ the motion 

f. th ; r? the retention of this secti 

in this ^ticle, if it is the clear intention of the Comm 

tee that m this provision, the contemplation is just 
recognize the mere power of oversight over an inferi 
body and does not exclude a restraining authority o\ 
the supervised body. Do I understand the Committ 
correctly? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. In which case, it also excludes the 
power of the President to suspend or remove public 
officials. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Or proceed with administrative com- 
plaints against them. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. In the context, therefore, of the 
concept of the supervisory powers as they are generally 
contemplated, this section should be retained in this 
Article, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. May I point out, however, so that no 
lacuna of interpretation will arise that the President’s 
power of control over the Ministry of Local Govern- 
ments will continue. With respect to disciplinary 
measures against members of local governments, there- 
fore, I think the power of the Ministry of Local Govern- 
ments, which is under the control of the President of 
the Philippines, will not be eliminated by this change in 
the relationship between the President and the local 
governments, which means the power of general super- 
vision over local governments. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I find that to be a 
dangerous interpretation because as a settled usage in 
jurisprudence would go, the power to initiate adminis- 
trative complaints against local officials rightfully 
belongs to the provincial boards. If it is the spirit of 
recognize autonomy and to decentralize national 
government, then we should not fall into that kind of 
interpretation. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I think local autonomy 
contemplates allowing all the channels to function. But 
it is also correct that as one moves up the channels of 
the hierarchy of government, appeals are generally ad- 

ressed to the Office of the President of the Philippines, 
^ very rarely will any case get to the table of the Pres- 
ident unless on appeal. In the administrative setup of 
any government, there is presumed to be a final appeal 
to the head of the government. 

MS. AQUINO. In that case, it holds that the general 

power of suspension and removal still 
rig u y elongs to the local governments, and matters 
o appeal which may be in the nature of a general super- 
visory power may pertain to the Office of the President, 
if only to clarify the interpretation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I agree with the 
interpretation of Commissioner Aquino but those things 
can be provided for in the Local Government Code. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


455 


MR. OPLE. In general, however, I think the Commit- 
tee shares this interpretation, Madam President. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I move for a modification of the 
amendment of Commissioner Bernas. Instead of deleting 
the last clause “and ensure that laws are faithfully exe- 
cuted,” I move that this particular phrase be transferred 
to the Article on the Executive because this is-an essen- 
tial function or power of the President. So, as would 
now be worded, that particular Section 1 7 of the Article 
on the Executive would be without this last clause, 
although this is essential. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I ask Commissioner Davide a 
question. Madam President? Is he referring to execution 
of laws in general, without particularly mentioning local 
government? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is the general law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. At any rate, in the oath of the 
President, the President can execute all laws of the land. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. That is why it should 
not be deleted but merely transferred to Section 17 of 
the proposed Article on the Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. No, but it should be removed 
from Section 7. 

MR. DAVIDE. It should be removed from here. 

THE PRESIDENT. It should be removed with the 
understanding that it will be a separate sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It can be done. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. I was going to support the view of 
Commissioner Davide that it is not only the President’s 
right but prerogative or duty under the Constitution to 
see to it that laws are faithfully executed. This refers 
not only to national laws but also to local laws. 

I do not perceive any violation of the concept of 
decentralization that we have accepted here, if we give 
to the President the power to see to it that laws are 
faithfully executed. The implication of the failure to 
give the President that power would be the danger of 


creating an imperium in imperio where we could have a 
local official who refuses to implement or execute the 
laws faithfully and the President unable to do anything 
about it. 

So, I would not favor the dropping of the phrase but 
I would favor its inclusion, as suggested by Com- 
missioner Davide, in the Article on the Executive. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Commissioner Azcuna invited our 
attention to the 1935 or 1973 Constitution that there 
were two powers: one, general supervision; and two, to 
see to it that laws are faithfully executed. On the second 
sentence of this provision under Section 17 of the 
Article on the Executive, we may omit the phrase “as 
may be provided by law,” but I would prefer the text 
“and shall take care that all laws be faithfully executed” 
instead of “to ensure” which is the text in the draft of 
the Committee, because it seems that there are really 
two powers not necessarily inclusive or exclusive of each 
other. So that this proposed Section 7 should read: 
“The President of the Philippines shall exercise general 
supervision over local governments AND SHALL TAKE 
CARE that THE laws be faithfully executed.” That 
simplifies the matter, I believe. So, Section 17 of the 
Article on the Executive will just state as its first 
sentence: “The President shall have control of aU the 
executive departments, bureaus and offices.” The next 
sentence should be transposed to be Section 7 of the 
Article on Local Governments with the elimination of 
the phrase “as may be provided by law.” Does the 
Committee look upon this suggestion with favor? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We sympathize with the provision 
but we already agreed with the Bernas amendment. The 
Committee believes that the Bernas amendment is good 
enough - without prejudice to the amendment sug- 
gested by Commissioner Davide — because I think the 
intention even of the 1935 Constitution is really to 
separate the second function. They were put in only in 
one sentence. The second function is implementing the 
presidential oath, that the President shall execute all the 
laws of the land. So, I think the Davide suggestion is 

well-taken. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would have no objection to the 
Davide aihendment, and also to incorporating the 
recommendation of Commissioner Padilla to put that 
in the Article on the Executive. But if we do that, I 


456 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


would suggest that we put in Section 7 of the Article on 
Local Governments the specification of the authority of 
local governments over interior local governments, the 
hierarchy. I would suggest that if we take this out and 
put it in the Article on the Executive, then we put in its 
place the old section from Section 4 (1), Article XI of 
the 1973 Constitution which states: 

Provinces with respect to component cities and munici- 
palities, and cities and municipalities with respect to 
component barrios, shall ensure that the acts of their com- 
ponent units are within the scope of their assigned powers 
and functions. 

It just clarifies things and establishes this clear hierarchy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is the Gentleman presenting that as 
an amendment? 


the two. As worded in Section 1 7 of the Article on the 
Executive, it is separated. We just delete the words “as 
determined by law” to remove control by the legislature 
over local governments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, in line with 
this, I thought the suggested formulation of Section 
1 7 — and I do not know if this tallies with the thinking 
of Commissioner Azcuna — would be: “The President 
shall have control of all the executive departments, 
bureaus, and offices and shall take care that laws be 
faithfully executed.” I understand that this exercise 
of general supervision over all local governments is 
supposed to be transposed to the Article on Local 
Governments or is it the reverse? 

Thank you. 


FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


words, the whole of 

Section 4, Article XI of the 1973 Constitution? 

4 sentence of Section 

4 (1) because the second sentence is already taken care 
of somewhere else, I think. 

of^ctioT? ^ lieu 

ot Section 7, as worded now? 


the^^Executiv^^The^® I*"® Allele o 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 
ni^THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recoj 

MR. AZCUNA. May I just inquire as to the wordir 
of the provision m the Article on the Executive? Woul 
T ''forded as Section 7 as worded in the Article c 
^cal Governments or as originally worded minus “i 

T 1"^ of the Article o 

have^ron^r “Th® President sha 

over loral a ° niinistries and general supervisio 

fflithfiillv governments and shall take care that laws ai 
raithtuUy executed That u/iii j- 

Section 17. • ^^at will be the wording c 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee ready to give 
any reaction? The proposal is to transfer Section 7 to 
the Article on the Executive, and in heu thereof, to have 
this first sentence of Section 4 (1), Article XI of the 
1973 Constitution in the Article on Local Governments. 
Is that acceptable to the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We leave it to the body to decide. 
Madam President, because as far as we are concerned, 
we agree with Commissioner Aquino that there should 
be a provision on supervisory powers of the President 
in the Article on Local Governments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I 
inquire from Commissioner Bernas because he is trans- 
posing Section 4 ( 1 ) of Article XL Is it understood that 
the whole of this paragraph should be transposed? 

FR. BERNAS. Only the first sentence. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Not the provision on highly 
urbanized cities. 


ivii\. iNULj^tuu. ihe Bernas amendment is 
Section 7 should read as follows — please correct me if I 
am wrong:'‘THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
SHALL EXERCISE GENERAL SUPERVISION OVER 
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. PROVINCES WITH RE- 
SPECT TO COMPONENT CITIES AND MUNICIPALI- 
TIES, AND CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES WITH 
COMPONENT BARANGAYS SHALL 
ENSURE THAT THE ACTS OF THEIR COMPONENT 
WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THEIR AS- 
SIGNED POWERS AND FUNCTIONS. ” Am I correct? 


FR. BERNAS. I have 
with that except that for 


no serious conceptual difficulty 
nte, it is tautological. 


^ general superv 

power should be separated from the power to take 

that the laws are faithfully executed rather than me: 


FR. BERNAS. It embodies everything in my amend- 
ment but as to where the first sentence will be placed, 
I am leaving that to the Committee. One suggestion is 
that the first sentence should go to Section 17 of the 
Article on the Executive. I am willing to go along on 
that. But if the Committee prefers to keep it here, that 
is really not my responsibility. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


457 


MR. NOLLEDO. As far as the Committee is con- 
cerned, what I have read should really appear on Section 
7 in line with the observations of Commissioner Aquino. 

THE PRESIDENT. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Based on what I have read, we 
would like to retain here as Section 7 the provision on 
the supervisory powers of the President, as amended by 
Commissioner Bemas, including Section 4 (1) of the 
1973 Constitution on the hierarchical supervision of 
provinces and municipalities. 

THE PRESIDENT. How is this to be adjusted to the 
provision over local governments in the Article on the 
Executive? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I remember, Madam President, that 
there was a motion filed by Commissioner Quesada that 
the provisions of the Article on the Executive should 
yield to what we should agree upon here with respect 
to the report of the Committee on Local Governments. 
We are now deciding what should be agreed upon by us 
with respect to the power of general supervision of the 
President over local governments. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Perhaps, it would be best for us 
to refer to the record rather than to our memory 
whether such a consensus was reached by this body. The 
best source of information would be the record, and I 
would submit that until we have verified from the 
record, we should not act on this matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. But the Chair believes that the 
body can now decide where the provision will be best 
and appropriate: should it be in the Article on Local 
Governments or should it be in the Article on the 
Executive? I think we can decide on it now. 

MR. GUINGONA. I thought we were relying on 
whether there was that consensus. In view of the state- 
ment of the Chair, I respectfully submit. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I think it is 
important that the Committee call the attention of the 
Members of the Constitutional Commission that there 
is also a similar provision on autonomous regions in 
Section 3, lines 29 to 3 1 , page 3 of Resolution No. 470, 
the consolidated report of the Committee on Local 
Governments, which reads: 

The President of the Philippines shall exercise general 

supervision over autonomous regions to ensure that laws are 

faithfully executed. 


I would like that our decision should also take into 
account another similar provision appearing with respect 
to autonomous regions. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, if the Bemas 
amendment as modified by the Committee would be 
voted upon, I would make a reservation to introduce at 
the proper time the clause “to ensure that laws are faith- 
fully executed” in the Article on the Executive more 
particularly to Section 1 7 thereof. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Chair believes that what 
is before the Body now is the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Bemas which has not been withdrawn. I 
believe that is in Section 7 : “The President of the Philip- 
pines shall exercise general supervision over LOCAL 
GOVERNMENTS.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Then I will continue. Madam 
President: “PROVINCES WITH RESPECT TO COM- 
PONENT CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES, AND 
CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES WITH RESPECT TO 
COMPONENT BARANGAYS SHALL ENSURE THAT 
THE ACTS OF THEIR COMPONENT UNITS ARE 
WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THEIR ASSIGNED POWERS 
AND FUNCTIONS.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to Commissioner 
Bemas? 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to call the attention 
of the Committee that the second sentence just read was 
actually lumped together with Section 4 (2) of the 1973 
Constitution, which starts with: “Local government 
units may group themselves . . .” If we include that as a 
second sentence of Section 7, it has absolutely no rela- 
tion at all to the power of general supervision of the 
President over local governments, whereas the original 
formulation in the 1973 Constitution referred to states: 

SEC. 4 (1) Provinces with respect to component cities 

and municipalities . . . 

(2) Local government units may group themselves, or 

consolidate or coordinate their efforts, services 

I am thinking that if we have to add that provision at 
all, we should add it to the next section in order that it 


458 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


has relation to each other, because that provision, if it 
will be mcluded in the power of the President of general 
supervision, will have no relation at all to the first 
sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, not as part of 
Section 7. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I beg to disagree. Madam President. 
I think the relation is almost direct. It concerns the 
hierarchical way of supervision by higher local govern- 
ments over inferior local governments. So, I think Com- 
missioner Bemas was correct. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand. ) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(No Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 25 votes in favor, one against and no 
abstention; the amendment is approved. 

So, that is the new Section 7. May we proceed now to 
Section 8? 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. I might also add that the following 
section talks about groupings which are not juridical 
persons. They are just various juridical entities cooperat- 
ing, but not forming a new juridical entity. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I just remind the 
Commission that, according to the previous agreement, 
the provision on metropolitan areas whl immediately 
precede what is now Section 6, which pertains to the 
voluntary grouping of municipalities or cities. So, I 
thmk this interconnection between Section 6 and what 
IS now considered to be Section 5, namely, the Bernas 
amendment is not actually well-founded because there 
would be the section on metropolitan areas to follow 

eTrlllnif what is now Section 6 on the 

groupmg of local governments. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Section 8 is the Ople amendment, 
and Commissioner Ople will be happy if I read again his 
well-deserved amendment. It states: “THE CONGRESS 
MAY BY LAW CREATE SPECIAL METROPOLITAN 
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, SUBJECT TO A PLEBI- 
SCITE AS SET FORTH IN SECTION 11 HEREOF. 
THE COMPONENT CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES 
SHALL RETAIN THEIR BASIC AUTONOMY AND 
SHALL BE ENTITLED TO THEIR OWN LOCAL EXE- 
CUTIVE AND LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES. THE 
JURISDICTION OF THE METROPOLITAN AUTHOR- 
ITY THAT WILL THEREBY BE CREATED SHALL 
BE LIMITED TO BASIC SERVICES REQUIRING 
COORDINATION.” 

That is Section 8, the Ople amendment. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, since this has already 
been voted upon . . . 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, it was voted upon already. 


atn^tJa'nf ^ Section 7. The Opl 

con«!nltH^t^ Section 8, and Section 9 refers t( 

consohdation or coordination of efforts and services. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

Madam President, the Commit 

amindment Gentleman restate th, 

PRESIuSjt^^^ amendment is as follows: “THl 

TKF PHILIPPINES SHALL EXER 

CISE GENERAL SUPERVISION OVER lOrAl 

^'th Respect^; 
COMPONENT CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES ANI 
CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES WITH reSpr^^^^ 
COMPONENT BARANGAYS SHALL ENSURE THAI 
THE ACTS OF THEIR COMPONENT UNITS AR 
WITHIN THE SCOPE OF THEIR ASSIGNED POWER' 
AND FUNCTIONS.” 


MR. OPLE. I think the Chair may want to submit for 
approval the specific location of that amendment, unless 
this is considered merely a renumbering matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. It was approved before. The only 
matter to be determined is the particular numbering of 
the section. But we may just as well submit it again to a 
vote today. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 9, Madam President, which 
was formerly Section 6, reads: 

Local government units may group themselves, con- 
solidate or coordinate their efforts, services, and resources 

for purposes commonly beneficial to them. 

This is a reproduction of the identical provision in the 
1973 Constitution, Section 9. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


MONDAY. AUGUST 18, 1986 


459 


MS. AQUINO. I move to amend this section by 
adding after the word “them” the words IN ACCORD- 
ANCE WITH LAW AND WITH THE APPROVAL OF 
THE MAJORITY OF THE PEOPLE IN A PLEBISCITE 
CALLED FOR THAT PURPOSE which is in accordance 
with the old Section 1 1 now being renumbered as 
Section 14. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
restate her amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. After the word “them,” include the 
phrase IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND SUBJECT 
TO APPROVAL BY A MAJORITY OF THE VOTES 
CAST IN A PLEBISCITE, IN THE POLITICAL UNIT 
OR UNITS DIRECTLY AFFECTED. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, the provision will read as 
follows: “Local government units may group them- 
selves, consolidate or coordinate their efforts, services 
and resources for purposes commonly beneficial to 
them IN ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND WITH THE 
APPROVAL OF THE MAJORITY OF THE VOTERS 
IN THE POLITICAL UNITS AFFECTED.” 

MS. AQUINO. “MAJORITY OF THE VOTES CAST 
IN A PLEBISCITE, IN THE POLITICAL UNIT OR 
UNITS DIRECTLY AFFECTED.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Will the proponent yield to a 
question or two? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, gladly. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Why should this grouping to- 
gether of local government units be submitted to a 
plebiscite when we are not forming a new political unit? 
From my reading of the Local Government Code, when 
you create or abolish a barrio, a municipality, a city or 
a province that is the time for a plebiscite to be under- 
taken so that the people will be made to vote. But here 
it is only the grouping of efforts, services and resources. 
We are not forming a new political unit. So, why involve 
the people in a plebiscite? 

MS. AQUINO. I have no quarrel with Commissioner 
Maambong on that. In fact, it is clear that there is no 
intention to vest juristic personality in whatever 
amalgam will come out of this consolidation. It is just 
that it assumes likewise a quasi-juridical personality 
inherent in a municipal corporation. A municipal 
corporation has two powers essentially: one as a public 
corporation which partakes of the nature of any entity 
with governmental power. By that we mean the power 
to enforce laws, the power of eminent domain, police 
power and the power of taxation. However, it likewise 
assumes the powers pertaining to a private corporation; 


essentially, the personaUty to sue, the personality to be 
sued and the personality to acquire properties whenever 
allowed by law. To a certain extent, therefore, a con- 
solidation — whether this is a juristic or a quasi-juridical 
personality — vests in that amalgam or consolidated 
body certani powers of a juridical personality. In other 
words, we can appreciate it as not assuming a juridical 
personality but assuming the powers pertaining thereto. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is the Commissioner saying that 
by this form of grouping, we are actually creating what 
is known under our law on municipal corporation or 
public corporation a public quasi-corporation, as dis- 
tinguished from a quasi-public corporation? In a public 
quasi-corporation, it is actually a public corporation but 
it performs not governmental functions but private 
functions usually directed towards rendering of services. 
Are we, therefore, creating by this provision, or do we 
hope to create by this provision a public quasi-corpora- 
tion? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Madam President, in the nature 
of that which they would call as some kind of a de- 
velopmental authority. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, if we are intending 
to form a public quasi-corporation, then we do not need 
to submit it to a plebiscite for the approval of the 
voters. I cannot recall a situation where the formation 
of a public quasi-corporation is submitted to a plebi- 
scite. So, probably in the Commissioner’s proposed 
amendment, we could stop after the phrase “as may be 
provided by law,” if that is agreeable to the Com- 
missioner. At any rate, that will have to be submitted 
to the Committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee sympathizes with 
the amendment, but regrets that it cannot accept the 
same unless Commissioner Aquino will end with “in 
accordance with law,” without submitting the same to a 
plebiscite because it seems to me that Section 9 con- 
templates a temporary aggrupation. 

MS. AQUINO. Not necessarily temporary but a 
voluntary aggrupation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. A voluntary aggrupation, yes. To 
my mind, this will open again the avenue towards the 
formation of autonomous regions if we submit it to a 
plebiscite and give it some permanent . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Aquino insist 
on her amendment? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, my concern is the 
very vague, all-encompassing and all-embracing inter- 
pretation that could be read into the phrase “for pur- 
poses commonly beneficial to them.” However, if we 


460 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


can put for the record the essential delimitations of that 
concept, then I would concede to the deletion of the 
last portion of my amendment and stop after “in 
accordance with law.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am agreeable. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Will Commissioner Aquino 
yield to a clarificatory question? 

Since the Commissioner mentioned a regional de- 
velopment authority, will the regional development 
council found in Section 10 be an appropriate 
mechanism? 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. My reading of this is that it encourages 
local governments to experiment some kind of coopera- 
tion among themselves, and if from the very beginning 
we require a law governing them before they can do it, 
it would seem to discourage the experimentation. It 
would seem to me that even if we do not say “as may be 
provided by law,” it would still be within the power of 
the le^slature eventually to pass some kind of law 
regulating whatever is happening after some experi- 
mentation. But if from the very beginning we say “as 
may be provided by law,” then the intent would seem 
to be that the local governments will have to wait for 
legislation to be passed before they can even begin to 
experiment on these things. 


MS. AQUINO. No, not necessarily. I just mentioned 
the term “developmental authority” at the instance of 
the suggestion of some of those who appeared in the 
Legislative Committee meeting; it was just a nomencla- 
ture. It is not necessarily intended to define the powers. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I ask a question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Suppose there is no implementing 
statute because the Commissioner said “in accordance 
with law”? Can this provision, without an implementing 
statute, be seif-implementing? 


. AQUINO. Actually, this Representation con- 
templates it in the nature of a general enabling act, for 
the creation of some kind of a developmental authority 
f local governments to precisely under- 

take the purposes provided for in what is now Section 9. 


MS. AQUINO. No. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


rtu *^®tter for us to 

before bit after some experimentation on this 

formulate some kind of enabling act? 
fomulaW legislature later on from 

leem fme t this. Right now, it would 

seem to me to better leave them free to seek ways of 

mg this unhampered by preexisting legislation, 
say™^ Commissioner Aquino 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would insist on 
my amendment to msert “in accordance with law” 

an^forr^ of r ^ dynamics 

any form of consolidation, amalgamation or aggroup- 

ment assumes a poUtical color which can create a baili- 

nartv TL%n?Jnt? Particular political 

party. The mtention, therefore, of the amendment is to 

confine it within the modicum of statutory restraints i^ 
the nature of a general enabling act. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I just wanted to call the attention of 
the Commission to the fact that this provision was 
actually adopted from the 1973 Constitution and not- 
withstanding the lapse of some time since this came into 
force and effect, we have not heard of local govern- 
ments grouping themselves for their common beneficial 
purposes except for one brief experiment and that was 
in Metro Manila. I understand that no one was happy 
about that experiment and so that provided the basis 
for a decree creating the Metro Manila Commission. I 
think that the concern of Commissioner Bemas that 
local governments should start experimenting with this 
innovative form of regrouping for common benefit will 
be better served if there is a general enabling act that 
will provide confidence to mayors and their municipal 
councils that there is, in fact, an implementing law that 
suggests a more specific stmcture under which this form 
of cooperation - to which we all agree is very com- 
mendable and should be attempted - could exist. And 
so that explains why the Committee agrees to the 
amendment of Commissioner Aquino which, in effect, 
would provide for a general enabling act to give more 
substance and meaning to this otherwise unutilized 
constitutional provision. 

« 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just one ques- 
tion to clear up a point. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


461 


The proponent mentioned that the intended vehicle 
may be a quasi-public corporation, but that is not a 
limiting term. What I mean is, they could form in some 
other way, not in any way limited to a quasi-public 
corporation; they may form an association which may 
be registerable other than a quasi-public corporation for 
the same purpose. 

MS. AQUINO. That would have to be covered pre- 
cisely by the general enabling act being contemplated 
in this amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but I was just thinking that 
if we really define it as a quasi-public corporation and 
nothing else that may be limiting to Congress. 

MS. AQUINO. But that is not simply possible. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, the answer is, it does not have 
to be a quasi-public corporation. It could be another 
form, another vehicle for this purpose. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, did I hear the pro- 
ponent say that in the absence of such an enabling law, 
the municipalities will not be able to do anything? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, Madam President. On the one 
hand, it could be perceived the way the Commissioner 
said it. It could stifle initiative. On the other hand, in 
the context of Commissioner Ople’s comment, this 
could precisely vest legal fiat on any effort or initiative 
that would be set in this trend. 

FR. BERNAS. But if we put “in accordance with 
law,” would the Commissioner at least agree to the 
interpretation that even before that law is passed, they 
may begin a cooperative effort? 

MS. AQUINO. I am concerned about a political 
adventure which would assume a partisan political color. 
I am very aware of the experience of the creation of the 
Metro Manila Commission. It may be an overreaction, 
but if we could make it clear for purposes of inter- 
pretation that this is not essentially a self-executing 
provision, however, it does not intend to delimit or 
inhibit initiatives that would lead to the creation of 
amalgam or consolidated bodies, then I would concede 
to that kind of an interpretation. 

MR. RAMA. The body is ready to vote. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Aquino restate 
her amendment? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I will read on behalf of Com- 
missioner Aquino. 

As amended. Section 9 should now read: “Local 
government units may group themselves, consolidate or 
coordinate their efforts, services, and resources for pur- 
poses commonly beneficial to them IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH LAW.” 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. What is now the interpretation if 
this proposal is passed? Will it not prohibit political 
units and municipalities from starting an initiative on 
their own? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. According to the interpretation of 
Commissioner Bemas? 

MS. AQUINO. According to the interpretation of 
Commissioner Bemas. 

MR. BENGZON. So, that is the sense of the Com- 
missioner, as read into the record. 

MS. AQUINO. I have conceded to that interpreta- 
tion. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words “IN ACCORD- 
ANCE WITH LAW” does not deter them from exercis- 
ing their initiative and grouping themselves; is that 
correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee accept the 
proposed amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, the Committee accepts the 

amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Shall we proceed to Section 10? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 10 states: 

The Congress may provide for regional development 

councils composed of local government officials with such 

adequate powers as may be prescribed by law, designed to 


4S2 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


accelerate the economic and social growth of the local 
government units. 

Actually, Madam President, this was suggested by 
Commissioner Monsod in order to bring down powers to 
local government officials. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have some amendments on this 
particular section. 

On line 16, change the word “Congress” to PRES- 
IDENT; and then change the word “may” td SHALL. 

On line 17, after the word “councils,” insert OR 
OTHER SIMILAR BODIES. 

On lines 18 and 19, delete “with such adequate 
po^rs ^ may be prescribed by law” and substitute 
AND representatives OF MINISTRIES AND 
OTffiR APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT OFFICES 

organizations 

WITHIN THE REGIONS FOR PURPOSES OF EFFEC- 
TIVE ADMINISTRATIVE DECENTRALIZATION. 

Before the word “accelerate,” insert STRENGTHEN 
THE AUTONOMY OF THE UNITS THEREIN AND 

“growth,” insert AND 

DEVELOPMENT. 

« “local government” and after 

units, msert IN THE REGION. 

section will read: “The PRESIDENT 
rrrucD regional development councils OR 

bodies composed of local govem- 

representatives of MINIS- 
appropriate government 
^on-governmental ORGANIZA- 

regions FOR PURPOSES OF 
DECENTRALIZA- 
UNTT«i^ the AUTONOMY OF THE 

t . and to accelerate the economic 

?N ™ REgS”^^'" development of the units 


BODIES because later, the President might decide to 
establish other regional bodies than those presently 
existing. 

MR. OPLE. The function of the RDCs, as they are 
known by that acronym, is mainly to participate in a 
planning process from the province through the region. 
I think they are also utilized as a medium for proposing 
allocations of infrastructure funds set aside in the 
budget for a region but which must be still allocated to 
the component provinces and cities of that region under 
the parameters established by the Ministry of Public 
Works and Highways and the NEDA jointly. So, it is in 
that context of the function now exercised by the 
regional development councils as the regional unit of the 
NEDA that I want to ask whether in the view of the 
proponent of the amendment this has anything to do 
with the strengthening of local autonomy. 

Mr. davide. It wm certainly contribute. That is 
why we added an additional function, another purpose- 
administrative decentralization to strengthen the auto- 
nomy of units therein, and to accelerate the economic 
and social growth and development of the units and the 
region itself. 

In other words, we have sought to introduce the 
concept of administrative decentrahzation as distin- 
guished from political decentralization. The two must 
come together or must work hand-in-hand to promote 
the socioeconomic development not only of the com- 
ponent units but, to a greater degree, the region. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, if the function of these 
RDCs is a planning function including proposals to allo- 
cate certain sums of public funds for infrastructure 
projects within a region subject to the approval not only 
of the NEDA in Manila but also of the different minis- 
tries of the national government, I do not see how this 
directly correlates with administrative decentralization 
and the strengthening of local autonomy, unless the 
proponent now wishes to enlarge, augment and perhaps 
make more permanent the functions of the regional 
development councils. 


Da^de Madam President, will Commissiont 

JJavide yield to a question? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

menf co^S I^d aT amendef h 

now siirh ntViPr k amended by the Commissiom 

term’ “reeinnal formed. Does not tf 

term regional deve opment councils” actually refer t 

T NFnr development councils ufilized b 

under existing arran. 

MR. DAVIDE. At the beginning, that could be Th< 
is why we added the phrase OR OTHER SIMILA 


MR. MONSOD. May I ask for recognition. Madam 
President. I may be able to explain some of the issues 
that have been raised. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. It is my understanding that since the 
new government took over, the functions of the regional 
development councils are in the process of being en- 
larged. Unlike in previous years where it is a top-to- 
bottom planning process, it is now a bottom-up plan- 
ning process. What is happening now in the regional 
development councils — consultations with local offi- 
cials and also nongovernmental institutions or organiza- 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18. 1986 


463 


tions — is that they are the ones being asked from which 
projects and programs to flesh out the framework for 
economic development. The second part of that is 
supposed to be the coordinating and monitoring process 
on how these projects and programs are being imple- 
mented, with the private sector itself being a part of the 
monitoring process. So, both a top-to-bottom, and 
bottom-up process is going on in the regional de- 
velopment councils since the assumption of the new 
government. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask Commissioner Monsod whether 
in the enlargement of the functions of the regional 
development councils, decentralization of administrative 
services is included. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe that that is one of the 
expansions of functions or qualifications that they are 
working at in order to implement and concretize de- 
centralization of government functions. 

MR. OPLE. It is understood, of course, that the 
region al, development coun cil is based on so-called 
regions that are not invested with the authority and aura 
of municipal corporations, am I correct? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, because it is 
es sentially a coordinative bod y. But 1 believe that what 
would come out of the new section — and I am with 
Commissioner Davide on this — is that there should be 
a better definition of this as the experience accumulates 
so that it will evolve truly into a more decentralized 
organization or administration of government. 

MR. OPLE. The regions are not recognized in the 
enumeration of political subdivisions. But does the 
Commissioner think that through the process of 
strengthening regional planning and consultations, they 
might rise someday to the level of a political subdi- 
vision? 

MR. MONSOD. That is possible. Madam President, 
and the reason we have some information on this is that 
there are several nongovernmental organizations that are 
discussing with the ministries their possible role in the 
future as nongovernmental organizations. In the process, 
they are already participating and being consulted in 
this bottom-up process. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I would Eke to ask a question or two of 
the proponent of the amendment. 

I notice that the word “Congress” under the Com- 
missioner’s amendment has been substituted by the 
word PRESIDENT in the style of the sentence. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, for the reason that when it comes 
to administrative decentralization or the thrust of the 
proposal, it should really be a presidential function. In 
other words, we should give the President greater flexi- 
bility. If we leave it to Congress, Congress may not 
provide it at all. That is why I said in my proposal, 
among others, that we should change the word “may” 
to SHALL. 

MR. FOZ. Does the Gentleman not think that even 
without a provision, as the Gentleman would amend it, 
the President has the power to create, by executive 
order, certain administrative bodies or executive bodies 
that would achieve the puipose of the Gentleman’s 
amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. It can be left to his discretion; but in 
line with the policy we are adopting — that is, greater 
local autonomy and broader administrative decentraliza- 
tion of executive functions — I would propose, as the 
Committee itself had originally proposed, that that 
should be a mandate so it could really be organized. 

MR. FOZ. But per information given by Com- 
missioner Monsod that such things are now going on 
and in a more creative manner — as a matter of fact, 
he mentioned the bottom-up process of consultation 
and monitoring of plans or planning of projects — does 
the Gentleman not think that the President is within his 
power to pursue the idea even without any specific 
constitutional provision in the tenor of the proposed 
amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. If we provide this particular section, 
the President could have a stronger basis for his action 
and, therefore, he would have the greater courage to 
pursue the objectives. He or she will have a constitu- 
tional basis for his or her acts. 

MR. FOZ. On the other hand, if that is the purpose 
of the Gentleman, does he not think that Congress 
should be involved in this so that the hand of the Pres- 
ident is better strengthened in carrying out the objec- 
tives of this provision? 

MR. DAVIDE. We know pretty well how the work in 
Congress will be; so the political issue might be injected 
into this beautiful proposal if it would be the act of 
Congress itself. 

MR. FOZ. But just the same, the President may have 
to turn to Congress for specific proposals to carry out 
his objectives in line with this amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is nothing that can prevent 
Congress to enact a law or a resolution making the 
necessary proposals as additional inputs to the Pres-* 
ident’s act in providing for the regional development' 
councils or similar bodies. 


464 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. • 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recog- 
nized. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, in support of the amendment of 
Commissioner Davide, would the Gentleman be amena- 
ble to strengthening this proviso even further by specifi- 
cally providing that such councils should provide — or 
whatever term the Gentleman might want to use — 
consultative mechanisms with the different sectors of 
the region in the formulation, planning, implementation 
and monitoring of projects and programs? As stated by 
Commissioner Monsod, they are beginning to do this 
bottom-up approach. I remember that when we go 
around the different regions discussing and consulting 
with the NEDA, the complaint of the NEDA always was 
that they could never get the people in the region to 
participate in the implementation of their programs and 
they were very happy when the private sector would 
come in and bring them together. So, as Commissioner 
Monsod said, they are beginning to do this. Would it not 
help if we also constitutionalize this consultative 
mechanism or is that already included in the term “as 
may be prescribed by law”? 

already included in the composi- 
° u regional development councils or other 
K ^ong those who wUl compose these 

organizations. So, they are 


MS. NIEVA. So, that will include the consultation. 

include everything — cor 
sultation, momtoring, and others. 


MS. NIEVA. It will include the whole process. If that 
rs understood, then I would not insist further. 

Thank you. 


ing regional development councils. I would agree that 
although there is an effort now on the present RDCs to 
expand, their experience in the past may prevent the 
desired aim of closer pubUc-private coordination. 

I think the concepts of bottom-up and participatory 
communication have been practiced over the past 10 
years, even if unsuccessful. But nonetheless, in most of 
these RDCs and municipal development councils, only 
the elite participated. It was a government effort with 
very little private participation. I think this is what has 
encouraged many members of the private sector to or- 
ganize. We are aware of certain regions like Negros 
which have active private development councils. 

As a matter of fact, the present officer-in-charge in 
Negros is relying primarily on the private development 
council as his main arm in going about his planning in 
the government. The amendment that I would like to 
propose as amendment to this provision reads: THE 
STATE SHALL FURTHER ENCOURAGE THE ESTA- 
BLISHMENT OF PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT COUN- 
CILS WHICH WILL COOPERATE WITH THE 
REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCILS. 

MR. DAVIDE. If this section will be approved, the 
President, in the exercise of his discretion, would 
consider the inclusion in the development councils or 
similar bodies members from nongovernmental organi- 
zations because it is already included in my proposal. 
So, the private development council may either be re- 
presented in the council itself at the instance of t e 
President. Besides, I am sure that in the light of t ® 
answer given by Commissioner Monsod and also in t e 
light of the answer that we had given to the question o 
Commissioner Nieva, all the sectors will be consulted y 
these development councils. 

The main problem is that under the Commissioner s 
proposal, I understand that in the Article on Socia 
Justice, the role of people’s organizations has been 
recognized, and adequate consultative mechanisms have 
already been provided for. So, they can complemen 
each other. 


MS. ROSARIO BRaID. Madam President. 

PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid 
recognized. 


braid. Would Commissioner David( 
entertam a question and a possible amendment? 

would gladly entertain and con 
sider the proposed amendment. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. There are efforts now by the 
pnvate sector m certain regions and provinces to organ- 
ize themselves; they call themselves private or provin- 
cial development councils. These councUs think they 
could work on their own and cooperate with the exist- 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think this amendment is 
made in the light of the concept of subsidiarity or 
private initiative. Here, the initiative will come from the 
private agencies rather than from the government taking 
the primary responsibility in coordinating with the 
private sector. 

I think the idea of more decentralization and less 
centralized planning, lessening the role of NEDA and 
the government role in planning is to let the private 
agencies be the main engine of growth in a worthwhile 
concept. 

In the light of these and as we now can showcase our 
experiences of private initiative in organizing itself for 
problem-solving in cooperation with the regional 
development councils, I propose this amendment. 


1 


/ 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


465 


The concept is not for the RDCs to absorb private 
councils but for the latter to organize themselves and to 
link their efforts with RDCs. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would consider the very important 
provisions on people’s organizations in the Article on 
Social Justice, which were originally Sections 19 and 20, 
the main proponent of which is Commissioner Garcia. 

I take it to mean that these independent regional 
development councils, at the instance of private initia- 
tive, can come in easily under what have been approved 
originally as Sections 19 and 20 — if 1 remember 
correctly — in the Article on Social Justice. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. That is true, but we would 
like to institutionalize these private development coun- 
cils so that they are able to work together with the 
existing government RDCs. 

MR. DAVIDE. As worded, all nongovernmental 
organizations are taken into account in the proposal, 
not only that they can work side by side with, or even 
be members of the regional development councils or any 
other similar bodies. But we will give the discretion to 
the President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just say that 
the manifestations of Commissioner Rosario Braid are 
certainly meritorious, but she must also remember that 
there are other bodies like the people’s economic coun- 
cils which are also being organized. 

So, there are many nongovernmental bodies that will 
play a part in this. We need not focus on the private 
development councils because there are many types of 
nongovernmental organizations. 

To constitutionalize private development councils 
individually rather than subsumed under nongovern- 
mental organizations would really veer away from the 
concept of the regional development councils, with 
private sector participation because, after all, what is 
being talked about here are government expenditures, 
and the private sector even under our Constitution is 
free. It has the initiative, and it has only a coordinative 
function with the government. Also, as Commissioner 
Davide said, they are subsumed under nongovernmental 
organizations. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I will withdraw my amend- 
ment as long as the concept of coordinating and equal 
role of private organizations is included in this amend- 
ment. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. RAMA. The body is ready to vote. Madam 
President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I have a 
clarification. Under the present proposed amendment, 
what is the exact composition of these regional de- 
velopment councils because the draft I have here from 
Commissioner Davide only mentions of local govern- 
ment officials? 

Although I have very limited experience in regional 
development councils, I notice that if a regional de- 
velopment council is only composed of local govern- 
ment officials, it could not succeed in its work without 
the support of the heads of hne ministries within the 
regions. For example, in the Regional Development 
Council of Region VII, the support staff is actually the 
NEDA of Region VII. So, I would like to know the 
exact composition as proposed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Based on the section, after “govern- 
ment officials,” the following were added: “AND 
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRIES AND OTHER 
APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND 
FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS 
WITHIN THE REGIONS.” 

MR MAAMBONG. Would it be all right if we use the 
word HEADS instead of “REPRESENTATIVES” be- 
cause when we say “HEADS OF MINISTRIES WITHIN 
THE REGION,” we are actually referring to regional 
directors who, under the present composition of the 
regional development councils, are actually members 
of the regional development councils? 

Just for the record, from my understanding, the 
regional development councils now are composed of the 
provincial governors, the city mayors, the regional 
directors, the president of the municipal mayors league, 
and private individuals who are experts in their fields. 

So it would be more in keeping if we say “HEADS 
OF MINISTRIES WITHIN THE REGIONS,” with 
specific reference to regional directors of line ministries. 
Is that all right with the Gentleman? 

MR DAVIDE. So, it will now read: “government 
officials AND HEADS OF MINISTRIES AND OTHER 
GOVERNMENT OFFICES AND NON-GOVERNMENT- 
AL ORGANIZATIONS WITHIN THE REGIONS.” 

We accept the amendment. 

MR. RAMA. What does the Committee say before we 
vote? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee would like to 
submit the same to the body. 


466 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The important matter here is, 
whether we will change “Congress” to PRESIDENT. 
In principle, there is nothing controversial, I believe, 
except in whom to vest this power — the Congress or 
the President. Are we ready to vote on this? 


MR. NOLLEDO. We have some misgivings. 

MR. RAMA. We are ready to vote, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide read 
the entire section, as amended. 


MR. DAVIDE. As proposed, it will now read as 
follows: ‘The PRESIDENT SHALL provide for regional 
development councils OR OTHER SIMILAR BODIES 
composed of local government officials AND HEADS 


OF MINISTRIES AND OTHER GOVERNMENT OF- 
FICES AND REPRESENTATIVES FROM NON- 
GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS WITHIN THE 
REGIONS FOR PURPOSES OF ADMINISTRATIVE 
DECENTRALIZATION to STRENGTHEN THE 
AUTONOMY OF THE UNITS THEREIN AND TO 
economic and social growth AND DE- 
VELOPMENT of the units IN THE REGION.” 


vuiiiNO 

PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of th 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Seven 

Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (N 
Member raised his hand. ) 

the^nro3^? ^^'"'^21 votes in favor and none agains 
tne proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. For the record, Madam President, th 
coauthors of the amendment: Con 
raissioners Monsod, Bengzon and Maambong. 

to Se^tioifu"^' President, I ask that we procee 

recoSzed.*^^^*^^^^' ^°"imissioner Maambong 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President as far • 
Section 1 1 is concempd t .. *^resiaent, as lar < 

to make which I reserved^v^h^^ manifestatio 

ment to Section 1. On the amenc 

should be changed likewise to BARAnS^y"’’^^^ ' 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Where is the word “barrio”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner is referring t 
the old Section 1 1 , which is now Section 14. ^ 


MR. MAAMBONG. I was referring to the original 
draft. I am referring to Section 14 now. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we inquire from the Chair- 
man what is Section 1 1 now? Is this the original 
section? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 1 1 , Madam President, reads: 
“Each local government unit shall have the power to 
create its own sources of revenues and to levy taxes, fees 
and charges subject to such guidelines as Congress may 
provide. A local government unit shall likewise have the 
power to levy and collect charges or contributions 
unique, distinct and exclusive to it.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I have a proposal to reduce the 
original Sections 8, 9 and 10 which are now Sections 11, 
12 and 13. The amendment reads: SEC. 11. LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT UNITS SHALL HAVE THE POWER 
TO CREATE ITS OWN SOURCES OF REVENUES, 
AND TO LEVY, IMPOSE, AND COLLECT TAXES, 
FEES AND CHARGES, SUBJECT TO THE GUID& 
LINES AS MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY LAW BOT 
CONSISTENT WITH THE BASIC POLICY OF AUTO- 
NOMY FOR SUCH UNITS, WHICH SHALL ACCRUE 
EXCLUSIVELY TO SUCH UNITS. 

SEC. 12. LOCAL GOVERNMENTS SHALL HAVE 
AN EQUITABLE AND JUST SHARE, AS MAY BE 
DETERMINED BY LAW, IN THE NATIONAL TAXE^ 
WHICH SHALL BE PERIODICALLY AND AUT(> 
MATICALLY RELEASED TO THEM, AND IN 
TAXES, FEES AND CHARGES IMPOSED AND COL- 
LECTED FROM OR OTHER PROCEEDS OF THE 
EXPLOITATION, EXPLORATION, UTILIZATION 
AND DEVELOPMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
WITHIN THEIR RESPECTIVE AREAS. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, the Gentleman deleted 
the second sentence of now Section 1 1 . 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, for the reason that it is already 
included in the authority to create its own sources of 
revenues, and to levy, impose and collect taxes, fees 
and charges. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The second sentence. Madam 
President, is not subject to the guidelines as the Con- 
gress may provide. 1 find some superfluities with respect 
to the general rule on the levy of taxes, fees and 
charges. As far as I am concerned, the provisions should 
be separated from each other in order to recognize the 
importance of each provision especially Section 13, 
which was based on an Ople resolution. 


MONDAY. AUGUST 18, 1986 


467 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is already included. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
would like to study the amendment further. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, copies have already been 
distributed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, the Committee is not ready 
to react on the amendment this afternoon or does the 
Committee need time? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Because we are objecting to the 
deletion of the second sentence of Section 1 1 . That 
deletion would result in the disregard of customs and 
traditions existing in various indigenous communities. 

MR. DAVIDE. If the proposal cannot be acted on 
yet, I have an amendment for the original Section 11, 
which is now Section 14. On line 8, page 3, delete the 
words “political unit or” so that the line will only read: 
“units directly affected.” 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I have an amendment affecting Section 14. 
This would involve just a transposition of the section 
to make it follow Section 2 because Section 1 4 talks of 
creation, division, merger, abolition or alteration of 
boundaries of province, city, municipality or barangay. 
Since it involves changes in the boundaries of local 
government units, this provision is more directly related 
to Section 2 of the draft article. So, logically it should 
follow Section 2, perhaps as a new section because 
Section 2 is already long as it is. Therefore, the amend- 
ment is just to transpose Section 14 to make it Section 
3, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Is the Gentleman referring to the 
original Section 2, because the present Section 2 is the 
PadUla amendment? The Gentleman must be referring 
to the original Section 2 which is now Section 3. 

MR. FOZ. I am referring to that provision regarding 
the enactment of a local government code. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, that is now Section 3. 

MR. FOZ. Then with that numbering, Section 14 
should be transposed after Section 3, so it should be 
Section 4. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has no objection 
to the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. But before it is transposed, I request 
the deletion of the words “political unit or” on line 
8 so that the line will read; “units directly affected.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I object to the 
deletion of the word “political.” I can live with the 
deletion of “unit or” but not the word'^^oUticaF 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree, as modified. We retain “polit- 
ical” so it will only read “political units directly af- 
fected.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

Is there any objection to the transfer after Section 3? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is 
approved. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I am going back to Section II, 
originally Section 8, with regard to the power to levy 
taxes. I notice that the Committee changed the word 
“limitations” as provided in Section 5 of the 1973 
Constitution to “guidelines.” 

I suppose the proposed change is in line with more 
local autonomy. I am in favor of more local autonomy 
but in considering or granting the power to tax, some 
cases state that the power to tax includes the power to 
destroy. Does not the Gentleman believe that in addi- 
tion to “guidelines,” we should reinstate the word 
“lirriitations” because “guidelines” is sort of a prospec- 
tive directive? It does not give the Congress any power 
to revise or reverse some actions that may be taken by 
the political units in the exercise of their power of taxa- 
tion. For example, there may be more taxes imposed by 
local units, and the Congress may not be able to pre- 
scribe certain reasonable limitations. The Ministry of 
Finance may be against the imposition of certain taxes 
that may be considered inimical not only to the eco- 
nomic expansion of the region but even to that of the 
national economy. The Congress, and even the execu- 
tive, will have no authority or power to regulate nor 
limit this very extensive power of taxation. 

My suggestion is to also use “limitations” as Congress 
may prescribe. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The use of the word “guidelines” is 
in favorable reaction to the requests of the League of 


468 


MONDAY, AUGUST 18, 1986 


Governors and City Mayors when, through the courtesy 
of Commissioner Calderon, I met them at Aberdeen 
Court. They said that P.D. No. 231, which was pro- 
mulgated by Mr. Marcos, authorizing local governments 
to levy taxes is full of limitations and restrictive provi- 
sions that the power to tax local governments is, in 
effect, negated. In fact, Mr. Marcos enumerated in 
Section 5 — if my memory serves me right — the taxes 
that local governments cannot impose. Their hands are 
tied in imposing local taxes, fees and charges. So, they 
asked me to present their plea to this Commission — to 
just use the word “guidelines.” This means that the 
word “limitations” is anathema and will deny them the 
effective decentralization they are clamoring for. 
Madam President, I think this question is terribly 
important that this should be presented tomorrow 
morning so that the other Commissioners may be able 
to ponder upon them meticulously. 

MR. PADILLA. I have no objection because this is 
quite important. Of course, from the point of view of 


local executives, they would want more plenary powers 
of taxation, being a very important and very delicate 
power which may have far-reaching effects. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The power of taxation is subject to 
well-settled limitations — that they must be for public 
purposes, uniform and must not be confiscatory. We 
can enter them into the record to be observed by local 
governments in the imposition of local taxes. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move for adjourn- 
ment of the session until tomorrow at nine-thirty in 
the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 7:07 p.m. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


469 


R.C.C. NO. 60 
Tuesday, August 19, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:52 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Alberto M.K. Jamir. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. JAMIR. Let us pray. 

Merciful God, we approach the end of our pilgrimage 
in search of a constitution which will embody the 
highest ideals and aspirations of our people with increas- 
ing unease. While we, all of us, are sincere in our efforts 
to apply the proper solutions to the pressing problems' 
of our country, we find ourselves divided in the manner 
of solving them. There are those amongst us who would 
channel our country’s course along lines that are in 
keeping with and respectful of the rights of others. 
There are those, however, who prefer a different path 
by dangling before our people’s eyes a hope for eco- 
nomic emancipation without regard to its effects upon 
others. 

In such a time as this, we implore Thy divine guid- 
ance that we may avoid creating an unattainable Utopia 
which, in the end, will only disillusion our people and 
thereby increase their discontentment. We beg of Thee 
to show us the way so that no seed may find a place in 
the Constitution we are making which may one day be 
the cause of a fratricidal class struggle among our 
countrymen, so that this beloved land may not be 
drenched with the blood and tears of its own children. 

It is inevitable that one of these precepts would fail 
to find acceptance. Should this come to pass, show us, 
O Lord, how to bear the resulting disappointment in 
good grace. Keep us together in spite of our differences 


in outlook, so that we can continue to fashion a consti- 
tution which will come from Thy hands, through ours, 
that our people may have a vibrant and living charter to 
guide them in their journey through peace and progress 
throughout the ages. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 


Alonto 


Nieva 


Aquino 

. Present 

NoUedo .... 


Azcuna 

. Present* 

Ople 


Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla 


Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada .... 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present* 

Rama 


Bemas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Rigos 


Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 


Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 


Colay CO 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 


Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 


F oz - . . . 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present 

Tadeo 


Gascon 

. Absent 

Tan 


Guingona . . . . 

. Present* 

Tingson .... 


Jamir 

. Present 

Trenas 


Laurel 

. Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 


Monsod 

. Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


'Appeared after the roll call 


470 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications and Committee Report, the President 
making the corresponding references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Herminio H. Cacanindu 
Provmci^ Secretary, transmitting Resolution No. 7 

Panlalawigan of La Union, d( 
g/em odymg the opposition of the Province of L 
Philij^p^e^^* storage of nuclear armaments in th 

(CommunicaUon No. 576 - ConstitutionaJ Commissio 

Carino of Bontoc, Mountai 
thmiccin^’ ^^smitting a resolution signed by on 
and hundred eighty-nine (1,189) Tinggiar 

Cordillera, caUing for an autc 
among othere^"^ ancestral land right; 

~ Constitutional Commissio 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

t^naT cZm'- the Constitv 

tion^ Commission to consider the following issues 

(a) abolition of the (THDF; (b) agrarian reform; (c) allc 
cation of seats in the bicameral legislative body; (d) autc 
nomy for the Cordilleras and our Muslim brothers- an 
(e) American military bases. 


(Communication No. 578 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from Dr. Victor A. de la Cruz, Filamer 
Christian College, Roxas City, and three others, uphold- 
ing the inviolability of the separation of the Church and 
State. 

(Communication No. 579 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Ms. Phyllis Zaballero and Ms. Maria Isabel 
Ongpin of the Alliance of Women Towards Action and 
Reform (AWARE), proposing inclusion in the Constitu- 
tion the following provision: “The State recognizes the 
right of women to equal treatment with men in all 
spheres of civil, political, economic, social and cultural 
life.” 

(Communication No. 580 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Minister Candu I. Muarip of the Ministry of 
Muslim Affairs and Cultural Communities, transmitting 
two resolutions of the Zamboanga del Norte MusIot 
A ssociation, to wit: Resolution No. 02-86 urging in- 
clusion of a provision in the Constitution recogmzing 
the existence and establishment of the sultanate as a 
form of sociocultural and political organization in 
Regions IX and XII; and Resolution No. 04-86 urging 
inclusion in the Constitution of a provision recognizing 
Arabic as one of the basic Filipino languages in South- 
ern Philippines and authorizing and encouraging the 
teaching thereof in both public and private schools and 
the same to be regulated by the national government. 
(Communication No. 581 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

COMMITTEE REPORT 

Committee Report No. 39 on Proposed Resolution 
No. 542, prepared jointly by the Committee on Social 
Justice and Committee on Human Resources, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION A SEPARATE ARTICLE ON FAMILY RIGHTS, 

recommending its approval in substitution of Proposed 
Resolution No. 272. 

Sponsored by Hon. Nieva, Villacorta, Gascon, Uka, 
Tadeo, Garcia, Lerum, Tan, Bennagen, Bengzon, Jr., 
Rodrigo, Guingona, Rigos, Rosario Braid and Trenas. 

To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


471 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 470 
(Article on Local Governments) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of Proposed Resolution No. 470 on the Article on 
Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection?. (■S'zVence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we request the honorable Chairman and 
members of the Committee on Local Governments to 
please occupy the front table. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. For purposes of clarification for the 
record, Proposed Resolution No. 470 is a consolidated 
report coming from Proposed Resolution Nos. 470 and 
5 1 1 of the Committee on Local Governments. 

In view of the fact that we have some Muslim visitors 
from Mindanao who have been here for days to listen to 
the deliberation on the autonomous regions and to 
know the fate of this Article, I move that we defer con- 
sideration of the first sections of the Article on Local 
Governments, and move over to the section under the 
title “Autonomous Regions.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What will be deferred actually is 
only the consideration of about two or three provisions 
of Part 1. 

MR. RAMA. Two or three provisions but it will take 
sometime, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Chairman say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As Chairman of the Committee, I 
would like the Floor Leader to know that there are only 
very few provisions left on the first part of our report. 
Besides, Commissioners Alonto, Abubakar and Benna- 
gen who are highly competent on several aspects of the 
second part of our report are not yet here. So I object 
to the motion. - 

MR. RAMA. For that reason. Madam President, I 
withdraw the motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we will proceed with the con- 
tinuation of the consideration of Part 1 of the report. Is 
the Chairman ready with it? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yesterday we were considering a 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide con- 
solidating certain sections. Is that correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Padilla would like to add the words “AND LIMITA- 
TIONS” to “guideUnes.” 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President, I made the 
observation that m the previous Constitutions, the word 
“limitations” is used. However, the word “limitations” 
was substituted in the committee report by the word 
“guidelines.” I suggested that we add after the word 
“guidelines” the words AND LIMITATIONS. I stated 
that while we agree to give political subdivisions local 
autonomy and, perhaps, increase the same, we must be 
careful that the power to tax by local governments may 
not be without limitation because it- is said that the 
power to tax may include the power to destroy. Local 
autonomy is intended for the purpose of giving local 
subdivisions more authority to promote general welfare 
and to solve their peculiar problems by allowing them 
discretion and even jurisdiction to adopt measures for 
the common good within their territorial jurisdictions, 
but an unlimited jurisdiction or unlimited power of 
taxation without limitations by Congress may be 
dangerous. It may not foment or promote the common 
weal. It may be resorted to by some local executives as 
an arbitrary means to exact more contributions by way 
of levies, taxes, fees, and others to the detriment of the 
general public. Hence, I have no objection to the word 
“guidelines” but I would prefer that we retain the word 
LIMITATIONS also. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
deeply regrets that it cannot accept the amendment of 
the honorable Vice-President for the following reasons: 

By adding “LIMITATIONS” to “guidelines,” we will 
unduly restrict the local power to tax. In yesterday’s 
session, I manifested before the honorable Commission 
that this recommended provision of the Committee is in 
favorable reaction to the unanimous request of the 
members of the League of Governors and Qty Mayors 
who appointed Governor Melanio Singson as their 
spokesman, asking the Committee to please delete the 
word “LIMITATIONS” in view of the many limitations 
set forth in P.D. No. 231, the Local Tax Code, which 
practically negated the power of local governments to 
tax. So I think I am echoing the urgent request of the 
governors and the city mayors before this honorable 
Commission. 

Madam President, that dictum of 1803 of Chief 
Justice Marshall that the power to tax includes the 
power to destroy is misinterpreted by some lawyers. As 
far as I am concerned and as a professor of taxation, it 


472 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


simply means that as long as the tax law is legal, then 
the taxpayer cannot evade the payment of taxes on the 
ground that payment thereof will render his business 
inutile or will result in his impoverishment. 


In one recent case, the Supreme Court of the Philip- 
pines, speaking through Chief Justice Fernando, said 
that the dictum of Chief Justice Marshall was practically 
overruled by Justice Frankfurter in the case of Graves v. 
New York, 306, US 466. That remark of Chief Justice 
Marshall was called by Justice Frankfurter as an unfor- 
tunate remark characterized as a flourish of rhetoric 
attributed to the intellectual passion of the times, allow- 
ing the free use of absolutes. This is not merely to 
emphasize that it is not and there cannot be such a 
constitutional mandate. Justice Frankfurter could right- 
fully conclude the web of unreality spun from Mar- 
shall s famous dictum which was brushed away by one 
stroke of Mr. Justice Holmes’ pen that “the power to 
tax is not the power to destroy while this Court sits.” 

And so. Madam President, I do not believe that if we 
just put guidehnes” there, the local executives can 
impose taxes that are unnecessary or beyond the capa- 
city of the taxpayer to pay because there are settled 
citations recognized in all republican governments 
that the power to tax shall be subject to certain condi- 
tions, namely, that the tax must be for a pubhc purpose; 
that It must be uniform within a locality; that it must 
not mfringe upon accepted national economic guide- 
mes; and that it must not be confiscatory. Those prin- 
ciples are deeply imbedded in every constitutional 
government. 


And so, I plead to the Members of the Commission tc 
please hear the plea of the governors and the citj 

in deleting the wore 
LIMITATIONS and instead use the word “guidelines.’ 


implying that it would more clearly guarantee that these 
principles of taxation are observed? 

MR. PADILLA. We have a rule in the 1935 Constitu- 
tion, Section 22 (1) thereof, that “the rule of taxation 
shall be uniform,” and this same principle was foUowed 
in Section 17 (l)of the 1973 Constitution with the addi- 
tion: “and equitable.” In other words, it is “uniform 
and equitable.” The latter section also states about 
adopting a progressive system of taxation. This is the 
power of the legislative department for national taxes. It 
is natural for the executives of local governments, 
governors and mayors to claim that they exercise the 
power of taxation that is really delegated to them by 
the Congress and the Constitution. If this power of 
taxation by the local units is in accordance with this 
standard of being “uniform and equitable” and even 
progressive, then there would be no problem. But when 
local executives are given, through their municipal 
councils or provincial boards, the power of taxation 
without limitations, that means should they disregard 
this basic principle not only of being uniform and 
equitable but also of being progressive, then there is a 
danger that local units will not only overtax the people 
but even duplicate many national internal revenue taxes. 
And that will be a burden to the people. 

MR. OPLE. Wm the Committee object to spelling out 
these same principles of uniformity, equitable and 
progressive standards in an appropriate place in the 
Article on Local Governments? I remember that yester- 
day the Chairman of the Committee, Commissioner 
Nolledo, said that he could entertain an amendment 
which would make these rules explicit to modify the 
word “guidelines” in heu of “LIMITATIONS.’ Does 
Commissioner Nolledo confirm this? 


Thank you. Madam President. 
MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I have no objection if the amend 
ments are presented to us. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 


tio^?^ OPLE. Will Commissioner Padilla yield to a ques 

buU^wm ySld.^^' ^ remarks 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized 

1 power of taxation under a rule o 

that may not b^ 

denied, including the pnnciple of taxation for a public 
purpose and uniformity of standards. 

When Commissioner Padilla proposes the use o 
“LIMITATIONS” in addition to “guidelines,” is h^ 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May I just address a few questions to 
the Committee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Gladly. 

FR. BERNAS. I understand the concern of Com- 
missioner Padilla, and at the same time, however, I 
appreciate the need for making use of the word “guide- 
lines” in order to give real taxation autonomy to the 
local government. But would it be possible for the 
Committee to specify areas of taxation where Congress 
can only give guidelines and areas of taxation where 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


473 


Congress may impose limitations? Would that be 
possible? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is possible. For example, in the 
case of some businesses, taxes are imposed by the Na- 
tional Internal Revenue Code. Local governments may 
impose the same, subject to limitations set forth by law 
because there will be two taxing powers in that case. 
But there are areas where local governments have ex- 
clusive authority, like the imposition of license fees 
where they may be subject merely to guidelines. 

FR. BERNAS. Would it be too much to ask the Com- 
mittee to specify areas where only guidelines will be 
required? 

MR. NOLLEDO. 1 would say it is really too much for 
the Committee to do that because of the many techni- 
calities involved in taxation. If we do that, we might 
unwittingly put undue limitations upon the local power 
to tax. So as far as I am concerned, I would stick to the 
original proposal of the Committee. Guidelines may 
constitute also some reasonable limitations. 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Regulatory fees which will pay for 
the cost of public services are perfectly in order. But 
there are times when local governments would impose a 
repetition of the real estate brokers tax already provided 
in the National Internal Revenue Code. So there may be 
duplications. The real estate tax is mainly a local tax 
and it provides for certain rates of taxation based on 
assessments. Most of these accrue to the local govern- 
ment as a local tax. But if there is no limitation, say, the 
Provincial Board or the City Council of Manila or 
Quezon City would impose an additional one percent 
tax, then that is double taxation. And increased taxa- 
tion would be an additional burden on real estate 
owners and on the people. 

MR. NOLLEDO. To abbreviate the proceedings, will 
the Vice-President and Commissioner Ople be amenable 
if I recommend the term REASONABLE LIMITA- 
TIONS and then delete the word “guidelines”? 

MR. PADILLA. The term “REASONABLE LIMITA- 
TIONS” would be better than just “guidelines” because 
the limitations must really be reasonable. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Instead of setting forth also the set 
of limitations which are recognized in every. repujjlican 
form of government and to cut short our discussion on 
that, the Committee might as well accept the amend- 
ment of the Vice-President. 


MR. OPLE. Provided it is understood that all these 
limitations and the taxation power of local governments 
imposed under existing decrees are not thereby per- 
petuated. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The undue limitations set forth 
specifically under P.D. 23 1 are not perpetuated. 

MR. OPLE. There is a long enumeration of limita- 
tions there. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, the Committee agrees. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. As a matter of fact, when I proposed 
this, I was basing it on the previous constitutional pro- 
visions. I had no reference to P.D. 23 1 because I am one 
of those who do not believe in recognizing, much less 
legalizing or validating and much less constitutionaliz- 
ing the unilateral presidential decrees of the past regime. 

I have made my position very clear on that point. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the amendment 
of Commissioner Padilla consists of deleting the word 
“guidelines” on line 23, page 2 of Proposed Resolution 
No 470, and in Ueu thereof, substitute the words 
REASONABLE LIMITATIONS. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I have no objec- 
tion to the word “guidelines.” We can retain the word 
“guidelines ” It should read: “. . . guidelines and 
REASONABLE LIMITATIONS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. By saying “REASONABLE LIMITA- 
TIONS,” it would seem to me that we are not adding 
anything because the expectation would be that limita- 
tions will be reasonable. So, I do not see this amend- 
ment as strengthening the taxing autonomy of local 
governments especially since the presumption always is 
that Congress acts with reason. It would seem to me 
that by accepting such phrase, in effect, we remove the 
taxing autonomy . 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. I am unable to appreciate the position 
of the proponent and the Committee in accepting the 
amendment. It is axiomatic inlaw and jurisprudence; in 
fact, it is fundamental in all democratic governments 
that taxation is subject to limitations: First, taxation is 
always subject to the requirement of a public purpose; 
second, the requirement of jurisdiction; and third, the 
requirement of uniformity. These are already safety 


474 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


valves which are inherent limitations to the power of 
taxation. The inclusion of the amendment, as proposed 
by the proponent, would only muddle the issues in the 
context of the position of Commissioner Bemas. 


power of Congress. Why are we not going to apply the 
same limitations to a lower political unit? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. NOLLEDO. It seems that because of the objec- 
tion of Commissioner Bemas, the issue now is which 
shaU we use? Shall it be “guidelines” or REASONABLE 
LIMITATIONS? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is the 
original proponent and, therefore, it is up to Com- 
missioner Padilla whether or not to accept the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Ople. 


^ to say that Section 5 of 

the 1973 Constitution provides: 

Each local government unit shall have the power to 
create Its own sources of revenue and to levy taxes subject 
to limitations as may be provided by law. 

I was not the author of the adjective “REASONABLE” 
but I would accept that word. That does not mean 
mnitations on the power of Congress. It is more a limita- 
tion on the power of the local units to tax. 

So, there was a significant relevance when the former 
Constitutions provided for limitations. I hear now that 
some say it is nonsense to include LIMITATIONS 
tion^^^h *;J*^^®^tood that these are reasonable limita- 
tinn!” President, when the word “limita- 

deletedTnd^V^^‘^^^ “^ the former Constitutions is 
line. ” IS substituted with another word “guide- 

V “"P^ication may be that there wUl be no 

Congress. That is the sad 
triplication because when an existing word 
that IS meanmgful is eliminated, then it might give the 

^MelinM^r?°” Congress may only provide for 
to tax^ limitations on the local power 


already the limitations £ 

unfformitv 5 . constitutional requirements just li 
that thele ^ f^’^^tion and so forth. And aside frc 
Th<» ’ ipcrici t-^ limitation of political dynami 

S /r of local governments^ whi 

f^th^P^ subject to the pressui 

of their locality. That, by itself, will also act as 
limitation. 


THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote now? 

MR. PADILLA. May I just say one word. The limita- 
tions in the legislative department are limitations on the 


THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Padilla is very clear on line 23, page 2 of 
the proposed Section 1 1 of the committee report which 
is to change the word “guidelines” to “REASONABLE 
LIMITATIONS.” 

MR. PADILLA. It is not exactly to change. 

My amendment should read: “. . . subject to such 
guidelines AND LIMITATIONS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Vice-President insist on 
the phrase “REASONABLE LIMITATIONS”? 

MR. PADILLA. The word “REASONABLE” may or 
may not be included. I am more insistent that my 
amendment should read: “. . . such guidelines AND 
LIMITATIONS as Congress may provide.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee withdraws its 
acceptance of the amendment because the word 
REASONABLE is not included. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed Padilla amendment, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor, 1 2 against and no 
abstention; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Suarez be recognized to introduce an amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

My proposal is very simple. I would like, to submit a 
motion to delete the last sentence in Section 8, appear- 
ing on lines 24 to 26, which reads: “A local government 
unit shall likewise have the power to levy and collect 
charges or contributions unique, distinct and exclusive 
to it.” The reason is the fact that in the previous sen- 
tence of Section 8, each local government unit is already 
vested with the power to create its own sources of 
revenues. So, imagine under this section as approved 
with all the amendments, there will be a situation 
created wherein the citizens of a local political unit 
would be heavily burdened with taxes. If we are going 
to interpret this Section 8 to its logical conclusion, it 
would appear that even a barangay unit would have the 


475 





TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


power to levy taxes. Then if we are going to carry it 
further, the municipal government can also levy taxes. 
In addition, we have the provincial government, and on 
top of the provincial government, there will be the 
regional unit which would be levying and imposing taxes 
on the poor citizens of a political unit. Of course, on 
top of it all, we have the national government. 

So, Madam President, this particular sentence would 
not only be a surplusage but would be a heavier burden 
imposed upon simple citizens Uving in a political unit. 
For these reasons, I submit most respectfuUy that this 
particular sentence be deleted. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee regrets that it 
cannot accept the amendment because this provision is 
in keeping with the principle that we have to respect the 
customs and traditions of the people of the indigenous 
communities. 

MR. COLAY CO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is a clarificatory question to the Committee: 
What does the Committee have in mind in allowing this 
power to a local government unit to collect charges or 
contributions? These are not taxes, I am sure. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I am ordered by 
our distinguished Chairman to make the explanation. 

We are aware that the Filipino nation is composed of 
a pluralistic society and as such, each sectoral composi- 
tion has a particular unit with customs and traditions 
peculiar to it. 

Let us take the case of the Bangsa Moro, which 
started organizing its government through voluntary 
contributions. The Bangsa Moro has developed this 
particular idea which was later on confirmed by Islam 
when it came to this country and contributed volunta- 
rily towards the development of this form of govern- 
ment. The Islamic community also helps run this 
government up to this moment, whether inside or out- 
side government authority. This is particularly the inten- 
tion of this particular sentence included in this section. 

These good traditional customs of the different 
indigenous groups in the country should be given a 
constitutional recognition so that we can further de- 
velop those customs for the interest not only of the 
locality where they belong but also for the socio- 
political development of the country as a whole. That is 
the motive. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am afraid the Commissioner has 
not answered my questions. 


MR. NOLLEDO. What are the Commissioner’s ques- 
tions? 

MR. COLAYCO. What are these charges? What are 
these contributions? For what purposes? Is it to build a 
church, is it to build a road, is it to contribute to a 
fiesta? That is all I want to know. 

MR. ALONTO. Particularly, that will be used in 
general to contribute to the purpose of developing 
and strengthening the society itself. 

MR. COLAYCO. But we have the taxing power for 
that, for public use. 

MR. ALONTO. No, the taxing power that we have in 
general is for public use. 

MR. COLAYCO. So these charges are for private use. 
Is that what the Commissioner mean? 

MR. ALONTO. The purpose of the particular polit- 
ical unit who developed this traditional custom of 
voluntarily giving contributions or levying those people 
constituting that society is to help support whatever 
project it has for sociopolitical development. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner means that there 
are cooperative efforts among members of indigenous 
communities. So, without any constitutional authority 
or legal authority since anyone of them can question the 
levy, they may not be able to raise some sinking fund 
for the common benefits as dictated by their customs 
and traditions. 

We do not need to cite specific examples because 
even in areas that are located in Mindanao and Palawan, 
these people demand contributions from the members 
of their tribes. And some members of the tribes who 
have studied in Manila change their minds because of 
their new environment. They object to the imposition 
of levies. But actually these levies have been recognized 
since time immemorial. And the purpose is laudable: for 
their common benefit in the spirit of cooperativism. 

MR. COLAYCO. That is precisely my point. The 
Committee gives the power to levy. That means it is 
mandatory. 

MR. ALONTO. As I said, this is only constitutionaliz- 
ing the particular customs and traditions of the dif- 
ferent tribes. 

MR. COLAYCO. Will the Commissioner mention a 
particular purpose for the alleged voluntary contribu- 
tions which have been given by the local community? 
Let us say, for instance, it is customary at least in our 
province that when a person dies, instead of sending 
flowers the people give “abuloy” in cash. Is it something 
like that? 


476 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. ALONTO. Something of that nature. 

MR. COLAYCO. But we cannot make it compulsory. 

MR. ALONTO. There are different indigenous tribes 
in this country that have already developed this practice 
to the extent not only of a customary law but as an 
obligatory imposition among the members of the 
community. 


MR. ALONTO. I agree with the Commissioner, but 
the wordings of this sentence could be improved to 
clearly define that the indigenous customs of a group of 
people cannot be forced upon others. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, this first sentence of the section 
refers to communities and local governments in general. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. This provision was copied from the 
UP draft. 

THE PRESIDENT. One at a time, please. 

MR. COLAYCO. It is all right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would Uke to 
inform Commissioner Colayco that this was copied 
verbatim from the UP draft after studies of various 
customs and traditions in different parts of the country 
were made. This is also in response to the request of the 
mdigenous communities. 

MR. COLAYCO. I have the Commissioner’s answer. 
However, I am not satisfied. 

Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 


tionf ■ I propound some more ques- 

communitJ^^th™^^^®*^' suppose that in a Muslim 

limT Ct th a custom particular to the Mus- 

Christian residents in that com- 

Mus 20 “ 


MR. ALONTO. I can assure the Commissioner that 
not only because it is not within the spirit of the Consti- 
tution to impose a different custom on a different indi- 
genous tribe but also because as far as the Muslim corn- 
mum y IS COTcemed, we have this fundamental belief 
^ ^1. cannot impose your way of life on 

others other than on yourself.” And so, in a Muslim 
^rnmuni y the Muslims will never impose this on their 
Chnstian brothers who are living with them in the same 
community. 


MR. RODRIGO. But this sentence provides that the 
levy wiU be made by the local government. And those 
who live in the locality under the local government 
might not be all indigenous people. As a matter of fact, 
in most communities the population is mixed. 


MR. RODRIGO. After this, there are some sections 
regarding autonomous regions. Why not confine this 
provision to autonomous regions? 

MR. ALONTO. I will have no objection to that 
proposal of transferring that particular provision to the 
autonomous regions if the consensus of the Members of 
the Constitutional Commission is that those other tribes 
in this country like the Tagalogs would not like to 
constitutionalize their good customary laws and tradi- 
tions. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I am constramed to 
object to the motion to delete the sentence in that 
resectioned Section 1 1 . I appreciate the position of the 
Committee that the intention here is to grant the local 
governments with the reasonable latitude of fiscal auto- 
nomy. Besides, it has been mentioned that it is ^ready 
being practiced in some local governments in view of 
specific practices and traditions. So this provision would 
just give legal imprimatur to an already accepted prac- 
tice. I would suggest, however, that this section be 
transposed to the Article on Autonomous Regions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I just would like 
to know whether we have to pul this in the Constitu- 
tion. If it is already a custom that is flourishing without 
any objection, do we have to constitutionalize its con- 
tinuance? Can we not allow them to flourish? In fact, it 
may later on be putting a straitjacket on them or be 
making it unhealthy for other groups. 

So, for that reason, I would not also want this to be 
in the Constitution. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


477 


MS. AQUINO. If the reluctance is in view of possible 
abuse, it is my submission that there are sufficient safe- 
guards in the Constitution itself. In the Article on the 
Bill of Rights, any possibility of arbitrary classification 
can be effectively circumscribed by the provisions on 
the equal protection of the laws. In the Article on the 
Legislative, we have a provision which states that all 
taxation shall be uniform. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, the objection is 
not only from the point of view of abuse but on the 
more basic question: “Do we need to put such a thing in 
the Constitution?” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am supporting the motion to 
transpose it in the Article on Autonomous Regions. The 
idea really is to codify, as it were, existing customary 
laws, so that these customary laws as they are integrated 
into the national law will strengthen the whole body of 
national laws. It is true that customary laws have a 
power of their own without the necessary coercion that 
is associated with bureaucracy. The idea really is to help 
strengthen the existing body of national laws by inte- 
grating what we call “ethnic laws.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but there is a provision in the 
Article on Autonomous Regions that the government 
shall strengthen and protect the traditions and the 
cultures. It is here. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No, I think the idea is to specify 
this within the context of local governments. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but Section 4 states: 

Within its territorial jurisdiction, an autonomous region 

shall have the legislative authority over the following: 

. . . Preservation and development of customs and tradi- 
tions, and culture indigenous to the autonomous region. 

So, if that is the purpose, this is well served already by 
this provision abundantly. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I think the motion is 
to have this sentence deleted from this section, and 
the Committee is amenable to transferring this to an 
appropriate section under the Article on Autonomous 
Regions. So, in effect, the Committee is amenable to 
have this deleted from this present section. 

THE PRESIDENT. We do not have the official stand 
of the Committee yet. 


MR. NOLLEDO. We adopt the stand of Commis- 
sioner Alonto, Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Maybe the idea of transposing this 
is not literal in the sense that we transpose this as a 
discrete statement. We are more interested in putting 
in the concept to strengthen the general provisions in 
regard to respecting existing indigenous traditions in 
the area, and I feel that that can be better discussed 
when we go into the Article on Autonomous Region. 

So my idea is that this will not be bodily transposed 
to the Article on Autonomous Regions, but the concept 
will be integrated to the appropriate sections under 
Autonomous Regions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, although I would be 
amenable to transposing this section, I would oppose re- 
moving it, especi^y after listening to the explanations 
of Commissioner Alonto. This is a kind of tax which is 
not uniformly appUcable, and that being so, it is 
necessary to make a special authorization for it so that 
it does not run afoul with the equal protection clause. 
So, in effect, it would be an exception to the equal 
protection clause, and because it is an exception, it 
would seem necessary to specify it. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear from Commissioner 
Suarez? 

MR SUAREZ. I think we have discussed the matter 
thoroughly, Madam President, except with respect to the 
matter of possible transposition of this particular provi- 
sion to the Article on Autonomous Regions, but even if 
we reach that point, this humble Representation would 
still submit a motion for the deletion of this particular 
provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. So I think we can proceed to vote 
on it. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, before we vote 
may I just ask one question? Are charges or contribu- 
tions really equivalent to the power to levy and collect 
charges or contributions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, they have the nature of taxes. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, I would like to 
know from the Committee if it is agreeable to transpose 


478 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


this last sentence to another section on the Article on 
Autonomous Regions or to stick to the present con- 
figuration. I ask so because the first paragraph is no 
problem. Why risk a division simply on this particular 
last sentence when we can consider that later on under 
the Article on Autonomous Regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I adopted the opinion of Com- 
missioner Alonto. My only fear is that if we will transfer 
it to the portion on Autonomous Regions, there may be 
other tribes involved who are not included in the two 
autonomous regions that we are recognizing and, 
therefore, we limit the applicability of the provision. 

MR. -BENGZON. That is precisely the point. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

In order to expedite the matter, we will urge a voting 
on the matter. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, all that we are called upon is 
to decide whether or not we should delete the Iasi 
sentence of Section 1 1 . Commissioner Suarez has stated 
the prmciple that is involved in this particular sentence 

as are in favor of the proposed amendment, 
se raise their hand. (Several Members raised theii 
hand.) 

thj^r against the amendment, please raise 

their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

abs^nHnn“\^ ^ and no 

tion, the amendment is approved. 

Commi Madam President, I ask that 

Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

nized^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

24. Afte^rtL^ord"^‘p^^^ 

consistent wiTu Ttyir®’ following words: 

autoSy policy of local 

Padilla amendmpnt^^H^-®‘^°*”® necessary because of the 
TIwJs.’^ addmg the words “AND LIMITA- 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Committee has accepted the 
amendment. Is there any comment on this? 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 20 of Section 9, I propose for 
its division. . . 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is now Section 1 2. 

MR. DAVIDE. We will make the first sentence to be 
reworded as the second sentence of Section 1 1 . It would 
read as follows: SUCH TAXES, FEES AND CHARGES 
SHALL ACCRUE EXCLUSIVELY TO THE LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT UNIT. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, before we vote I 
think Commissioner Rodrigo was ahead. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I am not an expert on taxation, so I 
just want to know. Even a municipality levies loc 
taxes. Does the province have a share? 

MR. SUAREZ. May I state that I have the same 
question, so I would like to join Commissioner Rodngo 
in that inquiry. 

MR. RODRIGO. I ask so because if a municipality 
levies taxes, it is impossible for the province to share m 
those taxes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am not aware of any rule that says 
so but I know that even the province has also the power 
to levy taxes. 

MR. RODRIGO. That is correct. But is it then the 
purpose of this amendment that taxes imposed by a 
municipality should be exclusively for that municipality 
and the province may not share at aU in the taxes? Is 
that the purpose of this amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the question should be 
directed to the proponent. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


479 


MR. DAVIDE. Even under the Committee’s wording, 
it would clearly appear that if a municipality levies a par- 
ticular tax, the province is not entitled to a share for the 
reason that the province itself, as a separate local 
governmental unit, may collect and levy taxes for itself. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Besides, the national government 
also shares national taxes with the province. 

MR. RODRIGO. But if we approve that amendment, 
the national government may not share in the taxes 
levied by the province? 

MR. DAVIDE. The national government may impose 
its own national taxes. The concept here is that the 
national government must share these national taxes 
with the other local governmental units. That is the 
second paragraph of the original Section 9, now Section 
12, beginning from lines 29 to 30. 

MR. RODRIGO. Do I get it then that if the national 
government imposes taxes, local government units share 
in those taxes? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, the local government shares in 
the national taxes. 

MR. RODRIGO. But if the local government imposes 
local taxes, the national government may not share? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct because that is pre- 
cisely to emphasize the local autonomy of the unit. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That has been the practice. 

MR. RODRIGO. Then let us go back to my original 
question. If a municipality imposes municipal taxes, the 
province may not share? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. 

MR. RODRIGO. Is that the purpose? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, because the province itself may 
impose taxes affecting properties or persons within this 
particular unit. 

MR. RODRIGO. So if the provincial government 
imposes taxes, the municipalities may not share? Is that 
it? 

MR. DAVIDE. They may not share; but it is a matter 
of strategy on the part of a province to improve the 
collection so that a certain percentage be given to the 
municipality. It is now a matter of political strategy. 

MR. RODRIGO. I will come back to my question; 
I am not an expert on taxes. How is it at present? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The same as contemplated by the 
answers of Commissioner Davide under P.D. No. 23 1 . 

MR. RODRIGO. “Kanya-kanya.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. “Kanya-kanya.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide explain 
what is wrong with Section 12 as worded by the Com- 
mittee in the committee report which reads: “. . . shall 
belong exclusively to local governments”? 

MR. DAVIDE. In the committee report, I only 
caused the deletion of the words “be retained by” and 
“shall belong.” In lieu of that, the word ACCRUE is 
placed. So, “. . . it shall ACCRUE exclusively to the 
local government units.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is reco^ 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will Commissioner Davide agree 
with the recommendation of the Committee that in- 
stead of putting “UNIT” we put there “local govern- 
ments” as originally contemplated in our report? I fear 
that there might be a possibility or a need for the local 
government units within the province to share with the 
province portions of taxes imposed by the municipali- 
ties, as revealed by the inquiries of Commissioner 
Rodrigo. So, instead of using “UNIT,” we just put there 
“local governments.” 

MR. DAVIDE. I concede to the wisdom of the propo- 
sition. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In which case, the Committee gladly 
accepts the amendment. 

MR DAVIDE. So it will read; SUCH TAXES, FEES 
AND CHARGES SHALL ACCRUE EXCLUSIVELY TO 
THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS. 

THE PRESIDENT. How about the second sentence? 

MR. DAVIDE. The second sentence would be a new 
section that would be Section 13. As modified it will 
read as follows: “LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS 
SHALL HAVE A JUST SHARE, AS DETERMINED BY 
LAW, in the national taxes WHICH SHALL BE auto- 
matically PERIODICALLY released to them.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That will be Section 12, subsection 
(1) in the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, we will just delete that because 
the second would be another section so Section 12 


480 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


would only be this: “LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS 
SHACL HAVE A JUST SHARE, AS DETERMINED BY 
LAW, in the national taxes WHICH SHALL BE auto- 
matically PERIODICALLY released to them.” 


worded and how we have changed the numbering of the 
sections. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. But the word “PERIODICALLY” 
may mean possibly withholding the automatic release to 
them by adopting certain periods of automatic release. 
If we use the word “automatically” without “PERIODI- 
CALLY,” the latter may be already contemplated by 
“automatically.” So, the Committee objects to the word 
“PERIODICALLY.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Let us start with Section 12. 

MR. DAVIDE. The original Section 9, which is now 
Section 12, will read as follows: “LOCAL GOVERN- 
MENT UNITS SHALL HAVE A JUST SHARE, AS 
DETERMINED BY LAW, in the national taxes WHICH 
SHALL BE automatically released to them.” 


MR. DAVIDE. If we do not say PERIODICALLY, it 
might be very, very difficult to comply with it because 
these are taxes collected and actually released by the 
nation^ government every quarter. It is not that upon 
collection a portion should immediately be released. 
It is quarterly. Otherwise, the national government 
will have to remit everyday and that would be very 
expensive. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is not hindered by the word 

“PERlOn^^^ “automatically” and 

PERIODICALLY at the same time, that means cer- 

t^ penods have to be observed as will be set forth by 

“ ^ thereby negating the meaning of 

automatically.” 


PFRTOnirY! w ^ do "ot stat 

m!.i 7 K A done every semester;! 

mSLse® ^^dl automati 


far as the Committee is con- 
CATLY ” ^ '"^®o^oosly object to the word “PERIODI- 


MR. DAVIDE. Only the word PERIODICALLY? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Commissioner is amenable to 
deleting that, we will accept the amendment. 

agree to the deletion of the 

word PERIODICALLY. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

The Committee accepts the amendment. 

Se^ion the Commissioner please read 


THE PRESIDENT. This has been accepted by the 
Committee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Guingona be recognized for an antenor 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is f&cog 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to propose an amendment to the 
Section 1 1 , Une 24, after the words “Congr®® 
provide.” 


MR. NOLLEDO. We are informing Commis 
Guingona that that was already amended by 
missioner Davide by adding the words “consisten 
the basic policy of local autonomy.” 


MR. GUINGONA. Yes, but just the same, t amend- 
ment is not affected by Commissioner David® s 
ment. My amendment would read as 
GUIDELINES MAY BE ENACTED BY CONg 
WHICH IN ANY MANNER WOULD DIMINISH 
AUTONOMY ALREADY ENJOYED BY HIGHL 
URBANIZED CITIES AND CITIES 
OF THE PROVINCE BY VIRTUE OF 
CONGRESSIONAL GUIDELINES, U^IXSS 
PROVED BY THE MAJORITY OF THE INHAB- 
ITANTS THEREOF. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 


MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to commend Com- 
missioner Davide for his receptiveness. That will abbre- 
viate the proceedings of this Commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide please 
clarify what has been amended for those who were not 
here yesterday? They are confused as to how we have 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee regrets that it 
cannot accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any comment on this 
particular proposed amendment of Commissioner 
Guingona?’ 

MR. GUINGONA. May I be allowed to explain? 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


481 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I am for a 
strong national or central government, but I see no in- 
compatibility between a strong government, on the one 
hand, and strong local government units as agents of the 
national government, on the other. I would like to 
congratulate the Committee for its perception; but 
unless these local government units are given the corre- 
sponding or adequate power in order to insure local 
autonomy, all our expressions of sympathy would be of 
ho avail. I believe. Madam President, that there are two 
very important powers that a local unit may enjoy in 
order to have a genuine local autonomy. One is a 
meaningful participation in the power to govern them- 
selves. The second is provided for in this particular 
section — the power to create sources of revenues and 
impose the corresponding taxes, levies, fees, et cetera. 

In our discussions yesterday, it was clear that we have 
three categories of cities. We have the component cities, 
which are in the lowest grade or class “C”; the cities 
which are independent of the province, which we can 
categorize as class “B”; and the highly urbanized cities 
classified as class “A.” I would take it that as these cities 
graduate from one level to another under the guidelines 
to be provided for by Congress, they would have greater 
power to create sources of revenue and the greater 
power to tax. Once these powers are already granted by 
the guidelines and are actually imposed, these should be 
considered vested powers that cannot be removed 
from the highly urbanized cities by another guideline 
that would be subsequently formulated by Congress. 

For example, if Quezon City, because of its category 
under the guidelines in 1988, is allowed to tax the 
practice of medicine or law in that city or to tax aircon- 
ditioners or whatever. Congress cannot pass another 
guideline in the future restricting it from imposing that 
kind of tax without the approval of the inhabitants of 
that city, urbanized city or city which is independent of 
the province because they are the ones directly affected. 
If we take this power away from them, this could be a 
subject of political football, where the powers already 
granted may be taken away. In order to strengthen local 
autonomy, the highly urbanized city which is already 
exercising powers duly granted to it by the guidelines 
should not be divested of these powers. I would also like 
to mention. Madam President, that I had originally 
intended to include the component cities but I have 
made my amendment conservative. But I would like to 
make it of record that perhaps the legislature could also 
consider the component cities with this matter in mind 
because when we talk of local autonomy, it is not only 
a matter of talking of the relationship of the nation^ 
government vis-a-vis a local government unit. I would 
also envision local autonomy to mean the relationship 
of the smallest unit, the municipality, for example, 
in relation to the bigger unit - today the bigger unit is 
the province. There could be in the future bigger govern- 
ment units — metropolitan governments, regional 


governments as indicated by Commissioner Ople yester- 
day. And this relationship between the municipal 
government and the regional government should also be 
taken into consideration. 

As a matter of fact, a study was made by the UP 
College of Public Administration Local Government 
Center before the 1971 Constitutional Convention was 
convened. The UP Local Government Center made a 
research and found out that in many countries the trend 
is towards merging local units into bigger units. At that 
time, the UP Local Government Center of the UP 
College of Public Administration said that there were 
80,000 local units in the United States and there was a 
move to reduce this number to only 16,000. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

May I know if the Committee would accept the 
amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Tlie Committee nevertheless regrets 
that it cannot accept the amendment. The matters con- 
templated in the amendment can be well taken care of 
in legislation. 

MR. GUINGONA. I submit. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will submit this to a vote. 

MR. GUINGONA. No, Madam President, I will not 
insist. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Commissioner Guingona 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we 
proceed to Section 13, may I move that we vote on the 
whole Section 8, now Section 1 1 , as remolded and re- 
formulated? May I ask the Chairman of the Committee 
to read the whole of Section 1 1 . 

MR NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 1 1 should 
now read as follows: “EACH LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
UNIT SHALL HAVE THE POWER TO CREATE ITS 
OWN SOURCES OF REVENUES AND TO LEVY 
TAXES FEES AND CHARGES SUBJECT TO SUCH 
GUIDELINES AND LIMITATIONS AS CONGRESS 
MAY PROVIDE, CONSISTENT WITH THE BASIC 
POLICY OF LOCAL AUTONOMY. SUCH LOCAL 
TAXES FEES AND CHARGES SHALL ACCRUE EX- 
CLUSIVELY TO THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we now 
vote on Section 1 1 ? 

VOTING 

the PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
11, as read by the Chairman, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 


482 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


The results show 28 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 1 1, as amended, is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask 
Commissioner Nolledo to read the whole of Section 9, 
now Section 1 2, as amended. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 9, now Section 1 2, reads as 
foUows: “LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS SHALL 
^VE A JUST SHARE, AS DETERMINED BY LAW, 
in the national taxes which shall be automatically 
released to them.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
12, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member reused his hand.) 

The remits show 29 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 12, as amended, is approved. 


MR SARMIENTO. For his amendment to Section 1C 
now Section 13, may I ask that Commissioner Ople b 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

In association with Commissioner Davide, I proposi 
^en^ent which reads as follows: “Local govern 

^ proceeds of th. 
with?n^th •" development of the national wealtl 
VIDFn MANNER PRO 

SUCH^SHlRm^’-A^® WITHOUT PREJUDICE TC 

benefits DIRECl 

si^LaJi f POPULATION.” In view of th( 

S the Commit 

give a brief explanation. Madam President 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Madam President. 

municip^itiS^rec^ve Philippines, mos 

P200 000 so that ft. ^ ^nual mcome of only abou 

development^^project Th^! 
peipetuating staiatioifSd ^ 

ing community fmstrations as'^well^a^s 
disillusionment with the central c “ ^ 

towards local 

Governments may suffer the fate of e'^Lr\eroi 
efforts of decentralization which, without innovativ. 
features for local income generation, remained a piou 


hope and a source of discontent. To prevent this, this 
amendment which Commissioner Davide and I jointly 
propose will open up a whole new source of local finan- 
cial self-reliance by establishing a constitutional princi- 
ple of local governments, and their populations, sharing 
in the proceeds of national wealth in their areas of 
jurisdiction. The sharing with the national government 
can be in the form of shares from revenues, fees and 
charges levied on the exploitation or development and 
utilization of natural resources such as mines, hydro- 
electric and geothermal facilities, timber, including 
rattan, fisheries, and processing industries based on 
indigenous raw materials. 

But the sharing. Madam President, can also take the 
form of direct benefits to the population in terms of 
price advantages to the people where, say, cheaper elec- 
tric power is sourced from a local hydroelectric or 
geothermal facility. For example, in the provinces 
reached by the power from the Maria Cristina 
electric facility in Mindanao, the direct benefits to the 
population cited in this section can take the form o 
lower prices of electricity. The same benefit can oe 
extended to the people of Albay, for example, w ere 
volcanic steam in Tiwi provides 55 megawatts of c eap 
power to the Luzon Grid. 

The existing policy of slapping uniform fuel 
ment taxes to equalize rates throughout the ^ 

the name of price standardization will have to yie 
more rational pricing policy that recognizes the 
ment of local communities to the enjoyment o 
own comparative advantage based on resources 
God has given them. And so. Madam 
that the Committee consider this proposed amen 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

. +r, is recog- 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonl 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. Will the Gentleman, the champion of 
autonomy, yield to some clarifications? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly. Madam President. 

MR. ALONTO. Commissioner Ople ^ 

explanation that the population or inhabitants o 
area should also benefit firom the exploitation an 
development of the natural wealth and resources. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. ALONTO. Will that also include the hiring md 
the employing of the local inhabitants who are quahfied 
for the work and process of exploitation and develop- 
ment of this national wealth? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. In the broader 
contemplation of the sharing in the proceeds of natur^ 
resources and direct benefits to the population, a priori- 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


483 


ty for the employment of local people is among the 
direct benefits to the population contemplated in this 
amendment. 

MR. ALONTO. In that case, in behalf of the popula- 
tion of the island of Mindanao which is the source 
of the Maria Cristina electric power, I share with the 
Commissioner’s amendment and strongly support the 
proposal. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I just would like to put some caution into priority for 
local employment. It is also a fact that given a hydro- 
electric project, we need minimum technical skills that 
may not be locally available.. However, although this 
section contemplates priority for local hiring it will not 
prejudice the viability of a project based on local natural 
resources if certain s kills have to be imported, let us 
say, from Manila or Cebu in the case of a project in 
Mindanao. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I support this 
proposal and it certainly is meritorious but I just wanted 
to make a manifestation that the new government has 
adopted in the case of electric power, within its frame- 
work for economic reforms, what they call grid pricing 
rather than a national pricing formula for electricity. 
This means that those with some natural resources, like 
Mindanao where the cost of power is lower, can set the 
price of power corresponding to the cost of power 
generation. In other words, there would be differences 
in the pricing of power depending on the grid and recog- 
nizing the natural resources behind such generation of 
power. So, this is meritorious. I just wanted to say that 
this is already the policy of government. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
ask Commissioner Ople if he is amenable to the reword- 
ing of his amendment. After “areas” on line 2 of page 3, 
we add the words: IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY 
LAW INCLUDING SHARING WITH THE PEOPLE BY 
WAY OF DIRECT BENEFITS TO THEM. 

MR. OPLE. Would the Gentleman agree to substitute 
INHABITANTS for “PEOPLE”? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Instead of “PEOPLE” we use 
INHABITANTS? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, the amended section will read 
as follows: “Local governments shall be entitled to share 


in the proceeds of the exploitation and development of 
the national wealth within their respective areas IN THE 
MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW INCLUDING SHAR- 
ING WITH THE INHABITANTS BY WAY OF DIRECT 
BENEFITS TO THEM.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted. Commissioner 
Ople? 

MR. OPLE. Just a slight amendment: WHICH MAY 
BE ALSO IN THE FORM OF DIRECT BENEFITS TO 
THE INHABITANTS. This is simpler. 

Is the word “INHABITANTS” proper to local govern- 
ment units or should it be “POPULATION”? May I call 
on the indomitable Chairman of the Committee on 
Local Governments to submit a final phrasing. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As far as the Committee is con- 
cerned, it is adopting the original suggestion: “IN THE 
MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW INCLUDING SHAR- 
ING WITH THE INHABITANTS BY WAY OF DIRECT 
BENEFITS TO THEM.” I think that is clear enough. 

MR. OPLE. I yield to the more gracious style of the 
Committee, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. ~ 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May we just clear up one point, Madam President? 

I am with the Gentleman in his suggestion that the 
inhabitants should be getting direct benefits from the 
royalties that may be derived but it is not clear to me 
who shall direct the manner by which these benefits 
should be extended to the inhabitants. Would it be 
Congress or would it be the local government? 

MR. OPLE. It may be both, Madam President. I think 
Congress may have to pass an enabling legislation that 
will fix certain standards and proportions of sharing, but 
this Section can operate in a self-executory manner 
without benefit of legislation. For example. Com- 
missioner Monsod pointed out that under the regional 
grid system, it is already being done by the incumbent 
government, but I would assume that the local govern- 
ment will initiate a process whereby, for example, the 
National Power Corporation can consider a petition of 
the local people for a price rebate on the basis of this 
new Section 13. 


484 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. SUAREZ. To concretize the mechanism, let us 
say a particular political unit would be entitled to Pl- 
million worth of royalties in a year. In order to deter- 
mine how this PI million will be extended by way of 
direct benefits to the people at the first instance, the 
local government will have to initiate the process, but 
to be concretized in a legislation to be passed by 
Congress. 


13. I feel that since this wealth belongs to the local 
government unit, then they should be entitled to an 
equitable share. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee sayT 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


MR. OPLE. It is very correct. Madam President. 


MR. GUINGONA. Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the honorable Chairman read 
Section 13 once more so that we can vote on this? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this par- 
ticular amendment of Commissioner Guingona which 
has been accepted by the Committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 13 now 
reads as follows; “Local governments shall be entitled to 
share in the proceeds of the exploitation and develop- 
ment of the national wealth within their respective areas 
IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW INCLUDING 
SHARING WITH THE INHABITANTS BY WAY OF 
DIRECT BENEFITS TO THEM.” 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Bennagen be recognized for a minor 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, before we call 
for a vote, I manifested my intention to the Floor 
Leader to introduce one more amendment to this 
section and I was about to be caUed after Commissioner 
Ople. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, it will be a proposed amend- 
ment to the amendment of Commissioner Ople. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

On Section 13, page 3, I propose to change the word 
“exploitation” to UTILIZATION in order to temper the 
unsavory connotation of the word “exploitation, 
which, incidentally, has already been deleted in the 
other provisions for consistency. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


MR. guingona. Madam President, are we ready to THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
vote? ’ nized. 


VOTING 

voting on Section 13 as 
amended by Commissioners Ople and Davide. 

As many as are in favor of this particular proposed 
amendment of Commissioners Ople and Davide to 
Section 13, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor and 1 against; the 
proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Guingona be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to insert the word EQUITABLY be- 
tween the words “to” and “share” on line 3 1 of Section 


MR. MONSOD. I agree with Commissioner Bennagen. 
As a matter of fact, in the interest of harmonizing the 
words with the wording of the Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony, we are already avoiding the word 
“exploitation” and instead we are using the words 
“UTILIZATION and development.” So, is it all right if 
we harmonize it that way. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. I also support the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the word to be used? 

MR. BENNAGEN. “UTILIZATION and develop- 
ment and delete the word “exploitation.” 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


485 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the Chairman, Commissioner Nolledo, read the whole of 
Section 1 3 before we vote on it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 13, as 
amended, now reads as follows; “Local governments 
shall be entitled to EQUITABLY share in the proceeds 
of the UTILIZATION and development of the national 
wealth within their respective areas IN THE MANNER 
PROVIDED BY LAW, INCLUDING THEIR SHARING 
WITH THE INHABITANTS BY WAY OF DIRECT 
BENEFITS TO THEM.” 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Can we delete the words “TO THEM” 
in the last sentence of the Section? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. OPLE. I support the amendment, Madam 
President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. Is it still on Section 13? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. This is just 
to transpose the Guingona amendment. Instead of the 
phrase “to EQUITABLY share in,” I propose TO AN 
EQUITABLE SHARE so that it will harmonize with the 
just share in the national taxes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 

MR. OPLE. I support the amendment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask the Chairman of the 
Committee to read the whole of Section 13, as amended, 
so we can vote on it? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 13, as 
amended very recently, now reads as follows: “Local 
governments shall be entitled TO AN EQUITABLE 
SHARE in the proceeds of the UTILIZATION and de- 
velopment of the national wealth within their respective 
areas IN THE MANNER PROVIDED BY LAW, IN- 
CLUDING THEIR SHARING WITH THE INHAB- 
ITANTS BY WAY OF DIRECT BENEFITS.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
Section 13, as read by the Chairman, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (One 
Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 3 1 votes in favor and 1 against; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, for Section 1 1 , 
now Section 14, may I ask that Commissioner Maam- 
bong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I am not pro- 
posing an amendment. I just want to manifest that the 
word “barrio” in Section 14 should now be changed to 
BARANGAY because of the amendment to Section 1 
of “barrios” to BARANGAY. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Committee agree? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, we have made the change. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
change of the word “barrio” to BARANGAY? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Rosario Braid be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I will not 
make an amendment, if the Committee can answer my 
question. 

Would the criteria on Section 14, line 5, page 3 in- 
clude criteria suggested by environmental planners such 
as encouragement of mergers, subdivisions and altera- 
tions of boundaries according to geographical, cultural 
considerations? These have been recommended by the 
Society for Environmental Planners and various other 
institutes. But the provision here seems to state that any 
alteration would have to conform to criteria laid in the 
Local Government Code which uses criteria of size and 
income. Should we continue to perpetuate the current 
geographical divisions which are criticized as the gerry- 
mandering of local politicians or should we encourage 
the creation of new mergers according to these factors 
I mentioned? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Do I understand that the Com- 
missioner is against gerrymandering? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, I am. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The factors mentioned by the Com- 
missioner are deemed contemplated by the Committee. 


486 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I raise the question, Madam 
President, because it says here that the criteria are those 
established by the Local Government Code. I looked 
up the Code but it does not state those criteria I 
mentioned but only the criteria of size and income. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. I think the criteria in the Local 
Government Code are insufficient. Madam President. I 
subscribe to the Commissioner’s statement that the 
factors mentioned should likewise be considered. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Should not these criteria be 
included here? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, I think they should be con- 
sidered. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Therefore, could we amend 
this section to include those factors as additional crite- 
ria? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think we are only urging Congress 
to consider those criteria mentioned without necessa- 
rily pending this provision. The Commissioner told 
nie that she is merely inquiring and if I would say 
affirmatively that those factors should be considered, 
necessarily there is no need for amending this section. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, while this is 
denominated as Section 14, this should be transferred 
after Section 3 and should now be Section 4. Transposi- 
tion was made upon motion of Commissioner Foz. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. While we have already approved 
the deletion of “unit or,” I would like to inform the 
Committee that under the formulation in the present 
Local Government Code, the words used are actually 
“political unit or units.” However, I do not know the 
implication of the use of these words. Maybe there will 
be no substantial difference, but I just want to inform 
the Committee about this. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Can we not adhere to the original 
“unit or units”? Will there be no objection on the part 
of the two Gentlemen from the floor? 

MR. DA VIDE. I would object. I precisely asked for 
the deletion of the words “unit or” because in the 
plebiscite to be conducted, it must involve all the uiuts 
affected. If it is the creation of a barangay, the munici- 
pality itself must participate in the plebiscite because it 
is affected. It would mean a loss of a territory. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. What is now to be considered? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we will now prO' 
ommissioner Davide be recognized. ceed to the autonomous regions. 


nizld^ president. Commissioner Davide is recog 


MR. DAVIDE. 
Section 1 , for the 


Madam President, 
autonomous regions. 


this will be on 


THE PRESIDENT. May I just be clarified? Was this 
Section 14 now transferred to be known as Section 4? 


MR. DAVIDE. That was the Maambong proposal, I 
guess. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, my proposed 
arnendment to that was already accepted by the Com- 
mittee and it is only the deletion of the words “unit or” 
on line 8. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Suarez be recognized for an antenor 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

I have an amendment, but if I obtain the necessary 
clarification from the distinguished Chairman, I will not 
press for the amendment. It is in connection with the 
words “boundary substantially altered” appearing under 
what is now known as Section 14. Madam President, do 
I take it that the plebiscite and all other requirements 
in the matter of boundary alteration would be needed 
only in case it is substantial in character? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, do we still have a Section 14? 

MR. DAVIDE. That was supposed to be transferred 
to an earlier portion. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. So if it is less substantial in character, 
there is no need for a plebiscite or for the other require- 
ments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is the implication. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


487 


MR. SUAREZ. And what would be considered sub- 
stantial alteration, for purposes of clarification on the 
record, Madam President? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee leaves it to Congress 
to determine by formulating the necessary provision m 
the Local Government Code. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Would the Gentleman have any objection if we delete 
the word “substantially” in order to avoid any confu- 
sion or misunderstanding regarding its possible interpre- 
tation even by Congress itself? In other words, the 
moment there is a boundary alteration, then it is man- 
dated that all the requirements must be ’complied 
with. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, there is a possibi- 
lity that the boundary involved may be minimal and the 
other municipality will not object, and the people 
perhaps of that municipality will not object. So I think 
the word “substantially” should remain in the provision. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

We will not press for the amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. We are now on Section 14, line 10, 
page 3 of the draft. Before the first word “There,” I 
suggest that the following phrase be placed, namely, 
SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL IN A PLEBISCITE BY 
A MAJORITY OF THE VOTERS OF THE LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT UNITS AFFECTED and put a comma 
(,) after. That would be my first amendment because I 
will have another amendment on line 12. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner has deno- 
minated this as Section 14. Do I understand now that 
we are not following the numbering of the sections in 
the Committee Report? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the numbering is 
not consecutive with respect to autonomous regions. So 
we may refer to that as Section 1 of Autonomous 
Regions or can we refer to that as Section 14? 

MR. BENGZON. Considering that this is one article, 
perhaps we should have a continuous numbering. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, at the start of the 
discussion on the report of the Committee on Local 
Governments, the Chairman stated that this report on 


local government consists of two parts: The first part 
refers generally to all local government units; and the 
second part refers to autonomous regions. In the second 
part, we start with Sections 1 , 2, 3, 4 and so on. 

MR. BENGZON. It does not matter with me. Madam 
President. That is another issue which the body can 
consider at the proper time. 

THE PRESIDENT. So let us adhere to the draft — 
Section 1 of the Autonomous Regions. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. May I repeat 
my amendment to Section 1 , Autonomous Regions. Be- 
fore the word “There” on line 10, put the following 
phrase: “SUBJECT TO THE APPROVAL IN A PLEBI- 
SCITE BY A MAJORITY OF THE VOTERS OF THE 
LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS AFFECTED,” and 
then continue with “There shall be created autonomous 
regions in Muslim Mindanao and the Cordillera consist- 
ing of provinces ...” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I be recog- 
nized to clear up one point? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I call the attention of Com- 
missioner Bengzon to lines 26, 27 and 28 which read: 

The creation of the autonomous region shall be ap- 
proved in a plebiscite by a mqority of the voters of the 

constituent units. 

Will this not operate to solve the problem which the 
Commissioner raised under Section 1? 

MR. BENGZON. It depends on how we interpret this, 
Madam President. In the way I envision it, there are two 
sets of plebiscite. We have to know first which are those 
provinces in one region that would wish to be a part of 
the autonomous region. Subsequently, Congress will 
enact the organic act which will be the constitution of 
this autonomous region, and this organic act will there- 
after be presented to the people for approval in a 
plebiscite. 

MR. SUAREZ. If I understand the Gentleman cor- 
rectly, what he is suggesting is the first step. 

MR. BENGZON. What I am suggesting is the first 
step. 

MR. SUAREZ. And the second step is the one con- 
templated under lines 26, 27 and 28 and this will be 
undertaken or resolved and determined by the voters 
of the constituent units — in other words, the consti- 
tuent political units which have already agreed. 

MR. BENGZON. These are the units which have 
already opted to be .part of the autonomous region. 


488 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


They will now be ratifying that oiganic act which, in 
effect, will be their constitution. 

MR. SUAREZ. This is pursuant to Commissioner 
Bengzon’s suggested amendment to Section 1 . 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. May I be allowed to explain. Madam 
President. 


votes and after we shall have determined that these 
provinces wish to become part of the autonomous 
region, that is the time when Congress will now enact 
the organic act that would spell out the details on the 
creation of this autonomous region. This will be 
presented thereafter again in a plebiscite, this time to 
approve the organic act that has been prepared by 
Congress. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, will the Gentleman 
yield to some questions? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. BENGZON. Gladly, Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. It may be true that historically 
there are a lot of our brothers in these areas who have 
wanted to become autonomous. Precisely, for that very 
reason, we should not deprive them of the right to 
express categorically their desire to be a part of the 
autonomous region. This is a rare and historic moment 
m their lives and in our history as a whole. Therefore, 
we should respect that right and we should give them 
evety opportunity to express individually this desire of 
theirs to become a part of the autonomous region. 


Secondly, we have seen quite a number of people 
here who have come and who have expressed their 
desire to be part of the autonomous regions. We- have 
the Ifugaos; the Kahngas and those from Apayao, but 
we do not know what is the feeling of the other 
brothers we have m the other parts of the provinces that 
may be affected by this move. There may be other in- 
igenous communities in other provinces, perhaps, in 
tvfo* ^ Pangasinan, and we do not know what 

nart^ nf about this. If they do agree to become 

f autonomous region, well and good, and, 
thi/ M«r’ them that rare opportunity in 

Hp«iro country to express affirmatively their 

hppr,r« " s^e manner, those who may not wish to 
ffivpr. autonomous region should also be 

fhPir H ^ opportunity to express in black and white 

Drovinpr^^ autonomous region. All 
an?nl^ municipalities which will form part of the 

exnrpw!^^* region would be very clearly seen to have 

the antr. ‘^^^^^orically their desire to become part of 
me autonomous region. 


insofW ^ Mindanao should have no problem 

IX and in concerned, particularly those in Region 
locrauLorn^'”"..^^ '^ey have been given the 

in our historv to ^ living this great opportunity 

m our history to express affirmatively their rieht their 

destre to become part of the au.onolS re Jon in ft s 
manner, we cannot be saiH in mis 

down the throats of our Vrothfr! autonomy 

a uur Drothers m these areas ust 

because a majority of them have said that they want to 

be autonomous. Those who do wish to be part of the 

autonomous region should be given the opportunity to 

express that desire. After we shall have gotten their 


MR. ALONTO. The Committee feels that Section 1 
is the general provision which merely points out and 
mandates the Congress to organize two autonomous 
regions — Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. ALONTO. The process by which Congress shall 
start to reorganize is found in the other sections under 
the heading Autonomous Regions as stated and already 
pointed out by Commissioner Suarez. In Section 2, the 
Congress shall organize this in such a manner that all 
those units that wish to join the autonomous region 
shall be consulted because Congress would not be enact- 
ing an organic act without consulting the multisectoral 
body that is involved in these two regions. And so, what 
the Commissioner is trying to prevent is already stated 
in this section that has been presented to the body. So, 
a few would suggest to put that phrase there that will 
give a different meaning to this section which is of 
general application to the rest of the country. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
deeply regrets that it cannot accept the amendment, 
because it is emasculating the entire set of provisions 
on Autonomous Regions. It will be unwieldy to create 
the autonomous regions because we are contemplatmg 
on two kinds of plebiscite. I think the provisions on 
lines 26 and 28 are clear enough with respect to Section 
2, because we have to consult the multisectoral bodies 
for each autonomous region. Public hearings will be 
conducted, and then when the organic act is passed, it is 
only after this organic act has been passed that the 
people will be able to determine whether the provisions 
thereof will really redound to their benefit. If we go to 
a plebiscite for the first time, telling them whether they 
wish to create autonomous regions, the people may be 
misinformed and, therefore, there will be no basic issues 
to be defined. 

This Chairman regrets that that kind of amendment 
presented is not in accordance with what has been 
agreed upon in a caucus. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I reply? 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


489 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. There is no need to be very emo- 
tional about this whole thing. I do not think that the 
Chairman really got my point here. 

In this body, we have approved that autonomous 
regions will be created for Muslim Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras. That is definite. There is no quarrel about 
that. It is definite. The only purpose in my amendment 
is to find out which among those provinces would wish 
to become part of the autonomous region. We have 
several provinces that will be involved. So, let us find 
out from those provinces if all of them are wUling to 
be part of the autonomous region. We cannot ram it 
down their throat. I am sure that there are several 
provinces that are willing, that would wish to become 
part of this autonomous region. But it should be stated 
in black and white. They should be given that rare 
opportunity to express their affirmative belief. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


ONLY CONSTITUENT UNITS VOTING FAVORA- 
BLY IN SAID PLEBISCITE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN 
THE AUTONOMOUS REGION. The second paragraph 
of Section 2 will, therefore, read as follows: “The 
creation of the autonomous region shall be EFFECTIVE 
WHEN approved by majority of the voters of the consti- 
tuent units IN A PLEBISCITE CALLED FOR THE 
PURPOSE: PROVIDED, THAT ONLY CONSTITUENT 
UNITS VOTING FAVORABLY IN THE SAID PLEBI- 
SCITE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGION.” I think that this will accomplish, 
with only one plebiscite, both the approval of the auto- 
nomous regions, as well as the determination of which 
provinces shall be included and which shall not be 
included in said autonomous region. 

PRESIDENT. How about the organic act? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, the organic acts are 
the ones that will be submitted to the voters for a plebi- 
scite; organic acts will contain the territorial delimita- 
tions. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Bacani. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, this is in re- 
sponse to what Commissioner Nolledo said. In Section 
2, what is being mandated is that Congress shall enact 
an organic act in consultation with multisectoral bodies 
for each autonomous region, defining the basic structure 
of government for the region. I think what is being 
asked by Commissioner Bengzon — and I would like to 
second him in that — is that the people would also be 
able to exercise self-determination as to whether they 
would themselves in a particular town or province be 
willing to be included in the autonomous region. I think 
that was basically answered by Commissioner Alonto at 
one time when we were asking him about the constitu- 
tion of this autonomous region. He said that in cases 
where the places are inhabited not only by Musfims, 
then people can determine whether or not they want to 
join the autonomous region. But how are we going to 
find out whether the people want to join tlie auto- 
nomous region, if we do not do it by a plebiscite? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I wonder if Com- 
missioner Bengzon and the Committee would accept a 
sU^t suggestion which would necessitate only one 
plebiscite for determining both the approval of the auto- 
nomous region, as well as the inclusion or noninclusion 
of constituent units. That can be very easily accom- 
plished by adding to the last sentence of the last para- 
graph of Section 2 the proviso that PROVIDED, THAT 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Azcuna a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. In that one plebiscite, are we 
already going to present to the people the organic act 
that will be made by Congress? 

MR. AZCUNA. Yes, Madam President. The organic 
act will already be presented, together with the pro- 
posed territorial delimitation or the constituent units. 
And once the organic acts are accepted, only those 
constituent units which voted in favor of the organic 
acts will be included in the autonomous region. That 
will be the effect of the plebiscite. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, what about a 
particular area, province, municipality or barrio which 
may wish to join in the autonomous region, but when 
the organic act is presented it would not agree with the 
terms or the delimitations and they may vote against 
that? 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, the formulation of 
the organic act will be through a method of consultation 
with local leaders. So, presumably, it will distill the con- 
sensus of the regions and the inhabitants therein, so that 
it will probably be acceptable to most, if not to all, of 
the inhabitants of that region. It will really be left to 
whether or not they want to be included in the auto- 
nomous region rather than on a term that they do not 
like. Anyway, the basic powers are already defined in 
this Article, so it will just be really details of the region, 
inclusion of certain territories that will be legislated. My 
proposal would simplify it by having only one plebi- 


490 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


scite, and then determining in that plebiscite whether a 
certain province or a certain city voted in favor, in 
which case it will be included. 

MR. BENGZON. May I have then the suggested 
amendment of the Commissioner. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, I suggest that lines 
26 up to 28 be reworded as follows: “The creation of 
the autonomous region shall be EFFECTIVE WHEN 
approved by majority of the voters of the constituent 
units IN A PLEBISCITE CALLED FOR THE PUR- 
POSE: PROVIDED, THAT ONLY CONSTITUENT 
UNITS VOTING FAVORABLY IN THE SAID PLEBI- 
SCITE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE AUTONO- 
MOUS REGION.” 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, if the Committee 
is willing to accept that, I am willing to withdraw my 
amendment on Section 1 , line 1 0. 


^/MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, Section 2, as 
amended, will read as follows: “The creation of the 
autonomous region shall be EFFECTIVE WHEN ap- 
proved by majority of the voters of the constituent 
units IN A PLEBISCITE CALLED FOR THE PUR- 
POSE: PROVIDED, THAT ONLY CONSTITUENT 
UNITS VOTING FAVORABLY IN THE SAID PLEBI- 
SCITE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE AUTONO- 
MOUS REGION. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will Com- 
missioner Azcuna agree to an amendment to his 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Instead of “constituent units,” 
I suggest PROVINCE OR CITY, so that it will not 
include municipality and barangay. 


THE PRESIDENT. Or the Commissioner can join in 
this particular amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President, I will join 
Commissioner Azcuna in that amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. AZCUNA. It is accepted. Madam President. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Madam President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I ask for a suspension. Madam 
President, m order to consult the other members of the 
Committee for what involves a transcendental question. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:08 p.m. 


resumption of session 

At 12:21 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

President, may I ask 
Commissioner Bengzon be recognized. 

nizld.^ president. Commissioner Bengzon is re 

MR. BENGZON. May I request my fellow C 
missioner ^d partner. CommiLner aLcu^ to 
the microphone. Since I have agreed to accent the 

?? amending Itoes 

27 and 28, which amendment has been accepted b; 

Ounmittee, I request the Commissioner to 
that amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say?_ 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment on lines 26, 27 and 28? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just ask a claiificatory ques- 
tion? Why are we excluding municipalities as vahd 
constituent units for purposes of a plebiscite? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, it is not that 
we are excluding the municipal unit as a unit or that we 
are prejudiced against municipal units; but just toagine 
the anomaly if, for example, the whole province of 
Zamboanga is agreeable to be a member of the auto- 
nomous region, and then one small municipality is 
against it, and that one municipality will not be a 
member of the autonomous region. That would be 
anomalous. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. / 

MR. DE LOS REYES. It could also be that one 
barangay will be against being a member of the auto- 
nomous region. So, we should have a certain parameter 
by limiting it to province or city. That is my reason. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


491 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I can see the point 
in the case of the barangay. But let us take the case of 
Lanao del Norte which, I believe, has 24 municipalities. 
As I understand it, and I can be corrected, there are 1 2 
or 13 Muslim municipalities and 11 or 12 Christian 
municipalities. Would that not complicate the issue if 
we say that the 1 1 municipalities, if they are really 
Christian municipalities, can be outvoted in the prov- 
ince, even if individually there is a very strong majority 
not to be included in the autonomous region? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would think that they should 
abide by the decision of the majority in the province. 
Otherwise, if we will allow each municipality to have 
their say on the matter, then that will defeat the very 
purpose for which autonomous regions are being 
created. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I inquire from Commissioner 
Azcuna? Suppose there are six or seven municipalities 
that are contiguous and adjacent to each other and 
which all vote against joining the autonomous region, 
will that not be a sizeable unit or group to warrant being 
exempted? I would just like to know. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, as the provision is 
presently worded, this would depend on the relative 
size of population or voter-wise as against the whole 
province. If it is the majority of the province, then it 
can turn the vote for that province. But the reckoning 
of inclusion or exclusion from the region would be on a 
province-to-province and city-to-city basis as worded. It 
will be reckoned on the basis of the voting in the 
province^ and in the cities included in the proposed 
autonomous region, not by municipalities. 

BISHOP BACANI. Not even by groups of municipa- 
lities? 

MR. AZCUNA. Not even by groups of municipalities. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may I add that 
before this plebiscite takes place. Congress shall have 
already enacted the organic act. Before it enacts this 
organic act, it will go through the process of public 
hearings and consultations. And I suppose those munici- 
palities that would not wish to become part of the 
autonomous region can certainly express their desire. 
And if they are unable to succeed in Congress, they can 
always try when it comes to the plebiscite. Otherwise, 
we might get into a situation where one small municipal- 
ity in the middle of a province may vote against it and, 
therefore, it will become an island unto itself. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I would like to pose 
one question: If a city within the prospective auto- 
nomous region will not participate in the plebiscite or 
would boycott the plebiscite, would such a boycott be 
considered as a rejection of its membership in the 
autonomous region? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. So it may be actual participation with 
positive rejection or nonparticipation at all which would 
also amount to a rejection. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, because this is such an impor- 
tant and historic moment in the history of the country 
that there should be an affirmative expression of the 
will of the people. 

MR. DAVIDE. If it is nonparticipation, it is not really 
affirmative in the sense that a vote against is cast. 

MR. BENGZON. That is right. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, if they do not participate, would 
such nonparticipation by the greater number of inhab- 
itants in a given city be construed as amounting to a 
rejection? 

MR. BENGZON. It should be construed as a negative 
vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, it is a negative vote. 

Thank you. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. The act of boycotting does not 
necessarily mean a refusal to join the autonomous 
region. It can mean a defiance against the constituted 
authority of this country. So, I beg to disagree with the 
interpretation given by Commissioner Bengzon to the 
inquiry of Commissioner Davide. I think it should not 
be taken into consideration in the discussion of this 
historic event. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair agrees with Com- 
missioner Alonto. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I was going to say 
that we have been enlightened by the explanation of 
Commissioner Alonto and, therefore, we agree with the 
interpretation of the Committee that those who wish to 
vote affirmatively must vote “yes”; those who do not 


492 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


wish to join must cast their vote and vote “no”; and 
that in case some will boycott, that boycott will not be 
considered as a negative vote. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I just want to add a few notes here 
as a result of our public hearings and consultations with 
various groups which are involved in this issue. This idea 
is not mine but it came from any of these individuals in- 
volved in consultation, both in the Cordilleras and in 
Muslim Mindanao. There is this apprehension among the 
non-Muslims and the non-Cordillera people about this 
inversion of the historical process, which means that 
some kind of a reversed discrimination can emerge from 
the autonomy status. One of them believes that that is a 
projection of the Christian-Muslim relationship in the 
case of the South, and of the lowlander-highlander rela- 
tionslup in the North. They agreed in their deliberations 
that they will abide by the principle of fuU equality and 
nondiscriminatory practices for that is the principle 
that they are trying to work by. The details of this have 
to be worked out in the organic act and in all other acts 
that would emanate from this autonomy status. 

In any case, the feeling is that they have learned 
enough from these centuries of struggle not to repeat or 
to invert that kind of historical process. If that is a 
consoling thought, then I wish to share that with the 
body. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Are we now ready to vote on this particular proposed 
amendment of Commissioners Azcuna and Bengzon? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I just ask a question? 

m 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. I had to be out on important mat- 
ers, so if my question has already been answered, please 
tell me. 


^ce the autonomous region is formed and b( 
o igra ion, may a certain province decide later o 
re^onT^* iiow, to secede from the autonc 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, that is the subj( 
of an ^endment which Commissioner Davide will p: 
pose a little later. But m the meantime, we would like 
pt through with our amendment which has alrea 
been approved by the Committee. The fact of wii 
drawal, I thmk, is the subject of another amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment of Commissioners Azcuna and 
Bengzon, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand. ) 

The results show 36 votes iji^avor and none against; 
the amendment is approved/^ 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, there are still 
proponents for this section but since it is already past 
twelve, may I move that we suspend the session until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:33 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:53 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We are still on Section 14. May I 
ask that honorable Commissioner de Castro be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have a minor observation on Section 1, page 3, lines 
10 and 11, which reads; “There shall be created auto- 
nomous regions in Muslim Mindanao . . .” Upon first 
reading, it will appear that the whole Mindanao is com- 
posed of Muslims because “Muslim” is used as an 
adjective for Mindanao. If the Committee will agree, I 
would rather change it FOR THE MUSLIMS OF MIN- 
DANAO instead of “Muslim Mindanao.” So, the provi- 
sion will read: “There shall be created autonomous 
regions FOR THE MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO and the 
Cordillera ...” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Alonto here? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Alonto is not here 
but the Committee rejects the amendment. Madam 
President. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


493 


MR. DE CASTRO. If I may explain. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro may 
proceed. 

MR. DE CASTRO. As I said, when one reads the 
provision, it will appear that the whole Mindanao is 
occupied by Muslims when it is not true. Surigao is not 
occupied by Muslims; there is no Muslim in Surigao. 
There is no Muslim in Misamis Oriental, in Bukidnon, in 
Misamis Occidental. So, it may not appear right when 
we say “Muslim Mindanao” so I am changing it FOR 
THE MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I explain briefly why the Committee 
is inclined not to accept the amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has not accepted 
the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I am trying to explain why the 
Committee has not accepted the amendment. With the 
permission of the Committee, I think “Muslim Minda- 
nao” in this paragraph refers to the old Moro homeland, 
more or less, defined in the Tripoli Agreement. How- 
ever, this is now subject to a plebiscite, and Congress 
will have the power to designate the areas for the 
plebiscite in consultation with the leaders of Muslim 
Mindanao. To say “MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO” rather 
than “Muslim Mindanao” will be really to delimit the 
area of autonomy in such a way as to put the whole 
autonomy in jeopardy as contemplated in this section. 
But I am glad that the member of the Committee with 
the greatest competence on this subject has already 
arrived. Commissioner Ahmad Domocao Alonto, and I 
would like to yield the floor to him if he is ready. 
Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, the fears of the 
Honorable Ople have no basis because we are only 
clarifying the areas of Muslim Mindanao. If we put 
“Muslim Mindanao,” it will appear that the whole 
Mindanao is a Muslim area. I will submit, Madam 
President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I think there is a different concep- 
tion and descriptive idea of the word “Muslim Minda- 
nao.” The whole Mindanao is not inhabited predo- 
minantly by the Muslims. But when we say “Muslim 
Mindanao,” this refers to the part of Mindanao pre- 


dominantly occupied by the Muslims. That is why to 
be more colorful or descriptive, when we say “Muslim 
Mindanao,” that means that part of Mindanao pre- 
dominantly occupied by the Muslims. 

Not only is this in the Philippines but also in other 
countries such as Sri Lanka. We call a part of Ceylon 
as Ceylonese Ceylon and that is occupied by the Ceylon- 
ese, different from the Tamils’i So, when we say 
“Muslim Mindanao,” it means an area predominantly 
occupied by the Muslims. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Will the Honorable Abubakar 
agree to “MUSLIM-DOMINATED AREAS OF MINDA- 
NAO”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee does not accept the 
amendment because. Madam President, the basis of 
granting autonomy to a region is not only the historical, 
cultural, linguistic, ethnic and communal characteristics 
but also the economic or other aspects. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We agree on that. What we do not 
seem to understand is that when we say “Muslim Minda- 
nao,” the word “Muslim” is used as an adjective for the 
whole Mindanao. We simply state that the whole of 
Mindanao is Muslim area, which is not. That is why my 
amendment is “FOR THE MUSLIMS OF MINDANAO” 
instead of “Muslim Mindanao.” 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I suggest perhaps a compro- 
mise formula. It will be something like this: “There shall 
be created autonomous regions in THE PREDO- 
MINANTLY Muslim AREAS OF Mindanao” and a 
comma (,). So, we refer to the area and to the predomi- 
nance of the population. It is not Muslim-dominated. 
That is not the idea, but numerically the majority is 
Muslim. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I will agree to that, just to content 
ourselves and just to be sure that Mindanao is not all 
Muslim area. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, the amendment 
being proposed does not really alter what is really the 
meaning of “Muslim Mindanao” because when we read 
the section in relation to the other sections, it will defi- 
nitely show that only those areas whose population or 
inhabitants that have a common historical, cultural, 
linguistic, ethnic, communal, economic or other charac- 
teristics will vote for the autonomous region. 


494 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


So, whatever area is not predominantly occupied by 
inhabitants of the same common historical, cultural, 
linguistic, ethnic, communal, economic or other charac- 
teristics will not vote. 

MR. DE CASTRO. There really is. 

MR. ALONTO. Without even altering. Madam Pres- 
ident, the wordings of the first sentence of this section, 
that would definitely guarantee whatever the Gentleman 
has in mind. It might include people or inhabitants that 
are not within the concept of the definition stated in 
Section 1. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If the Gentleman will please 
listen, it does not change the meaning of granting auto- 
nomous regions to the Muslims in Mindanao. I would 
only like to correct the impression of the phrase “Mus- 
^ Mindanao” because it will appear that the whole 
Mindanao is a Muslim area. My amendment— “FOR THE 
MUSLIMS OF Mindanao” — does not affect the cultural, 
linguistic and ethnic characteristics. It is only for a 
better understanding of what we intend to make as 
autonomous regions in Mindanao. 

I submit. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. If that is the fear of Commissioner 

eliminate “Muslim” and use 

only Mindanao’’? 


THE PRESIDENT. What 


Castro say? 


does 


Commissioner de 


MR. DE CASTRO. It will change the whole thing, 
Madam President. It will grant the Misamis Orienta 
group autonomy. The third presidential candidate 
Mr. Canoy, is waiting for that because he is working foi 
a federal state in Mindanao. It will change the whole 
thing if we take away PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM 
AREAS OF Mindanao” or “FOR THE MUSLIMS OF 
Mindanao.” 


THE PRESIDENT. What was the recommendation of 
Commissioner Bacani which was accepted by Com- 
missioner de Castro? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I ask the Committee a question in 
connection with the subject at hand? 

Madam President, under the limited autonomy now 
existing in Mindanao mainly inspired by the Tripoli 
Agreement, there are provinces like Zamboanga del 
Sur and Zamboanga del Norte that are represented in 
the autonomous government; and yet in the case of 
Zamboanga del Sur, if put to the test of predominantly 
Muslim areas, may I assure you that Zamboanga del Sur 
will be eliminated. If this is true of Zamboanga del Sur, 
this is even truer of Zamboanga del Norte. So, if we do 
not retain “Muslim Mindanao” which has been given 
this definite meaning in the explanations of the Com- 
mittee, we will be limiting the areas of the autonomy 
even more than what now exists contrary to the clear 
desire of the Constitutional Commission to provide a 
more meaningful, a more complete and a more sub- 
stantial economy for the same areas that are now 
covered by the autonomous regional government in 
Mindanao. For that reason. Madam President, as one of 
the original authors of the resolution adopted by the 
Committee for creating the two autonomous regions, I 
believe I cannot support the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Crispino de Castro. 

Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I ask a question of the 
Honorable Ople? I heard him say that there is now an 
autonomous region in Mindanao because of the Tripoli 
Agreement. Is that correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I know the legislative body in 
the autonomous region of Mindanao based on the 
Tripoli Agreement? 

MR. OPLE. There is a legislative assembly, and a so- 
called Lupong Tagapagpaganap. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is that legislative assembly recog- 
nized by our present government? 


BISHOP BACANI. The recommendation is “IN TH 
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM AREAS OF Mindanao 

MR. DE CASTRO. I agree with that. 

I” that case, there wUl also be 
p^allel. We will be speaking of areas and not of pereon 
We speak of areas in the Cordillera and areas “IN TH 
PREDOMINANTLY MUSLIM AREAS OF Mindanao 
I think it clarifies the sense intended by the phraf 
“Muslim Mindanao.” 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


MR. OPLE. Apparently it is recognized, Madam 
President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I do not believe so; otherwise, 
Muslim Mindanao must be operating independently now 
of the Philippines. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I intervene for clarification? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I want to assert the fact that the 
autonomous region in Mindanao is recognized by the 
present government, Madam President. (Applause) 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


495 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, there is an autonomous 
region now in Mindanao. It is composed of the 
provinces of Sulu, Zamboanga, Basilan and Zamboanga 
del Norte. I am not sure if Lanao and Tawi-Tawi are 
included. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Tawi-Tawi is included in Region IX. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. This is the Southern Mindanao 
Autonomous Region; it has a legislative body with a 
Speaker and is located in Zamboanga. This legislative 
body drafts laws and resolutions for the Southern 
Mindanao region. I even know the Speaker personally. 
He is Mr. Sali Ututalum, Jr., and he resides in Zam- 
boanga and presides over this legislative body. If there is 
any clarification or any question as to the existence of 
this body, then many of us do not know the present 
governmental setup in Mindanao. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I have stated from 
the start of our consideration of this Article on Local 
Governments that the autonomous region exists now in 
this country. There is a de facto existence of an auto- 
nomous government in what we call now Regions IX 
and XII. Region IX is composed of the provinces of 
Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, Basilan, Zamboanga City, Zamboanga 
del Sur and Zamboanga del Norte, including all the com- 
ponent cities in the provinces. Region XII is composed 
of the Provinces of Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, 
Maguindanao, Sultan Kudarat and North Cotabato. This 
autonomous region has its central governmental quarters 
in Zamboanga City for Region IX and in Cotabato City 
for Region XII. In fact, it is stated by Commissioner 
Ople that it has an executive commission and a legisla- 
tive assembly. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. ALONTO. These two regions have been organ- 
ized by virtue of P.D. No. 1618 of President Marcos, as 
amended by P.D. No. 1843. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. ALONTO. If the Gentleman will bear with me, I 
will explain to him. That is why I said that there is a 
de facto autonomous government existing in Mindanao. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we please allow Commis- 
sioner Alonto to finish his remarks before any inter- 
ruption? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. 


MR.. ALONTO. Madam President, this autonomous 
region is recognized by the present regime for the very 
reason that the present regime is now in the process of a 
negotiation with the Moro National Liberation Front. In 
a way, what we are doing is to give a constitutional basis 
for the President of this country today to proceed with 
that negotiation with the Moro National Liberation 
Front. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, not only that. President 
Corazon C. Aquino has appointed Mr. Albert Tugum as 
the Chairman of Region IX and Mr. Datu Zakaria 
Candau as Chairman of Region XII. They are doing their 
work well right now. So, there are two recognized auto- 
nomous regions. They have also a complete regional 
assembly as the legislative body. So, it is only a matter 
of putting this in the Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, what is before the body is the 
proposed amendment on line 1 1 of Section 1 . 

Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, if there is now 
an autonomous region in Mindanao and if, according to 
the Honorable Ople, this has the recognition of the 
central government, what then is the use of creating 
autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and going 
through the process of a plebiscite and enacting an 
organic act? 

My amendment is simply to clarify the term “Muslim 
Mindanao.” I really did not expect that this will go this 
far — that it is being placed in the Constitution, that it is 
a fait accompli and that all we have to do here is say 
“amen” to the whole thing and if we do not say 
“amen,” they will still continue to be autonomous 
regions. I insist on my amendment. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. May I provide more information to Com- 
missioner de Castro concerning this matter. 

First of all, we have to correct his misimpression that 
the autonomous regions, such as they now exist in 
Mindanao, do not enjoy the recognition of the central 
government. Secondly, may I point out that the auto- 
nomy existing now in Regions IX and XII is a very 
imperfect kind of autonomy. We are not satisfied with 
the legal sufficiency of these regions as autonomous 
regions and that is the reason the initiative has been 
taken in order to guarantee by the Constitution the 
right to autonomy of the people embraced in these 
regions and not merely on the sufferance of any existing 
or future administration. It is a right, moreover, for 
which they have waged heroic struggles, not only in this 
generation but in previous eras and, therefore, what we 
seek is constitutional permanence for this right. 

May I also point out. Madam President, that the 
Tripoli Agreement was negotiated under the aegis of 


496 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


foreign powers. No matter how friendly and sympathe- 
tic they might be to our country, this is under the aegis 
of the 42-nation Islamic Conference. Should our 
brothers look across the seas to a conclave of foreign 
governments so that their rights may be recognized in 
this Constitution? Do they have to depend upon foreign 
sympathy so that their right can be recognized in final, 
constitutional and durable form? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople, the consen- 
sus here is to grant autonomy to the Muslim areas of 
Mindanao. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 


THE PRESIDENT. The only point is, shall we change 
the wording of line 11 of Section 1? That is all. The 
words Muslim Mindanao” are stated in the committee 
report. Commissioner de Castro seeks to amend the 
words. The Committee does not accept, so let us put it 
to a vote. 


MR. OPLE. I am willing to have it submitted to a 
vote. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 


^®LLED0. Madam President, before we vote o] 
this the ^endment recommended by Commissioner di 
Castro will be a retrogression because he will be con 
centratmg the autonomy only to the Muslim-dominate( 
areas The presently constituted autonomous region 
consist of Muslim-dommated and Christian-dominate( 
^eas where, according to Commissioner Alonto the' 
live in harmony and love. So, we will be retrogressing 
we will be limiting the autonomy to Muslim Mindana. 
if we will adopt the de Castro amendment, Madar 
President. 


shall be created autonomous regions in THE PRE- 
DOMINANTLY Muslim AREAS OF Mindanao.” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think we use “MusUm Minda- 
nao” here in the sense that we also use “Christian 
Philippines” to refer to our country in relation to the 
Asian context. When we use “Christian Philippines,” we 
do not deny the existence of other religious groups. So, 
I think we should take the term in that context. 

Also, we should recognize the fact that there are areas 
in Muslim Mindanao where several groups of ethnic 
origins, of ethnic religious language and characteristics, 
harmoniously coexist. We should encourage that kind of 
social harmony in the region. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner de Castro, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) ( Applause) 

We request our visitors to please refrain from any 
demonstration here in the session hall. 

The results show 5 votes in favor and 22 against, the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Villacorta be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, it is only a 
clarification of the words “Muslim Mindanao.” I did 
not really expect it to be carried to this extent. It is not 
a retrogression because we will have a plebiscite in that 
area. So, if all the Christians there want to have auto- 
nomous regions, so what? It will still be the same. 

^ “Muslim Mindanao” means that the whole 

Mindanao is Muslim populated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, that has been stated already, 
Commissioner de Castro. 

May we have the proposed amendment so we can 
submit it to a vote. 

MR. DE CASTRO. As worded, and as amended by 
the Honorable Bacani, the amendment readsi ‘‘There 


MR. Villacorta. Madam President, this is an 
amendment by substitution to lines 12 and 14 o 
Section 1. We have distributed copies of the proposed 
amendment which is cosponsored by the Honorable 
Ople, Bennagen, Uka, Alonto, Abubakar, Villegas, 
Sarmiento, Davide, Aquino and Suarez. 

As amended, this section will read as follows: ‘ There 
shall be created autonomous regions in Muslim Minda- 
nao and the Cordillera consisting of provinces, cities 
and geographical areas SHARING DISTINCTIVE OR 
UNIQUE historical, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, com- 
munal, economic or other characteristics within the 
framework of the national sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of the Philippines.” So, the amendments are to 
delete “with common” and substitute it with SHARING 
DISTINCTIVE OR UNIQUE, and to delete “and 
respecting.” 


TUESDAY/AUGUST 19, 1986 


497 


If the Committee wants an explanation, I would like 
to offer the justification for this amendment, Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The justification for using the 
phrase “SHARING DISTINCTIVE OR UNIQUE” is to 
highlight the rationale for the granting of autonomy to 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras, which have dis- 
tinctive characteristics that distinguish them from the 
dominant national community which is predominantly 
Christian and which make them deserving of the special 
attention and treatment from the State. 

Moreover, this amendment is to emphasize that 
regional autonomy is reserved only to those regions 
which have distinctive and unique characteristics, and 
not to regions which have characteristics common to the 
dominant national community. 

This will reflect the sense of the Commission’s not 
favoring the idea of federalism which would make 
regional autonomy open to all regions. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. I have an amendment to the amend- 
ment, and I am sponsoring this because I have lifted this 
from a draft presented to me by Commissioner Alonto 
and was, in turn, suggested by a gentleman who was 
with us in the 1971 Constitutional Convention, Mr. 
Michael Mastura. The amendment is; On line 12, we 
eliminated the phrase after the word “geographical” all 
the way to the word “characteristics” on line 13, and in 
lieu thereof, the following: MUNICIPALITIES 

HAVING COMMON GEOGRAPHIC TIES, HIS- 
TORICAL AND CULTURAL HERITAGE, ECO- 
NOMIC AND SOCIAL STRUCTURES AND OTHER 
CHARACTERISTICS. Then continue on to “within 
the framework of and respecting the national sover- 
eignty . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner VUla- 
corta say? 

MR. BENGZON. May I explain. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. BENGZON. From the explanation given to me 
by the gentleman I just mentioned, the words “linguistic, 
ethnic, communal” which are already included in the 
term “historical and cultural heritage.” That is all- 
encompassing and, of course, we retain the words 
“COMMON GEOGRAPHIC TIES” and “THE ECO- 
NOMIC,” and add SOCIAL STRUCTURES AND 


OTHER CHARACTERISTICS. This would simplify the 
whole sentence and put elegance into it. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I accept the 
amendment on condition that instead of the word 
“COMMON” which would not really reflect the sense 
behind the granting of regional autonomy, the Honor- 
able Bengzon use DISTINCTIVE. 

MR. BENGZON. Commissioner Alonto says “yes,” so 
I accept the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman kindly read 
again. 

MR. BENGZON. A little kibitzer here suggested 
“COMMON AND DISTINCTIVE.” 

MR. VILLACORTA. Did Commissioner Bengzon use 
the word “SHARING”? 

MR. BENGZON. No, I did not use the word “SHAR- 
ING.” 

MR. VILLACORTA. It will make it more emphatic 
and representative of the unity that they have if we use 
the word “SHARING,” then “COMMON AND DIS- 
TINCTIVE GEOGRAPHIC TIES.” 

MR. BENGZON. So, instead of using the word 
“HAVING,” maybe it would be more descriptive to 
use the word “SHARING.” 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, Madam President. 

MR BENGZON. So, the provision will read: 
“MUNICIPALITIES SHARING COMMON AND DIS- 
TINCTIVE GEOGRAPHIC TIES, HISTORICAL AND 
CULTURAL HERITAGE, ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL 
STRUCTURES AND OTHER CHARACTERISTICS.” 

MR. VILLACORTA. That would be all right. Madam 
President. 

MR. BENGZON. It is beautiful. 

the president. Does the Committee need time to 
consider or does it accept the amendment? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee would like to nego- 
tiate with Commissioner Bengzon on the use of “geo- 
graphic areas” because this will affect the Cordilleras. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Both the Cordilleras and Minda- 
nao. 

MR. BENGZON. The word “TIES” was lifted from 
the draft that was submitted to me. 


498 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. ALONTO. Madam President, this is a very basic 
point and I move that we suspend the session. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, may I ask the Committee to set 
aside that phrase. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we suspend 
the session for two minutes? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 3:30 p.m. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee agrees that “and 
respecting” should be deleted. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. Madam President. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:47 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

^ 1 ^’ ^^^^*®NT0. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner Bengzon be recognized for 
ms reformulated Section 14. 


THE PRESIDENT. Section 1 of Part II. 
Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I am happy to sa> 
that we were able to come to an agreement includinf 
the intended amendment of Commissioner Davide, sc 
we saved that particular portion. As it is now, ’the 
section will read as foUows: “There shall be createc 
autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and the Cor 
dhlera consisting of provinces, cities and MUNICIPALI 
Ilm GEOGRAHIC areas SHARING commor 

historical AND cultural HERI 
TAGE, economic AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE ANE 
other RELEVANT characteristics within the framework 
ot and respecting the national sovereignty and territoriaJ 
mte^ty of the Republic of the Philippines.” The last is 
the Davide amendment. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Just for the record, the co- 
authors of my amendment are as follows: the Honorable 
Ople, Sarmiento, Bennagen, Uka, Alonto, Abubakar, 
Villegas, Aquino and Suarez. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved.. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
the honorable Commissioner from Cebu, Hilario G. 
Davide, Jr., be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

A 

I will propose very minor perfecting amendments 
one substantial amendment. On line 11, I seek for ® 
deletion of the word “in” before “Muslim” and in i 
stead, the word FOR; between “and” and “the 
“Cordillera,” insert the word FOR and add S to or 
dillera.” So, the provision will read: “FOR Mus 
Mindanao and FOR the CORDILLERAS consistmg oi 
provinces ...” and so on. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


becomes a joint amen 
o Commissioners Villacorta, Bengzon and othe 

amSmenSSn ‘ 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none, e 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 14, after the word “of,” I seek 
for the deletion of “and respecting.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is already deleted. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there 
proposed amendment? 


any objection to the 


Do^^ ha^^ President, just one minor poin 

Do we have to retam respecting”? 

MR. BENGZON. That is the wording of the Con 
mittee. 


MR. DAVIDE. So in Ueu of “and respecting,” ins^ 
the following: THIS CONSTITUTION AND SUBJECT 
TO THE IMPERATIVE TO PRESERVE AND EN- 
HANCE. So, lines 14 and 15 will read as follows: “with- 
in the framework of THIS CONSTITUTION AND SUB- 
JECT TO THE IMPERATIVE TO PRESERVE AND 
ENHANCE national sovereignty and territorial integrity 
of the Republic of the Philippines.” 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


499 


MR. NOLLEDO. I tJiink the amendment is not 
acceptable to the Committee, Madam President. If Com- 
missioner Davide would agree, 1 recommend that it 
should read: “within the framework of THIS CONSTI- 
TUTION and the national sovereignty AS WELL AS 
territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines.” 
The Committee will accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have no objection. So, the provision 
will read: “within the framework of THIS CONSTITU- 
TION and the national sovereignty AS WELL AS terri- 
torial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Azcuna be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President, my amendment 
has already been taken up and approved. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Azcuna. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we vote 
on the whole Section 1, now Section 14, may I ask 
Chairman Nolledo to read Section 1, as amended. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we ask Commissioner Benna- 
gen to read Section 1 . 

MR. BENNAGEN. I will read it on behalf of the 
Chairman. “There shall be created autonomous regions 
FOR Muslim Mindanao and FOR the CORDILLERAS 
consisting of provinces, cities, MUNICIPALITIES and 
GEOGRAPHIC areas SHARING common AND DIS- 
TINCTIVE historical AND cultural HERITAGE, eco- 
nomic AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND other RE- 
LEVANT characteristics within the framework of THIS 
CONSTITUTION and the national sovereignty AS 
WELL AS territorial integrity of the Republic of the 
Philippines.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular section, as amended, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 


The results show 28 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 1 , as amended, is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. For Section 2, now Section 15, 
may I ask that the honorable Commissioner Foz be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. In our amendment to the original Section 
2 under the autonomous regions, now Section 15, there 
win be a transposition and some additions. So, I will just 
read the section, particularly the first paragraph, as 
sought to be amended. It shall read: THE CONGRESS 
SHALL IN CONSULTATION WITH MULTISEC- 
TORAL BODIES IN EACH AUTONOMOUS REGION 
ENACT AN ORGANIC LAW DEFINING THE BASIC 
STRUCTURE OF THE REGIONAL GOVERNMENT. 
IT SHALL CONSIST OF THE REGIONAL EXECU- 
TIVE DEPARTMENT HEADED BY AN ELECTIVE 
CHIEF EXECUTIVE AND A REGIONAL LEGISLA- 
TIVE ASSEMBLY. THE ORGANIC ACT SHALL PRO- 
VIDE FOR SPECIAL COURTS WITH FAMILY AND 
PROPERTY LAW JURISDICTION WITHIN THE 
REGION EXCEPT OVER ITS CHRISTIAN INHAB- 
ITANTS SUBJECT TO THE APPEAL PROCEDURES 
PROVIDED BY NATIONAL LAW AND THE PROVI- 
SIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION. 

We would like to get the response of the Committee 
to the provision as sought to be amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, there is a pro- 
posed amendment to this section by Commissioner Ople 
which covers practically the entire section. So, I am now 
at a loss on whether to accept the amendment or not 
until the Ople amendment is considered. May I also 
observe. Madam President, that the words “APPEAL 
PROCEDURES” would seem to be irrelevant. With due 
respect to Commissioner Foz, we are talking only of 
jurisdiction here; besides the procedural rules on per- 
sonal law and property law jurisdiction of the special 
courts may be provided for in the Rules of Court or in 
other special rules. So, I would prefer not to mention 
“APPEAL PROCEDURES.” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Also in the suggested Foz amend- 
ment, reference is made to the exception of Christian 
inhabitants from the family and property law jurisdic- 
tion. There would be other groups; non-Christians and 
non-Muslims would be part, and may be some compro- 
mise description of this mixed population should be 
adopted instead of specifying only Christian inhabitants. 


500 




<n; 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. FOZ. I would be amenable to any suggestion in 
that regard. But I think there has to be mention of 
appeal because the family and property laws that may 
be provided or enacted by the legislative assembly of the 
region have to be consistent with national law and the 
pertinent provisions of the Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will Commissioner Foz be satisfied 
if the Committee states that it is its intention that the 
Rules of Court, as promulgated by the Supreme Court 
in accordance with the provisions on judicial power of 
the Constitution, will govern? That is the sense of the 
Committee. That is why if Commissioner Foz will delete 
the portions on procedural appeal, the Committee will 
be very receptive to his amendments. And if he can 
harmonize his amendments with those of Commissioner 
Ople, the Committee will likewise seriously consider the 
amendment. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, we would like to hear 
Commissioner Ople. I understand 
^^’^’^issioner Davide also has some amendments 
that have relevance to this section. Section 15. 


MR. NOLLEDO. May we call upon 
Ople, Madam President? 


Commissioner 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. FOZ. Under the amendment of Commissioner 
Ople, there would first be a regional constitutional 
commission that would draft the organic act for the 
region. Once this is drafted, the organic act shall be 
submitted to Congress for its consideration. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Congress has the final say. 

MR. FOZ. But the Congress will not be bound in any 
respect by such a draft organic law. 

MR. OPLE. The effect will be persuasive on Congress, 
Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Does the Gentleman not think that if the 
draft organic law prepared by the regional constitutional 
commission contains certain radical ideas or provisions, 
and if Congress does not approve of such radical ideas or 
provisions, there would be some kind of a frustration or 
letdown on the part of the multisectoral bodies who 
would be represented in that commission, and that this 
would have some adverse effect on whatever Congress 
will finally approve as an organic act? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized 

^MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

This is an amendment proposed by Commissioner 
Kama, NoUedo, Davide, Bennagen, Alonto, Villacorta 
^una and this Representation. The amendment reads 
Ihe Congress shall enact an Organic Act FOR EACf 
region to be INITIALLY 
^ REGIONAL CONSTITUTIONAI 
TO BE NOMINATED BY MULTI 

bodies and APPOINTED BY THE 
PRESIDENT.” 

Then, on some stylistic changes in what follows foi 
revi y and simplification, all recommended by Com- 

“THE ORGANIC ACl 
GOVFRmSpmtS STRUCTURE OF 

THF region consisting of 

TIVE Jm V department AND LEGISLA 

resentat^vp VL ®dth elective and rep 

UNITS OF THE CONSTITUENT POLITICAL 

courts with likewise provide foi 

con s,e„, Jurisdicfor 

Judicial Pow^.. of this Constitution or 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam 
ments of Commissioner Foz 
Ople amendment. 


President, some amend- 
can be incorporated in the 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, may we ask some q 
tions of Commissioner Ople with regard to his aim 
ment? 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I suppose we have to presume, just 
like in the case of other bodies, the good faith, in 
telligence and regularity of the constitutional com 
mission that will be appointed, including the intelligence 
to know what is attainable. Therefore, that is a risk that 
I do not wish to deny can be present. It is very 
offset by the prospects of the popular response to 
act of initiative that is granted to the inhabitants of e 
region through their representatives who will be ap- 
pointed. 


MR. FOZ. Since there would be practicalfe^ two stages 
in the enactment of such an organic act or law, would i 
not be more convenient for Congress to be direct y 
vested with the authority to proceed and draft, an 
finally enact such an organic law after consultations 
with multisectoral bodies in the region? After all, the 
Congress is not expected to draft it without consulta- 
tions. That is a very express provision, a requirement in 
Section 15, that Congress shall proceed only in consulta- 
tion with the multisectoral bodies in the region. So, it 
would be a roundabout way to first authorize tbe 
setting up of a regional constitutional commission 
whose work, after all, would have to fall onto the lap of 
Congress which will have the final authority to pass such 
a law. 


MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. The idea is to put 
the stamp of authentic participation of the autonomous 
region right upon the act of creation; and while the 
Congress has the power to pass an organic act, there is 
no reason why the autonomous regions should not be 
given the privilege of participating in their own creation 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


501 


/ 


from the beginning by drafting the organic act for the 
consideration and approval by the Congress. May I 
submit that while Congress is in no way barred from 
introducing any changes that it will consider necessary 
to reflect the national popular will, the process of 
regional leaders themselves including multisectoral 
representatives drafting an organic act for the considera- 
tion of Congress falls in place as a very symbolic act 
dramatizing the principle behind autonomy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I add to 
Commissioner Ople’s statement? Under the Ople amend- 
ment, the consultation with multisectoral representa- 
tives is not prohibited. Even the constitutional com- 
mission created under ^he Ople amendment can conduct 
the consultation before it actually drafts the organic 
act for the region. 

MR. OPLE. There is nothing here to impede any 
manner and degree of consultation with the people, 
Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. May we 
address a few clarificatory questions to the honorable 
proponent? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

If I understand the thrust of Section 2, as proposed, 
it contemplates two legislative acts: one, the organic act; 
and two, the act preceding the organic act. I am refer- 
ring to the establishment and organization of what the 
Gentleman calls a regional constitutional commission. 
Is our understanding correct in this regard. Madam 
President? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President, except that the 
act of drafting the organic act at the regional level is 
mainly in aid of legislation by Congress. 

MR. SUAREZ. But it is a preparatory act to the 
enactment of the organic act or charter. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Gentleman is not contemplat- 
ing under this provision that the regional constitutional 
commission would be created by this Constitution? 

MR. OPLE. The power is vested in the President of 
the Philippines to appoint. 


MR. SUAREZ. On the appointment in the President, 
but not in the constitution of the regional constitu- 
tional commission, or would it be left to Congress? 

MR. OPLE. I would rather leave that to Congress. I 
also assume that in the process of drafting the organic 
act at the regional level, the process of interaction 
between Congress or the leaders of Congress and the 
regional commission shall have already taken place. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Would the Gentleman take into account the proposal 
of Commissioner Foz, because it is not clearly stated in 
this proposal? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. I would like to seek some clarifica- 
tion from Commissioner Ople. In previous discussions, 

I often hear that what we put in the Constitution are 
supposed to be provisions that will be good for many 
years. I am just bothered by this particular section 
because it is stated here that this will only be initially 
drafted by a regional constitutional commission to be 
nominated by multisectoral bodies and appointed by 
the President, et cetera. But will this particular section 
serve any purpose after this would have been enacted? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the principle is established that in 
the future beyond the autonomy granted to two specific 
regions now, if there is an application for such regional 
autonomous status, the same principle will be observed. 

MS. QUESADA. So, this is a principle or a guideline 
that needs to be retained here even after Congress shall 
have enacted an organic act? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, in the indefinite future when more 
regions with common and distinctive ethnic, cultural, 
economic and other characteristics decide to seek auto- 
nomous status, then the same principle will apply. 

MS. QUESADA. So, we will not leave it to Congress 
to provide for these details? 

MR. OPLE. Actually, Congress will not be barred 
from providing for a law that will spell out the details 
of this principle. Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 


502 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Will Commissioner Ople yield to 
two questions, Madam President? 

MR. OPLE. Gladly, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. First, on the authority of the draft 
to be submitted by the regional constitutional com- 
mission, will it be much more than the authority of, let 
us say, the draft constitution of the UP that was given 
to us? Or will it be at par with that draft constitution 
as regards its binding force? 

MR. OPLE. We say that Congress has the final say but 
in the nature of what Commissioner Bemas this morning 
called the political dynamics of the situation, I would 
assume that Congress would put the utmost weight on 
this draft organic act that will be submitted to them by 
the regional constitutional commission. 

BISHOP BACANI. The second question that I would 
hke to ask for my enlightenment so I can vote is: In 
Section 7 of the provisions on the autonomous regions, 
it is stated: 

The Congress shall, within one year from the election of 

its Members, define the territorial jurisdiction of, and pass 

the Organic Acts, for the autonomous regions in Muslim 

Mindanao and the Cordilleras. 

Pushing back the actual passage of the organic act, 
will it not, therefore, mean that if we accept the Gentle- 
man’s amendment, there will be a greater impatience 
generated in the regions because then the autonomous 
regions will not have been constituted yet? 

MR. OPLE. No, Madam President. I want to thank 
Commissioner Bacani for calling the attention of the 
body to that. In the last section, there is a timetable set 
so that within one year of the election of the Members 
of the next Congress, an organic act for the autonomous 
regions will be passed^ I think this is well within the 
deadline, Madam President. If Congress know that 
within one year from the time of their election they 

K organic act, I am sure that steps 
wou be taken in the spirit of prudence and responsi- 
n ^ ^ o insure that this regional body will be function- 
al output can be delivered according to 

Hpadlin Congress comply with the 


that will be approved by Congress. Does the Gentleman 
not think that that would be sufficient? 

MR. OPLE. I think that can also be allowed but as to 
being sufficient, I have my misgivings about that. In 
fact, when representatives of the autonomous regions 
are called to participate in the very act of their creation 
by drafting an organic act, they are exalted to the level 
of a dignity that will never be attained through informal 
consultations alone. 

BISHOP BACANI. But, Madam President, my fear is 
that there may be some decisions where the difference 
in the number of votes was very slight, like the decision 
on adopting a bicameral or unicameral form of legisla- 
ture. I was told that officially there was only a dif- 
ference of two votes. When it becomes an act of a 
regional constitutional commission, people may really 
expect that something like that will also be approved by 
Congress. But later on. Congress may decide otherwise. 
So, the level of expectation may be brought very high 
when the proposals come from a regional constitutions 
commission, while a less formal convention of multi- 
sectoral bodies may actually be able to propose effec- 
tively without, at the same time, unnecessarily raising 
the expectations at a level which cannot be met. 

MR. OPLE. Just one brief reply to that. Madam 
President. I visualize the situation by that time as bemg 
one where Mindanao and the Cordillera have their own 
representatives. Members of the House of Representa- 
tives and Members of the Senate will then be in close 
touch all the time with the leadership and memberehip 
of both Houses. Because of this close rapport, I t in 
we can be sure that the level of attainability of a dra 
organic act prepared at the regional level will have een 
very much improved and the same representatives M 
senators representing these regions will make sure t a 
there are very few gaps in the perceptions of what can 
be attained as the final output in terms of an organic 
act. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair believes that the 
subject has been sufficiently discussed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee, Madam President, 
is asking for a suspension of the session to consohdate 
the amendments. 


BISHOP BACANI. Just 
Madam. President. 


an additional question. 


Will the sarne purpose that is sought to be achieved 
by such a regional constitutional commission not be 
achieved by something less formal? It can be a con- 
vention, but not necessarily a regional constitutional 
commission, which will draft suggestions for the charter 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Nolledo requests 
a suspension of session to harmonize the Foz amend- 
ment. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


503 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes, and will Commissioner Foz please confer with 
the Committee for his amendment. 

It was 4:18 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:53 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Foz and Commissioner Ople have harmonized their 
amendments. 

May I ask that Commissioner Nolledo read the re- 
formulated section. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Bennagen to read the amended section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

We have come to a happy agreement on the formula- 
tion of Section 2 and it reads: “The Congress shall enact 
an Organic Act FOR EACH AUTONOMOUS REGION 
WITH THE ASSISTANCE AND PARTICIPATION OF 
A REGIONAL CONSULTATIVE COMMISSION. THE 
ORGANIC ACT SHALL DEFINE THE BASIC STRUC- 
TURE OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE REGION CON- 
SISTING OF THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT AND 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY BOTH OF WHICH SHALL 
BE ELECTIVE AND REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
CONSTITUENT POLITICAL UNITS. THE ORGANIC 
ACT MAY LIKEWISE PROVIDE FOR SPECIAL 
COURTS WITH PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PRO- 
PERTY LAW JURISDICTION CONSISTENT WITH 
THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND 
NATIONAL LAW. THE CREATION OF THE AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGIONS SHALL BE APPROVED IN A 
PLEBISCITE BY MAJORITY OF THE VOTERS 
CAST.” 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What happened to the other 
paragraph amended by Commissioners Azcuna and 
Bengzon? 

MR. BENNAGEN. We approved that earlier. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, but there is a 
committee amendment on . . . 

THE PRESIDENT. This was approved already as is. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, I think we can read that later 
on when we approve the whole section. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is part of Section 2, Madam 
President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. This is a continuation of the first 
paragraph. 

MR. NOLLEDO. What has been read. Madam Pres- 
ident, is the first paragraph of Section 2. The second 
paragraph will be read by Commissioner Bennagen. 

MR. BENNAGEN. “THE CREATION OF THE 
AUTONOMOUS REGION SHALL BE EFFECTIVE 
WHEN APPROVED BY MAJORITY OF THE VOTES 
CAST OF THE CONSTITUENT UNITS IN A PLEBI- 
SCITE CALLED FOR THE PURPOSE PROVIDED 
THAT ONLY PROVINCES AND CITIES VOTING 
FAVORABLY IN SAID PLEBISCITE SHALL BE IN- 
CLUDED IN THE AUTONOMOUS REGION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. That was approved already. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR PADILLA. With regard to the phrase “SPECIAL 
COURTS WITH PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PRO- 
PERTY LAW JURISDICTION,” I would propose the 
deletion of this sentence for the following reasons: 
First, our approved Article on the Judiciary does not 
provide for these special courts although the Supreme 
Court is authorized to establish inferior courts. Second, 
within these autonomous regions, the chances are that 
the judge is a Muslim in the Muslim region or a native 
lawyer judge, say, in the Cordilleras. In a litigation, the 
Muslim plaintiff, usually represented by a Muslim 
lawyer, and the Muslim defendant, also represented by 
a Muslim lawyer, can very well inform the Muslim judge 
or even the Christian trial judge in control of the litiga- 
tion of the proper law applicable. The regional trial 
court in that autonomous region or province — some- 
times there are several regional trial courts in one 
province - may decide the case by applying the per- 
sonal law of the Muslims or of the Cordilleras that is 
properly applicable. My point is that while former 
President Marcos issued one presidential decree creating 
this special Muslim Shari’a Court, he also issued another 
decree on Muslim personal laws. I understand that there 
have been efforts by Muslim lawyers to get some in- 
struction or education from foreign lands; there was 
even an attempt to have Muslim lawyers take bar 
examinations given by the Supreme Court, but I under- 
stand no one passed the examinations. What I am trying 


504 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


to say is that I recognize that the Muslim or Islamic 
Shari’a law will be applicable to a litigation involving 
their personal law. But we do not perhaps need to create 
special courts because this can be taken care of by the 
regional trial courts. The only point is that the Muslims 
in Mindanao want their personal law respected and 
enforced. This can be done within our judicial system, 
without the need of creating and maintaining special 
courts. Oftentimes, Muslim conflicts may be decided 
by settlement through peaceful negotiation, maybe 
through the intervention of their datu. The very few 
litigations may not reach the courts. But if they reach 
the courts, why should we recognize, legalize, validate 
and even constitutionalize special courts created by two 
decrees of the past regime which may not be necessary? 

I understand. Madam President, that the Tripoli 
Agreement under Section 14 (3) says that in the areas 
of autonomy , the Muslims shall have the right to set up 
their own courts which implement the Islamic Shari’a 
law, and shall be represented in all courts, including the 
Supreme Court, et cetera. We wUl recognize the Islamic 
Shan a law as applicable to a litigation between 
Muslims. But should we continue with these special 
courts when, after all, even in cases ofUtigation between 
Filipmos and foreigners and there being conflict of laws, 
our own courts decide by applying the proper law; and 
m the absence of positive statutory law, the customs 
are always a source of law that will apply to a given 
litigation? 


on marriage, divorce, there is no prosecution for bigamy 
because Muslim law permits more than one wife or some 
customary law on succession — I do not know whether 
there is recognition, for example, of primogeniture. 
These portions of our Civil Code will give way to the 
Islamic Shari’a law. But the court that will decide this 
issue between Muslim litigants need not be a special 
court. I think it can be taken care of by the regional 
trial courts. I would say that most probably the regional 
trial judge in a province within the Muslim autonomous 
region will be a Muslim Filipino. 

MR. RAMA. Does the Gentleman know that there are 
already existing special courts taking special examina- 
tions related to the Muslim law? 

MR. PADILLA. That is my information. Madam 
President. President Marcos issued these two presidential 
decrees; one creating the special courts and another, 
issuing a MusUm code of law, which is quite extensive — 
perhaps almost one-half of our Civil Code — and which 
very few could understand. But the law applicable cm 
always be presented to the regional trial judge for its 
proper application. 

MR. RAMA. With the indulgence of the Chair, Com- 
missioner Uka would like to provide information of the 
actual Muslim courts that are now existing and how 
they operate. 


So, if it is acceptable especially to Commissioner 
Alonto, my proposed amendment is that while we 
respect ^e Islamic law on litigations affecting the 
Muslims in Muslim Mindanao, is it absolutely necessary 

that we have special courts for the application of such 
law? 

As I said, I suppose the judge in these Muslim 
provmces will be a Muslim who knows Muslim law. 
Assuming he is a Christian judge, the Muslim lawyers of 
e litigants can present evidence as to the proper law 
app icable. The regional trial court or the provincial 
n court may make a decision by applying and 
respecting the Islamic Shari’a law. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask Com- 
missioner Padilla a few questions. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama may pro- 


also Gentleman 

up cou^Tln complications if we have to set 

are made so that Particularly when the appeals 

would confuse the Court° of 

Court. Is that part of the Supreme 

Pdn 01 the Gentleman’s apprehension? 

I sut)nn<:p 

Rules of Court Qhrmin Procedural law, the 

Rules ot Court, should apply. But with regard to sub- 

stantive law - what they call personal law like the laws 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, I wish to inform the 
body that as of this moment, the special courts known 
as Shan’a Courts are already established in the Muslim 
provinces. There are two kinds of judges; the executive 
judges and the municipal judges of the Shari’a Courts. 
Their jurisdiction covers Muslim personal laws on family 
and property. Those judges already appointed took 
seminars conducted under the supervision of the 
Supreme Court. And many of them are my former 
students. Before they are appointed judges, they have to 
take seminars and some of them were sent to Cairo, 
Egypt to study the Islamic law or Shari’a. There is Judge 
Corocoy Moson, who is now in Cotabato City as Shari’a 
executive judge. There is also one executive judge in 
Marawi, another one in Zamboanga City and the others 
are Shari’a municipal judges in some municipalities. 
These courts were created because of the peculiar laws 
or provisions under the Islamic jurisprudence or Shari’a. 
That is why during the meeting of the Committee on 
the Judiciary, I even asked what may happen if a case is 
appealed from the special Shari’a Courts to the Supreme 
Court or the Court of Appeals, as the case may be. How 
will the Supreme Court decide or resolve it when there 
is no Muslim justice in the Supreme Court? Of course, 
the only thing that could possibly be done is to appoint 
a Muslim justice in the Supreme Court because through 
all the years from the Spanish time up to the present, 
there was not a single Muslim justice in the Supreme 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


505 


Court, not because there are no qualified Muslim 
lawyers but I really do not know why. Maybe a Mushm 
may be appointed justice this year, maybe next year, 
maybe never. So, there are still some important things 
to be done to make the Shari’a Courts functional. The 
Supreme Court in the meantime postponed the giving 
of the so-called Shari’a mini-bar examinations con- 
ducted by it but many are now preparing for the 
examinations. They call it mini-bar which means small, 
like minimized, mini-skirt, and things like that. So, there 
is really a reason for the creation of the so-called Shari’a 
Courts in the Muslim areas of the Philippines. In fact, 
there is already issued by decree a personal code of the 
Muslims which is being applied by these Shari’a Courts. 
What should be done in case this provision on Shari’a 
Courts be deleted? What shall we do with those Shari’a 
Courts already established? And what about the mini- 
bar examinations to be conducted by the Supreme 
Court? Shall we order the Supreme Court to stop the 
examinations and shall we abolish these special courts? 

I was about to stand up earlier to propose an amend- 
ment to the amendment so that the provision will read; 
“The Organic Act shall likewise provide for SPECIAL 
courts with personal law and property law jurisdiction 
within the autonomous region consistent with the provi- 
sions of this Constitution on Judicial Power.” I would 
change the word “may” to SHALL to make it manda- 
tory. But that would depend upon the wish or decision 
of the body as expressed by the Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. UKA. What about the amendment of my good 
friend. Commissioner Padilla? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. May we inquire from Commissioner 
Uka whether these appointments were done during the 
Marcos regime or during the Aquino administration? 

MR. UKA. Let me refresh my memory. Some were 
appointed during the past administration and some were 
appointed to fill some of the vacancies during the 
present administration. 

MR. PADILLA. As to the question of what will 
happen to these judges, they can always be the regional 
trial judges or the municipal trial judges. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. The suggestion of Commissioner 
Padilla is really quite something to think about. How- 
ever, the amendment of this section as already read to 


the Gentleman has provided for all that he has in mind. 
The last sentence reads: “The Organic Act may likewise 
provide for SPECIAL courts with FAMILY and pro- 
perty law jurisdiction consistent with the provisions of 
this Constitution AND NATIONAL LAW.” 

So, the organization of special courts is actually an 
implementation of that basic and essential reason why 
we are granting autonomy to these particular regions 
which, as we have stated in Section 1, is the nonviola- 
tion of historical, cultural, linguistic, ethnic, communal, 
economic and other characteristics. In order to imple- 
ment this and strengthen the basis or reason why we 
should, as we have done, grant autonomy to these 
regions, those particular cultural differences between 
the cultural minorities and the cultural majority in this 
country should be implemented. One of the most 
important differences between the dominant cultural 
community and the cultural minority in this country is 
the law that governs personal, family and property rela- 
tions between the different inhabitants within that 
cultural community. So, how can we give reality to the 
acceptance of cultural differences between the cultural 
inhabitants in this country if we do not provide for the 
government instrument to implement those differences? 

This is very basic in the creation of autonomous 
regions for if we do not provide for that, it is only 
autonomy in mouth and not in reality. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I would like to support the 
position of Commissioner Alonto. I think the setting up 
of special courts is giving due recognition to a viable 
legal system. This is long recognized by the dominant 
western-based legal system. I think, in the long run, it 
will enrich our national law. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I would like to give some information. I 
think there is a serious problem of qualified personnel 
for appointment as judges as well as for Muslim lawyers 
who will be qualified to practice before these special 
courts that we are speaking about. This is indicated by 
the results of a special bar examination conducted by 
the Supreme Court, especially for Muslims who will 
practice, as well as those who are going to be appointed 
judges of the Shari’a Courts. I remember that in one 
special examination, which is I think the only examina- 
tion given by the Supreme Court for such special Mus- 
lim examinees, there were, I think, about 75 examinees 
and only' 17 passed the bar exam. In other words, 
not all Muslims are qualified to be appointed judges of 
the Shari’a Courts perhaps for lack of adequate pre- 


506 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


paration and knowledge of this Shari’a law. It is not as 
simple as we think it is. I think Commissioner Alonto 
will bear us out on this. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, that is precisely why 
they are given special seminars, because there is the 
provision of the Islamic law on property and personal 
rights. 

MR. FOZ. It is such a complicated system. 

MR. UKA. The Supreme Court gives them some 
seminars. As a matter of fact, those who passed really 
did very great work in the seminars, and some of them 
were even sent to Cairo by the government. 

MR. FOZ. For special training, yes. 

UKA. Those who passed with good grades were 
sent there, and when they came back, they became 
executive judges. Again, let me cite Corocoy Moson, and 
all the others who passed that examination. This year, as 
I said, there will again be a mini-bar examination to be 
conducted by the Supreme Court. It was supposed to be 
given last December, but then they had to postpone it. 
And many are now actually preparing for that. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, because of that serious 
shortage of qualified personnel even for practice before 
the Muslim courts, I think it would be also a little incon- 
ceivable for Christian lawyers of the regular courts — we 
are speaking of the regular courts - to handle special 
questions involving the Shari’a law. It is really out of the 
question; it is impossible. If most of the Muslims them- 
selves are not qualified to be appointed judges or even 
to practice Muslim law before the Muslim courts it 
would be really quite difficult for judges of legillar 
courts, let us say, of the RTCs, to apply the Shari’a law. 
It would take several months and years of training. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, Commissioner Padilla 
posed a nice and beautiful question: “Suppose the litiga- 
tion is between a Muslim and a Christian?” What does 
the Committee say about that? 

MR. ALONTO. When the litigation is regarding a 
question that could be resolved by a national law, 
naturally the national law will apply. 

MR. UKA. That is what I was going to answer. 

MR. ALONTO. But this is a case where the persons 
involved are all belonging to the same ideological 
culture; both litigants are Muslims. 

MR. UKA. In other words this is only a special court 
for Muslims to solve the problem of property and 
personal laws. 


MR. ALONTO. With regard to what Commissioner 
Foz said, I would like to invite the Commissioner’s 
attention to the provision which says: “The Organic 
Act may likewise provide for special courts.” But with 
this provision, the implementation is going to take time, 
and in the meantime, we would have to provide for 
qualified people to man those special courts. 

THE PRESIDENT. So the matter can be left to 
Congress. There should be no quarrel about that. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes, so why are we fighting over this? 

MR. UKA. I see. Now, what happens to my amend- 
ment which is to use SHALL instead of “may”? 

MR. ALONTO. It is accepted by the Committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee has accepted that 
amendment. 

MR. ALONTO. We are mandating Congress to 
provide for a special court. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Before we vote on these amend- 
ments, may I seek clarification from either Commis- 
sioner Alonto or Commissioner Uka? I understand that 
this codification of Muslim personal laws was done to 
allay the Muslim Fihpino’s feeling of alienation from the 
country’s cultural mainstream. As a matter of fact, this 
decree provided for the formal codification of Musto 
personal laws based on its adat (customary) and Shan a 
(religious) laws. My first question of Commissioner 
Alonto is this: Does the Commissioner find a necessity 
in the future of also codifying the Muslim criminal laws. 

MR. ALONTO. Preliminarily I would like to inforrn 
the Commissioner that I myself have not read this book 
on Muslim personal laws authored by President Marcos, 
not believing in whatever he has done because he 
deceived the MusUms in this country. 

But there is a provision here which directs the legisla- 
tive assemblies of the autonomous regions to codify 
their customary or local laws. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, in the future 
there is the possibility that there will be a code of 
Muslim personal laws to suit the Muslims and a code of 
Muslim criminal laws? 

MR. ALONTO. Not only a possibility, but it is a 
mandate on the legislative assemblies of autonomous 
regions. That is the main reason for their being. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


507 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. I would like to address my 
next question, perhaps, to Commissioner Bennagen. 
Would there be a need, to the Commissioner’s knowl- 
edge, of also codifying the personal and criminal laws 
for the Cordillera? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Not only for the Cordillera but for 
all other indigenous communities in the country. As a 
matter of fact, there is an ongoing study at the UP 
College of Law being conducted by a team of lawyers 
and anthropologists to codify existing laws among 
indigenous communities as well as lowland ethnic laws 
so that eventually they shall be recognized in their own 
terms as part of the national law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. I think the Com- 
missioner’s answers will help us decide on this issue. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The idea is to grant this equality 
that they deserve. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. What we need is integration with 
equality, not so much stress on peculiarities that are 
accidental within the nation and the Filipino people. We 
recognize the right to religious freedom; we recognize 
the customary law in the absence of statutory law; we 
recognize that in a litigation between Muslim brothers, 
the Islamic Shari’a law should be applied. Commissioner 
Foz says it is very hard for a judge in the Regional Trial 
Court to decide a litigation that involves the personal or 
family relations among Muslims. I do not think that is 
correct. As long as the issues are correctly stated and 
presented and the law applicable is placed in issue 
clearly, then a good judge can properly decide the issue. 
He need not be a Muslim to apply the proper law. But 
what I am saying is, within these provinces that will 
constitute, say, Muslim Mindanao, chances are that the 
judges will be Muslim Filipinos, so there is no need for 
special courts. But even assuming that he be a Christian 
judge, if he acts as he should with impartiality and with 
honesty applying the proper Islamic Shari’a law, then 
there will be justice and recognition of the ri^ts of the 
Muslim litigants. 

What I am trying to stress is, in my opinion, there is 
no need to multiply the courts. I am not denying the 
fact that our Muslim brothers must have justice in 
accordance with their Islamic Shari’a law, especially on 
family rights. But must it be done by special judges and 
special courts? 

Madam President, in conflict of laws, a municipal 
court — what I mean by municipal court is a domestic 
court — may not be fully aware of the foreign law ap- 
plicable but if that law is alleged and proven, and if the 
law is applicable, the local court should adopt the 


foreign law applicable as part of the municipal law. And 
when there is a conflict- of laws, justice demands that 
the proper law in accordance with the rules of private 
international law be applied but it need not be applied 
by a foreign judge; it can be applied by our own judge, 
our own courts. 

And this question should not be made part of the 
Constitution. The Article on the Judiciary says our 
judicial system is vested in the Supreme Court and other 
lower courts that may be created by law. But here we 
are preempting or we are placing a priori the require- 
ment of a special court which should be left to Congress 
rather than constitutionalizing the decrees of President 
Marcos which not only would recognize their existence 
and validity but would raise them to a higher category. 

I do not think there is necessity for that. 

That is the point of my amendment. I want to make 
it clear that I am not against Muslim autonomy, par- 
ticularly the application of proper personal law on litiga- 
tions among them, but that can be applied within our 
judicial system. 

MR. UK A. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. UKA. In order to implement the nice suggestion 
of my friend. Commissioner Padilla, why do we not 
require the Shari’a and other laws to be part of the 
curricula of the colleges of law in this country? In that 
way every lawyer or would-be lawyer will be able to 
know what is Shari’a law and other customary laws so 
that nobody will be ignorant about them. If we can add 
to our legal curricula international law or other laws for 
that matter, why could we not integrate also this 
Muslim law and other customary laws? They do this in 
Indonesia where they have what they call “unity in 
diversity.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. That would be sub- 
mitted to the Supreme Court for whatever action it may 
deem proper to take. 

Now, the Chair thinks there has been too much time 
already consumed on this question of whether or not to 
have special courts. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Just one sentence. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

I think meaningful autonomy demands that the 
juridical processes should be given full play in the auto- 
nomous regions, and to be able to do that, we should 
allow the setting up of special courts to complement 


508 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


those other processes and structures that will be set 
up later on. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to refresh ourselves: The 
Committee had accepted the Ople amendment in 
Section 2. We will vote first on the proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, on the Ople 
amendment as revised, may I propound some ques- 
tions? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may 
proceed. 

RODRIGO. In the Ople amendment as revised, 
^ A 7^^ Section 2 read: “THE CONGRESS 

ORGANIC ACT FOR EACH 
ASSISTANCE 
^ regional CON- 
LTATIVE COMMISSION.” There is no provision 
here on how this consultative commission will be 
created, how it will be constituted. Does not the Com- 
missioner think that there should be such a provision? 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, in the original foim 
this was going to be a constitutional commission whose 
members shall be nominated by multisectoral bodies 
and appointed by the President. Now, I have complied 
with the wishes of other proponents and some members 
of the Committee to reduce the level of participation 
in drafting the organic act at regional level from a 
constitutional commission to just a consultative com- 
mission, the understanding being that Congress will 
create this commission. 


RODRIGO. Does not the Commissioner think 
mat It should be spelled out that it will be created by 
Congress? 

^ compliance with the Commis- 

lost earlipr^^w i7^r>”^^^ reinstate the clause that was 
ill Commissioner Bennagen read that? 

ANCE THE ASSIST- 

CONSULTATTVF*^JJSir^^^^^ ^ REGIONAL 
SHALL BE MEMBERS 

RESENTATIVES TO RF ’^ULTISECTORAL REP- 
PRESIDENT” appointed by the 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Ople please 
read the first paragraph of Section 2 which is to be sub- 
mitted to a vote? 

MR. OPLE. “. . . COMPOSED OF MEMBERS WHO 
SHALL BE NOMINATED BY THE MULTISECTORAL 
BODIES AND APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, it should read: “THE CON- 
GRESS SHALL ENACT AN ORGANIC ACT FOR 
EACH AUTONOMOUS REGION WITH ASSISTANCE 
AND PARTICIPATION OF A REGIONAL CON- 
SULTATIVE COMMISSION COMPOSED OF MULTI- 
SECTORAL REPRESENTATIVES APPOINTED BY 
THE PRESIDENT.” 

MR. OPLE. Yes. Shall we settle on that final phras- 
ing? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the Commit- 
tee? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. RODRIGO. I think the first formulation by 
Commissioner Ople is better: “COMPOSED OF MEM- 
BERS NOMINATED BY MULTISECTORAL BODIES 
AND APPOINTED BY THE PRESIDENT.” 

MR. OPLE. With the agreement of the Committee, 
may I suggest that we accept this amendment? 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, will the Committee 
entertain another modification? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I propose APPOINTED BY THE 
PRESIDENT FROM A LIST OF NOMINEES MADE 
BY MULTISECTORAL BODIES. 


MR. OPLE. I think that expresses it better. 

FR. BERNAS. The last part should rather read: 
FROM A LIST OF NOMINEES FROM MULTI- 
SECTORAL BODIES. 


is 


MR. RODRIGO. That is better. Now 
gomg to be constituted. 


we know how it 


MR. OPLE. Yes, I accept the 
believe does the Committee. 


aniendment and so I 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


MR. NOLLEDO. So the first sentence. Madam 
President, will read: “THE CONGRESS SHALL ENACT 
AN ORGANIC ACT FOR EACH A.UTONOMOUS 
REGION WITH ASSISTANCE AND PARTICIPATION 
OF A REGIONAL CONSULTATIVE COMMISSION 
COMPOSED OF REPRESENTATIVES APPOINTED 
BY THE PRESIDENT FROM A LIST OF NOMINEES 
FROM MULTISECTORAL BODIES.” 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


509 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to that first 
sentence of Section 2 as accepted by the Committee? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment, as 
amended, is approved. 

On the second sentence, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The second sentence reads: “THE 
ORGANIC ACT SHALL DEFINE THE BASIC STRUC- 
TURE OF GOVERNMENT FOR THE REGION CON- 
SISTING OF THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT AND 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY BOTH OF WHICH SHALL 
BE ELECTIVE AND REPRESENTATIVE OF THE 
CONSTITUENT POLITICAL UNITS.” 

That is the second sentence. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular sentence? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the same is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As amended by Commissioner Uka, 
the third sentence reads: “The Organic Act SHALL 
likewise provide for SPECIAL courts with personal, 
FAMILY and property law jurisdiction consistent with 
the provisions of this Constitution AND NATIONAL 
LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Padilla on this one. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it to eliminate “SPECIAL 
courts” or the whole sentence? 

MR. PADILLA. To eliminate the whole sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee does not accept the 
Padilla amendment. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the amendment? 

MR. PADILLA. The Uka amendment from “may” to 
“SHALL” was accepted by the Chairman, but Com- 
missioner Alonto has been stressing the word “may” so 
that it will be up to Congress, not as a mandatory duty. 
I would ask that my amendment be submitted to a vote. 
Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I have read the third sentence which 
is objected to by Commissioner Padilla, Madam Pres- 
ident. So we submit it to the Commission for a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the amendment of Com- 
missioner Padilla? 

MR. PADILLA. It is to eliminate the entire sentence. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Is it still seasonable at this stage to offer an 
amendment to the amendment of Commissioner 
Padilla? I heard him say that what he is against is ac- 
tually the creation of special courts, not the application 
of the customary law on family relations and property 
rights. 

So if I may, I would like to offer an amendment that 
instead of deleting the entire provision or sentence, 
it be made to read in this manner: “The Organic Act 
may likewise provide THAT THE CUSTOMARY LAW 
ON FAMILY RELATIONS AND PROPERTY SHALL 
BE MADE APPLICABLE within the autonomous 
region” etc. 

That would eliminate the requirement that special 
courts be organized. 

MR. PADILLA. I would have no objection to the 
amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee does not accept the 
amendment, Mgdam President. 

MR FOZ. With this amendment, this would leave 
Congress to find out if there is really a need for esta- 
blishing special courts or for the regular courts to handle 
what it is that may arise involving customary law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the courts are 
now existing. This is just a recognition of the existence 
of Shari’a courts which are actually functioning ac- 
cording to Commissioner Uka. 

MR FOZ. But we have to realize that even before 
the formal establishment of these Shari’a courts, dis- 
putes over the same matters were being resolved in the 
old customary ways of the Muslims. It was just for- 
malized with the promulgation of those Marcos decrees. 
So we leave to Congress the discretion to study further 
whether special courts are really necessary. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we do not inhibit 
Congress from amending these decrees or even totally 
disregarding them and passing other laws similar to these 
decrees. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I ask 
Commissioner Padilla two clarificatory questions? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 

recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I recall that in previous 
practice, the courts of first instance, acting as special 
courts with special jurisdiction, act as land registration 
courts. We have now established the Judicial and Bar 


510 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


Council. Is it the Commissioner’s intention that, for 
example, an appointee to the RTC or CFI in Mindanao 
will have to be determined by the Judicial and Bar 
Council, keeping in mind that judges for appointment in 
those places should know something about Muslim 
laws? Is that the concept of Commissioner Padilla — 
without the necessity of creating a specialized court? 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, without the necessity of creat- 
ing or continuing to maintain these special courts. 

Regarding the appointment of judges, we have 
approved the Article on the Judiciary requiring that ^ 
such appointment by the President come from a list of 
recommendees. Naturally, the autonomous region will 
also propose nominees who are not only qualified, 
honest, good dispensers of justice, but also with some 
knowledge of the Islamic Shari’a law. But even if a par- 
ticular judge does not master or does not know so much 
about the Islamic law, a good judge can always decide 
with honesty the legal issues involved and the proper 
law applicable. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. With the explanation of that 
concept, I would like to support the stand of Com- 
missioner Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I have accepted 
the amendment to the amendment of Commissioner 
Foz. 


THE PRESIDENT. So the amendment is no longer to 
delete but to adopt the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Foz? 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, because my idea, after all, as 
correctly stated by Commissioner Foz, is not to deny 
the Muslim community their rights. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Foz read his 
proposed amendment to the third sentence in lieu of 
e third sentence of the Ople amendment. 


reads: “The Organic Act may 
RErATinwc^ IS® CUSTOMARY LAW ON FAMILY 
APPWABLE.’^ete PROPERTY MAY BE MADE 

comSetety*" 

provision.^ A„d' Ss'tS/r 

special courts, juvenile courts anH .“ cr^tmj 

has nevor o ‘^o^rts and circuit courts. There 
has never been any opposition to this. These speciaJ 

courts have been created to deal on speciM DarticulM 
cases. We ^e merely suggesting the creLon if a spedi 
court m the autonomous refion to deal on particular 
special cases. Why the objection to this*? I cannol 
understand. Madam President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a 
few minutes. 

It was 5:50 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 6:01 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I be 
recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Upon consultation with 
Commissioners Padilla, Uka, Foz and members of the 
Committee on Local Governments, we are offering this 
proposal which will meet the ideas and objections of the 
authors of these different proposals. The sentence will 
read: “The Organic Act may likewise provide for A 
JUDICIAL SYSTEM THAT WILL APPLY PERSONAL, 
FAMILY and property law consistent with the provi- 
sions of this Constitution AND NATIONAL LAW. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may we change the 
word “will” to SHALL? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is accepted. Madam Pres- 
ident. Does the Committee accept the amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR OPLE. Is it understood that the special courts 
now existing will be preserved, and this is without pre- 
judice to more special courts to be created as may be 
determined necessary in the future? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Special courts now existog, 
pursuant to the provision in the Transitory Provisions 
which we intend to propose to this honorable Com- 
mission, will not be automatically abolished. This pro- 
vision precisely will give us a certain leeway, more 
elbowroom, for the creation of more specialized courts 
but within the provisions of our Constitution and the 
national law. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we preserve the phrase “on 
Judicial Power”? 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 






511 


MR. NOLLEDO. No, the phrase “on Judicial Power” 
is already embraced in the phrase “with the provisions 
of this Constitution AND NATIONAL LAW.” 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog^ 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I would like to state that if by that 
term “judicial system” the interpretation is not only 
to preserve and maintain the special courts but even to 
organize more special courts, I am not in agreement 
with the proposal as drafted because precisely my main 
point was to eliminate special courts so that the regular 
trial courts, both regional and municipal, may under- 
take the enforcement and application of the personal 
customary laws of these special regions. 

MR. OPLE. But that is the meaning attached to the 
amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With due respect to Commissioner 
Padilla, Commissioner Ople’s observations find support 
among the members of the Committee. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. This matter has been sufficiently 
discussed by the Members of the Commission. May I ask 
that we vote on this amendment as proposed by Com- 
missioners de los Reyes, Foz and others? 

THE PRESIDENT. WUl Commissioner de los Reyes 
read the third sentence? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “The Organic Act may like- 
wise provide for A JUDICIAL SYSTEM THAT SHALL 
APPLY PERSONAL, FAMILY and property law con- 
sistent with the provisions of this Constitution AND 
NATIONAL LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I ask a question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. RODRIGO. We now have a judicial system all 
over the country, national in scope. Now, when “judi- 
cial system” is mentioned in this proposed amendment, 
does this mean a separate judicial system from our 
present existing judicial system? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, it shall not be separate. 

MR. RODRIGO. It is not separate. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The judicial system exists within the 
autonomous region. It says there “consistent with the 
provisions of this Constitution AND NATIONAL 
LAW.” So it is not separate. 

MR. RODRIGO. What is the wording again? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “The Congress may likewise 
provide for A JUDICIAL SYSTEM THAT SHALL AP- 
PLY PERSONAL, FAMILY and property law consistent 
with the provisions of this Constitution AND NATION- 
AL LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. That is it. Is that judicial system 
distinct from the regular national judicial system that 
we have now: Supreme Court, Court of Appeals, 
Regional Trial Courts, et cetera? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. It is not distinct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is part of that judicial system. 

MR. OPLE. It is part of the judicial system of the 
Republic of the Philippines under this Constitution, but 
at the same time, it has the flexibility to accommodate 
the special needs of the autonomous region. Madam 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. But it is within the judicial system. 

MR. OPLE. It is within the Constitution and the 
law. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. In the light of the statement of Com- 
missioner Ople and the explanation given by him, I 
would propose an amendment. Instead of “consistent 
with the provisions of this Constitution AND THE 
NATIONAL LAW,” it should read: “SUBJECT TO 
the provisions of this Constitution ON JUDICIAL 
POWER AND THE NATIONAL LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner de los 
Reyes say? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. The fact of the matter is that 
I do not see much of a difference; I think it is a matter 
of style, but I have no real objection to the proposal of 
Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is stronger, “SUBJECT TO the 
provisions” etc. 


512 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, and I hope the 
Committee does the same. Madam President. 


what we were saying. So if that is the case, we might as 
well go to our original formulation of special courts. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we vote now on the third 
sentence that has been read? 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR- FOZ. I am really bothered by the term “judicial 
system. WUl the Commissioner please read the whole 
sentence, as amended, again? 


MR. DE LOS REYES. “The Organic Act may likewise 
provide for A JUDICIAL SYSTEM THAT SHALL AP- 
PLY PERSONAL, FAMILY and property law SUBJECT 
TO the provisions of this Constitution ON JUDICIAL 
POWER AND THE NATIONAL LAW.” 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President, in this context the 
judicial system is really a subsystem or a subset of the 
national judicial system. And the reason this is em- 
ployed as a proposal from the President earlier was 
precisely because it could accommodate innovative 
forms of the dispensation of justice in the future as 
Congress may determine. It will partake of some legal 
self-sufficiency and to that extent, it is congruent with 
the special needs of an autonomous region. So, it is 
congruent with the special needs and conditions of an 
autonomous region but subject to the provisions of the 
Constitution on judicial power and national law. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. I would like to call for a vote on 
these two issues: First, whether or not to use the term 
“judicial system.” If that is defeated, then we will call 
for a vote on the use of “special courts.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to that? 


FR BERNAS. Since this is subject to the provisions 
on judicial power, it is really within the existing judicial 
system, so perhaps we should avoid the use of the 
gene^ tern “judicial system” and instead we should 
use COURTS OR SPECIAL COURTS. 


THE PRESIDENT. Then we go back to the old issue. 
MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 


MR BENNAGEN. I think if we understand tl 

TmulfiL^t existing within a framework ( 

LnrPhT nation, there should be r 

apprehension about the confusion that might arise : 

Judicial system of the autonomoi 
faft k national judicial system, because tl 


MR. PADILLA. I am against the use of 
courts” and object more against the use of ‘judicial 
system” within our judicial system. 

MR. BENGZON. But those are the two issues that are 
before the floor. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. I have a motion. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the issue. Madam President, 
is whether we revert to the original provision usuig 
“special courts” or we adopt the de los Reyes amend- 
ment using “JUDICIAL SYSTEM.” 

MR. PADILLA. My amendment is to delete the 
whole sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us vote first whether we will 
delete or not. 


MR. FOZ. But, Madam President, the term “judic 
system gives the idea that withta the autonomo 
region, there shall be a Supreme Court a Court of A 
peals, a Re^onal Trial Coutt. and mu^ieW ourts 
Its own That is the implication of using the te, 
judicial system even if it is still under our Constit 
tion. When we say “sUll under our judicial system 
then decisions of the Supreme Court of the region m; 
be appealed to the national Supreme Court. That 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of delet- 
ing the last sentence of Section 2, starting with the 
words “The Organic Act may likewise provide,” please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


513 


As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 5 votes in favor, 25 against and 1 
abstention; the amendment is lost. 

Now, let us put to a vote the original proposal of the 
Committee — that with “special courts.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. It reads: “The Organic Act shall 
likewise provide for SPECIAL courts with personal, 
family and property law jurisdiction consistent with the 
provisions of this Constitution AND NATIONAL 
LAW.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. So, if this proposal gets a suffi- 
cient number of votes, we do not vote anymore on the 
“judicial system.” 

As many as are in favor of the Committee proposal as 
so worded, please raise their hand. (Several Members 
raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 24 votes in favor, 4 against and 1 
abstention; the proposal as recommended by the Com- 
mittee is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rodrigo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on the same section? 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is on the same section. Madam 
President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to read the second 
paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo may 
please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It reads: “The creation of the auto- 
nomous region shall be EFFECTIVE WHEN approved 
by majority of the VOTES CAST BY THE constituent 
units IN A PLEBISCITE CALLED FOR THE PURPOSE 
PROVIDED THAT ONLY PROVINCES, CITIES AND 
GEOGRAPHIC AREAS VOTING FAVORABLY IN 
SAID PLEBISCITE SHALL BE INCLUDED IN THE 
AUTONOMOUS REGION.” 

THE PRESIDENT. That has been approved already. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It was approved but being part of 
Section 2, I recommend that the proposal be approved 
if there is no objection. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, did I hear the 
Chairman correct when he said “GEOGRAPHIC 
AREAS”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the second paragraph, as amended, 
is approved. 

Shall we read the whole Section 2 now? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The whole Section 2 now reads: 
“The Congress shall enact an Organic Act for each 
autonomous region with the assistance and participation 
of the regional consultative commission composed of 
representatives appointed by the President from a list of 
nominees from multisectoral bodies. The Organic Act 
shall define the basic structure of government for the 
region consisting of the executive department and legis- 
lative assembly both of which shall be elective and rep- 
resentative of the constituent political units. The Or- 
ganic Acts shall Likewise provide for special courts with 
personal, family and property law jurisdiction consistent 
with the provisions of this Constitution and national 
law.” This is the first paragraph. Madam President. The 
second paragraph of Section 2 reads: “The creation of 
the autonomous region shall be effective when approved 
by majority of the votes cast by the constituent units in 
a plebiscite called for the purpose, provided that only 
provinces, cities and geographic areas voting favorably 
in said plebiscite shall be included in the autonomous 
region.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, on that third 
sentence on “special courts,” the committee report used 
the word “may,” not ‘ shall.’ 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Committee accepted the Uka 
amendment “shall,” and there was no objection to it. 

MR. PADILLA. It was never put to a vote. It was 
only the Chairman who immediately accepted it while 
we were in a period of interpellations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we will put it to a 
vote. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The matter has already been set- 
tled; the same has been approved with the word “shall.” 

As many as are in favor of Section 2 as read, please 
raise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 


514 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 3 1 votes in favor, none against and 
1 abstention; Section 2 is approved. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that 
Commissioner Regalado be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Before I make any proposal, this would be in the 
nature of a parliamentary inquiry because the equivalent 
provision, which is Section 5 of this Article, was dis- 
cussed when I was in the hospital, and I am not very 
sure, based on my readings of the Journal, whether it 
reflects completely what took place here. 

Under Section 3 now, it is provided that: 

The President of the PhOippines shall exercise general 
supervision over autonomous regions to ensure that laws 
are faithfully executed. 

I understand from the Journal that, with respect to 
Section 5 of the first portion of this Article, the same 
words were used except that it ended with the word 
‘regions,” to read: “The President of the Philippines 
shah exercise general supervision over autonomous 
regions,” plus the other statements made therein. 

In the approved resolution on the Article on the 

xecutive, in Section 17 thereof, the second sentence 
states: 


The President shall exercise general supervision over ah 
local governments as may be provided by law. 

Pro'^ided by law,” which 
P . . ^ ® delimitation on the power of gener 

doetTnt°" over ah local government 

does not appear m either Section 5 or Section 3 of th 

K Governments. Now, this makes a lot < 
difference because the present rule is that the power ( 

tntin’if of the President under the Const 

tution IS not self-executing. There must be an impl 
mentmg law. It was so understood under the 193 
Constitution, and it was so understood and adopted 1 

Constitution, that the use of tl 
p as provided by law” was a limitation on tl 

power of general supervision of the President over loc 

it was pointed out 

i , "u- ^ ^®oision penned t 

Justice Laurel, that this “general supervision over loc 

governments as provided by law” is actually in tl 
nature of a compromise resulting from the conflict . 
views m that body, mainly between the historical viei 
which recognizes the right of local self-government, ar 
the legal theory which sanctions the possession by tl 
State of absolute control over local governments 

In the previous cases decided by the Supreme Court 
the case of Pianos vs. Gil, and the case of Villena v 


Secretary of the Interior — the Court just proceeded on 
the assumption that with or without a statutory provi- 
sion granting the President general supervision over local 
governments, the President had a residual power to 
discipline officers of the local governments. But in the 
subsequent case of Lacson vs. Roque, which appears to 
be the case in point now, and which was promulgated 
on January 10, 1953, the Supreme Court pointed out 
that, unlike control over the ministries, with respect to 
local governments the power of general supervision of 
the President over such local governments shall only be 
insofar as the same may be provided by law. That was 
the reason it held that President Quirino did not have 
the power to suspend Mayor Lacson, because neither 
the Charter of Manila nor any other law gave him that 
power of suspension. 

I am wondering whether the Commission or the 
Committee has made a complete turnaround by now 
merely providing that the President, with or without a 
law, shdl have the power of general supervision over 
local governments, meaning, the so-called “residual 
powers” of the central government over the local 
governments, or whether there must be an enabling law 
because, as pointed out by Justice Tuazon: “It is one 
thing to control, and another to suspend.” 

The Supreme Court even pointed out that insofar as 
supervision of local governments is concerned, there 
must only be a limited authority. That is why the law 
says only “general supervision as provided by law, 
because such a limited authority would not be in contra- 
vention of, but is precisely in adherence to, the prov^ 
sions intended to safeguard local autonomy . The tren 
in our formulations here is to give more and more loc 
autonomy to local governments. If we eliminate the 
phrase “as provided by law” insofar as the general 
vision over local officials by the President of the Pl^P* 
pines is concerned, then we are delimiting instead o 
expanding local autonomy. 

And that was precisely why in a resolution I submit- 
ted to the Committee on the Executive I saw ^ ^ 
that phrase “general supervision” is to be maintained, as 
distinguished from “control ovet Ministries” and only 
“as provided by law.” Otherwise, the President may 
exercise the so-called “general supervision” untram- 
meled by any provision of law which restricts his power 

and it will virtually eliminate the line or the distinction 
between control and supervision. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, in brief, what is Commissioner 
Regalado’s point with respect to Section 3? Does it con- 
flict with any other provision? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, my point is that 
it conflicts with the second sentence of Section 1 7 of 
the Article on the Executive which has already been 
passed on Second Reading and which I believe should 
be the proper wording for the reasons I have given, and 
such a case has already been decided. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


515 


THE PRESIDENT. The new Section 8 of the Article 
on Local Governments also states that “The President of 
the Philippines shall exercise general supervision over 
local governments.” 

MR. REGALADO. Period. Whereas under Section 17, 
Madam President, the second sentence says, “He shall 
exercise general supervision over all local governments 
as may be provided by law and shall take care that the 
laws be faithfully executed.” 

THE PRESIDENT. And that is the Commissioner’s 
point. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I think in our deliberations yesterday, 
the intention was clearly not to expand the power of 
the President but rather, precisely, to limit the power of 
the President towards ensuring that laws are followed. 
The interpretation was given that general supervision 
simply means that the superior sees to it that the 
inferior acts within the powers granted by law. More- 
over, when we amended Section 8, there was also a 
clarification in order to further emphasize autonomy 
vis-a-vis the President. We also said that there is a hier- 
archy of supervisions: municipalities over barangays, 
provinces over municipalities and component cities, and 
then the President, over provinces and highly urbanized 
cities, and I suppose now also over autonomous regions. 
But the object is mainly that the President, as execu- 
tive, and by virtue of his oath to make sure that laws are 
complied with, would only have this power of general 
supervision, not of control. His power is mainly to 
ensure that laws are followed. So, clearly, the intention 
is not to expand the power of the President. 

The cases just cited are correct; precisely, the power 
to discipline was not recognized on the part of the 
President because the existing law at that time gave 
disciplinary power, initiation of disciplinary authority, 
to somebody else. I think the case involved the question 
of whether the President could initiate disciplinary 
action against an elective official. 

MR. REGALADO. That was the case of Pianos vs. 
Gil 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. And since the charter said that 
only the provincial board could initiate it, since that 
was the law, then that had to be applicable. 

MR. REGALADO. In the case of Lacson vs. Roque, 
there was no provision whatsoever in the Charter of the 
City of Manila. In the case of Villena vs. the Secretary 
of the Interior, they applied the Administrative Code. 
Actually, my only question is: Why have we eliminated 


the phrase “as provided by law” which is actually a 
safeguard for local autonomy? 

FR. BERNAS. The intention, as I recall, was that the 
power of general supervision should be dependent on 
existing law because supervision means making sure that 
the laws are followed. 

MR. REGALADO. I agree that the power of super- 
vision is dependent on existing law but the extent of 
supervision must be spelled out by law. 

FR. BERNAS. I think what we were saying is that 
when we speak of autonomy, we are speaking of auto- 
nomy not just vis-a-vis the President but also vis-a-vis the 
Legislature. So that while we are curtailing the power of 
the President, we are also curtailing the power of the 
Legislature. 

MR. REGALADO. I am referring here only to the 
power of the President not with respect to the provin- 
cial government over the municipalities constituent 
thereof. I am only wondering, and I am sure there will 
be questions because of the disparity of the expression 
used therein, why under the Article on the Executive, 
the power of general supervision is “subject to” and “as 
may be provided by law” whereas here, that phrase 
which assumes some vital importance is completely 
eliminated in two sections. 

FR. BERNAS. That is why I think when we discussed 
this yesterday, the Chairman of the Committee on Style 
and also the Chairman of the Sponsorship Committee 
saw the possible necessity of reconciling the two. In 
other words, by dropping the phrase “as may be pro- 
vided by law,” we are cutting the discretion of Congress 
to give or not to give authority to the President. The 
intention was not to strengthen the President but rather 
to strengthen autonomy vis-a-vis the Legislature. 

MR. REGALADO. Was it therefore the understanding 
of the body and of the Committee — because I was not 
here at that time - that the power of general supervi- 
sion of the President over local governments lies purely 
on the fact that he is the national head of the govern- 
ment and not because it is a power vouchsafed to him 
by provision of law, in other words, a rethinking, a 
360-degree turn from the present conventional rule? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is right. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. For the information of Com- 
missioner Regalado, who was not here when this matter 
was taken up, I, as Qiairman of the Committee on 


516 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


Style, called attention to the duplication of this pro- 
vision on the power of general supervision of the Pres- 
ident over loc^ governments. I called attention to the 
fact that Section 5, now Section 7 of the proposed 
provision that we are discussing, is substantially the 
same as Section 17, second sentence thereof under the 
Article on the Executive, except — and I called atten- 
tion to this — for the phrase “as may be provided by 
law” which appears in Section 17 of the Article on the 
Executive but does not appear in Section 5 of the pro- 
posal. My interest was to find out the desire of the 
body because the Committee on Style will have to 
eliminate one to avoid a duplication. And it was decided 
by the body to remove that sentence from the Article 
on the Executive, transfer it to the Article on Local 
Governments, and follow the wording of the provision 
in the Article on Local Governments, which is minus the 
phrase “as may be provided by law.” 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. In the proceedings yesterday, it was 
made clear that the intention of the body is to sustain 
and adhere to the settled jurisprudence that general 
supervisory powers only mean the power to oversee an 
inferior body and it does not constitute any restraining 
authority on the part of the national government over 
the body being supervised. And the deletion of the 
phrase “as may be provided by law” was deliberately 
intended to deny Congress any legislation that might 
enlarge the supervisory powers of the President 
previously defined. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that clear now to Commissioner 
Regalado? 

N^. REGALADO. In other words, was it the sense 
o the body that the present Section 3 under the Article 
on ^tonomous Regions and Section 5 under the 
provision on Local Governments will be 
e e e and that the second sentence of Section 1 7 will 
e ransposed to the Article on Local Governments 
mmus e phrase as may be provided by law”? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. The answer is yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we first allow the Chairman 
of the Committee to react to the statement of Com- 
missioner Regalado about the basis. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, my answer is yes . 

THE PRESIDENT. The answer is affirmative. 
Commissioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

On my notes on the proceedings yesterday, the 
observation of Commissioner Rodrigo on Section 1 7 of 
the Article on the Executive is correct. And on Section 
7, formerly Section 5, we stated that: “The President 
of the Philippines shall exercise general supervision over 
local governments.” And this is followed by the pro- 
visions of Section 4.1 of the 1973 Constitution which 
states: 

Provinces with respect to component cities and munici- 
palities, and cities and municipalities with respect to com- 
ponent barrios, shall ensure that the acts of their compo- 
nent units are within the scope of their assigned powers and 
functions. 

That is what I got in our proceedings yesterday. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is correct. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any proposed amendment 
to Section 3? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I ask that we 
vote on Section 3, as amended, which is now Sec ion 
16. May we ask the Chairman of the Committee to rea 
it? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 3 on Autonomous Regions 
reads: “The President of the Philippines shall exercise 
general supervision over autonomous regions to ensure 
that laws are faithfully executed.” 


t + 1 , ALADO. And was it the sense of the bod> 
a e power of general supervision by the President 
over oca governments is no longer dependent upon an> 

s a u ory la ut mheres from his position as head ol 
the gov ernment? 

th ^ "ot in a position to answe 

in was to find out which 
should delete because of the duplication. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the Committee say? 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular section? (Silence) The Chair hears none. 
Section 3, as amended, is approved. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the Committee 
believes that the next three sections may take a lot of 
time to discuss, and so we ask that the Floor Leader 
move for adjournment until tomorrow morning. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I just want to put on 
record the proponents of Section 2: Commissioners 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 19, 1986 


517 


Ople, Nolledo, Foz, Monsod, Rama, Bennagen, Alonto, 
Villacorta, Azcuna, Uka and Munoz Palma. 

Thank you. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, there are so 
many proponents for Section 4. So I join the manifesta- 


tion of our Chairman, Commissioner Nolledo. I move 
that we adjourn the session until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 6:39 p.m. 





( 

! 

[ 

i 




WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


519 


R.C.C. NO. 61 

Wednesday, August 20, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:46 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Edmundo G. Garcia. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. GARCIA. The Reading is taken from the Gospel 
of St. Luke, Chapter 1, verses 46-55, The Magnificat, 
Mary’s Song of Praise: 

My heart praises the Lord; my soul is glad because of 
God my Saviour, for He has remembered me, His lowly 
servant! From now on all people will call me happy, 
because of the great things the Mighty God has done for 
me. 

His name is holy; from one generation to another. He 
shows mercy to those who honor Him. He has stretched out 
His mighty arm and scattered the proud with all their plans. 

He has brought down mighty kings from their thrones, and 
lifted up the lowly. He has filled the hungry with good 
things, and sent the rich away with empty hands. He has 
kept the promise He made to our ancestor; and has come to 
the help of His servant Israel. He has remembered to show 
mercy to Abraham and to all his descendants forever! 

Dear God, Father of our people, be with us till the 
end as we finish our task of writing a charter together 
with our people for the future. 

We continue this effort in FAITH, knowing fully 
well that no matter how much we try, what we can 
produce is but an imperfect and unfinished document — 
imperfect, because we are men and women with feet of 
clay holding imperfect tools in uncertain times; unfin- 


ished, for no matter what we do, only the people can 
give life and meaning to the lines we write. 

We continue this effort in HOPE, knowing that if we 
fail to say or fail to do what we must, someday our 
people will say or do what must be said or done in our 
barrios and cities, in our towns and countryside or in 
our autonomous regions. 

Dear God, You, Who can read between the lines, and 
even beyond them, we hope that You will perfect our 
efforts by Your guidance and loving kindness, in session 
or out of session, in season or out of season, for the 
good of our people and this country which You love so 
dearly. 

Finally, we continue this effort in LOVE, knowing 
that when all is said and done, the one important thing 
is how we have loved our neighbor in word and deed, 
especially those who have less in life, those closest to 
Your heart: the lowly ones, the voiceless and the poor. 

Dear God, You, Who love our people and our country 
more than anyone of us here and more than we can 
imagine, stand by our side. We believe in the constancy 
of Your love, because though we may seem to be a poor 
and peripheral nation is no reason for us not to be 
proud and free, to be strong and self-reliant, to be 
independent and sovereign. 

You Who have crushed the proud from their thrones, 
lift up Your lowly ones and this our only country, brave 
isles in difficult seas but beloved in Your eyes. 

Dear God, we trust that You will be with us, now and 
always. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Brocka . . 


Alonto 

. Present 

Calderon . . 


Aquino 

. Present* 

Castro de . . 


Azcuna 

. Present 

Colavco . . 


Bacani 

. Present 

Concepcion . . 

. . Present 

Bengzon 


Davide 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Foz 


Bernas 


Garcia 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Gascon 

. . Present 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


520 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


Guingona . . . 

. . Present* 

Rigos 


Jamir 


Rodrigo . . . , 


Laurel 


Romulo . . . , 


Lerum 


Rosales . . . . . 


Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Sarmiento . . . 


Monsod . . . . 


Suarez 


Natividad . . . 


Sumulong . . . 


Nieva 


Tadeo 


Nolledo .... 


Tan 


Ople 


Tingson . . . . 


Padilla 


Trenas 


Quesada . . . . 


Uka 


Rama 


Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Regalado . . . . 


Villegas 


Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 35 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

anJrov Is there any objection that we 

approve the Journal of yesterday’s session? (Silence) 
Ihe Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
^oceed to the Reference of Business? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary -General read the following Com- 
municationSf the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Santiago Morales of the 
Philippine Chamber of Communications, Inc., Room 
504 SMS Bldg., 120 Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila, 
requesting inclusion in the Constitution of the following 
proposed provision: ‘Tn the interest of national security 
and for the common good, no foreigner shall be allowed 
to sit in the governing body of public utilities nor shall 
any foreigner or foreign corporation, association or 
entity be allowed to be involved, through a management 
contract or other means, in the management, adminis- 
tration, operation, and control of public utilities.” 

(Communication No. 582 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Letter from Ms. Marie Francesca Yuvienco of St. Paul 
College, Quezon City, urging the retention of the United 
States military facilities in Clark Air Base and Subic 
Naval Base. 

(Communication No. 583 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Letter from Rev. Henry Habon of Tarlac, Tarlac, urging 
the Constitutional Commission to incorporate in the 
Constitution the provision on the inviolability of the 
separation of the Church and the State, as embodied in 
the 1973 Constitution. 

(Communication No. 584 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Communication from the Sangguniang Bayan of 
Rosario, Agusan del Sur, signed by the Municipal 
Mayor-Designate Ruperto V. Bermudez, seeking the 
disbandment and/or abolition of the Philippine Consta- 
bulary (PC) and the Integrated Civilian Home Defense 
Forces (CHDF). 

(Communication No. 585 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

Letter from the Concerned Women of the Philippines, 
signed by fifteen members, reiterating its stand on “the 
sacredness of the family as a basic unit of society” and 
the right to life of the unborn child which begins from 
the moment of conception.” 

(Communication No. 586 — Constitutional Commission 
..of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


521 


Letter from Mr. Jose P. Dimalanta, Jr. of Tabuk, 
Kalinga-Apayao, requesting reconsideration of the 
Constitutional Commission’s decision to refuse the 
mechanism of limiting reelections thru a process effec- 
tivity barring elective officials from running for the 
same public office after two or three terms, saying that, 
at this crucial stage in our history, there is a compelhng 
need to apply the brakes to unlimited reelections, and 
perforce to unabated abuse of power; otherwise there 
will be a larger break from the sociopohtical mainstream 
that will be the breeding ground for future civil strife 
of the internecine type. 

(Communication No. 587 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Ramon Y. Sy, UCPB Building, Makati 
Avenue, Makati, Metro Manila, submitting his position 
paper in which he discussed his policy recommendations 
on the settlement of our foreign debt. 

(Communication No. 588 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Ms. Cristina M. Liamzon, National 
Coordinator, Philippine Partnership for the Develop- 
ment of Human Resources in Rural Areas, submitting a 
position paper on the proposed amendments to Sections 
5, 6 and 7 of the Article on Social Justice, expressing 
hope that these statements be given sufficient attention 
in the deliberations of the sections. 

(Communication No. 589 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente D. Millora, transmitting a 
resolution of the Board of Governors of the Integrated 
Bar of the Philippines, urging the Constitutional Com- 
mission to provide in the Constitution for a time limit 
of six (6) months from date of sequestration by the 
Presidential Commission on Good Government within 
which the corresponding action for forfeiture of ill- 
gotten wealth should be filed in court. 

(Communication No. 590 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Amendments and Transitory 
Provisions. 

Communication from the Convention of Philippine 
Baptist Churches, Inc., P.O. Box 263, Iloilo City, signed 
by its General Secretary, Rev. Penuelito A. Sacapafio, 
registering its opposition to a proposed constitutional 
provision which will make religious instruction in the 
public schools compulsory or mandatory. 


(Communication No. 591 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Letter from Mr. Ernesto B. Hidalgo of Room 209 CCH 
Bldg., Alfaro St., Salcedo Village, Makati, Metro Manila, 
submitting a proposed amendment to Section 9, Article 
XIV of the 1973 Constitution for inclusion in the new 
Constitution to wit; “In cases where the exploration, 
development or exploitation of any of the country’s 
natural resources requires a capital investment of ten 
million U.S. dollars (US$10 million) or more, foreign 
citizens, corporations or associations may be allowed to 
own at least 60 per centum of the capital; provided, 
however, that said foreign citizens, corporations or asso- 
ciations must gradually dispose of at least twenty per- 
cent of its total equity to Filipino citizens within the 
period of ten years at the rate of two percent annually 
commencing from the start of actual commercial 
production.” 

(Communication No. 592 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication from Ms. Perla B. Sanchez of the Insti- 
tute of Maternal and Child Health (IMCH), 1 1 Banawe 
St., Quezon City, endorsing an open letter signed by 
two hundred eighty-eight signatories with their respec- 
tive addresses, seeking the deletion of Section 9 of the 
proposed Article on the Declaration of Principles, which 
states: “The State shall equally protect the life of the 
mother and the life of the unborn firom the moment of 
conception.” 

(Communication No. 593 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from five hundred ninety signatories 
with their respective addresses seeking the inclusion in 
the Constitution of a provision obliging the State to 
protect the life of the unborn from the moment of 
conception. 

(Communication No. 594 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is a request for a short privilege 
speech on the occasion of a very special event. 

May I ask that Commissioner Alonto be recognized? 


522 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER ALONTO 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, distinguished 
Members of this august body. I thank God for the 
privilege that this august body has given me on this 
most momentous day in our history. 

Madam President, tomorrow is the third anniversary 
of the martyrdom of one of the most distinguished 
sons of this country, the late former Senator Benigno S. 
Aquino, whose martyrdom three years back has awak- 
ened the whole country to the realization of its actual 
state of affairs. This anniversary of the death of the late 
Senator Ninoy Aquino, I believe, was the main reason in 
proclaiming this Freedom and Peace Week, which was 
announced the other day by the distinguished President 
of this august body. It is for this reason. Madam Pres- 
ident, that I have requested for the privilege and honor 
of at least recalling some of the historic commitments 
of this great Filipino, as our contribution to the celebra- 
tion of Peace and Freedom Week. I refer. Madam 
President, to the historic lecture delivered by the honor- 
able Senator Benigno Aquino, Jr. at the King Abdulaziz 
Science Auditorium on May 12, 1981 in Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia. 

It was during the days of his self-imposed exile that 
the former Senator broke the serenity of that exile in a 
foreign land to go to another foreign land for the pur- 
pose of continuing his search for peace and freedom in 
this country, which at that moment was obliterated by a 
suppressive and tyrannical dictatorship. 

The title of this historic lecture is “The Historical 
Background of the Moro Problem in Southern Philip- 
pines.” For purposes of depicting the concern of the 
late Senator Aquino for peace, freedom and demo- 
cracy m this country, allow me, Madam President, to 
quote from this historical pronouncement of the late 
Senator: 

My dear friends, over the last eight years, as a result of 
the so-called Muslim mini-war in the Philippines, more than 
a hundred thousand Filipino Muslims have lost their lives; 
over two hundred fifty thousand have come as refugees in 
the neighboring Sabah State of Malaysia, and more than 
one milhon have been displaced and rendered homeless. On 
the other side, according to President Marcos himself, about 
ten to eleven thousand Filipino soldiers have been killed 
over the last eight years as a result of the battle in the 
Southern Philippines. These grim statistics have not captured 
e ea ®®®^the world press and, as a result, world public 
opinion has not been mobilized enough to clamor for a halt 
to this sen^less carnage. The Philippine government under 
President Marcos calls the Muslim fighters rebels; he calls 
them outlaws; he calls them insurrectionists; he calls them 
secessionists or, far worse, traitors to the Philippines. The 
Muslims, on the other h^d, see themselves as patriots, as 


holy warriors, defending their homeland and their Islamic 
faith and sacred birthright of self-determination from 
infidel attacks. It is most unfortunate that Filipinos are 
fighting against Filipinos today. 

I have come all the way from Boston precisely to urge 
our brothers, especially those from the Moro National 
Liberation Front and the BangsaMoro Liberation Organiza- 
tion, most probably to start their united effort so that as 
one Muslim nation they will be able to present a more 
formidable force in any negotiation with the present 
government. This evening, I would like to announce to you 
that the Moro National Liberation Front under Chairman 
Nur Misuari and the Bangsa Moro Liberation Organization 
under Sultan Haroun Al-Rashid Lueman have finally joined 
forces and together will continue the struggle for the 
freedom of our Muslim brothers now in the Southern 
Philippines. Chairman Misuari, who heads this joint group, 
together with the leadership of Sultan Lueman, will be 
rallying most of the Muslims not only here but in our coun- 
try so that once united, they will be able to present their 
case better in the halls of the Organization of the Islamic 
Conference before the Philippine government, and be able 
to work towards the resumption of the Tripoli Agreement 
in international bodies like the United Nations. 

However, before I go into this, I would like to give you a 
brief history of the Muslim struggle. This struggle has con- 
tinued for almost four centuries and this may be the last 
chapter of the classic encounter of the crescent and the 
cross. It is true that this conflict has many ingredients and 
many causes — ethnic hostilities, economic rivalry, and 
political antagonism — but all these reasons are radically 
different from the understanding of each side as to what 
the conflict is all about. My point is that the Muslims look 
at this problem from one angle and the non-Muslims from 
another. They cannot seem to agree on what they are 
saying and we have this incessant conflict. I will just cite to 
you an example of what happened last February. According 
to the best reports, to an island outside of Jolo known as 
Pata Island, which has about eleven thousand people, the 
military sent a battalion of soldiers to inventory the fire- 
arms of its people. However, the soldiers who came from 
Luzon, not understanding the customs of our Muslim 
brothers in the South, occupied the mosque in that island. 
After they had occupied the mosque, they got some pigs 
and dogs and started making lechon (grill) inside the 
mosque. Now, you know that pork is one of those pro- 
hibited foods in the Muslim religion, but these soldiers did 
not notice that they were in a sensitive situation and so 
started cooking inside the mosque, which naturally enraged 
the people in the village. 

At this juncture, my dear friends, let us look back a little 
at history. You and I know that the Muslims in our country 
have predated the Christians in that country. Arab traders, 
as early as the ninth century, have become dominant in 
the vigorous Southeast Asian center with the religion of 
Islam. At the end of the thirteenth century, according to 
Marco Polo, he found a flourishing Muslim Sultanate in 
Northern Sumatra. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


523 


According to our own Dr. Mauyag Tamano in his book, 
and I quote: “By 1917, the U.S. government had as one of 
its goals the complete fusion of a group of Filipino Muslims 
and a majority segment of the Filipino Christians.” In other 
words, the Spaniards before and the Americans who came 
later, had one goal — to integrate this community. But this 
community could not be integrated because the Muslims 
felt they had their own national identity. 

The Americans bringing in their own cultural tradition 
wanted to enforce a strict separation of the Church and 
State, but this American tradition was seen by the Muslims 
as a threat to their own traditions. The very notion of the 
separation of the Church and the State, in the view of a 
Muslim, was a Christian idea; for among the Muslims, the 
Church and the State are indivisible, at most, two aspects 
of the same reality . . . 

Madam President, in order not to tire this august 
body, I would like to leave out that portion of the 
lecture which deals with the historical perspective 
touched upon by the late Senator Aquino. I would like 
now to read that last portion of this historic document 
which intends to solve the present situation, the present 
conflict in the South: 

This evening, my friends, I would like to outline to you 
a solution that I proposed to the leaders of the Muslim 
communities led by Chairman Nur Misuari and Sultan 
Haroun Al-Rashid Lucman, and, hopefully, will be able to 
bring peace to our troubled land. 

1 . We will note that in 1977, under the aegis of the Organi- 
zation of the Islamic Conference, an agreement was signed 
in Tripoli known as the TRIPOLI AGREEMENT. Under 
this agreement, our Muslim brothers have given up the 
quest for independence and they will remain in the Repub- 
lic provided they are given the autonomy in the 13 prov- 
inces of Mindanao. To the 13 provinces of Mindanao, we 
are going to give them autonomy in those regions. They 
will be able to set up their own security forces and they will 
be able to govern themselves. This was a very good begin- 
ning — and for a while, there was a ceasefire and there was 
no killing. Unfortunately, when this agreement was imple- 
mented, our President did not implement it to the letter 
and instead of discussing this with the Muslim leaders, 
broke off, and Mr. Marcos went on to implement it uni- 
laterally. Instead of 13 provinces, Mr. Marcos split these 
two regions — one is Region IX and the other is Region XII 
and they removed three provinces. Naturally, our Muslim 
brothers said that “This is a violation of the TRIPOLI 
AGREEMENT. The TRIPOLI AGREEMENT talks of 13 
provinces, and now you have reduced this number to 10, 
and what is worse, you have split us into two.” 

I, therefore, would like to propose that the Philippine 
government return to the original Tripoli Agreement. If the 
Philippine government returns to the Tripoli Agreement, 
then we will make an appeal to our Muslim brothers to 
come back to the table so that we can discuss our problem 
rather than shoot it out. If we do not negotiate, my friends, 
there will be a return to bloodshed and more people will 
die. But we have promised our Muslim brothers that if they 


come back to the negotiating table, if they come back to 
the Tripoli Agreement, then the entire Christian North will 
support them in tlieir claim and once more we would like 
to propose affirmative actions on the regions in Mindanao. . . 
What do I mean by this? If our regions in Mindanao are 
underdeveloped and they are entitled to only one school, 
by our definition of affirmative actions, we will increase 
your school to four every year so that income (sic) between 
the two communities will be close at the end of the 
century. 

2. We believe that all Christian troops in Mindanao should 
be withdrawn from that area. It takes two to fight. If there 
are no more soldiers, there will be no more fighting and, 
therefore, we will be able to disconnect (sic) the fighting. 

All Christian troops will be removed firom those Muslim 
areas and we will let the Muslims police themselves. We will 
tell them: “We are removing the Christian troops and you 
set up your own police force; you set up your regional 
forces; you police yourselves because we do not want any- 
more conflict between Christian and non-Christian com- 
munities.” 

3. We will propose that the Muslims set up their own courts 
— their own “shari’ah courts, their own schools, their own 
madrasahs; if they want to use Arabic to teach their child- 
ren, they can use Arabic to teach their children. Why 
should we impose English or Tagalog if they want their own 
Arabic? And, therefore, we believe that they should also 
have their own courts and they should also have their own 
schools. Their local autonomy officials should be Muslims 
and they should be elected by their own people. The 
national government will always support them if they are 
entitled to by way of development. I believe the Muslim 
community should be allowed to call in their lawyers and 
set up their own civil code as against our own civil code. If 
this is achieved, it will go a long way as essential oppor- 
tunities that will signal the beginning of the Renaissance in 
the Muslim community in the Philippines which, some five 
hundred years ago, was the center of Filipino culture, learn- 
ing and power. With the assistance of the Islamic Con- 
ference, funds for development could be secured, ushering 
in a new prosperity, envisioning a system of official free 
institute (si^) all over the Philippines. We feel that if our 
brothers unite and hostilities stop, we can set up training 
camps and educational institutions all over Mindanao so 
that the products of these institutions can come to the 
Middle East for better employment and if we appeal to the 
Organization of the Islamic States, I believe the Filipinos, 
now numbering a hundred and fifty thousand to two 
hundred thousand here, will increase to more than half-a- 
million. 

Madam President, this pronouncement of the late 
Senator Aquino has clearly proven that even in his try- 
ing and difficult days, his main concern was the return 
of freedom, peace, and democracy to the people of the 
Philippines, irrespective of race or creed. 

Madam President, I would like to close this privilege 
of reading this into our records, with the hope that in 
consideration of the report of the Committee on Local 


524 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


Governments regarding the autonomous region, the 
formula that is given by Senator Aquino in his speech 
shall be taken into consideration. 

Thank you and may God give us peace and freedom 
in this country. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

At this juncture, the Chair acknowledges the presence 
of students from St. Paul College, St. Scholastica’s and 
Maryknoll. We also have here with us our brothers from 
Mindanao and from the Cordillera region, as well as 
students from the PSBA and the Philippine Women’s 
University. At the South Wing Lobby is a big group of 
students from La Consolacion Grade School who are all 
interested in what is going on in these halls of the 
Constitutional Commission. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 470 
(Article on Local Governments) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
continue the consideration of the Article on Local Gov- 
ernments, Proposed Resolution No. 470. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed with the continuation of the consideration of 
the Article on Local Governments? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I request all 
those who have amendments to confer with the commit- 
tee for more speedy proceedings. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, we are now con- 
sidering amendments to Section 4 of the report on 
autonomous regions. 

MR. RAMA. May I, therefore, request that Com- 
missioners Foz, Rodrigo, Bacani, Uka, Quesada, Davide, 
Rosario Br^d, and Bengzon approach the committee to 
present their amendments. May I request that as soon as 
the committee ch^rman announces the amendments ac- 
cepted by the committee, that he also announce the 
authors of said amendments. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 10:24 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 10:55 a.m., the session was resumed. 


jnjE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bacani be 
recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I have proposed 
an amendment which will be incorporated into the 
amendment of Commissioner Regalado, but I ask that I 
be given the privilege of asking a few questions to clarify 
the meaning of the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on Section 4? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. My amend- 
ment consists of adding the words “CONSISTENT 
WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION” 
in the first paragraph of Section 4. As it stands now. 
Section 4(10) will have to read this way in conjunction 
with the first paragraph of Section 4: 

Within its territorial jurisdiction, an autonomous region 

shall have legislative authority over the following: . . . 

10) Preservation and development of customs and tradi- 
tions and culture indigenous to the autonomous region. 

And these are the questions I would like to ask in 
order to clarify the meaning of that amendment which, 
I believe, the committee is willing to accept. The auto- 
nomous regions have indigenous culture, and do I under- 
stand that religion is among the prominent components 
of that culture? If so, the preservation and development 
of customs, traditions and culture would include the 
preservation and development of religion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

When we say that the autonomous regions shall have 
legislative authority over the following, would the com- 
mittee not explicitly want to exclude the provision that 
they shall have legislative authority over religion? Or 
would the committee want that also to be included 
within the purview of what is being proposed in Section 
4 (10)? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, before I answer 
that question, may I inform the Commissioner that we 
have acceded to the Davide amendment with respect to 
Section 4(10) which is now Section 4(1 1) of the report. 
Instead of using too many words, we agreed that we 
should use “Preservation and development of THE 
CULTURAL HERITAGE OF THE REGION.” I agree 
with Commissioner Bacani that “CULTURAL HERI- 
TAGE” here may cover religious practices. And in the 
exercise of legislative authority over the cultural heri- 
tage of the region, the Constitution must be respected. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1 986 


525 


BISHOP BACANI. That is why I am proposing that 
amendment. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is precisely the reason why we 
are accepting the amendment, Madam President. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I ask a further question? In 
precise refetence to the Muslim autonomous regions 
there allegedly exist Muslim village schools where the 
Muslim religion is being taught at the expense of the 
State. 1 suppose that is not construed as a violation of 
the Constitution. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we ask Commissioner Alonto 
to answer that question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, there seems to be 
some misunderstanding. The teaching of religion in the 
different schools in Mindanao now, whether private or 
public, is not supported by the State. The State does 
not spend anything. Those are all voluntary on the part 
of the community. And similarly in some pubUc schools 
here in Luzon and in the Visayas, there are some good 
people who volunteer to teach religion in the public 
schools, but this is not supported by the State. 

BISHOP BACANI. I asked about this because I have 
two sources of information which actually tell me that 
the State supports Muslim village schools. I do not want 
to contradict that, if that is what is happening there. 
But would the committee be excluding government 
support for the teaching of the Muslim religion in the 
Muslim village schools? 

J 

MR. NOLLEDO. Personally, in answer to the Com- 
missioner’s question, the provisions of the Constitu- 
tion on the nonuse of government funds to promote 
religion should prevail all over the country, including 
the autonomous regions. 

MR. ALONTO. Yes, because that is the general 
provision. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I point out that our amend- 
ments are on lines 1 , 2 and 3 in the original Section 4, 
and what is being discussed now is already on Section 
10 . 

THE PRESIDENT. That is subsection 10 of Section 4. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, since amend- 
ments of many Commissioners have been accepted by 


the committee with respect to the amendments on lines 
1, 2 and 3, may I suggest that we get through first with 
those amendments before we get into the subsections, 
so that we will finish off the amendments that have 
been accepted? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bacani agree- 
able? 

BISHOP BACANI. I am agreeable to that. Madam 
President. We only wish to take note that it was pre- 
cisely because my amendment has been transferred to 
lines 1 , 2 and 3 that I started raising my questions.-The 
reason for my amendment has reference to Section 
4(10) but the amendment has, in fact, been transferred 
to line 1 . 

MR. BENGZON. And which has been accepted by 
the committee. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will call Commissioner 
Bacani later on, if there is a need. 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you very much. Madam 

President^_gj,^!e=^ 

MR. BENGZON. May I request the chairman of the 
committee to read the amendments on Unes 1 , 2 and 3, 
as proposed by the many other Commissioners and 
accepted by them. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Before I proceed to the other pro- 
visions, I would like to request the Chair to ask the 
body if they have any objection to the amendments 
now embodied on lines 1, 2 and 3, because the com- 
mittee has accepted all these amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, the Members of the Commission 
may please refer to the original. They can readily see, as 
I read these amendments, the changes effected after the 
amendments. Section 4, lines 1, 2 and 3 should now 
read as follows: “Within its territorial jurisdiction, AND 
WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF THIS CONSTITU- 
TION, NATIONAL POLICIES, LAW AND DEVELOP- 
MENT an autonomous region shall have legislative 
authority, AS PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC ACT, over 
the following:” 

Before I proceed. Madam President, I would like to 
state that the first part beginning with the words “AND 
WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK . . .” is authored by 
Commissioners Bacani, Bengzon, Monsod, Regalado and 
Foz, while the words “AS PROVIDED IN ITS OR- 
GANIC ACT, were authored by Commissioner Rodrigo. 

The committee has accepted all these amendments, 
Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


526 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like some clarification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, 1 would like to 
compromise. I shall read the amendments now so that 
the Secretariat can put them in writing instead of me 
rewriting them. I have read the first three lines. I am 
willing to read the others so that the Secretariat can 
put them in writing now and circulate the copies. 


MR. DAVIDE. As worded, there is a comma after 
“CONSTITUTION,” another after “NATIONAL 
POLICIES,” and another after “LAW,” and then 
“DEVELOPMENT.” I would like to find out if “LAW” 
and “DEVELOPMENT” are quaUfied by “NATIONAL.” 


FR. BERNAS. That would be perfectly acceptable, 
Madam President, provided before we proceed with the 
discussion, the Secretariat would supply us with 
whatever they have. 


MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. 


MR. DAVIDE. If that is so, I propose an amendment. 
Instead of a comma (,) after “CONSTITUTION,” place 
the word AND to make it very clear that “NATIONAL” 
“NATIONAL POLICIES,” “NATIONAL 
LAW, and “NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ” 


MR. NOLLEDO. The committee does not object to 
that suggestion. Madam President, but I have to read 
the amendments so that the Commissioners will have an 
offhand knowledge of the amendments which the 
committee has accepted. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President, Section 4 is a very 
central section in this provision and I gather that quite 
a number of amendments have been accepted by the 
committee. For purposes of more orderly and in- 
telhgent discussion of this by the entire Commission, 
niay I request that the Commission be furnished a copy 
of the amended draft of Section 4, and while we wait 
tor that, we could be discussing other sections. I think 
tms is very central, very crucial, and we would like to be 
able to analyze every word, every change that has been 


ArJ^J^ president. What does Chairman Nolledo saj 

Dellfltion^ ^ ^ Section 4 that will justify an inte 

p llation as stated by Commissioner Bemas? 

ees^oii Madam President, while the su 

think thp the changes are clear and 

prehend th Commission can easily cor 

a lot of time becaui 
had to rewrite amendments which I placed here, 
before the Seor t ^ considerable length of tin 

carefully I think thp */®3d the amendments hei 
changes!' “ 

Commissioner Bernas, I have to dissMt ' 

votfasffo^J ■JTotn"’ bSltl'ri' ‘’’f 

have been made and frankit i ^ ^ many chang( 
following the discussions. As I’said^his difficult 

section and while we wait for thk ^meLVd'dra'ft'v 
can go to Section 5, or Section 6, or whatever. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Before the chairman reads the 
amendments, I would Uke to call the attention of the 
committee. I have also submitted a proposed amend- 
ment to Section 4, which reads: “Within the territorial 
jurisdiction, an autonomous region shall EXERCISE 
legislative POWERS WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF 
NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS, POLICIES AND 
GOALS OVER THE following REGIONAL AFFAIRS.” 
With regard to the first line, I do not recall having in the 
present formulation of the committee the words: 
“FRA'MEWORK OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
PLANS, POLICIES AND GOALS,” and, therefore, I 
would like the honorable chairman to please consider 
such proposed amendment. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The amendments of the Commis- 
sioner were taken into account. I think Commissioner 
Maambong should be one of the coauthors considering 
that we used some of his words. I hope Commissioner 
Maambong will be kind enough to accede to the amend- 
ments as accepted by the committee because these 
amendments from Commissioners Bengzon, Monsod, 
Foz, Regalado and Bacani are substantially the same as 
his. So, I will add Commissioner Maambong as one of 
the authors. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask Commissioner 
Nolledo to please proceed to read. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We will listen to the reading of 
the new formulation. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may I read the 
provisions as amended. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


527 


1 ) “Administrative organization” — there is no 
amendment. 

2) “Regional taxation” — we deleted the clause “as 
provided for by law” because of the Rodrigo amend- 
ment. 

3) “Ancestral domain and natural resources” — there 
is no amendment. 

4) “PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PROPERTY RELA- 
TIONS” — an amendment introduced by Commissioner 
Foz. The original No. 4 will be No. 5. 

5) “INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT INCLUD- 
ING urban and rural planning and development” — as 
amended by Commissioner Maambong. ITiat will be 
No. 5. 

6) “AGRICULTURAL, COMMERCIAL AND IN- 
DUSTRIAL PROGRAMS AS WELL AS economic, 
social and cultural development.” Actually, “AGRI- 
CULTURAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL 
PROGRAMS” may be embodied under “Economic 
development” but we felt that it was necessary to 
identify the programs. So, the original No. 6 will be 
No. 7, as amended by Commissioners Rosario Braid and 
Regalado. 

7) “Establishment, maintenance and administration 
of schools OFFERING FORMAL AND NONFORMAL 
EDUCATION INCLUDING ADOPTION OF ADDI- 
TIONAL CURRICULA CONSISTENT WITH THE 
CULTURAL HERITAGE OF THE REGION.” These 
three lines are amendments by Commissioners Rosario 
Braid and Regalado. 

8) “Promotion and regulation of TRADE, INDUS- 
TRY AND tourism within the region” — as amended 
by Commissioner Uka. 

Let us now proceed to No. 9 which was formerly 
No. 8. 

9) “Establishment, operation, maintenance AND 
ADMINISTRATION of health, welfare and OTHER 
social services PROGRAMS AND FACILITIES” - as 
amended by Commissioner Maambong. 

1 0) “Protection of the environment in accordance with 
standards and regulations of the national government.” 
There is no amendment. 

1 1 ) “Preservation and development of THE CUL- 
TURAL HERITAGE OF THE REGION” - as amended 
by Commissioners Davide and Maambong. We just used 
the term “CULTURAL HERITAGE” because we felt 
that the term covers the customs, traditions and culture 
indigenous to the autonomous region. 

12) “PROMOTION OF ADEQUATE AND APPRO- 
PRIATE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS FOR THE 
REGION.” This is a new amendment introduced by 
Commissioner Rosario Braid and accepted by the com- 
mittee. 

13) “Such other matters as may be authorized by law 
for the promotion of the general welfare of the people 


of the region.” We deleted the word “autonomous,” as 
amended by Commissioner Maambong. 

Madam President, that completes Section 4 of the 
provisions on autonomous regions, as amended by 
various Commissioners. All amendments were accepted 
by the committee. I ask the Secretariat to kindly re- 
produce copies of Section 4, as amended, to be dis- 
tributed to the Members of the Constitutional Com- 
mission. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretariat is so ordered; and 
in the meantime, we can now proceed to the next 
section. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just a minor 
clarification on Section 4(2). Did we include “AND 
OTHER REVENUE-RAISING MEASURES”? 

Our proposed amendment is: “Regional taxation 
AND OTHER REVENUE-RAISING MEASURES as 
provided for by law.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee will accept, because 
the term “revenue measures” may cover voluntary 
contributions. Will the Secretariat take note of this. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the Maam- 
bong amendment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I propose an 
amendment to Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 5, line 26, I propose to 
add the letter “S” to the word “executive” to read 
“executives”; to change “each” to THE; and to add the 
letter “S” to the word “unit” to read “unitS.” 

On line 27, after “forces,” add the phrase “OF 
their respective UNITS.” On Une 28, after “de- 
fense,” add the words “AND SECURITY”; then delete 
the phrase “against insurgency or invasion.” 

So, the entire Section 5 will read as follows: “The 
maintenance of peace and order within the region shall 
be the responsibility of the local police agencies. The 
local chief executives of THE constituent UNITS shall 
exercise general supervision over the local police forces 
OF THEIR respective UNITS.” 


528 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. May we interrupt Commissioner 
Davide at this moment because there is a Regalado 
amendment to line 28. 

Madam President, we are accepting the Davide 
amendment up to the word “UNITS” where we just 
stopped. We are accepting all those amendments because 
they are just matters of style. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is correct. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I notice that in several parts of 
this article, the phrase “chief executives” is used. If one 
is chief, there cannot be several chief executives. There is 
only one chief executive in the Philippines, and that is 
the President. So, I would suggest to the committee to 
find another expression to describe the officer alluded 
to. 


MR. NOLLEDO. However, Madam President, we 
would like to inform Commissioner Davide that the 
committee has accepted the amendments proposed by 
Commissioner Regalado where line 28 will read as 
follows; “The defense of the region against LAWLESS 
VIOLENCE, REBELLION or invasion. . .” If Com- 
missioner Davide will accept the amendments of Com- 
missioner Regalado, we will also accept “SECURITY.” 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, this section is in 
accordance with the resolution of Commissioners de 
Castro and Natividad because when I called their at- 
tention, they said that the word “local” will already 
qualify the term “chief executive.” However, we have 
no objection if we wiU use the term “the local execu- 
tives.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I think my proposal 
will cover everything. It is the entirety of defense and 
security. ‘SECURITY” will include insurgency, 
invasion, sedition, rebellion and so on. So, the sentence 
will only read: “The defense and SECURITY of the 
region shall be the responsibility of the National 
Government.” 


MR. CONCEPCION. It is impossible to have a coun- 
try with several chief executives. The chief is only one. 
That is why the President is the chief executive because 
the others are plain executives. The only chief is the 
President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee agrees. We will 
delete the word “chief.” 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. 
MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Will Commissioner Davide yield 
to an amendment to his amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I ask Commissioner Davide a 
question? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, my amendment 
will read: “The defense and SECURITY of the region 
shaU be the JOINT responsibility of the REGIONAL 
GOVERNMENTS AND NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.” 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. I wUl gladly yield to him. Madam 
President. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I regret that I 
cannot accept, because the overall defense and the 

country are the responsibility of 
, .,® government. If we make it a joint responsi- 

^ It might create a very dangerous situation. One 
responsibility to the other and there 
1 PossibiUty of a deadlock. The other, the 

demand a broader power 
a o our national defense and security forces. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Sarmiento 
insist on his proposed amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I withdraw my amendment. 
Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. Madam President, I also have an 
amendment along that hne and I was just wondering i 
we could fuse our amendments. In a situation where 
peace and order in the autonomous region breaks down 
because the local police agencies are either unable to 
cope with the situation or are corrupt and engaged in 
banditry against the citizens of that region, what can the 
national government do? 

MR. DAVIDE. The President of the Republic is the 
Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the Philip- 
pines and can exercise his commander-in-chief powers. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. But are we not going to put 
something here that would automatically and clearly 
state that the police agencies somehow are under the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1 986 


529 


supervision of the national government in order to take 
care of that situation? The way it appears here, the local 
police agencies seem to be the factotum in their area. 

MR. DAVIDE. We have the sentence itself, which is 
the source of the authority to be exercised by the 
national government. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I answer 
the question of Commissioner Bengzon? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, under the 
Article on General Provisions, we have provided a 
national police force, civilian in nature and in character, 
supervised and controlled by a national police com- 
mission. In the event that the local police agencies of 
autonomous regions shall be unable to cope with their 
work, the National Police Commission can order some 
members of the national police force or local police 
agencies in other areas to proceed to the autonomous 
region and help them. And there is also nothing which 
the National Police Commission could not do as a 
national police force to send reinforcements to the 
autonomous region. So, it is not possible that the local 
police agencies of the autonomous region alone shall 
maintain peace and order in their region. It will be 
subject to the aid and reinforcements of nearby police 
agencies or from the National Police Commission which 
controls the national police agency. 

MR. BENGZON. I believe that the Gentleman is 
answering a situation where external forces are at play 
and, therefore, the security of this region is endangered. 
How about a situation where the problem lies within the 
local police forces in the autonomous region themselves? 

MR. DE CASTRO. The administrative supervision of 
local police agencies, including the dismissal and in- 
vestigation of the same, shall rest on the National Police 
Commission. If we say that they are corrupt and are in 
cahoots with the thieves and the robbers, then, the local 
executive can immediately report to the National Police 
Commission which shall take immediate action, either 
by removing them from that area and replacing them 
with other police units. 

MR. BENGZON. What I would like to be clear about 
and what I would Uke the Journal to be clear about is 
that, in autonomous regions, the local police agencies 
have the responsibility of maintaining peace and order. 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is correct. 

MR. BENGZON. Am I correct to say that this is not 
an absolute power, considering that the region is auto- 
nomous, and considering that the local police agencies 


in an autonomous region are also autonomous? Am I 
correct in saying, therefore, after the Gentleman’s 
explanation, that when it comes to peace and order, 
when it comes to the supervision of police forces, the 
national government, through the National Police Com- 
mission, still has authority over the local police forces? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, because the recruitment and 
the training of the local police agencies shall be national 
in scope. As stated in the Article on General Provisions, 
the reason is that there is a dire need of professionaliz- 
ing the police service. Also, there are equipments, such 
as the laboratory and investigative equipments, cameras, 
which local units and even autonomous regions may not 
be able to establish except at the national level. 

MR. BENGZON. What is the meaning, therefore, of 
the second sentence in Section 5, lines 26 and 27, where 
it says that “The local chief executive of each consti- 
tuent unit shall exercise general supervision over the 
local police forces” if the National Police Commission 
exercises supervision over the local police forces? 

MR. DE CASTRO. The general supervision of the 
local executives should not be taken away from them 
because they are the ones who see the work of their 
police agencies everyday and they are very jealous about 
this supervision. They do not like to lose supervision 
over their local police agencies. 

MR. BENGZON. In other words, what the Gentleman 
is saying is that this power of the local executive, in his 
supervision over the local police forces, is subject to and 
junior to the power of the National Police Commission. 
Am I correct? 

MR. DE CASTRO. As stated in our formulation in 
the Article on General Provisions, there shall be a 
national poUce force, civilian in nature and in character, 
controlled and supervised by a National Police Com- 
mission. Local executives may exercise supervision over 
their local police forces in accordance with law. In 
short, there will be some parameters in the supervisory 
jurisdiction of local executives and the National Police 
Commission. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you very much. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 

recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Perhaps we could solve the 
problem now. It is precisely because of the concern of 
Commissioner Bengzon regarding the relationship 
between the national government and the local police 


530 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


agencies that we presented before the committee an 
amendment to the first sentence to clear up all doubts. 
The amendment we presented is to add to the first 
sentence, after the word “agencies,” the words “WHICH 
SHALL BE ORGANIZED, MAINTAINED AND UTIL- 
IZED IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS.” 
This will tally with the statement of Commissioner de 
Castro that we have a similar provision in the Article on 
General Provisions. 

The first sentence of Section 5, if acceptable to the 
committee, would read: “The maintenance of peace and 
order within the region shall be the responsibility of the 
local police agencies WHICH SHALL BE ORGANIZED, 
MAINTAINED AND UTILIZED IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH APPLICABLE LAWS.” I would like to inform 
the committee that this addition, which we seek to in- 
clude as an amendment, is lifted from P.D. No. 1618 
which organized the present regional autonomous 
regions to emphasize the relationship between the 
national government and the local police agencies. I will 
just call the attention of the committee to perhaps 
consider the proposed amendment we have on the first 
line of Section 5. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Laurel be recognized. 

MR. LAUREL. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel is recog- 
nized. 


, laurel. The way the discussion is going on, i 
v^u seem that the second line, regarding the loca 
chief executive has been agreed upon. But I would lik^ 
to take note of the fact that, as stated by former Chie 
ustice Concepcion, there is only one chief executive ii 
the Philippines and that is the President. As a matter o 
President not as chief executive bu 
as THE Executive. If there is only one chief executive 

there is only one executive, and that executive is th 
President. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. We will suspend the session for a 
few minutes to enable the Commissioners to confer with 
the committee. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 11:36 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:54 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Precisely, in anticipation of the 
concern of Commissioner Bengzon articulated on the 
floor, as I mentioned earlier, I have presented before 
the committee my proposed amendment on Section 5. 
During the suspension. Madam President, I consulted 
with Commissioners Bengzon and Natividad, who have 
acceded to be proponents of this resolution, and we also 
sought the expert advice of Commissioner de Castro. 

With some modifications by Commissioner Regalado, 
our amendment is .an insertion of a phrase in the first 
sentence of Section 5 after the word “agencies.’ The 
amendment is to insert the words “WHICH SHALL BE 
ORGANIZED, MAINTAINED, SUPERVISED AND 
UTILIZED IN ACCORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE 
LAWS” so that the first sentence of Section 5 will read. 
“The maintenance of peace and order within the region 
shall be the responsibility of the local police agencies 
WHICH SHALL BE ORGANIZED, MAINTAINEI^ 
SUPERVISED AND UTILIZED IN ACCORDANCE 
WITH APPLICABLE LAWS.” The addition of the word 
“SUPERVISED” was upon the behest of Commissioner 
Regalado, with the advice of Commissioner de Castro. 

I would like to know what is the thinking of the 
committee. 


So, if the body and the committee are willing, 
would rather start line 26 with the word “Local.” I 
stead of sa^g “The local EXECUTIVES,” strike o 

. f’scause “The executive” should ref 

only to the President of the RepubUc. 

word’ sentence by striking out tl 

CUTIVFS nf th “Local EX: 

CU 1 or the constituent UNITS.” 


MR. DE CASTRO. The committee accepts the 
amendment. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. The committee gladly accepts the 
lendment. 

MR. LAUREL. Thank you, Madam President. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Upon the request of the chairman 
of the Steering Committee, I would like to make it of 
record that the insertion of the word “SUPERVISED” 
would mean that the local executives would be able to 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


531 


exercise day-to-day supervision over the operations 
of their police agencies, and this will constitute normal 
police operations. If and when they need help particu- 
larly on abnormal operations, the national government 
can step in to manage the situation. 

In the case of internal and external disciphne, as 
requested for clarification by the chairman of the Steer- 
ing Committee when he stated that the problem might 
be not from external forces but a lack of discipline or a 
failure of discipline within the police forces of the area, 
the reply is that there are two kinds of discipline con- 
templated here; the internal disciplinary system and the 
external disciplinary system. The internal disciplinary 
system will be exercised by the local executives exercis- 
ing supervisory powers in that they will take care of 
minor offenses and impose disciplinary measures on 
minor offenses. But on the fear of the chairman of the 
Steering Committee that a general failure of discipline 
might ensue and the national government will be help- 
less, the reply of the Committee is that the external 
disciplinary system will then be automatically in place 
because the National Police Commission has jurisdiction 
over serious offenses and it has the power to suspend, 
transfer and dismiss erring members of the police forces. 
On top of that, the national government shall maintam 
common services; meaning, the training services. There 
are 1 3 regional academics in place now and one national 
police academy. They conduct police examinations of 
three classes at a total of 6,000 or 7,000 examinees a 
year. They pay claims and death benefits as common 
services to all police forces in the country. They main- 
tain crime laboratories which are not within the finan- 
cial reach of most local governments. They also provide 
for fire service facilities which are quite expensive — 
PI, 600 ,000 per truck — and which are extended to local 
governments by the national government. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We agree to the statements made 
by Commissioner Natividad. And in addition to making 
the police force truly a good police force, the first 
examination given is an aptitude test to determine 
whether the examinee has the aptitude to become a 
policeman. Many people take this aptitude test, and we 
find that somebody can be a good lawyer, a good 
doctor, a good engineer but he cannot be a good police- 
man. So, he is rejected in our aptitude test, before he is 
trained and accepted in the police service. He cannot 
perform police service immediately even upon accep- 
tance and appointment except after training for three 
months in our police academy. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. I have a simple amendment to Section 
5, Line 24, by deleting the word “maintenance” and 
substituting therefore the word “PRESERVATION.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, the amend- 
ment which I have proposed, with Commissioners 
Bengzon and Natividad, has already been accepted by 
the committee; so it is within the jurisdiction of the 
committee. However, I would personally accept the 
amendment considering that if we use the word “PRE- 
SERVATION,” that will save us the trouble of using the 
same word in the last line because the word “maintain” 
would be used twice. I think the proper word would be 
“PRESERVATION” but that is actually up to the 
committee which has accepted my amendment. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The committee accepts the 
amendment of Honorable Jamir. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it on this first sentence? 

MR. ROMULO. It is a question. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo may pro- 
ceed. 

MR. ROMULO. Section 5 dichotomizes between 
internal peace and order of the region and external 
threat. If the Gentleman will read lines 28 and 29, it is 
stated: 

The defense of the region against insurgency or invasion 

shall be the responsibility of the National Government. 

My question is this: Suppose there is a general failure of 
peace and order within the region, may the national 
government intervene motu proprio or must it await the 
call from the local executive? 

MR. DE CASTRO. It can intervene motu proprio. 
Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. I assume from the Gentleman’s 
answer, therefore, that if the armed forces is in hot 
pursuit of a rebel force which enters the autonomous 
region, it may continue that hot pursuit without the 
permission of the local executive? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. ROMULO. If the armed forces suspect that there 
is a sanctuary being used by rebel forces within the 
autonomous region, may the armed forces, on their own 
authority, proceed to attack them? 


532 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President, because 
the defense and security of the autonomous region is 
the responsibility of the national government. 

MR. ROMULO. Even the internal peace and order? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President. The 
Honorable Davide proposed an amendment on lines 28 
and 29, and we would request him to state his amend- 
ment. After that, we can answer the question of the 
Gentleman verily. 

MR. ROMULO. To summarize, whenever in the 
opinion of the President there is lawlessness or some 
disorder within the autonomous region which, in the 
judgment of the President, the local police cannot 
handle, the President, as the commander-in-chief, may 
order the armed forces into the regional autonomous 
region and do whatever is necessary? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President, even with- 
out the request of the local executive in the area. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose my amendment on the 
last sentence. On line 28, between “defense” and “of,” 
insert “AND SECURITY,” then delete the clause 
“against insurgency or invasion.” So, the whole sentence 
— this is now the final sentence taking into account the 
original proposal of Commissioner Regalado, who then 
will be the coauthor — will read as follows: “T^e defense 
AND SECURITY of the regions shall be the responsi- 
bility of the National Government.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. The committee accepts the 
amendment because it is more embracing than the 
original sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment of Commissioner Davide? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you, I asked this for the 
record. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The committee has accepted the 
^endment to the first sentence. May the Chair act on 
this before we go to the other sentence. Madam Pres- 


HE PRESIDENT. If there are no further comments 
on IS arnendment to the first sentence, may we have 
It read again so that we can vote on it. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The committee accepts tl 
amendment. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. For clarification, we would like 
to read Section 5, as amended and approved by the 
body: “SEC. 5. The preservation of peace and order 
within the region shall be the responsibility of the local 
police agencies which shall be organized, maintained, 
supervised and utilized in accordance with applicable 
laws. The defense and security of the regions^ shall be 
the responsibility of the National Government.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, what about the 
phrase “The local executive of the constituent units 
on lines 26 and 27? 

MR. DE CASTRO. It is already deleted based on the 
amendment of Commissioners Maambong and Regalado. 

MR. LAUREL. Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner read it PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel is recog- 

again.' nized. 


CoraLsiowf 

TAiMT?r» ORGANIZED, M>5 

I AlNtD, SUPERVISED AND UTTT T7FFi tm 

CORDANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW 


MR. LAUREL. I understand that the second sentence 
which appears on lines 26 to 27 now reads: 

Local executives of the constituent units shall exercise 
general supervision over the local police forces of their 
respective units. 

That has to be approved before we go to the third and 
last sentence. 


Th^rh there any objection? (Silena 

The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner de Castro 
explain? 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


533 


MR . DE CASTRO. When we accepted the amend- 
ment of Commissioners Maambong and Regalado, lines 
26 and 27 were automatically deleted. The reason is 
that the provision of local executives exercising general 
supervision over local police forces is contained in 
applicable laws. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel, is the ex- 
planation satisfactory? 

MR. LAUREL. When I stood up, I simply wanted to 
remove the word “The” following the statement of 
Chief Justice Concepcion to the effect that there is only 
one chief executive in the Philippines and, that is, the 
President. Also, in our studies in political law, there is 
only one Executive and it is the President. So, we 
cannot refer to local chief executives and that is why I 
removed the word “The.” If we are to refer to heads of 
local governments, we should refer only to local execu- 
tives. But if the whole sentence has been deleted, there 
is nothing I can really do about it. 

Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We are sorry that we failed to 
clarify the deletion when we accepted the amendment 
of Commissioners Maambong, Regalado and Jamir. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to confirm that the 
understanding of the committee was that upon the 
acceptance and approval of my proposed amendment, 
the second sentence would be deleted. It was also ex- 
plained to me by Commissioner de Castro that this 
provision actually appears in the Article on General 
Provisions, and which provision was formulated by 
Commissioners de Castro, Natividad and this Rep- 
resentation. So, it would not be necessary, Madam 
President. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no regis- 
tered proponents of amendments to Section 6. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose the deletion of the 
entire Section 6. The section is no longer necessary 
because it is conceded that the autonomous regions can 
only exercise the functions enumerated in Section 4. 


THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the 
deletion of Section 6? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

^MR. RAMA. Madam President, I understand that 
'Action 7 has been amended by the committee. May we 
hear from the committee? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the committee 
has accepted the amendments introduced by Com- 
missioners Calderon, Jamir, Colayco, de Castro and 
Monsod. 

Section 7 now reads as follows: “DURING THE 
TERM OF THE FIRST CONGRESS, IT SHALL PASS 
THE ORGANIC ACTS FOR THE AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE COR- 
DILLERAS.” 

So, we deleted the one-year period stipulated in 
Section 7 because during the term of the first Congress, 
it may decide to pass the organic acts. So, we are giving 
Congress a longer time. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Com- 
missioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, whose particular 
term does the amendment refer to because we have a 
different term for the Senate and a different term for 
the Lower House? 

MR. NOLLEDO. It should be immediately the first 
tenn, as understood, the first three years. 

MR DAVIDE. So, I think the first three years should 
be amended to “WITHIN THREE YEARS FOLLOW- 
ING THE CONVENING OF THE FIRST CONGRESS 
ELECTED UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Will Commissioner Jamir please 
manifest on behalf of his group, whether he accepts the 
amendment? 

MR. JAMIR. Quoting Commissioner Suarez, I think 
the paternity has passed to the committee because it has 
accepted the amendment. So, it is for the committee to 
respond. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is enough that we manifest the 
intention taken from the statements of Commissioner 
Davide. So, as far as the committee is concerned, the 
words “DURING THE TERM OF THE FIRST CON- 


534 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


GRESS” — meaning, within the first three years. 
Congress shall pass the necessary organic acts — would 
be sufficient. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
continue? 


MR. ALONTO. Second, we realize that because of 
the Ople amendment which requires a consultative 
constitutional commission to draft for Congress the 
draft of the organic act. Congress must have more lee- 
way at least within the first term of Congress. That is 
why the committee accepted the amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The maximum term of the First 
Congress would actually be six years because it includes 
the Senate. So, the organic act may be passed even 
beyond the first three years, which would actually be 
the second term for the Lower House. 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

I just want to note that part of the persuasive force of 
the Ople proposal is that it would not delay in any way 
the one-year deadline set in Section 7. But now, it is 
foreseen that it might delay this time limit. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


NOLLEDO. No, that is why the intention of the 
committee is that the organic acts should be passed 
within the first three years. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is why my proposal is as follows: 
“WITHIN THE FIRST THREE YEARS FOLLOWING 
THE CONVENING OF THE FIRST CONGRESS 
ELECTED UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION.” 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 


BISHOP BACANI. I remember, Madam President, 
that in the discussion regarding the Ople amendment 
yesterday, we were given an assurance that the organic 
act will be passed within one year. So, what happens to 
that? Does that not affect the Ople amendment which 
stated, as part of its persuasive force, that the organic 
act should be passed within one year of the First 
ongress? This actually gives Congress more leeway; it 
extends the time Umit. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Commissioner Alonto would like to 
react. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

• PRESIDENT. Commissioner Alonto is recog- 


amendment was presented to 1 

u^a^v oh t- the committee did not i 

objection to It because in the first place, 

First c^ner^ P^l^ce, Congresses are numbered 
irst Confess, Second Congress. The term “period” 
parhamen ary terminology, when we say “Fi 
Congress, refers to the term of the Lower H^se. 1 
First Congress, for example, is counted on the term 
the Lower House and not the Senate. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I be allowed a brief response on this 
point. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. I have no intention to challenge the latest 
amendment abbreviating — it is not really abbreviating 
but actually extending — the period for Congress to 
enact the organic laws from the period during which 
Congress shall enact the organic laws. But I only want to 
point out for the record that I do not agree to this 
extension. We are writing a Constitution, of course, for 
generations to come, not only for the present but or 
our posterity. There is no harm in recognizing cert^n 
vital pragmatic needs for national peace and solidan y, 
and the writing of this Constitution just happens at a 
time when it is possible for this Commission to help e 
cause of peace and reconciliation in Mindanao and ^ 
Cordilleras, by taking advantage of a heaven-sent 
tunity. I think if we acknowledge this as a v 
objective, this is better served if we abbreviate e 
period for Congress to enact the organic laws as on^n 
ly proposed within one year rather than extend i o 
three years. 

The creation of the autonomous regions h^ r^sed 
the hopes and expectations of our people in those 
regions to the highest peaks in history. There are nego- 
tiations that will take place in Jeddah; there are r^gotia- 
tions now taking place with respect to the Cordilleras. 
And if the peoples of Mindanao and the Cordilleras now 
seek what we have, in effect, reneged on in the original 
deadline of one year, they may think that there has 
been a considerable relaxation from the ongin 
commitment of the Constitutional Commission to 
provide for autonomy and abbreviate the period during 
which the necessary laws will be enacted in order to 
make this autonomy real. As I said, I am not chalien^g 
this latest amendment which the committee has 
accepted, but in response to the point made by Bishop 
Bacani, I thought I would record my views. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


535 


SR. TAN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. I also object to the prolongation of the 
one-year period to three years. I do not find the reason 
grave enough. From the point of view of Congress, they 
can delay the passage of the organic act, but from the 
point of view of the Cordilleras or Muslim Mindanao, it 
is unfair to make them wait again, after having waited 
for decades, just because Congress thinks they need 
more time. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. This Representation did not submit 
that proposal as his own proposal. I submitted that 
proposal precisely because the proposed amendment 
accepted by the committee would prolong the period. 
It would consider now the term of the First Congress, 
and I called the attention of the body that the Senate’s 
term would be six years. So, in order to compel the 
First Congress, since that was accepted by the commit- 
tee, to enact the measure, it must be within the term of 
the Lower House. I am in favor of the original proposal; 
as a matter of fact, it should be one year. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
manifest that as chairman of the committee, I was made 
to believe by Commissioner Alonto, who is my adviser 
on this topic, that the three-year period would be 
reasonable. But in view of the objections on the part of 
my colleagues, this question should be submitted to the 
body for voting. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. When I joined the amendment of 
the Honorable Jamir regarding the term of the First 
Congress, our deliberations will show that we were in 
favor of one year. The reason that we set one year is 
that the Members of Congress may not be responsible 
enough, that we have to give them a deadline. The 
Members of Congress will eventually read all these 
proceedings and they will find out that it is the intent 
of this body that the organic act be passed within one 
year. But to state the one-year period categorically in 
the Constitution would not make the Congressmen and 
the Senators responsible enough not to take immediate 
action on this matter. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am strongly for the one-year 
period. I think it is not so much that we do not trust 
Congress; rather, we are stressing the urgency of the 
situation since we have premised, in part, the amend- 
ment on our search for peace. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to clear up this matter because time may 
be of the essence. May I address a few clarificatory 
questions to the distinguished chairman of the commit- 
tee. 

I have read P.D. No. 1618 governing the organization 
of autonomous Regions IX and XII. I notice that this is 
very adequate and satisfactory, so much so that as I 
understand it from Commissioner Alonto, this has been 
put effectively into practice. So, with P.D. No. 1618 
as the guideline, would the Commissioner think it would 
still be difficult for Congress to come up with an organic 
act governing the autonomous regions in Mindanao and 
the Cordilleras within one year? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with the Gentleman, because 
P.D. No. 1618, as amended by P.D. No. 1843-A, can be 
a sufficient basis for Congress to enact the organic act. 
However, the provisions of these decrees are such that 
the autonomy given to these two regions is not truly 
meaningful because certain controls are left to the 
Office of the President. Even the regional funds are 
governed by laws and regulations which cover similar 
local and national financial transactions. So, actually, 
with due respect to Commissioner Alonto, I was in favor 
of the one-year period and I support the one-year 
period. 

MR. SUAREZ. In order to work out all these 
mechanisms in the establishment of the two auto- 
nomous regions, does the Gentleman think it would be 
sufficient for Congress to provide for all of these within 
a period of one year? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think so, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. I understand that there are also 
certain preparatory steps to be taken before the auto- 
nomous regions could be organized and before the 
organic act could be legislated by Congress. Is the 
Gentleman thinking within that time frame, that is to 
say, would that one-year period still be reasonable, 
taking into account all of those factors leading to the 
organization of the autonomous regions which would be 
finalized and concretized with the enactment of the 
organic act? 


536 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman is referring to the 
consultations as authorized in Section 2 of the provi- 
sions on the autonomous regions. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the one-year period can still 
be sufficient if Congress adopts a systematic way of 
dealing with the problem. 

MR. SUAREZ. Granting that to be the case, does the 
Gentleman not feel that there is need for some degree of 
flexibility as far as time is concerned, although we can 
state into the record that it is the sense of the Com- 
mission addressed, of course, to the First Congress that 
they should do their work within a period of one year 
from the date it is convened? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman echoes the senti- 
ments of Commissioner de Castro, and I think the state- 
ments of Commissioner de Castro will suffice. I do not 
like to give any further comment on that. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the distinguished committee 
chairman. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. When we presented that amendment to 
the committee. Section 7 still contains the provision 
that the Congress would define the territorial jurisdic- 
tion of the autonomous region, in addition to passing 
the organic act. But since the committee took out the 
duty to define the territorial jurisdiction of the auto- 
nomous region, if the committee will permit, I am 

w mg to withdraw our amendment to cut short this 
discussion. 

MR NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the with- 
rawal and commends Commissioner Jamir for his high 
sense of statesmanship. 


ing in the Middle East. And among the leaders of a 
movement to free Mindanao from the rest of the archi- 
pelago is Nur Misuari. He is advocating, according to 
him, an autonomous government, which the Manila 
government believes is an act of secession. 

So, in order to foreclose and convince the rest of the 
Philippines that Mindanao autonomy will be granted to 
them as soon as possible, more or less, to dissuade these 
armed men from going outside while Mindanao will be 
under the control of the national government, let us 
establish an autonomous Mindanao within our effort 
and capacity to do so within the shortest possible time. 
This will be an answer to the Misuari clamor, not only 
for autonomy but for independence. 

Why should we delay if there is no justification to 
delay further? If we can make the autonomous govern- 
ment operate within six months, one year, one-and-a- 
half year, let it be so. Some people from Mindanao who 
are outside the Philippines — like Misuari and his group, 
and the other dissident groups of Salamat and Pundato— 
will be convinced that eventually the policy-making 
decision of the region will be in the hands of the people 
of Mindanao. 

If we can do it in one year, let us do it in one year 
and establish this autonomous region. This will be in 
partial answer to the Misuari campaign to segregate 
Mindanao. If it can be done in one-and-a-half year, let it 
be so. 

So, should we not provide a limitation within which 
implementation of the autonomy should be done? The 
answer is “y^s.” It should be established within the 
shortest possible time. 

Let our experts in the Commission, considering that 
we are a conglomeration of lawyers and economists and 
all that, formulate in time the structure of an auto- 
nomous Mindanao. Would it be possible for us to 
organize an autonomous Mindanao within the time 
element of one year, two years, or three years? Let 
us do it as soon as possible. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, how will Section 7 now read? 


“Th • ^QLLEDO. Section 7 now reads, as folio 
r.f > shall, within one year from elect 

P^ss the Organic Acts, for the at 
DILLERAS^”*^^ ^ Muslim Mindanao and the C( 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Before the voting, may I i 
some information to our colleagues. 

niz™^ president. Commissioner Abubakar is rec 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I just want to ask a question. If we 
enact this provision and, let us say. Congress, being 
saddled with so many problems of national irnport 
during the first year, fils to comply with this provision, 
what penalty do we impose on Congress? 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we deliberate over this 
during lunch? It is almost one o’clock. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


MR. ABUBAKAR. There are Christians in Mindanao 
there are also Muslims in Mindanao who are now worl 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
suspend the session until two-thirty in the afternoon. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


537 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair suspends the session. 

It was 12:35 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:47 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

Before we start, may I acknowledge the presence of 
students from the Rogationist College Seminary' (Para- 
naque), students from the Philippine Women’s Univer- 
sity and, again, our brothers from Mindanao and the 
Cordilleras who are here to witness the continuance of 
the consideration of the Article on Local Governments, 
more particularly, of the provisions on the autonomous 
regions. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rodrigo, who was on the floor when we sus- 
pended the session, be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, when the session 
was suspended this morning, I propounded a question 
which has not yet been answered. However, in order to 
save time, instead of interpellating, which can take a 
long time, I will just expound on my stand on this 
matter. 

I do not think that we should impose on Congress a 
very limited term of one year from the time it convenes 
within which to enact organic acts, both for Muslim 
Mindanao and the Cordilleras. First of all, let us remem- 
ber that this is the first Congress after martial law. Many 
of the Members will be neophytes. There will be 250 
Members of the House, 24 Members of the Senate. They 
will start from scratch in organizing Congress. They will 
have to enact the Rules from scratch. This, alone, will 
take months. They will have to elect the officers — the 
President of the Senate, the Speaker of the House, the 
Secretary, the personnel of Congress — then they will 
have to appoint the members of different committees. 
All this will take time. Remember, Madam President, 
that in the coming Congress, we will have a multiparty 
system, not a two-party system. It would be simpler 
under a two-party system to elect the officers. But 
under a multiparty system, there will initially be 
alliances and coalitions before they can elect and or- 
ganize. This again will take time. This will take months. 
Besides, we are establishing a bicameral legislature. A 
bill which comes from one House — and I suppose the 
bill on the organic act will originate from the House — 
will first be acted upon by the House. It will first pass 
through the committee. There will be public hearings. 
After that, it will be debated and approved on the floor 
during its consideration on Second Reading and finally 
approved on Third Reading. Then, the bill goes up to 


the Senate and the whole process starts anew in the 
Senate — it goes to the committee, it will be discussed 
in the committee, there will be hearings, there will be 
discussions and amendments on the floor and, in case of 
disagreement between the versions of the Senate and the 
House, there will be conference committees which will 
meet, and this will again take time. Remember, Madam 
President, that this First Congress will be saddled with 
the tremendous task of having to dismantle so many 
mistakes committed during the martial law regime. This 
First Congress will have to dismantle many undesirable 
presidential decrees because, otherwise, these presiden- 
tial decrees will be considered in force and effect. 

Remember also. Madam President, that in the esta- 
blishment of these autonomous regions in Mindanao and 
the Cordilleras, Congress will be called upon to enact an 
organic act, which means a Constitution. How long have 
we been here trying to frame a Constitution for our 
country? Morning, afternoon, evening, we work; and 
this is our sole task. In the case of the First Congress, it 
will have hundreds, if not thousands, of other tasks. It 
will be saddled with enacting the budget, the public 
works bill and many other local bills. So, how can we 
expect it to finish posthaste the organic acts of Minda- 
nao and the Cordilleras? Remember that they will be 
starting from scratch in this task. We have not started 
from scratch. We have as basis the 1935 Constitution 
and the 1973 Constitution. We just have to repeat many 
of their provisions. Yet up to now, we are only half 
through. So, how can we expect Congress to finish this 
task within one year. Madam President? On top of that, 
there is a provision in this article which we are dis- 
cussing that before Congress can act, there must be 
several steps taken. First, sectoral groups will have to 
prepare a list of names from which the President can 
appoint the members of the consultative commission. 
Then the commission is formed but it will take time 
before the commission is duly organized. After that. 
Congress will have to consult this commission and draft 
the organic act. And maybe the organic act for Minda- 
nao will be different from that for the Cordilleras. 

All this requires time. I will not speak long, Madam 
President. I have other arguments, but we are racing 
with time. I reiterate that we should not place our First 
Congress, composed of representatives elected by their 
constituency, in a very, very difficult situation. 

Wika nga sa Tagalog, marahil ay gaganda tayong lalaki 
sa mga Muslim sa Mindanao at sa mga taga-Cordilleras 
subalit ilalagay naman natin ang mga kinatawan ng 
bayan sa napakapangit at napakahirap na katayuan. 

Madam President, even Commissioners Alonto and 
Abubakar who are from Muslim Mindanao agree that 
we should give Congress more than one year. They agree 
that we should give it three years. Why should we insist 
on giving Congress only one year? 

Thank you very much, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


538 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Before we plunge deeper into this 
debate, I would like to narrow down the issues by 
calling the attention of the Commissioners that the pro- 
vision earlier accepted by the committee — that it would 
be during the first term of Congress — may not be 
feasible or acceptable to many because we have forgot- 
ten that the first term of Congress under our Constitu- 
tion is not three years but five years. It has been the 
misimpression here that this first term of Congress 
would refer only to a three-year term. But Congress or 
the House will have five years during its first term. 

So, we could probably narrow down the debate 
to a specific period. This reminder comes from Com- 
missioner de Castro and this Representation. 


MR. OPLE. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I just want to give a brief response to the remarks 
given by my distinguished kababayan. Commissioner 
Rodrigo. Originally the draft of this section of the 
Article on Local Governments provided for six months 
for Congress to enact the appropriate organic acts for 
the two autonomous regions. After taking full account 
of the concerns expressed just now by Commissioner 
Rodrigo, the members of the committee decided to 
extend this to a period of one year. 


The reason for this abbreviation of the period for the 
consideration of Congress of the organic acts and their 
passage is that we live in abnormal times. In the case of 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras, we know that we 
deal with questions of war and peace. These are 
momentous issues in which the territorial integrity and 
the solidarity of this country are being put at stake, in a 
manner of speaking. 


We are writing a peace Constitution. We hope that the 
Article on Social Justice can contribute to a climate of 
peace so that any civil strife in the countryside can be 
more quickly and more justly resolved. We are providing 
fegions SO that we give constitutional 
nwn demands and grievances of our 

nan in the Cordilleras and in Minda- 

thousand lives were lost in that 
heine ^o this day, the Cordilleras is 

and militanTstmg^e!'”^^^^ ^ peaceful 


thi mn^ Congress, in its wisdom, wUl not 

JhrouT . opportunity presented before tl 

through a one-year deadUne, for them - their c 
wisdom, their own grace, their own sagacity - to bi 
to bear upon this crisis that beset our country 
threaten our national solidarity so that at the sooi 
possible time, we can help, through this Constitut: 
restore the peace and solidarity in these regions 


I do not have to repeat what is knowi to all. There 
are urgent negotiations that are now afoot. The Islamic 
organization, consisting of 42 nations, which puts the 
Mindanao question on the agenda every year — at the 
very top of the agenda in their annual meeting — will be 
convened in Jeddah very soon. Again, they will talk 
about the problem in Mindanao. 

Rather than give opportunity to foreign bodies, no 
matter how sympathetic to the Philippines, to con- 
tribute to the settlement of this issue, I think the 
Constitutional Commission ought not to forego the 
opportunity to put the stamp of this Commission 
through definitive action on the settlement of the 
problems that have nagged us and our forefathers for 
so long. 

So, Congress will be busy; there is no question about 
that. They will be busy getting organized; they will be 
busy setting up the Rules of the House, electing their 
officers, but at the same time, momentous issues of 
national unity, of war and peace, ought not to be taken 
lightly even in competition with other admittedly 
urgent priorities. Congress will not begrudge themselves 
the effort to address this question at the soonest 
possible time, knowing that the solidarity and peace of 
this country are the issues. 

I have been asked by the committee to state my views 
concerning the proposed alternative of waiting for three 
years instead of one year before Congress enacts the or- 
ganic act. I submit. Madam President, that one year is 
sufficient, given the momentous character of the issues 
that have to be addressed by Congress; it is also 
reasonably sufficient. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Abubakar is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, I address this 
honorable body, conscious of the patriotism of Com- 
missioners Rodrigo and Ople. Both are from Luzon, but 
they are very concerned with the situation in the South, 
especially in its struggle for autonomy. 

Autonomy is welcomed by the South anytime, but 
there are diverse factors that would not, despite our 
enthusiasm and desire, permit us to accomplish the 
organization of autonomous Mindanao within one year, 
two years or three years as the Gentlemen of the Com- 
mission calculate. But I think everyone of us is imbued 
with enough patriotic fervor like Mr. Ople, who would 
like to grant autonomy to the South as soon as possible. 

Let us not put a time limit to meet the different 
thought and estimate of both my friends. Commis- 
sioners Ople and Rodrigo, who are equally concerned 
with the autonomy of Mindanao. As a challenge to the 
patriotism of both this Commission and the legislature 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


539 


which will convene as the First Congress, let us not put 
a time limit but amend the provision of this Constitu- 
tion to establish this autonomous region as soon as 
possible and practicable. 

The qualifying time element and practicality would 
meet the objection of Mr. Rodrigo as to the composi- 
tion and the time required. This would also satisfy the 
desire of Mr. Ople who wants to give to his feUow 
brothers in Mindanao the autonomy that they deserve 
and wants to hand to those people of the South as soon 
as practicable. 

Therefore, Madam President, can we not compromise 
these two conflicting objections regarding time and 
place by putting the phrase “AS SOON AS PRACTI- 
CABLE.” There is no time limit in challenging the 
patriotism of Congress to enact this law which will be 
welcomed in Mindanao; they may enact it within six 
months after it is convened, or three months after it 
is convened. If they would go beyond that and the 
people of Mindanao are not satisfied, they will have to 
answer during the electoral process. 

There can be a compromise in this matter by not just 
limiting the time but by putting the phrase “AS SOON 
AS PRACTICABLE.” That is the only compromise I 
can offer which would be satisfactory to both oppo- 
nents whose calculations as to time seem not to agree. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, the phrase “AS 
SOON AS PRACTICABLE” has never satisfied the 
committee. It can even reach 10 years, so we disown the 
statements of the Gentleman. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Would it not be a challenge to 
those in the convention or in the legislature, if we make 
it 1 0 years? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, I thought the Gentleman is 
seeking comment from the committee; we do not 
support the words “AS SOON AS PRACTICABLE. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Nolledo please 
allow the Chair to address a question to Commissioner 
Abubakar? 

Before we suspended the session for lunch, there was 
a proposal that within the first term of Congress, the 
organic act is to be passed. 

There was also a definition of what “first term 
means. Would the Gentleman consider it reasonable? It 
is up to us now to determine what period of time is 
included within that first term. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. That would be reasonable and I 
anticipate that Congress, in their patriotism and love 
of country, would grant autonomy to Mindanao in two 
months. T^ere is a leeway given to the whole Congress 
that within their term, this autonomy will be granted. 

I agree with the Gentleman, Madam President. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

I can see apprehension on the part of the Commission 
to grant the speedy enactment of the organic act on the 
assumption that Congress will find it extremely difficult 
to do this given all the constraints and the fluidity of 
the national situation. Let me just remind the body that 
in Section 1 5 of the revised provision, we approved the 
provision that Congress shall enact the organic act with 
the assistance and participation of a regional consulta- 
tive commission. 

On the side of optimism, I wish to share the informa- 
tion with this Commission that in the various public 
hearings, the multisectoral groups indicated that they 
are already working on a special charter for the auto- 
nomous regions in anticipation of the approval of the 
provisions submitted to the Commission. 

In other words, they are saying that they are not 
starting from scratch. The consultations that have been 
going on among various sectors in both Muslim Minda- 
nao and the Cordilleras are strong indications that it will 
not take all that long to finish the organic act given the 
spirit of Section 15, which means that there will be a 
partnership between the autonomous regions and 
Congress in the enactment of the organic act. I am 
pretty optimistic that it can be done within one year. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, may I offer 
a compromise amendment which will read as follows: 
“The Congress shall, within one year from ITS OR- 
GANIZATION, ENDEAVOR TO pass the Organic Acts 
for the autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao and 
the Cordilleras.” Would that satisfy all these conflicting 
amendments? 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. As one of the proponents of this amend- 
ment, I find this proposal acceptable in the context that 
this will allow Congress a margin of voluntary choice, so 
that it will probably spur them to endeavor to enact the 
organic acts even ahead of the one-year deadline. By 
providing this margin of choice to the Congress, we take 
full account of their dignity and patriotism and at the 
same time we ensure that there will be no delay in the 
passage of the organic acts. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


540 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. three years. That will simplify matters and save time. 

That is my suggestion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I speak in favor of Com- 
missioner Ople’s position, Madam President. 

There is a saying in Spanish “grandes males, grandes 
remedios” which means great maladies, great problems 
demand great remedies, great solutions. Madam Pres- 
ident, we have in Mindanao at present an ongoing, pro- 
tracted civil strife. It has caused the lives of thousands. 
We have at present continuing human rights violations, 
salvaging, disappearances, torture. Poverty stalks the 
once land of promise. It is my humble submission that 
given the gravity of these problems. Congress, in its 
prudence, foresight and acumen, wUl try its very best to 
pass an organic act within one year. Commissioner 
Bennagen said that Congress will not start from scratch 
because they have something to start with. Multisectoral 
bodies are now trying their best in formulating an 
organic act. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. I would like to advert to what the 
Chair stated that before we suspended the session, there 
was a proposal by some Commissioners that we give 

Congress one term. A term of Congress means the term 
of the Members of the House, which is three years. So, 
let us choose between giving Congress one year or giving 
it three years. I would like to explain that when we say 
we give Congress three years, it does not mean to say 
at Congress will wait until after three years before 
ac ing. No, that is the maximum. We would start from 
t e presumption that these Members of Congress who 
by the people — several of whom will be 
e ec ed from these autonomous regions — have the well- 
emg of the country at heart. We must start from that 
presumption. We, in this Constitutional Commission, are 
mere y appointive members. We should not set a time 
on the Members of Congress who will be elected 
^by should we? And, if we are going to 
imnno limit, let us make it reasonable. If we 

hannpno°f ^ limit of One year, what 

one vpar9 . f^lls to enact this legislation within 

Are wp Soing to penalize its members? No. 

elansed rnnf that, since one year has already 

organic' acts“>^^^ therefore, no longer enact these 
weTre nS The sponsors say 

Congress will enH*p ^andatory; we are just saying 

the use of nlarino what is 

k LtiLal whkvf n i" the Constitution which 

IS optional, which has no sanction? 

So may I sugpst that based on what Madam Pres- 
ident said, we should just give Congress one year or 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. We have been repeatedly informed, 
especially by our three Muslim Commissioners, that 
autonomous Regions IX and XII are in actual opera- 
tion. In fact, they say that even the special courts are 
actually functioning. If that is so, then there is no 
urgency in requiring Congress to pass within one year 
the so-called “organic acts.” I have always been wary 
and, in a way, opposed to adjectives like “highest prior- 
ity,” “utmost” or “foremost” because this Commission 
should give Congress sufficient discretion and judgment 
to act as the members thereof should act. 

So I join the remark of Madam President regarding the 
proposal of the first term of Congress which is intended 
to be three years but “within” not “after,” so as to give 
discretion to Congress to act accordingly. 

And before I finish, I sometimes feel perturbed by 
expressions like “this is the highest” or “grandes males, 
or “the organic act will be the solution to our problem 
of solidarity and peace,” because I believe that giving 
autonomy to the autonomous regions is a good princi- 
ple, but I would also add that we sliould not be giving too 
many special legislative authority along with local auto- 
nomy to autonomous regions which will not be enjopd 
by other regions in this country. In other words, w e 
we must acknowledge local autonomy to the auto- 
nomous regions, we should not forget that the oth®^ 
regions of this country are likewise entitled to simi ar 
equal local autonomy. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. This is a kind of question that can yield 
to an easier solution under a suspended session, because 
it concerns a matter of period, from one to three years, 
where the gap is not tremendous. Therefore, I move that 
we suspend the session for two minutes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:20 p.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:36 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 



WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


541 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, the proponents have 
come to a happy compromise. I ask the chairman of the 
committee to state the compromise. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
state the happy compromise? 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we ask Commissioner de los 
Reyes to please read the compromise provision. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, with the 
Chair’s permission, the provision reads: “THE CON- 
GRESS SHALL WITHIN EIGHTEEN (18) MONTHS 
FROM THE ORGANIZATION OF BOTH HOUSES 
PASS THE ORGANIC ACTS FOR THE AUTONO- 
MOUS REGIONS IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE 
CORDILLERAS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. To clarify the matter and to make it 
the mandate of the First Congress elected under this 
new Constitution, I propose the following amendments: 
Before “CONGRESS,” insert the word “FIRST,” and 
before the word “SHALL,” insert the phrase “ELECTED 
UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION,” so that it would 
read: “THE FIRST CONGRESS ELECTED UNDER 
THIS CONSTITUTION SHALL WITHIN EIGHTEEN 
MONTHS (18) FROM THE ORGANIZATION OF 
BOTH HOUSES PASS THE ORGANIC ACTS.” 

I am referring specifically to the First Congress 
elected under this Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I accept the amendment, but I 
leave it to the committee. 

. MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment, as amended by Commissioner Davide. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a few questions for the record. 
What is the meaning of “FROM THE ORGANIZA- 
TION”? When is that? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. “FROM THE ORGANIZA- 
TION” includes the election of the Senate President, the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives, all the officers 
and the formation of the different committees. 


MR. RODRIGO. So that is from that moment? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, it also includes the 
adoption of the respective Rules of both Houses. 

MR. RODRIGO. I thank the Commissioner. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Chairman Nolledo please read 
Section 7 now so that the body can vote? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Section 7 now reads: “THE FIRST 
CONGRESS ELECTED UNDER THIS CONSTITU- 
TION SHALL WITHIN EIGHTEEN (18) MONTHS 
FROM THE DATE OF ORGANIZATION PASS THE 
ORGANIC ACTS FOR THE AUTONOMOUS RE- 
GIONS IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND THE COR- 
DILLERAS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. It should be “ORGANIZATION OF 
BOTH HOUSES.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I will read the amendment as 
amended by Commissioner Davide. “THE FIRST CON- 
GRESS ELECTED UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION 
SHALL WITHIN EIGHTEEN (18) MONTHS FROM 
THE TIME OF ORGANIZATION OF BOTH HOUSES 
PASS THE ORGANIC ACTS FOR THE AUTO- 
NOMOUS REGIONS IN MUSLIM MINDANAO AND 
THE CORDILLERAS.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
7, as amended, please raise their hand. (All the Members 
raised their hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor, none against and 
no abstention; so Section 7, as amended, is^pproyedr-— " 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there is just one more 
unfinished item under this article and this is Section 4, 
copies of which have been distributed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioners please 
check their own copies of Section 4, which have been 
circulated. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, Section 4, as 
amended, now reads as follows: “SEC. 4. Within its 
territorial jurisdiction AND WITHIN THE FRAME- 
WORK OF THIS CONSTITUTION, NATIONAL 


542 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


POLICIES, LAW AND DEVELOPMENT, an auto- 
nomous region shall have legislative authority, AS 
PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC ACT over the following: 

1 ) Administrative organization; 

2) Regional taxation and other revenue-raising meas- 
ures; 

3) Ancestral domain and natural resources; 

4) PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PROPERTY RELA- 
TIONS; 

5) INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT INCLUD- 
ING URBAN AND RURAL PLANNING and 
DEVELOPMENT; 

6) AGRICULTURAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUS- 
TRIAL PROGRAMS AS WELL AS ECONOMIC, 
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT; 

7 ) Establishment, maintenance and administration 
of schools OFFERING FORMAL AND NON- 
FORMAL EDUCATION, INCLUDING ADOP- 
TION OF ADDITIONAL CURRICULA CON- 
SISTENT WITH THE CULTURAL HERITAGE 
OF THE REGION; 

8) PROMOTION AND REGULATION OF TRADE, 
INDUSTRY AND TOURISM WITHIN THE RE- 
GION; 

9) Establishment, operation, maintenance AND AD- 
MINISTRATION of health, welfare and OTHER 
social services, PROGRAMS AND FACILITIES; 

10) Protection of the environment in accordance with 
THE standards and regulations of the national 
government; 

11) Preservation and development of the cultural 
HERITAGE OF the region; 

12) PROMOTION OF ADEQUATE AND APPRO- 
PRIATE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS FOR 
THE REGION; AND 

13) Such other matters as may be authorized by law 
for the promotion of the general welfare of the 
people of the region.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


We have presented this proposed amendment to the 
committee chairman. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Before the committee accepts, 
may we know from the proponents the meaning of the 
phrase “NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND 
GOALS”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. As I said, this was formulated 
with the help of Commissioner Davide. The word “NA- 
TIONAL” in the draft I presented to the body has been 
erased and substituted with the word “LAWS,” so it 
now reads: “FRAMEWORK OF THIS CONSTITU- 
TION AND THE LAWS AND DEVELOPMENT 
PLANS, POLICIES AND GOALS OF THE NATIONAL 
GOVERNMENT.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, it seems to me 
that the words “PLANS AND GOALS,” even “POLI- 
CIES OF THE NATIONAL GOVERNMENT” as well as 
“DEVELOPMENT PLANS” may come from techno- 
crats on the administrative level because they are 
separated from the word “LAWS.” And these plans, 
policies and goals may even negate the powers that we 
are granting under Section 4 of the provisions on auto- 
nomous regions, so the committee regrets that it cannot 
accept the amendments. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The problem as I see it is in the 
original formulation which says: “FRAMEWORK OF 
THIS CONSTITUTION AND THE NATIONAL POLI- 
CIES, LAW AND DEVELOPMENT.” I cannot get the 
concept very well. As far as I am concerned, the con- 
nection is not very specific. So, actually, in our pro- 
posed amendment we did not get anything out of the 
original formulation. We only put it, to our mind, in a 
more specific manner. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


maambong. I have presented perfecting 
amendments to the first paragraph of Section 4. This 
was ormu ate with the help of Commissioner Davide 
. . j record: “Within its territorial 

THE framework OF 

velopment plans, policies and goals of 
THE national government, an rutonomous 

region shall have legislative POWERS AS PROVIDED IN 
ITS ORGANIC ACT, over the following . .” 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

May we address a question to the distinguished 
proponent? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is seeking the 
introduction of the phrase “THE LAWS AND NA- 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


543 


TIONAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS, POLICIES AND 
GOALS.” Did I hear him correctly? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. This is an accurate reflection of what 
appears under Section 10, P.D. No. 1618 wherein the 
phrase “shall exercise local legislative powers over 
regional affairs within the framework of national de- 
velopment plans, policies and goals” is found. Is that 
not correct? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. As a matter of 
fact, the Commissioner is reading the material which 
was kindly furnished us by the honorable Secretary- 
General upon my request. 

MR. SUAREZ. Then I thank the Commissioner for 
that. That is exactly what we have been trying to point 
out since this morning, that under P.D. No. 1618 many 
of the provisions now sought to be incorporated in the 
Article on Autonomous Regions are already included 
therein. Is that not correct also? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct because P.D. 
No. 1618 contains words like “control” and that would 
not be in keeping with the policy on autonomous re- 
gions as enunciated by the honorable chairman of the 
committee. So we had to take out words like “control” 
and others. But in the formulation of the honorable 
members of the committee, they mentioned “develop- 
ment” without any colorable connection to the other 
parts of the section. That is why we defined the word 
“development” in the original formulation of the 
committee. 

MR. SUAREZ. We thank the Commissioner for the 
clarification and for furnishing us the desired material. 

MR. MAAMBONG. ' May I know from the Com- 
missioner if he supports this proposed amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner should convince 
me a little further. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
comments to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. May I know from the committee 
whether these 13 items that appear in Section 4, as 
amended, and reamended must appear in the organic act 
or the legislative measure to be enacted by Congress? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. In other words, they are all manda- 
tory, and the Congress in its discretion cannot choose to 
classify, modify, reduce or make any alterations there- 
of? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, in order to strengthen local 
autonomy. But, of course, the autonomous region need 
not legislate on all of these, only as its legislature may 
deem appropriate. 

MR. PADILLA. No, I am talking about the Congress. 
When we specify the 13 items, does that mean that 
Congress has no discretion whatever but must follow 
even the order — Nos. 1, 2, 3 up to 13 — to be included 
as integral parts of the so-called organic act? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are not asking Congress to 
follow the order as it appears here. However, to make it 
clearer, I think Congress has some discretion in laying 
down certain conditions that are reasonable under 
which these powers may be exercised. 

MR. PADILLA. But the Commissioner has stated that 
Congress cannot reduce or eliminate any of these items. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think the Commissioner is right. 

MR. PADILLA. No, the Commissioner should not say 
I am right, for I do not agree. That is not my opinion. 

The next question is: There are 13 items of legislative 
authority or power for these two autonomous regions. 
Are the other political subdivisions in the Republic of 
the Philippines, like the provinces, have the same or 
similar powers or legislative authority? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner knows that we 
are only recognizing two autonomous regions. These 
provinces will derive benefits from national laws, but 
not under this section. 

MR. PADILLA. In other words, the provinces, cities 
and municipalities do not have this additional legislative 
power or authority? 

MR. NOLLEDO. When we talk of regional taxation in 
relation to other political units, we do not preclude the 
power to tax of these other political units. Even some of 
the powers of regional governments may be exercised in 
the appropriate areas by other local government units, 
subject to requirements of national laws. 

MR. PADILLA. In other words, instead of the word 
“regional,” we make it provincial, city or municipal. 


544 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


And can all these 13 items be exercised equally by the 
other political subdivisions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not all of the powers. 

MR. PADILLA. Not all. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The administrative organization of 
other local government units shall be provided for in the 
Local Government Code, because these autonomous 
regions are really special regions. 

MR. PADILLA. In other words, we are granting to 
these two special regions, in the concept of local auto- 
nomy, more or additional legislative powers that are not 
enjoyed by the other political subdivisions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, powers that are not enjoyed by 
other poUtical subdivisions. That could be the effect 
because these regions have special powers. 

MR. PADILLA. We are granting to these two regions 
additional legislative authority or powers that are not 
enjoyed by the other political subdivisions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say “that are not necessa- 
rily enjoyed” because these regions, given special auto- 
nomy, are the most neglected areas in the Republic. 

MR. PADILLA. The question is not of supposed 

neglected areas.” We are willing to grant local auto- 
nomy, but it seems that we are granting — by enumerat- 
mg 13 items of additional legislative powers or authority 
— more powers or more autonomy than those recog- 
nized or granted to other provinces, cities and munic- 
ipalities. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but the Commissioner will 
notice that m the upper part, these will be subject to 
national policies and laws. I think that would be the 
savmg clause. That is very important. 

MR. PADILLA. I ^ against this Section 4 because it 
IS discnminatory against the greater number of political 
subdivisions in the country and it is, in a way, class 
legislation for two particular regions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. As I know it, class legislation does 
not apply to constitutional provisions. 

K may be true in a technical 

sense, but the pnnciple of equality as against discrimina- 
tion applies whether it is in the Constitution, in the law 
or in other pubhc matters. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, just to complete the 
record with respect to the intent of the committee and 
in the light of the interpellation by Commissioner 
Padilla, may I call the body’s attention again to the fact 


that there is a dominant national community in the 
Philippines, and this consists of people like most of us. 
They are Tagalogs, Visayans, Ilocanos, Kapampangans, 
Pangasinenses and others. But these are generally the 
lowlanders. They are Christians; they are the dominant 
national community. The reason this Constitutional 
Commission is granting autonomy to two regions, the 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras, is precisely, 
so that they can achieve a certain level of legal self- 
sufficiency in their lives, complete with some measure 
of self-determination within the larger framework of the 
national sovereignty and the territorial integrity of ^e 
Philippines. Autonomy is actually a creative alternative 
to secession. This is how autonomy is seen in most parts 
of the world today, especially after World War II. And 
so, in granting a measure of self-determination with 
some legal self-sufficiency to these regions, we are not 
discriminating against the dominant national com- 
munity. I think the grant of autonomy including the 
enumeration of items which the autonomous regions 
may legislate according to law should be rather seen in 
the context of a belated effort on the part of the 
dominant national community to help our economic- 
ally, more laggard brothers keep in step in the days to 
come with the dominant national community. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I seek some clarification 
from the committee as a follow-up to the questions of 
Commissioner Padilla as to whether these items in 
Section 4 should, of necessity, be included in the 
organic acts or that some of them may not be included 
because of a portion of the provision here which says: 
“an autonomous region shall have legislative authority, 
AS PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC ACT.” Does the 
phrase “AS PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC ACT” 
properly spell out “AS MAY BE PROVIDED IN ITS 
ORGANIC ACT” or “AS SHALL BE PROVIDED IN 
ITS ORGANIC ACT”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say “AS SHALL BE PRO- 
VIDED.” 

MR. REGALADO. And, therefore, it is mandatory. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, because when the words were 
added by Commissioner Rodrigo, he wanted some 
symmetrical appearance and so, I agreed to insert the 
words “AS PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC ACT.” 

MR. REGALADO. We contemplate two autonomous 
regions for the present. Is it envisioned by the commit- 
tee that the same provisions shall appear in the two 
organic acts for the two autonomous regions, meaning. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


545 


a uniformity of content in the taxonomy of legislative 
authority? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would say so, but if the Com- 
missioner is contemplating a possible situation where 
the organic act does not provide for any of these 
powers, I would say that these powers may nevertheless 
be exercised by the legislature of the autonomous 
regions because of the constitutional authority to do so. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, the organic act 
for the Cordillera shall include all these powers as within 
the legislative authority for that particular autonomous 
region, and the same thing shall also appear in the 
organic act for Muslim Mindanao? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Would the same apply if in the 
future there should be other autonomous regions that 
may be created? Would the same requirement, manda- 
tory in nature in the taxonomy of legislative authority, 
apply as a matter of uniformity and principle? Or would 
there be exceptions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would recommend that they 
should apply; but please take note that the Constitu- 
tional Commission has decided to authorize the forma- 
tion of only two autonomous regions, specifically 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. 

MR. REGALADO. So if all of these should, of 
necessity, appear anyway as within the legislative autho- 
rities of the autonomous regions, why do we still have 
to put the phrase “AS PROVIDED IN ITS ORGANIC 
ACT” instead of just saying “an autonomous region 
shall have legislative authority over the following. . .” 

MR. NOLLEDO. It is more of symmetry. 

MR. REGALADO. Putting that proviso could be 
misconstrued as a qualification. If the purpose is really 
to confer all these legislative powers uniformly upon all 
autonomous regions, we should eliminate the qualifying 
phrase and go straight to the point and state “an auto- 
nomous region shall have legislative authority or power 
over the following.” That would eliminate any possible 
doubt. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to answer that question 
in one aspect. The committee feels that — and this in 
answer to Commissioner Padilla’s question — although 
the legislature may not reduce these powers, it may lay 
down reasonable conditions under which these powers 
may be exercised. That is the reason I agreed with the 
inclusion of the words “AS PROVIDED IN ITS OR- 
GANIC ACT.” The legislature may provide the means 
by which these powers may be exercised because some 
of the powers herein enumerated are general in charac- 
ter. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is a previous question. The Maam- 
bong amendment calls for a vote. So may I suggest that 
we vote on it. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I would like to 
appeal again to the committee to favorably consider the 
amendment considering that Commissioner Davide and I 
really worked overtime on this. (Laughter) But more 
important, the proposed amendment does not really 
diminish the original formulation of the committee. 
Rather, we feel very strongly that it enhances the 
provision as formulated by the honorable committee. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will give the committee time 
to study this proposed amendment. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we ask for a one-minute 
suspension? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:03 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:23 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. We suggest that Commissioner Maam- 
bong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 

recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, instead of Com- 
missioner Maambong, I ask that Commissioner Bernas 

be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. May we wait for Commissioner Maam- 
bong. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, Commissioner 
Maambong is now running to the session hall. 


546 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. So, whom shall we hear. Com- 
missioner Maambong or Commissioner Bemas? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I was informed by the honorable 
chairman that there is a formulation of the provision of 
Section 4, first paragraph thereof, which substantially 
covers my proposed amendment. I would like to hear it 
from Commissioner Bemas so that I could readily give 
way and so that we can finish this article. 


AND NATIONAL LAWS, THE ORGANIC ACT OF 
autonomous REGIONS sh^l PROVIDE FOR legislative 
POWERS over: . . then we start enumerating. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the pro- 
posed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


FR. BERNAS. The formulation of the introduction 
to this section would read this way: “Within its teni- 
^nal jurisdiction AND WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK 

NATIONAL LAWS 
autonomous REGIONS shall 
PROVIDE FOR legislative POWERS over: . . .” Then, 
the enumeration follows. We shortened the Ust with the 
agreement of the committee. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, if that formula- 
tion is acceptable to the committee, I give way to that 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Bemas because 
it substantially covers my proposal. 

Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. I wonder if Commissioner Bemas will 
agree to an amendment to avoid the repetition of the 
” instead of the phrase “WITHIN THE 
FRAMEWORK,” it should be “SUBJECT TO THE 
PROVISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION.” 


FR. BERNAS. The enumeration of the various 
matters will follow “administrative organization.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts that. Ac- 
tually, that is not an amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, it is not an amendment. Pardon 
me for the repetition of the original draft. Then, “2) Re- 
gional taxation and other revenue-raising measures,” is 
also a repetition of the original draft. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose an amendment to 
No. 2. Instead of “Regional taxation and other revenue- 
raising measures,” we only say “CREATION OF 
SOURCES OF REVENUE,” to be harmonized or 
aligned with the particular provision on local autonomy 
on the matter of creation of sources of revenue. like- 
wise, that would be broader. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 


FR. BERNAS. I have no difficulty with that, and if mR. ALONTO. Madam President, will the Gentleman 
yield^°*^*^^^^^^ no difficulty with it, I will gladly yield? 


have no objection. The con 
thp gratitude to Commissioner Maambong, ac 

CommisLneTDaviS°"'"''""“''" 


MR. DAVIDE. Gladly. 

MR. ALONTO. I would like to ask this question: 
Would the phrase “CREATION OF SOURCES OF 
REVENUE” include the power to tax? 


president. So this will now be a joint prc 
mi DaTdeflTttat coSctf 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

BERNAS. So the introductory clause would 
read: “Within its territorial jurisdiction, AND SUBJECT 
TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION 


MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, to impose, collect and levy 
not only taxes but fees, charges — these are the revenue- 
raising measures. So the amendment will really shorten 
the terms and, at the same time, broaden the meaning. 

MR. ALONTO. I only want to clarify the wording. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide restate 
No. 2? 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


547 


MR. DAVIDE. No. 2 should read: “CREATION OF 
SOURCES OF REVENUES” instead of “Regional 
taxation and other revenue-raising measures.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the commit- 
tee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We ask Commissioner Bemas if he is 
amenable to the amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. It is Commissioner Davide’s amend- 
ment to the committee proposal, so, if it is acceptable 
to the committee, I will accept it. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Can we just approve the proposals so that we do not 
go back again. Let us begin with No. 1: “Administra- 
tive organization'.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

We now go to No. 2, as amended: “CREATION OF 
SOURCES OF REVENUES.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, I am a Uttle bit 
worried. Is the word “CREATION” a constitutional 
language? 

MR. DAVIDE. May I answer. Madam President? 

' THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, certainly, in the same provision 
on local autonomy the phrase “create sources of reve- 
nue” is also used. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No, only because it is so linked 
with sources of revenues. It sounds so much like magic, 
so I thought that maybe . . , 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I com- 
ment on this. Actually the phrase “other revenue- 
raising measures” was originally my amendment which 
was accepted by the committee. I just wonder, because 
in the first sentence we are talking of “legislative 
powers,” and it would not look nice for the exercise of 
legislative power to create sources of revenue. Legisla- 
tive power can tax, can have revenue-raising measures, 
but not create sources of revenue. It does not go with 
the grain of legislative powers. Also, this regional taxa- 
tion and other revenue-raising measures is a normal 
formulation of taxation powers even in the National 
Internal Revenue Code. 


So may I appeal to the committee to kindly consider 
this original proposal? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee believes that the use 
of the phrase “CREATION OF SOURCES OF REVE- 
NUES” is most appropriate, and besides, it has already 
been approved by the body. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the next item? 

FR. BERNAS. No. 3 reads: “Ancestral domain and 
natural resources.” 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, just a question to 
clarify things for the record. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Natural resources include minerals. 
Of course, it is understood that this is subject to the 
regalian doctrine — that minerals within the auto- 
nomous regions belong to the State. 

FR. BERNAS. It is subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution and national laws. 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the third 
item — “Ancestral domain and natural resources”? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the amendment is ap- 
proved. 

FR BERNAS. As indicated in the committee report, 
the next is No. 4: “PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PRO- 
PERTY RELATIONS.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is Commissioner Foz’ amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Can we have an approval on that. 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to No. 4: 
“PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PROPERTY RELA- 
TIONS”? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Actually, I have no objection to it, 
but I would like to clarify a situation where there is a 
conflict between the national law — for example, the 
Civil Code and the Criminal Code provisions on personal 
and family relations — and the personal, family and 
property relations law obtaining in the autonomous 
region. Which law will govern — the law of the nation or 
the law applicable only to the autonomous region? 


548 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. ALONTO. The reason for including that particu- 
lar provision in the legislative power of the autonomous 
region is that there is a difference between the national 
law and the family and personal law among the inhab- 
itants of the autonomous region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to make an answer to 
that good question, because I think with respect to this 
instance, which is No. 4, in case of conflict between 
national law and the law of the autonomous region on 
personal, family and property relations, the national law 
shall give way in the sense that the State is mandated to 
preserve and develop the cultural heritage of the region. 
So that is an exceptional case. I am glad that Com- 
missioner Suarez asked that question. For example, 
there is a Muslim personal law now embodied in P.D. 
No. 1083, recognizing absolute divorce, but the Civil 
Code of the Philippines, RA 386, as amended, does not 
recognize divorce. The Muslim law in this case shall 
prevail and shall be considered an exception to the 
national law. 

MR. SUAREZ. So if a region is converted into an 
autonomous region, the regional law covering that auto- 
nomous region will prevail over the national law, but 
the impact is only in personal, family and property 
relations? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is correct. We thank the 
Gentleman for asking that question. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other comment? 

FR. BERNAS. No more. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, No. 4 will read; “PERSONAL, 
FAMILY AND PROPERTY RELATIONS.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. No. 5 reads: “Regional URBAN AND 
RURAL PLANNING and development.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I comment on paragraph 5. 
My idea of infrastructure is first: construction of roads 
and houses. I think infrastructure development is 
covered by the words “URBAN AND RURAL PLAN- 
NING and development.” So will the proponent. Com- 
missioner Maambong, yield for the deletion of “infra- 
structure development” and simply retain “URBAN 
AND RURAL PLANNING and development”? 


FR. BERNAS. We have also added the word “Region- 
al,” so “infrastructure development” and “communica- 
tions” would also be included. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would just want to find out 
from the present proponent the formulation of No. 5. 

FR. BERNAS. “Regional URBAN AND RURAL 
PLANNING and development.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. I yield to that. Madam President, 
if that is acceptable to the committee. 

FR. BERNAS. That would include in fi'astructure and 
communication development. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


MR. MONSOD. I have a question. Suppose a national 
development program were approved by Congress, 
would that be within the context of the national law in 
the introductory paragraph of this section? 

MR. ALONTO. I think that would be a national law 
provided it does not conflict with what has been granted 
to the autonomous region. 

MR. MONSOD. My question is this: Let us say that 
in the national development program there is a provision 
for the establishment of a copper smelter, which after 
studies, is determined to be located in Leyte. Would the 
Cordilleras have the option still to set up their own 
copper smelter assuming that mineral resources like 
copper are already available therein? We can use carbon 
paper as another example. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think the answer to this question 
is not easy. It is not in terms of “yes” or “no” because 
certain considerations have to be taken into account. 
The provision for consultation provided that there 
should be adequate information both at the regional and 
national levels to serve as the basis for deciding whether 
or not it is warranted to have a separate infrastructure 
project in any of the regions. 

MR. MONSOD. In the event of conflict, which would 
prevail? 

MR. BENNAGEN. In the event of conflict, one 
should examine the possible social harm that could be 
done either to the host region or to the country. 

MR. MONSOD. Would the region have the power to 
incur foreign debt? 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


549 


MR. BENNAGEN. I do not think so. In the con- 
templation of the committee, that is not taken into 
account. 

MR. MON SOD. In that case, the ability of the region 
to implement the project even if it wants to would be 
barred or would not be possible because the national 
government can refuse to grant the authority to 
borrow. 

MR. BENNAGEN. If the region does not have the 
capability to do it, then some negotiations have to be 
done through and with the central government. 

MR. MONSOD. What does the Commissioner mean 
by “capability”? Does it refer to legal authority or 
viability of the region? 

MR. BENNAGEN. It refei's to financial capability, 
the capital outlay that would be needed and then the 
maintenance and viability eventually. 

MR. MONSOD. If it is a self-sufficient project in 
terms of foreign exchange, can tire region go aliead with 
it? Does it have a right to retain the foreign exchange 
earnings in order to pay the debt that it borrows outside 
the authority of the national government? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Given the best available informa- 
tion and as long as it supports the overall regional de- 
velopment of the autonomous region and shall also 
benefit the overall stability of a country, I do not see 
any reason why it cannot. 

MR. MONSOD. I do not know. I think we are going 
around the issue because it is a very important issue. If 
we are saying that the region can override the national 
decision on whether that loan or that project should be 
implemented, then there is a problem here. 

MR. BENNAGEN. In answer to that, I think this is 
the appropriate time because the issue is really impor- 
tant in terms of balancing regional capability and 
regional requirements with national capabihty and 
national requirements. But this is also true for the con- 
cept of stronger decentralization and this applies both 
to local governments and to autonomous regions. It is 
rather long but I think it is instructive. Experience 
suggests — this is based on studies in Africa which ap- 
pear in the Development Forum^z publication of the 
U.N. Development Program, in its issue of June-July, 
1983 — that decentralization involves far more than 
simply declaring a policy of bottom-up decision-making 
in organizing the administrative structure and establish- 
ing local or district planning procedures. The ability of 
governments to implement decentralization programs 
depends on the existence of or the ability to create a 
variety of poUtical, administrative, organizational and 
behavioral conditions and to provide sufficient resources 
at the local level to carry out decentralizing functions. 


Then it includes conditions that have to do with poht- 
ical and administrative stmctures, organizational factors, 
behavioral and psychological conditions and resource 
conditions required for decentralization. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Benias is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. This is just a reflection on tlie subject 
that is being discussed. I would venture the opinion that 
there can be no easy answers to these now because this 
will involve the balancing of various interests, not just 
economic interest, the regalian doctrine, the meaning we 
are giving to the preservation of cultural heritage, and 
regional economic development. All of these will have 
to be balanced any time a problem like that comes up. 

So there cannot be a “yes” or “no” solution to it today 
in the abstract. We will have to wait for the problem to 
arise and for policymakers, legislators or administrative 
officers to be able to study all tlie factors that are in- 
volved in order to come to an appropriate decision. And 
if there is still a conflict after that, ultimately we may 
have to drag the case to the Supreme Court so that the 
Supreme Court can give its interpretation of what the 
meaning is of the combination of values which we are 
embodying in this provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Concepcion first. 

MR. CONCEPCION. May I ask a clarificatory ques- 
tion. 

This refers to paragraph 4: “PERSONAL, FAMILY 
AND PROPERTY RELATIONS” that has been adopted. 

It occurs to me to ask this question: Do these laws 
follow the inhabitants of the autonomous region outside 
that region, like, for instance, in Manila? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Subject to jurisdictional require- 
ments. 

MR. CONCEPCION. What does the Commissioner 
mean by that? Let us suppose an inhabitant of an auto- 
nomous region whose laws permit bigamy, commits 
bigamy in Manila. He is an employee who is working in 
Manila. He is probably a ranking officer in his office. 
The wife is not an mhabitant of the autonomous region 
but a native of Manila, or Pangasinan or from other 
province. 

MR. ALONTO. If he is outside the autonomous 
region, then he is not within the jurisdiction of the auto- 
nomous legion. Hence, it he commits bigamy outside 
the autonomous region, then he is withm the jurisdic- 
tion of the place where he has committed bigamy. 


550 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. CONCEPCION. But suppose, it is not a criminal 
case, but it is a civil case concerning contracts or qualifi- 
cations to enter into contracts, like a question as to 
whether he is of age or not. Which laws shall apply? 
Shall the law of the autonomous region prevail? I am 
posing these questions because, as Father Bernas said 
correctly, there are questions that cannot be answered 
“yes” or “no.” But the impression I got from the 
answers given by the committee is that the laws of the 
autonomous regions follow its inhabitants wherever 
they are. Hence, I suggest that this is a matter that 
should first be taken under advisement. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to venture an answer to 
that interesting question. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. . 

MR. NOLLEDO. That will involve a question of juris- 
diction that will be decided by the appropriate courts. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. It is not a question of juris- 
diction. The question is what law is applicable. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, since jurisdiction will 
first be considered, I think it is only when jurisdiction is 
finally decided that we go to the question of whether 
what law shall be applicable. 

MR. CONCEPCION. No. There can be no question of 
jurisdiction so long as he is in Manila. There is jurisdic- 
tion over this person. This is a question of jurisdiction 
over this status which is different. 


MR. CONCEPCION. No, I am trying to explain. 
There is a difference between jurisdiction over the per- 
son and the law applicable to that person. There may be 
jurisdiction over the person but the issue may be what 
law shall apply? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If the Commissioner will permit me, 
I will make the problem specific. A Muslim from the 
autonomous region goes to Manila and commits bigamy 
with someone who is a resident of Manila. In other 
words, the second marriage was celebrated in Manila. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And then, in that case, being a 
Muslim, he can invoke his personal law that says bigamy 
is legalized. He can raise that as a defense, but the juris- 
diction of the court will be a court in Manila. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I am sorry; I do not think that is 
a question of jurisdiction of the court. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why that is not yet remedied 
by any exact provision of the law. We recommend that 
when Congress enacts the personal law that will govern 
the Muslims, the problem should be taken into account. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is why I asked permission 
to bring the matter to the attention of the Commission. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Concepcion 
very much for his interest. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Then in that case even Congress can 
remedy that. I will cite a specific example in relation to 
Article 15 of the Civil Code, if the Commissioner will 
permit me. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Yes. 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam President. 
MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Article 15 of the Civil Code says 
that personal law shall be binding upon citizens of the 
Philippines even if living abroad. 

MR. CONCEPCION. That is the question. 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is a provision from where we 
can begin discussing the question. 


MR CONCEPCION. That is the question precise 
Do we have several personal laws in the Philippines? 

MR. NOLLEDO. But because they reside in the coi 
try, when we do not talk of a foreign country here a 
since the autonomous region is within the framework 
national sovereignty, I think there is where the questi 
of jurisdiction will come in with kindest respect to t 
Commissioner’s opinion. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

May I just follow up this matter because this is really 
what is bothering a number of lawyers — about the 
applicability of the autonomous region’s property law 
relations which may be enacted by the regional legisla- 
tive assembly. I would like to take up the point raised 
by Chief Justice Concepcion and give as an example the 
matter of divorce because I understand from the in- 
formation which the distinguished chairman volunteered 
to give to the Commission, divorce is recognized in some 
areas in Mindanao under the autonomous region law. 
Now, that IS against the national law, the Civil Code 
provisions. But the committee is conceding that 
that is a valid law in that autonomous region, notwith- 
standing the fact that it is against the national law. Is 
my understanding correct? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


551 


MR. SUAREZ. But there is now a constitutional man- 
date that it must be within tlie framework of the 
national law. Would that divorce law, applicable and 
operative in that region, be still effective and valid after 
the ratification of this new Constitution? 

MR. NOLLEDO. As 1 stated, it is within the intent of 
the committee, and I hope the Commission, that con- 
sidering that we are bound to preserve and develop the 
customs and traditions, or the cultural heritage of the 
region, then the special law there must prevail over the 
national law. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the regional legislative assembly 
can enact a law allowing divorce among the inhabitants 
of that autonomous region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Now, suppose a husband and a wife 
living in that autonomous region moved to Manila and 
they would now like to separate arid get a divorce. Can 
they get it from the Manila Regional Trial Court? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would recommend that when 
Congress enacts the appropriate legislation, that pro- 
blem should be resolved in the appropriate provisions 
of the code. 

MR. SUAREZ. Or do they have to go back to their 
autonomous region and apply in the special courts that 
would be organized? 

MR. NOLLEDO. If I were Congress, I will adopt that 
rule that the Commissioner just stated. 

MR. SUAREZ. But that is not clear under the present 
provision, Madam President. ” 

MR. NOLLEDO. No. That is why we are leaving to 
Congress the power of legislation. And I am glad Com- 
missioners Concepcion and Suarez asked this question 
because that can be resolved in a code to be enacted by 
Congress. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I draw the honorable Com- 
missioners’ attention to a paper of Atty. Perfecto V. 
Fernandez of the UP College of Law, published in the 
Philippine Law Journal Volume 55, No. 4, December 
1980, which addresses this question. The paper is 
entitled: “Towards a Definition of National Policy on 
Recognition of Ethnic Law within the Philippine Legal 
Order.” 


He lists a number of categories, depending , on 
whether there is mutual enhancement of ethnic law and 
national law, and where there are conflicts. He calls the 
situation where there is conflict between ethnic law and 
national law acceptable, tolerable, and unacceptable. 

The issue being discussed now belongs to the unaccepta- 
ble sector. Let me read very briefly: 

Those in whose ethnic law tlie norms prevailing would 
not only run counter to national values or objectives but 
would also, even within the limited sphere of operation, 
create substantial harm to such national values or objec- 
tives. For tltis sector tlie substantial harm to national 
interest that they can cause places them beyond the outer 
limit or boundary mentioned above. Instead of recogni- 
tion, the response must be negative, ranging from denial 
of recognition by declaring even the mles themselves in- 
valid or the outcome of their operation invalid or both, 
through suppression, through criminal prohibition of what 
such norms may allow or recognize. 

Allow me to continue. Madam President: 

It will readily be seen that the operation of ethnic law 
to the extent recognized or permitted as above discussed, 
must be founded on a concept analogous to the principle of 
nationality in conflicts of law situations. Here the jurisdic- 
tional foundation must be the feet of membership of the 
parties to the dispute to the particular cultural community 
whose ethnic law is involved. Unless both parties are 
members, the ethnic law can have no application. 

Exceptions can, of course, be recognized, as we have 
pointed out. I do not have to read that, but the paper 
says that there could be exceptions. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I think what all of 
this is saying really is that once we approve these provi- 
sions, it is a mandate for Congress to make the necessary 
adjustments to our existing national laws, and the 
extent to which Congress will be willing to make the 
adjustments will have to be weighed very carefully. In 
the matter of divorce law for instance, since we say that 
all these local laws will have to be within the framework 
of national laws, clearly this is almost a command to 
Congress by saying that in the implementation of this 
autonomous plan it will be necessary to reformulate 
national laws including making the necessary exceptions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, it appears to 
me that there are certain issues which remain unre- 
solved, but perhaps it would help somewhat if I will 
read a very shoit paragraph from this book: An Intro- 
duction to the Code of Muslim Personal Laws, by 
Esteban B. Bautista of the UP Law Center who was a 
member of the Presidential Commission that drafted 


552 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


the Code of Muslim Personal Laws, P.D. No. 1053. On 
the topic, “Muslim and Other Laws,” he said: 

Nor is it true, contrary to the now current misconcep- 
tion or speculation, that the Muslim wUl now be governed 
solely by their legal system and be exempt from observing 
other Philippine laws. Muslims will continue to be 
governed by the laws of general application like the Re- 
vised Penal Code, except in certain cases as to bigamy under 
Article 180 and other penal laws; the Land Registration 
Act, Public Land Act, Mining Law, Forestry Law, Fisheries 
Act, the Land Transportation Code, the Tax and Customs 
Laws, the Commercial Laws, the Civil Service Law, all 
public laws in fact, and many others. 

The Civil Code itself will continue to be applied to 
Muslims, except in so far as it relates to persons and family 
relations and succession like inheritance. Indeed, even with 
respect to these matters, the Civil Code is expressly given 
suppletory application. Thus, if an ejectment suit should 
arise between two Muslims or between a Muslim and a non- 
Muslim, the Civil Code or any other applicable law will 
apply. If the dispute refers to a mining claim or to apiece 
of land, the Mining Law or the Land Registration Act or 
Public Land Act, as the case may be, wUl govern. 

Nor need the non-Muslims in the Muslim areas fear that 
they will now be governed by the Muslim legal system. It 
wUl apply to them and other non-Muslims in other areas 
oiUy in the limited instances provided for in the Code. 

I hope this clarifies certain points. Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I ask the committee a few 
clarificatory questions, particularly on this paragraph 
(4), on the application of personal, family and pro- 
perty relations. Section 4 starts with the opening state- 
ment “Within its territorial jurisdiction,” and it is my 
perception that the application of this personal, family, 
and property relations law is with respect to inhabitants 
of those autonomous regions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Xbat is correct. 

MR. REGALADO. Does the committee also take into 
account their religious affiliation? I recall that before, 
under RA 394, and which was subsequently extended 
absolute divorce was permitted, as an exception to the 
provisions of the Civil Code among pagans and non- 
Christies in non-Christian provinces. And Article 78 of 
the Civil Code, I recall, also provides such exceptions to 
the formalities and requirements for marriage and the 
application of Mohammedan laws between Muslims or 
pagans in non-Christian provinces. Those were the basic 
distinctions. In other words, two Christians, although 
living in a non-Christian province, will still be bound by 
the Civil Code. It is only when they embrace the afore- 


said religious affiliation, or become pagans, that they be 
included in the exceptions. What I would like to find 
out here from the committee is the basis of the applica- 
tion of these special laws in the autonomous regions. 
Will it be a question of the fact that they are residents? 
In other words, in effect the lex domicilii is coming in? 
Or will it be a question as to where it was contracted? In 
other words, the lex contractus? Or will it be a question 
of their religious affiliation, whether they are Muslims, 
pagans, or if they have any religion other than the 
Christian religion? That was the previous basic distinc- 
tions we had, based on religion under RA 394 and 
Article 78 of the Civil Code. 

MR. ALONTO. For the committee. Madam President, 
I believe the philosophy on the issues involved in those 
laws that the Commissioner has just cited is still true in 
the case of the autonomous region. 

MR. REGALADO. So does it follow that a Christian 
couple livmg in an autonomous region where divorce is 
allowed may avail of the same in the special courts 
therein? 

MR. ALONTO. A Christian couple definitely cannot 
avail of such a divorce just because they are living within 
an autonomous region. 

MR. REGALADO. I notice here, as pointed out by 
Chief Justice Concepcion, that we seem to have created 
a secondary set of conflict of laws. Whereas formerly 
the conflict of laws was between the laws of nations; 
that is, our municipal law vis-a-vis the municipal law of 
another foreign country, we have added a secondary 
stratum of a conflict of laws within the same municip^ 
forum but only because of the fact that they come from 
different regions; and I am a little concerned as to how 
it would eventually apply in a real conflict of law situa- 
tion involving other nations because here, within our 
own domain, we already have a conflict of laws on 
status, validity of marriage, validity of divorce, legit- 
imacy and illegitimacy, and even the criminal aspects of 
adultery and bigamy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, this conflict of 
internal municipal laws can be remedied by legislation. 

MR. REGALADO. So legislation will again have to 
take place to remedy the matter of the actual internal 
conflict of laws? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, religious affilia- 
tion has nothing to do with it? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think religious affiliation shall be 
considered. For example, in the Civil Code we will 
notice that there is a provision designed to assimilate the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20. 1986 


553 


Muslims within our legal system. We will notice that if 
the man is a Muslim, the Muslim law shall apply; and if 
the man is a Christian, then the Civil Code shall apply. 
And where there is a period of 20 years, then it will be 
the Civil Code that shall govern all inhabitants of the 
country. But the questions of assimilation have become 
complicated. And that is the reason Mr. Marcos issued 
P.D. No. 1083 codifying the Muslim personal laws, 
recognizing the practices, customs and traditions among 
the Muslims and allowing even divorce. 

MR. REGALADO. So, now we take into account the 
religion of the parties or absence of religion, as in the 
case of pagans or animists and the matter of their actual 
residence, whether they are residents of an autonomous 
region at the tune the controversy or the cause of action 
arose. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Those factors will be considered by 
Congress in the passage of appropriate legislation. 

Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may we go back to 
the other issues? I have reservation about some of the 
answers that were given. But it seems to me that the 
possible reconciliation is the next paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Monsod referring 
to paragraph 5? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes; it seems to me that maybe the 
way to resolve this is: first, that everything involving 
foreign relations, foreign trade, foreign debt, immigra- 
tion and so on should be outside the realm of the legis- 
lative power of the autonomous region. Second, it is 
assumed that the national development program will 
include the autonomous regions and that before it is 
promulgated and passed upon by Congress, it would 
already have reconciled the regional programs of the 
autonomous regions. 

I would rather, if I may, leave it at that, than to have 
in the record of this Commission the answer that would 
leave to autonomous regions the riglit to incur foreign 
debt or to establish a project that is not consistent with 
the national development program. 

MR. NOLLEDO. On behalf of the committee, I think 
Commissioner Monsod’s observations should be con- 
sidered correct. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 


MR. BENNAGEN. In the deliberations of the com- 
mittee, it was the understanding that those areas men- 
tioned, like foreign relations, foreign trade, banking 
and international migration are not within the purview 
of the autonomous region. With respect to the balancing 
of regional development and national development, we 
feel that that can be done through systematic consulta- 
tion. 

MR. MONSOD. That is resolved in the program itself, 
otlierwise it would not be a national development 
program if it has no reconciliations. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. If it has no reconciliation. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes, we just ask the understanding 
of the proponent of tlie phrase “national development.” 

It is the experience of so many countries, including the 
Philippines, that the national development plans are 
sometimes not sensitive to regional ecology and regional 
culture. The understanding is that tliere shall be a sys- 
tematic consultation antecedent to the formulation of a 
development plan. 

MR. MONSOD. It is not the intention of the commit- 
tee, I assume, that the autonomous regions would be 
outside of the national development program of the 
country. 

MR. BENNAGEN. No. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So, Madam President, before we 
pj*QQgg(l to the consideration of the next enumerated 
instance, I would like to state here for purposes of 
posterity tliat the term “property relations” should 
cover only relations affecting property in marriage and 
inheritance. 

These two topics are also covered by the Muslim 
personal law, which is PD No. 1083. 

THE PRESIDENT. We have to go back to Com- 
missioner Bernas’ tabulation. 

FR. BERNAS. We are on No. 5, which should read; 
“Regional, URBAN AND RURAL PLANNING and 
development.” 

The observations of Commissioner Monsod were 
precisely on that point. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 


554 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. No. 6 should read: “Economic, social 
AND TOURISM development.” 

Agricultural, commercial and industrial are included 
in “Economic.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Commissioner did not include 
“cultural development.” Is that covered by another sub- 
section? 

FR. BERNAS. We will be coming to that later. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. No. 7 should read: EDUCATIONAL 
POLICY. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think it should be plural. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, “EDUCATIONAL POLICIES.” 

The committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. No. 8 should read: “Preservation and 
development of THE CULTURAL HERITAGE.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection from Com- 
tnissioner Bacani? 

BISHOP BACANI. This is just a question, Madam 
President, on the term “Preservation and development 
of THE CULTURAL HERITAGE” of the region. In 
view of the responses to the questions I raised this 
morning where it was pointed out that religion is really 
a very important part of the cultures of these autono- 
mous regions, may I ask whether the term “Preservation 
and development of THE CULTURAL HERITAGE” of 
the region means that it will be a regional policy, for 
example, in the Muslim autonomous region, to protect 
the Islamic character of the region? 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, I think that is 
understood. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. I would like to ask the impli- 
cations of that because if it will become a regional 


policy to protect the Islamic character of the region, 
will there, therefore, be the possibility of laws prohibit- 
ing, for example, missionary activity in the region as 
being contrary to the preservation of the Islamic 
character of the region? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I will answer that. 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Alonto 
say? 

MR. ALONTO. Madam President, Islam itself is a 
paladin of a complete and realistic religious freedom. So 
the protection of Islamic heritage could not include, for 
example, the destruction of other religious persuasions 
within the region. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I would like to 
answer that by saying that any of these powers cannot 
alter the provisions of this Constitution in the sense that 
freedom of religion must be respected within the region. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, that is freedom to express 
and profess one’s religion. But there have been, sad to 
say, also experiences apparently in Indonesia and it 
seems in Malaysia also, where missionary activity has 
really been hindered, and for a very good reason for the 
people in those different Islamic nations; that is, I 
suppose, for the preservation of the Islamic cultural 
heritage. And so, while people there may not be forbid- 
den to profess their religion and worship, nevertheless, 
they may be hindered in the propagation of their 
religion. That is why I am very happy to hear Com- 
missioner Alonto say that such a preservation will not 
mean the curtailment in any manner of the activities of 
other religions whatever they are in their attempt to 
propagate their faiths. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. May I, Madam President, enlighten 
my dear friend and colleague that Islam’s red meaning 
IS “peace” - peace with your neighbor, peace with your 
e owmen, peace with your countrymen. In the coun- 
tries mentioned by the Commissioner where Islam 
prevails — Indonesia and Malaysia — there is not only 
freedom of religion, but even permissive governments 
because they permit missionary schools such as De La 
Salle and other institutions of Christian Catholic or 
non-Catholic faiths to be organized to teach and to 
spread their teachings among those who are enrolled 
m t eir schools. Freedom of religion and respect of 
one s conscience these days are equally granted to the 
non-Mushm population of Indonesia and Malaysia. 

I have been in these two countries as the diplomatic 
representative of the Philippines and I never encoun- 
tered any protest from the sectarian schools as to their 
treatment by the governments of these countries with 
predominantly Islamic population. That is why we do 
not hear of schools, Catholic as well as other sectarian 


1 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


555 


schools, being closed because of the prohibition to 
propagate their teaching and their faiths. Islam is a 
tolerant religion even m Malaysia and Indonesia. There 
are Christians there; Catholics and people of all kinds of 
religious faiths, living in harmony insofar as the inter- 
action of religious faiths and beliefs is concerned. As a 
matter of fact, the way I see it, it seems that we have 
more problems in the South tlian in Indonesia and 
Malaysia. I know because I was there; I represented our 
country there for many years and I was witness to the 
harmony between tlie different faiths as far as the 
exercise of their religious beliefs is concerned. There is 
freedom of thought and freedom of religion because 
Islam, like Christianity, values human life, and we would 
like to live together in complete harmony and under- 
standing. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

'N 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I miglit also add 
that I have a standing invitation from Commissioner 
Abubakar to establish aji Ateneo University in liis 
kingdom. (Laughter) 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Baca^ii is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. It is clear tlien that this 
provision does not hinder any faith at all from pro- 
pagating. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. Is there any objection to 
No. 8: “Preservation and development of THE CUL- 
TURAL HERITAGE”? (Silence) The Chair hears none; 
the amendment is approved. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I do not know whether this 
question will affect the approval of this paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. Which paragraph? 

BISHOP BACANI. The same paragraph. Would this 
preservation and development of the cultural heritage 
of the region include the teaching of the Muslim religion 
in public schools? I am only asking the question; I am 
not offering any objection. 

MR. ALONTO. The teaching of religion is pennitted 
in any school in the autonomous region. 

BISHOP BACANI. At present, in madrasah schools, 
the teaching of the Muslim religion is compulsory. With 
the phrase “development of THE CULTURAL HERI- 


TAGE,” would it also be a mandate for the continua- 
tion of the policies in the madrasah schools at present in 
Region IX and XII where the teaching of religion is 
compulsory and there is budgetary support from the 
State? 

MR. ALONTO. Even after the organization of the 
autonomous region, the State caiinot spend for religion 
because of the fundamental provision that we stated 
here in this Constitution that there is a complete separa- 
tion of the Church and the State. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. I have a position paper 
written by a member of the Catholic Bishop’s Confer- 
ence of the Philippines where it is stated, and I will be 
glad to be corrected, that, in fact, in madrasah schools 
in the South the teaching of religion is compulsory and 
there is budgetary support for it from the government. 

MR. ALONTO. There is none. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am not objecting to it in the 
sense tliat it may be an exception to our rules. I do not 
know whether it is an exception but I would just like to 
know whether this will mandate or allow the con- 
tinuation of such a policy. 

MR. ALONTO. I am not aware of any government 
fund that is being spent in the madrasah because right 
now, the madrasahs in Mindanao are private schools. 

MR. UKA. Madam President, may I make just a few 
statements. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Uka is recognized. 

MR. UKA. We should thank our brother Bishop 
Bacani for those clarificatory questions because such 
questions will make the issue clear. For his information, 
the madrasah schools, as Commissioner Alonto has 
said, are private schools and there is not a single centavo 
that has been spent by the government for these private 
schools. Madrasah schools, I repeat, are private schools. 
And, of course, they are free to teach their religion 
which is Islam. 

Now, to clarify all these matters, as I said, it is a 
good thing Bishop Bacani brought this up. We have a 
Catholic Bishop in Cotabato . . . 

BISHOP BACANI. Archbishop Smith? 

MR. UKA. That bishop practically retired. He is 
known as a Muslim bishop because he is very kind to the 
Muslim population. 

BISHOP BACANI. That is Archbishop Mongeau. 

MR. UKA. Yes, Archbishop Mongeau. 1 think that is 
a French-Canadian name. He said he would rather die in 


556 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


the Philippines, in Maguindanao or in Cotabato City. He * 
even put up a subdivision for Muslims. 

For further information, the Qur’an is the main guide 
for Muslims in their daily life. There are beautiful verses 
in it and I will quote some which refer to Christians. It 
says: 

Verily, you will find the Christian to be your best 
friends for among the Christians are priests and monks who 
are not proud and in their churches, the name of God is 
much remembered. 

Another verse: 

Verily, the Jews and the Christians — who believe in God 
and follow His commandments — shall have their reward 
from God. 

Another one; 

Let there be no compulsion in the matter of religion. My 
religion is mine; your religion is yours. 

And these verses are all fulfilled in the Muslim coun- 
tries where we find the most ancient Christian churches, 
more ancient or older than those in Europe that are still 
there because of those verses. And the Holy Prophet 
Muhammad said many good things about Christians, and 
let me tell the body that the few early followers of the 
Holy Prophet Muhammad would have all been killed 
had not the negus, that Christian emperor, welcomed 
and protected them in Abyssinia. Today their de- 
scendants constitute more than 50 percent of the 
population of Ethiopia or Abyssinia. That is why the 
Muslims should understand and love their Christian 
brothers. 

Another thing, one cannot be a 100 percent Muslim 
or a real Muslim unless he believes in Jesus as one of the 
great messengers of God because that is one of the 
requirements of the Muslim faith. Muslims call Jesus 
“Nabi Isa,” whose mother is Mariam (Mary). David is 
Daud; Abraham is Ibrahim. The Muslims’ Lord’s Prayer 
(Al-Fatihah) is very similar to the Christian Lord’s 
Prayer; the only difference is that in the Muslims’ Lord’s 
Prayer in the Holy Qur’an (A1 Fatihah) the verse “Give 
us this day our daily bread” is lacking. And that is 
perhaps the reason hot pan de sal (bread) is found 
mostly in the Christian areas. There are not many pan 
de sals in the Muslim areas because Muslims do not pray 
for it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bacani satisfied? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. Madam President, I just 
would like to put on record that I asked these questions, 
as I said earlier, not to oppose this provision, but to 
clarify its sense. 

I thank very much my brother Commissioner from 
the Muslim areas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

What is the next paragraph? 


FR. BERNAS. No. 9, and the last number, is the 
original No. 13 and it reads: “Such other matters as may 
be authorized by law for the promotion of the general 
welfare of the people of the region.” We have deleted 
No. 8 — that is included in economic development — 
No. 9, No. 10 and No. 12. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the comment of the com- 
mittee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee accepts the amend- 
ments, including the deletion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Actually this is no objection, but I 
just want to find out from the distinguished Fr. Bernas 
if he still finds a compelling necessity to enumerate all 
of these compelling legislative powers. Would he not just 
put a period after the phrase “legislative powers.” I 
would like to find out the compelling necessity to make 
all of these enumerations on legislative powers. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

My own reading of the situation is that we are writing 
a Constitution in abstracto; we are writing a Constitu- 
tion in the context of the current ferments within the 
nation: ferments in the North and ferments in the 
South. 

And so the enumeration becomes almost a necessity 
for us to be able to say to our brothers in the North 
and in the South: “Yes, we are listening to your aspira- 
tions, we sympathize with your desires, and we would 
like to express our sympathy and our appreciation of 
your desires by putting down something not just in 
general terms but also in as specific a form as possible 
consistent with Constitution-making.” 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner for his 
honest answer, but I am aware of the fact that as early 
as 1977, this P.D. No. 1618 enumerated the same 
powers, among other things, which Commissioner 
Bernas has stated, but it did not serve to stifle the 
ferments that he mentioned. 

Is the Commissioner saying now that if we include 
the enumeration in the Constitution it might stop and 
bottle up the ferments that are going on? 

BISHOP BACANI. Precisely, by having the Constitu- 
tion explicitly recognize this, we are recognizing the 
very importance of these problems, so important that 
we deem it proper to incorporate it in the highest law 
of the land. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


557 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I only would like to seek some clarifi- 
cation after this enumeration. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, can we please first 
make a vote on paragraph 9, unless the Commissioner 
wants to propose some amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that would be related, Madam 
President, because if I am not satisfied with the answer, 

I may be compelled to introduce an amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right; we will defer the voting 
then. Commissioner Davide may please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since we have enumerated these 
powers for the autonomous region, would such powers 
include the following: national defense and security, 
foreign relations or foreign trade; customs and tariff, 
and quarantine; currency, monetary affairs, foreign ex- 
change, banking and quasi-banking, and external 
borrowing; posts and communications; air and sea 
transport; immigration and deportation; citizenship and 
naturalization; and general auditing? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, they belong to the national 
government. 

MR. DAVIDE. I thank the Commissioner for that 
answer. 

In other words, not even the organic act can grant 
legislative powers over the matters I enumerated, 
meaning to say, that the organic act cannot so provide. 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, Madam President, it cannot. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you very much. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Those powers belong to the national 
government. They are exercised traditionally, constitu- 
tionally and legally by the national government. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. Just for the record, I would like to 
ask Commissioner Bernas if the words “social develop- 
ment” would now encompass No. 9, which is the 
establishment, operation, maintenance and adminis- 
tration of health, welfare and other social services 
programs? 


FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. No. 9 would be 
encompassed both under social development and under 
the general welfare clause of the last number. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to ask the committee 
if it is aware that those excluded powers are practically 
copied in toto from Section 4 of P.D. No. 1618. As a 
matter of fact, the quotation is verbatim. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would not say in toto, because 
No. 11 — national economic, social and educational 
planning — was not mentioned by Commissioner 
Davide, and that may fall in some respects under the 
powers of the regional government. 

Also Section 4(5) of the same decree which says 
“disposition, exploration, development, exploitation or 
utilization of all natural resources” was not mentioned 
by Commissioner Davide because it is qualified by the 
powers of the regional government. 

We thank the Commissioner for calling our attention. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case, this needs further 
clarification. In other words, as far as disposition, ex- 
ploration, development, exploitation or utiUzation of 
all natural resources, these are within the powers of the 
national government. 

MR. NOLLEDO. But qualified by the provisions 
affecting the jurisdiction of the regional government. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And the same answer is true 
when it comes to national economic, social and educa- 
tional planning? 

MR NOLLEDO. Also by the national government 
but also qualified by the provisions giving legislative 
powers to the regional government. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, just one follow- 
up question. Following the Commissioner’s explanation, 
those items enumerated under P.D. No. 1618 as not 
being within the exclusive power of the national govern- 
ment, and now slightly amended by Section 4, are the 
ones contemplated under Section 6 of the draft article 
to the effect that “All powers, functions and responsi- 
bilities not granted by this Constitution or by law to the 
autonomous region shall be vested in the National 
Government.” 


558 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, but that provision was already 
deleted by the Constitutional Commission. 


MR. NOLLEDO. May I request Commissioner Bemas 
to read Section 4, as amended? 


MR. REGALADO. So, what then would be the 
understanding? 

MR. NOLLEDO. That is why there was really a need 
for Commissioner Davide to enumerate the powers that 
pertain to the national government. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes; only for the record, but not 
set out in the article itself. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, only for posterity; for others 
to know; for legal purposes. 

MR. REGALADO. Therefore, I suppose that for that 
purpose, the enumeration in the record as to what are 
excluded from the powers of the autonomous govern- 
ment should be enumerated completely as set out in 
P.D. No. 1618. 

MR. NOLLEDO. It seems to me that the Commis- 
sioner would like to reinstate the deleted provision. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes, so that things would be clear, 
unless the committee just wants this read into the 
record without the necessity of such a provision in the 
article because that could be a bone of contention and 
this could help. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Would the Commissioner be satis- 
fied, if we manifest now that the deleted provision is the 
intention of the committee? Instead of reinstating the 
deleted provision in this article that all other powers not 
vested in the regional government shall be deemed 
vested in the national government, would he be satisfied 
if we state that we believe in the validity of that provi- 
sion? 

MR. REGALADO. I would be more in favor of re- 
instating Section 6, just to make it specific. 


FR. BERNAS. Section 4 will now read: “Within its 
territorial jurisdiction AND SUBJECT TO THE PRO- 
VISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND NATIONAL 
LAWS, THE ORGANIC ACT OF autonomous regions 
shall PROVIDE FOR legislative POWERS over: 

1 ) Administrative organization; 

2) CREATION OF SOURCES OF REVENUES; 

3) Ancestral domain and natural resources; 

4) PERSONAL, FAMILY AND PROPERTY RELA 
TIONS; 

5) Regional URBAN AND RURAL PLANNING and 
development; 

6) Economic, social and TOURISM development' 

7) EDUCATIONAL POLICIES; 

8) Preservation and development of the CULTURAt 
HERITAGE; AND 

9) Such other matters as may be authorized by l 
for the promotion of the general welfare of 
people of the region.” 


VOTING 


THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Secti 
4, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several Mernh^^ 
raised their hand.) 


As many as are against, please raise their hand 
Member raised his hand. ) ' 


The results show 29 votes in favor, none against anH 
no abstention; Section 4, as amended, is approved 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recogni^ 

MR. FOZ. In connection with the last item of Se r 
4, is it understood that the term “LAW” refe^*^^^^ 
“national law”? 


MR. NOLLEDO. After we shall have approved the 
amendments of Commissioner Bemas, the committee 
will welcome the reinstatement of that provision. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, a law passed by Congress 
MR. FOZ. Thank you. 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President, can we now vote on 
paragraph 9? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we can now vote on 
the entire Section 4, as amended. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the honorable chairman read 
Section 4, as amended. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT, 
recognized. 


Commissioner Maambong is 


MR. MAAMBONG. Before we proceed to anoth 
section, in yesterday’s discussion, I perceived that th 
were certain misconceptions brought about by a toS^ 
which we were not aware of, so I would just like to put 
on record certain items which I feel will correct these 
misconceptions. For example, yesterday there was a 
statement that shari’a courts may not be part of the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1986 


559 


country’s judicial system. Article 137 of the Code of 
Muslim Personal Laws says: 

The Shari’a Courts are made part of the country’s judi- 
cial system, and together with their personnel, are subject 
to the administrative supervision of the Supreme Court. 

The second item, Madam President, is about the 
examination conducted in order to qualify certain 
lawyers to become members of the shari’a courts. I have 
no quarrel with that regulation of the Supreme Court; 

I understand the examination was really conducted, but 
just for the record. Articles 140 and 152 of the Code of 
Muslim Personal Laws provide: 

Anyone, even a non-Muslim, who has the necessary 
qualifications may be appointed to this court. 

And, finally, there was a discussion here which was 
not resolved whether decisions of shari’a courts may be 
appealable to a higher court, and I have now the pro- 
vision of Article 145, which says: 

The Supreme Court is given the power to review deci- 
sions of the Shari’a District Courts. 

I think this will clarify the record. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, as far as the com- 
mittee is concerned, we made a statement that the 
shari’a courts fall within the judicial system of the 
Philippines, and that the third statement of Commis- 
sioner Maambong was also stated by the committee in 
relation to an amendment introduced by Commissioner 
Vicente Foz. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct. Madam President, 
the discussion I referred to was from the floor, not from 
the committee. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We thank the Commissioner. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. We are through with Sections 4 
and 5, Madam President. This is only an aftermath of 
my comment regarding Section 6 which the committee 
deleted, and yet it was made plain here for the record 
that there are certain powers which are reserved only for 
the national government as set out in P.D. No. 1618 and 
slightly amended now by the enumeration in Section 4. 

PRESIDENT. Would the Commissioner desire to 
propose an amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. To avoid any misunderstanding 
and to make things clear, I would like to propose that 


the original Section 6 be restored because it provides 
that “All powers, functions and responsibilities not 
granted by this Constitution or by law to the autono- 
mous regions shall be vested in the National Govern- 
ment.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We agree with the amendment of 
Commissioner Regalado. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the committee 
agrees to return Section 6? 

MR. NOLLEDO. We realize the implications of the 
absence of that provision, so the committee believes 
that Section 6 should be reinstated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I was the proponent for its deletion. 

I really submitted and I am going to submit again that 
all these powers are inherent in the Congress of the 
Philippines. All law-making authority and all law- 
making power belong to the Congress of the Philippines, 
and insofar as the autonomous regions are concerned, 
these are only the exceptions. And so it is not necessary 
to incorporate into the Constitution that all powers 
other than those granted to the autonomous regions are 
reserved to the Congress of the Philippines. As a matter 
of fact, if we place it there, it would create a doubt that 
we are’ really creating another entity probably equal in 
rank as the Congress of the Philippines, which is not so. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, may the commit- 
tee react to the statement of Commissioner Davide. Had 
Commissioner Davide not asked me the question of 
whether or not the powers enumerated by him fall 
within the jurisdiction of the government, perhaps I 
would not have agreed with the amendment introduced 
by Commissioner Regalado, because the implication is 
created that if there is any power not enumerated in 
what he has just stated, then they may necessarily 
pertain to the autonomous region, which is not so. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, 1 asked that question earlier, 
precisely to put a limit to the authority which may be 
authorized by the organic act. What 1 enumerated are 
the untouchables and not even the organic act can 
diminish these powers. That was the unplication of the 
enumeration. In other words, neither the organic act 
nor any other law can touch on these areas. 

MR. REGALADO. But, Madam President, Section 6, 
referring to all powers, functions and responsibilities 


560 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


which are reserved for the national government, does 
not refer only to congressional powers. They extend to 
executive powers, and all other functions and responsi- 
bilities. The purpose of restoring it is to make it clear, 
once and for all, that these are the limits of the powers 
of the autonomous government. Those not enumerated 
are actually to be exercised by the national government, 
and yet some of those exceptions under P.D. No. 1618, 
which were supposed to be untouchables under the then 
regime, were slightly qualified and modified now by the 
amendments of Section 4, as introduced by Com- 
missioner Bemas. That is why I decided to ask that this 
Section 6 should be reinstated to avoid any possible 
question or controversy in the future. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will withdraw my objection. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We thank Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to the rein- 
statement of Section 6? (Silenee) The Chair hears none; 
thei amendment is approved^/ 

REV. RIGOS. We request that Commissioner Ople be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

Is it still on this section? 

MR. OPLE. No, Madam President. We have a proposed 
last section in the Article on Local Governments — a 
new section. May I say first that the other proponents 
are: Commissioners Bennagen, Azcuna, Rama, Uka, 
Alonto, Abubakar and Bacani. 

Under the subhead of “Other Cultural Communities,” 
“CONGRESS MAY PROVIDE CERTAIN FORMS OF 
AUTONOMY AS MAY BE APPROPRIATE TO OTHER 
CULTURAL COMMUNITIES WITHIN THE FRAME- 
WORK OF EXISTING TERRITORIAL AND POLIT- 
ICAL SUBDIVISIONS, SUBJECT TO THE PROVI- 
SIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND NATIONAL 
LAW. FOR THIS PURPOSE, IT MAY CREATE A 
PERMANENT COMMISSION AS AN ADVISORY 
BODY TO THE PRESIDENT.” The reason for this 
amendment. Madam President, should be apparent to 
the Members of the Commission. This historic Artie e 
on Locdi Governments has by now provided for local 
autonomy for the entire infrastructure of local govern- 
ments; it has provided for autonomy for two regions, 
namely. Cordillera and Muslim Mindanao, for it has 
tended to overlook at least three million other minority 
Filipinos, including non-Muslim tribes in Mindanao, 
estimated to number about two m illi on, and such lesser 
tribes in Luzon, as the Mangy ans of Mindoro, the Duma- 
gats of the Sierra Madre, Provinces of Bulacan, Quezon, 
Rizal and Nueva Ecija, the Aetas of the Zambales 
mountains, the Tagbanuas of Palawan and numerous 
others. 

This proposed section corrects this gap by mandating 
Congress to provide for the manner in which certain 


forms of autonomy, as may be appropriate, can be 
granted to these other Filipino cultural communities. It 
is so worded that Congress has the utmost flexibility to 
provide for the manner and degree of autonomy that 
will precisely fit the great variations in the conditions 
and levels of economic and social development of these 
smaller and widely scattered groups. Congress may or 
may not vest a juridical personality in any of these com- 
munities. In the main, the intent is to recognize their 
cultural identities and their entitlement to a measure of 
autonomy within the framework of the existing political 
subdivisions, such as provinces, cities, municipalities, 
and barangays. There is a proposed commission which 
will oversee the implementation of any future act of 
Congress with respect to these other cultural com- 
munities, and which probably can help codify their 
customary laws and traditions, recommend to the 
President the policies and measures that will promote 
their welfare and safeguard their rights, and keep 
Congress up to date on the progress of such measures 
intended to protect and to benefit them. 

I ask the committee’s kind consideration. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Despite the usual well-researched 
explanation of Commissioner Ople, may I assume a 
contrary position? First, in my humble submission this 
provision will unduly, if not capriciously, amplify the 
provision on local autonomy. We will be creating more 
autonomous regions if we adopt this provision. 

Secondly, the creation of a permanent commissin 
has no place in the Article on Autonomous Regions ^ 
have a similar proposal that will be submitted for cop 
sideration to the Committee on General Provisions. Thi' 
proposal speaks of a permanent commission as an 
advisory body to the President. I think this should b 
tackled by the Committee on General Provisions. ® 

Thirdly, the Mangy ans of Mindoro, the Dumagats of 
Sierra Madre, the Aetas of Zambales, and other minori- 
ties in various provinces have not supplicated or be- 
seeched us for the creation of autonomous regions 
It is only the people of Cordillera and the Bangsa Moro 
who pounded on our doors asking for the creation of 
autonomous regions. 

So, Madam President, I object to the Ople proposal 
because it will pave the way for more autonomous 
regions and thereby open the doors for federalism in 
this country. 

MR. OPLE. May I respond briefly. Madam President? 

I do not think the fears of Commissioner Sarmiento 
are well-founded with respect to the risk that in adopt- 
ing this section, we may be paving the way for more 
autonomous regions. That would have been better justi- 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 20,1986 


561 


fled if we adhere to .the original formulation of this 
section, but as revised and as now being presented, we 
will see that in this case, Congress may provide — it is a 
permissive statement — certain forms of autonomy 
which are quite clearly unrelated to the powers that we 
have just given to the two autonomous regions, as may 
be appropriate to other cultural communities and witliin 
the framework of existing territorial and political 
subdivisions. 

As I said earlier. Congress will be in the best position 
to detennine what forms and manner and degrees of 
autonomy will be appropriate, according to tlie great 
diversity of the conditions and existing levels of de- 
velopment of all of these different tribes. 

May I point out that very recently, in Mindanao, I 
think in Zamboanga City, the representatives of the 
non-Muslim tribes claiming to represent more than two 
million non-Christian and non-Muslim tribes in Minda- 
nao gathered in order to communicate to the national 
government their own demand for appropriate atten- 
tion. I am not saying that they are making demands of 
the same magnitude as the Muslims in Mindanao or the 
people in the Cordillera, but we are not mandating 


Congress to extend such forms of autonomy to these 
people. We are merely empowering Congress; we are, 
in effect, saying that Congress may, according to the 
terms that it would like to set, grant certain forms of 
autonomy where in its considered opinion certain tribes 
other tlian non-Christian and non-Muslim tribes and 
non-Co rdillera tribes had attained to a standard where, 
they could be considered for some form of autonomy. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. In view of the objection of Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, the Chair resolves to defer con- 
sideration of this particular amendment when we have 
more of our colleagues present for the next session. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at eleven o’clock in the morning. 

It was 5:55 p.m. 






> . 


Si', is*?:’-:- ' '- >>: a ■ 

3^, .vT ^ V' , * ^ _ j r / V * 

'-V/' '"'• '■ .^. .X.' 

"■VuVi . „ j • - • ' 1 ' , 4 ' . • '■ . . ' • 

>■;'■■»•■ ■ '■ ■ - , • - •-.'. •■v ', '•v\'-' 








'•y *• t ' 


** I V • 

* ” ^ • , v'* ■' ►V. 

-. 1 ' ■;■:'■ ■'■ ■ ■ 




>• 


N,J < 


*«* *j 




• ^' 


• t. 5t'', 


' A. .._ , • 


.. ■ , 

» .p ' f* ' J 

. < ' ^ V ..■» }«' 

J a ./*•• 1-4 *<= .1 


. ri, ■'• 


IVni 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


563 


R.C.C. NO. 62 
Thursday, August 21, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 11:28 a.m., the Vice-President, the Honorable 
Ambrosio B. Padilla, opened the session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The session is called to 
order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody \vill please rise 
to sing the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Everybody will please 
remain standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honor- 
able Jose Luis Martin C. Gascon. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. GASCON. Pagbasa mula sa Ebanghelyo ni Juan. 

Kung paanong iniibig Ako ng Ama, gayon din naman, 
iniibig Ko kayo; manatili kayo sa Aking pag-ibig. 

Kung tinutupad ninyo ang Aking mga utos, mananatili 
kayo sa Aking pag-ibig; tulad Ko, tinutupad Ko ang mga 
utos ng Aking Ama at Ako’y nananatili sa Kanyang 
pag-ibig. 

Sinabi Ko sa inyo ang mga bagay na ito upang makahati 
kayo sa kagalakan Ko at malubos ang inyong kagalakan. Ito 
ang Aking utos: mag-ibigan kayo gaya ng pag-ibig Ko sa 
inyo. 

Walang pag-ibig na hihigit pa sa pag-ibig ng isang taong 
nag-aalay ng kanyang buhay para sa kanyang mga kaibigan. 

Panginoong Mapagmahal at Mapagpalaya, turuan Mo 
po kaming magmahal nang lubus-lubusan; mahalin ang 
aming kapwa lalung-lalo na ang mga nagliihirap at ina- 
api; mahalin ang aming mga kapatid na manggagawa, 
magsasaka, mangingisda, maralitang taga-lungsod, 
katutubo at maykapansanan. 

Turuan Mo po kaming makiisa sa kanilang pagbu- 
bungkal ng matigas na lupa. Turuan Mo po kaming 
makiisa sa kanilang pagtibag ng batuhan. Turuan Mo po 
kaming sumama sa kanilang kahirapan sa ilalim ng araw 
at ulan, at magtiis ng hirap at gutom. 


Turuan Mo po kaming tumulad sa lyo — nakahaitdang 
hubarin ang banal naming balabal at bumaba nang tulad 
Mo sa maalikabok na lupa, na taitggapin na maputikan 
at mapunit ang aming mga damit; at salubungin Ka at 
sumama sa lyo sa pagpapawis at pagbabanat ng buto. 

At, Panginoon,’sa tulong ng lyong pag-ibig at pagma- 
mahal, iligtas Mo kami sa mga mapang-alipin. Ang 
pagkakapantay-pantay at katarungan ay lyong pairalin, 
at mangyari nawa ang loob Mo dito sa lupa at bigyan Mo 
po kami ng tapang at lakas sa aming pakikibaka — 
pakikibakang laban sa aming pagkamakasarili upang 
maialay namin ng buong-buo ang aming buhay para sa 
kapakanan ng sambayanan. 

Siya nawa. 

ROLL CALL 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 
call the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Absent 

Alonto 

. Present* 

Nieva 


Aquino 

. Present 

Nolledo . . . . 


Azcuna 

. Absent 

Ople 


Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla 


Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada . . . . 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 

. . . Present 

Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado . . . 


Rosario Braid . , 

, . Present 

Reyes de los 

. . . Present 

Brocka 

, . Absent 

Rigos 


Calderon 

. . Absent 

Rodrigo . . . 


Castro de ... 

. . Present 

Romulo . . . 


Colayco .... 

. . Present 

Rosales . . . . 


Concepcion . . 

, . Present 

Sarmiento . . 


Davide 

. . Present 

Suarez . . . , 


Foz 


Sumulong . 


Garcia 

. . Present* 

Tadeo .... 


Gascon 


Tan 


Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . 


Jamir 


Trefias . . . 


Laurel 


Uka 


Lerum 


Villacorta 


Maambong . . 
Monsod . . . , 

. . Present* 

Villegas . . . 



♦Appeared after the roll call 


564 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


The President is on official mission. 

The roll call shows 3 1 Members responded to the call. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the 
presence of a quorum. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Vice-President. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes 
is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

There is an error on page 50, last paragraph. In the 
restatement of Section 4, the first “ANCESTRAL 
DOMAIN AND” should be deleted. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. What does the Floor Leader 
say? 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is 
recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Vice-President. 

I confirm the mistake; it was a pure typographical 
error. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the correction is 
approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Vice-President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE VICE-PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Communi- 
cations, the Presiding Officer making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Rafael E. Evangelista, transmitting the 
reaction paper of the Concerned Filipino Parents to the 
Resolution incorporating in the Constitution an Article 
on Education, Science, Technology, Sports, Arts and 
Culture, and requesting consideration of the views and 
opinions stated therein and their incorporation in the 
new Constitution. 

(Communication No. 595 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

At this juncture, the Vice-President relinquished the 
Chair to the Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo. 

Position paper of the Scientists For Life, Inc., Philippine 
Chapter, signed by Mr. Rey Garcia of Everlasting Street, 
Marcelo Green Village, Paranaque, Metro Manila, saying 
that there is no point of time that can be singled out as 
the beginning of human life, except the point of fertili- 
zation, that at that moment the conceptus is a unique 
and distinct individual, physically and materially 
different from the mother. 

(Communication No. 596 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Rey S. Hilario of Basilan Street 
Quezon City, urging the Constitutional Commission to 
make a just and proper delineation of the State’s role 
with respect to the population issue. 

(Communication No. 597 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from the Honorable Justice Raul M. Gonzales of 
the Office of the Tanodbayan (Ombudsman), pointing 
out a provision in the draft Constitution which prohibits 
the Ombudsman, after leaving office, from being elected 
to any office in the Philippines within a certain period 
of time, saying that this provision directed solely against 
the Ombudsman may be likened to “class legislation,” 
suggesting therefor that this be reconsidered and redis- 
cussed with the view of deleting the same. 

(Communication No. 598 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Accountability of Public Officers. 

Letter from Mr. Virgilio Escudero of Zamboanga City, 
opposing the idea of Muslim autonomy, suggesting 
therefor that the question be asked in a referendum to 
be conducted in the affected areas in order to determine 
the voice of the majority. 

(Communication No. 599 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 




565 


Letter from Mr. Arturo Y. Mendoza of Ipil, Zamboanga 
del Sur, seeking the creation of an autonomous Chris- 
tian Mindanao. 

(Communication No. 600 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Ludivico D. Badoy, O.I.C. of Cotabato 
City, submitting a position paper regarding the issues 
and matters affectmg local governments, requesting that 
the recommendations stated therein be considered 
favorably. 

(Communication No. 601 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Communication from former MP Jeremias U. Monte- 
mayor of the Federation of Free Farmers, 41 Highland 
Drive, Blue Ridge, Quezon City, submitting an article 
that points out the disastrous consequences of the 
present draft on agrarian reform and requests improve- 
ment thereof. 

(Communication No. 602 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Social Justice. 

Letter from Ms. Maria Carmen- C. Edaugal and five 
hundred ninety-four other students from various 
schools, urging the Constitutional Commission to in- 
clude in the Constitution a provision obliging the State 
to protect the life of the unborn from the moment ot 
conception. 

(Communication No. 603 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Ms. Josephine C. Reyes, President, Philip- 
pine Association of Colleges and Universities (PACU), 
Room 244, Isabel Building, Espana St., Manila, submit- 
ting for consideration proposed amendments to the 
Resolution incorporating in the Constitution an Article 
on Education, Science, Technology, Sports, Arts and 
Culture, prepared by the Committee on Human 
Resources. 

(Communication No. 604 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication signed by Mr. Felix K. Maramba, Jr., 
President of the Philippine Association of Flour Millers, 
Inc. and eighty-nine (89) other representatives of labor, 
agricultural and business sectors, and cause-oriented 
groups, presenting some proposals regarding indus- 
trialization and economic protectionism and expressing 


the hope that such proposals would be considered 
favorably. 

(Communication No. 605 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 470 
(Article on Local Governments) 

Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. I move that we continue the considera- 
tion of the Article on Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Ople be recognized for a new amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Mr. 
Floor Leader, is this for discussion only? 

MR. RAMA. According to the chairman, since this is 
the last provision which was discussed already, we may 
vote on this item alone or probably other items not 
affecting substantially the Article on Local Govern- 
ments. With respect to the Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony, it is requested by the President, Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, that we do not go into voting because 
some of the Members of the Commission are attending 
the anniversary ceremonies on the death of Ninoy 
Aquino. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Thank 
you, Mr. Floor Leader. 

Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

Yesterday afternoon, when the session was adjourned, 
we were at the stage of discussing a proposed amend- 
ment immediately following the sections devoted to the 
autonomous regions. The section reads as follows; 
“CONGRESS MAY PROVIDE CERTAIN FORMS OF 
AUTONOMY AS MAY BE APPROPRIATE TO OTHER 
CULTURAL COMMUNITIES WITHIN THE FRAME- 
WORK OF EXISTING TERRITORIAL AND POLIT- 


566 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


ICAL SUBDIVISIONS, SUBJECT TO THE PROVI- 
SIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND NATIONAL 
LAW. FOR THIS PURPOSE IT MAY CREATE A PER- 
MANENT COMMISSION AS AN ADVISORY BODY 
TO THE PRESIDENT.” 

The proponents are Commissioners Ople, Bennagen, 
Azcuna, Rama, Uka, Alonto, Abubakar and Bacani. 

Since that time, as the chief proponent of this amend- 
ment, I have consulted a number of Commissioners who 
have urged me to reformulate this amendment so that 
it wUl read: “CONGRESS MAY CREATE AN OFFICE 
OF TRIBAL COMMUNITIES TO ADVISE THE PRES- 
IDENT ON POLICIES AND PROBLEMS OF CUL- 
TURAL COMMUNITIES.” 

Let me confess that at this point, I am agonizing over 
this proposed reformulation. I have in mind about 2.5 
million tribal communities other than those embraced 
by the Muslim Autonomous Region and the Cordillera 
Autonomous Region; they are scattered all over the 
country. In Mindanao alone, there are two million of 
them. 

I have here in my possession a learned dissertation on 
customary laws and land ownership among tribal FUi- 
pinos, referring precisely to the tribal communities 
other than those now encompassed by the two autono- 
mous regions, a design by Father Vincent Collins, S.J., 
Task Force Coordinator in the Diocese of Malaybalay. 
I would like to call attention to the fact that there was 
a workshop held last March 3 and 4, 1986 at the Jesus 
Calls Retreat House in Philamlife, Quezon City, in 
which the problems of these other tribal communities, 
as I said, about 2.5 million all over the country but most 
of them located in Mindanao, were thoroughly dis- 
cussed. The resolution they approved will probably be 
of interest to the Commission at this point. It is a very 
brief one, and I hope you will allow me to read it: 

“Resolution” 

Whereas, tribal communities have long suffered from 
government neglect and discrimination; 

Whereas, there is a need for immediate recognition of 
the right of tribal communities to self-determination, 
ancestral domain, customary laws, equal protection of the 
laws and enhancement of human dignity and self-directing 
cultural development; 

Whereas, there is a need for a distinct government body 
to handle purely non-Muslim tribal affairs, and this refers to 
two-and-a-half million people; 

Whereas, President Corazon Aquino announced during 
her electoral campaign that her administration will allow 
the trii. al communities to retain their ancestral lands, cul- 
tural heritage, customary laws and ancestral domain; 

Now, therefore, be it resolved, as it is hereby resolved 
that a set of policy recommendations be formulated to 
meet the needs and aspirations of tribal communities; 

It is also resolved that an Office of Tribal Communities 
be created allocating the necessary funds therefor; 


It is further resolved that the attached policy recom- 
mendations be favorably considered by the appropriate 
government body; 

And be it resolved finally that copies of this resolution 
be widely disseminated among tribal communities to elicit 
maximum participation. 

Done in Quezon City, this 4th day of March, 1986. 

Specifically, this resolution refers to the Banonoo of 
Mindoro Oriental and Mindoro Occidental; the Ati of 
Iloilo; the Manobo of Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, 
Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Davao del Norte, 
Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Bukidnon, and North 
and South Cotabato; the Bilaans of North and South 
Cotabato, Davao del Sur and Sultan Kudarat; the Man- 
daya and Mansaka of Davao del Norte and Davao 
I Oriental; the Tibabaon of Davao del Norte and Agusan 
del Sur; the Subanon of Zamboanga del Norte, Zam- 
boanga del Sur and Misamis Occidental; the Hagonoon 
of Misamis Oriental, Bukidnon, Agusan del Norte and 
Agusan del Sur. I do not think I am obliged to repeat 
what I said yesterday that there are also many such 
tribes in the Island of Luzon including the Mangyans 
most of whom are now settled in the mountains over 
Bulalakao in Mindoro; the Dumagats of the Sierra 
Madre provinces; the Baluga and Aetas of the Zambales 
mountains, including those in Capas and Pampanga; and 
many others. I understand there is a study made by the 
famous anthropologist Ponciano Bennagen showing 
that there are about 130 tribal communities all over the 
country. 

Of course, it is understood that the Muslim cultural 
minorities of Mindanao and the Cordillera are the most 
highly organized and the most highly developed in this 
remarkable mosaic of 130 tribal communities. Probably 
it is in recognition of that fact that they are ready 
for autonomy. They are ready for a measure of self- 
government within the wider framework of the national 
sovereignty and territorial integrity that this Com- 
mission saw fit to grant them autonomous status. We 
are not asking for the grant of similar powers of self- 
government to all these other tribal communities. May 
I point out an example. In Bulalakao, Mindoro, there 
are about 600 Mangyan families. Right now, they are 
already incorporated into that existing subdivision of 
the Municipality of Bulalakao. They have a barangay 
captain who is usually invited to come down when there 
is a meeting of barangay captains. But the Mangyans 
under this proposal will not be an autonomous area 
rising to the same level of legal self-sufficiency as the 
autonomous regions of the Cordilleras and Muslim 
Mindanao. What is merely meant by this is that if 
Congress desires to do so, they may, without even vest- 
ing a juridical entity in that settlement of Mangyans, 
explicitly recognize their right to their own traditional 
political system with the equivalent of a datu as the 
head. As we all know, even without a law, this is exactly 
what happens. They have a recognized leadership; they 
have customary laws; they have their own modes of 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


567 


settling their own community disputes. I see no reason 
why, as I said, without vesting any juristic personality in 
such a settlement by law, their own customary laws may 
not be sanctioned; their centuries-old manner of select- 
ing their chiefs may not be sanctioned. We are realty 
speaking of as many conditions and levels of develop- 
ment as there may be tribal communities other than the 
two autonomous regions. In many cases, this will 
involve only 60 to 100 families. 

Commissioner Suarez and I were exchanging notes 
concerning the Baluga tribe in Pampanga, very near 
Clark Air Base; and we all know that they are the 
scavengers in that target range of the U.S. Air Force. 
They are not organized right now, according to native 
law and tradition. They are part of the existing political 
subdivision in Angeles City. But under this permission 
being granted to Congress, perhaps Congress may enact 
a law that for this type or category of 60 families of the 
Baluga somewhere in the outskirts of Angeles City, 
there will be a recognition of their customary laws. 
Perhaps, the Office of Tribal Communities proposed 
here can codify all of these custom laws just like the 
government has done in the case of the tribal custom 
law and traditions of the Muslims in Mindanao, now all 
embodied in a very handsome and impressive Code of 
Muslim Law, so that we do not lose the native heritage 
of these various tribes. 

There is a very high content of equity and justice in 
this proposal, Mr. Presiding Officer. These were the 
people ahead of us in colonizing this archipelago now 
known as the Republic of the Philippines. They were 
ahead of the Malays in coming to this country. How- 
ever, our ancestors, just like the white men that landed 
in Plymouth in the 16th century, asserted a more 
vigorous culture and domination; therefore, these tribes 
were all driven up the hUls. These are the hill people of 
our country. A very few of them are in the lowland and 
whether it is Luzon, Visayas or Mindanao, the superior 
culture and force of our Malay ancestors drove them up 
the mountains. Do we begrudge them this small repara- 
tion? After granting autonomy to the better, more 
highly organized and better developed tribes of Minda- 
nao and the Cordilleras, we now put them in constitu- 
tional limbo? We are merely suggesting that Congress 
be given the permission to extend various forms of 
political, cultural and legal accommodation to all of 
these tribes. They pose no harm whatsoever to the 
stability and integrity of this country. The Committee 
may say that it is no longer possible to accommodate 
this amendment. However, if we change it according to 
their advice to merely the creation of an office and 
eliminate the principle of granting certain forms of 
autonomy, it becomes even more vague and more 
flexible as may be appropriate to other cultural com- 
munities within, not outside, the framework of the 
existing territorial and political subdivisions. But the 
Committee may agree to accept it. I am willing to lose 
this on the floor, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Will the distinguished proponent yield 
to some questions? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The pro- 
ponent may yield, if he so desires. 

MR. DAVIDE. The Gentleman, therefore, did not 
accept the Commitee’s compromised proposal? 

MR. OPLE. I would rather lose the amendment on 
the floor than reduce this principle of the entitlement to 
some form of recognition of the other tribal communi- 
ties to the level of the creation of a mere office. 

MR. DAVIDE. In other words, the Gentleman will 
insist on his proposal which states: “CONGRESS MAY 
PROVIDE CERTAIN FORMS OF AUTONOMY AS 
MAY BE APPROPRIATE TO OTHER CULTURAL 
COMMUNITIES WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF 
EXISTING TERRITORIAL AND POLITICAL SUBDI- 
VISIONS, SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THIS 
CONSTITUTION AND NATIONAL LAW. FOR THIS 
PURPOSE, IT MAY CREATE A PERMANENT COM- 
MISSION AS AN ADVISORY BODY TO THE PRES- 
IDENT.” 

MR. OPLE. The Congress may create an office of 
tribal communities. 

MR. DAVIDE. When the Gentleman says “. . . WITH- 
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF EXISTING TERRITORIAL 
AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS,” he refers, of 
course, to cities, provinces, municipalities and barrios? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, their jurisdictions are undisturbed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Since it is within the particular frame- 
work of these political and territorial subdivisions, that 
autonomy to a cultural community can be given to a 
cultural community within a barrio itself. 

MR. OPLE. It can be a sitio of 20 families. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. For instance, a given barangay 
may consist of three sitios with a total population of 
600. Let us assume that in one of the sitios, there are 
only two families of a cultural community. Would that 
particular sitio, therefore, be constituted as a local 
governmental unit for this cultural community? 

MR. OPLE. Two families, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
would be most unlikely. I think the example will be 
much more realistic and concrete if it contemplates 20 
families. May I suggest a concrete example. In Norzaga- 


568 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


ray, Bulacan, which is at the foot hills of the Sierra 
Madre, there are Dumagats of probably about 50 
families in that specific locality. They live by harvesting 
rattan and selling this in the lowlands. They can form a 
sitio and their tribal customs and customary law can be 
recognized without distributing the integrity of the 
jurisdiction of the Mayor of Norzagaray and the 
Governor of Bulacan. It is as simple as that. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, but is the Gentleman aware of 
the fact that before we had a Commission on National 
Integration? And later, we had this sort of a body at- 
tending to the welfare and affairs of the tribal com- 
munities. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, we now reject the philosophy of 
integration. 

MR. DAVIDE. We can reject the philosophy of in- 
tegration, but under the Gentleman’s proposal, there 
will be a permanent commission which shall serve 
merely as an advisory body to the President. In other 
words, the existing mechanism of the executive branch 
of the government attending to the needs of the tribal 
communities will now be constitutionalized under the 
Gentleman’s proposal. 

MR. OPLE. It is an office of tribal communities, as 
suggested by the representatives of all of these non- 
Muslim tribes that met on March 4-6 in the Jesus Calls 
Retreat House in Quezon City. 

MR. DAVIDE. That office could only be a ministry 
in the executive branch of the government. 

MR. OPLE. I do not know if it is a ministry. 

MR. DAVIDE. But could it be a ministry in the 
executive branch of the government? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I shed some background 
information on this debate. Actually the proposal to 
create an office, perhaps a ministry or a Commission, 
for tribal communities is because of a desire of those 
non-Muslims to have a separate ministry from the Office 
of Muslim Affairs. Their experience is that in those 
instances, like in the Commission on National Integra- 
tion and in this present Office of Muslim Affairs and 
Cultural Communities (OMACC), the limitations of 
budget and personnel militate against the equitable 
treatment of all the other tribal communities to include 
the Muslims and the Igorots. So, they want now a 
separate office, whether a ministry or a commission. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is exactly my thrust because I 
really believe that this could be a matter within the 
competence of the, executive. It is not necessary for 
Congress to enact a law or even to constitutionally 
mandate Congress to enact a law creating this par- 
ticular office. I would prefer to make it flexible; that is, 
this particular matter should be left completely to the 
executive branch of the government. 

The executive branch of the government can create 
an entirely different or separate office for the tribal 
communities alone so that they will not be together 
with the Muslim communities. I think that is what the 
tribal communities demanded. It is not just autonomy 
or the extension of the concept of autonomy but a 
separate body to exclusively take care of their affairs 
and interest and the promotion of their welfare. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I have 
the floor. 

THE presiding OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Abubakar is recogiiized. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Thank you. 

There seems to be quite a not complete comprehen- 
sion of the objective or goal of Commissioner Ople as 
well as what is in the minds of most of the Commis- 
sioners concerning these tribal groups. If I understood 
Commissioner Ople very well, I believe that his concern 
is not so much the creation of a separate political 
unit for this group, as they are already embraced within 
the political unit of the municipality, the barrio, or the 
province spread out all over the archipelago. One can 
probably count tribal families of 30 to 40 persons in 
Bukidnon, another tribe in Agusan, or in the other 
provinces of Luzon. 

I admire the concern of Commissioner Ople with 
these tribal groups. They are the original inhabitants of 
the Philippines before the flow of Malayan immigration 
into this country. We must not forsake them, and so 
must not every Filipino concerned about what will 
happen to them. 

If I understood him again correctly, he is not advocat- 
ing local political autonomy; am I right? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, except in the sense that there must 
be recognition of their right to their ancestral domain, 

customary law and the modes of dispute settlement 
under that law. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. I think the Constitutional Com- 
mission could provide a separate article on this with the 
understanding that they constitute part of the political 
unit which they are inhabiting. But an office is the one 
advocated by Commissioner Ople to take care of the 
welfare, the interest, probably the health and the 
progress of these communities. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


569 


MR. OPLE. With the permission of Commissioner 
Abubakar, may I also point out that according to the 
Commission’s consensus already recorded in our pro- 
ceedings, one cannot create an autonomous region 
without amending the Constitution, following the 
adoption of this Constitution, where probably the 
power of initiative we vested in the people in the article 
on the amendment of the Constitution can be invoked if 
there is a sizeable confederation of such tribal communi- 
ties in Mindanao sharing border areas among a number 
of provinces now. 

But that is not contemplated in this section, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer. If the Tirurays, for example, who are 
quite numerous and the Manobos who are their neigh- 
bors decide 50 years from now to apply for a regional 
status, the Constitution will have to be amended before 
Congress can grant them autonomous status. That is the 
principal safeguard that this section, which looks after 
the interests of non-Muslim tribal communities, will not 
lead to a proliferation of claims for autonomous status 
in the future, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are 
concerned with the tribal communities that are not on 
the level of the Tausugs and the Maranaws in Cotabato. 
If I must remind the body, long before the Spaniards 
came, Sulu was already an independent sultanate. That 
is why there is a struggle for local autonomy and for a 
sharing of whatever political power the national govern- 
ment has on the part of Sulu, Maguindanao and proba- 
bly Lanao. There were already existing sultanates, 
existing rulers, existing practices of law. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, when Manila was merely a back- 
water. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, that is correct. So, I would 
agree with the Gentleman that we have not only a 
moral but even a historical or legal obligation to take 
care of these other non-Christian tribes who are now 
Muslims. In the previous years when the American 
regime was first established, several offices were created 
to take care of the different tribal regions. Among these, 
if I remember very well, was the Bureau of Non- 
Christian Tribes which took care of the non-Christian 
tribes not only in the Mountain Province, in Luzon and 
in the Visayas but also in Mindanao. 

MR. OPLE. An ancestor of Commissioner Guingona 
was the chairman of that bureau at one time. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, that is correct. Mr. Teofisto 
Guingona. My compliments. 

I totally agree with Commissioner Ople because this is 
where justice, where fairness and our ability to adjust to 
the realities that we must not forsake the people who 
may not be with us are concerned. 


I agree with Commissioner Ople, and I second his 
proposal that an independent, separate office be created 
to take care of the different tribal groups, develop them 
into a community of useful Filipino citizens, raise their 
standard of living and provide the basic services like 
education and health that government is supposed to 
give them. It is only fair to them and it is in our con- 
science that we must do this. 

I am happy to note that the former Minister of Labor 
is aware of the existing situation. I would like to appeal 
to the Chamber from our heart, from our mind and 
from our own blood because they are also Filipinos. As 
a matter of fact, they are more entitled than many of us 
because we are immigrants. These people are the original 
occupants of the Philippines. 

Therefore, I share the observation of Commissioner 
Ople that we should incorporate it in the Constitution 
so that acceding to them certain concession and rights, 
that by history and tradition are theirs, would not be 
the object of a political football. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. I want to thank Commissioner Abubakar 
for doing his share of the work because he is one of the 
coauthors of this amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, before we take a 
vote, there are two more registered speakers. May I ask 
that Commissioner Tingson be recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I pro- 
pound two or three questions to the Honorable Ople? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. TINGSON. The Commissioner mentioned the 
Atis of Iloilo. He did not mention Negros, but they are 
also in my province of Negros. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, they are on the Kanlaon slopes. 

MR. TINGSON. That is right. Is the Gentleman aware 
that these Ati tribes are fast vanishing and that whoever 
is left of them is now being integrated into the milieu 
of our society in Iloilo and in Negros, so much so that 
quite a number of them are now graduates of our 
schools there? It seems to me that creating this par- 
ticular office is sort of counterproductive to their being 
assimilated into the stream of our society. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, there is no incompatibility between 
recognizing the right of this indigenous tribe in Negros 
Occidental to their ancestral domains and the recogni- 
tion of their tribal ancestral law with the other objective 
of giving them unimpeded access to economic and 
career opportunities outside the tribe. 

As a matter of fact, the literature of mankind is full 
of moving episodes. When the member of a tribe who 


570 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21. 1986 


went to the big city succeeds and prospers, he decides to 
return to the bosom of his own tribe and people so that 
he can share his success with them. So, there is no 
necessary inconsistency in giving dignity to the history 
and tribal customs of an indigenous minority and allow- 
ing them full access to the opportunities that the macro- 
economy should provide to every Filipino, regardless of 
whether he is of tribal origin or not. 

MR. TINGSON. In our Order of Business today, 
our Secretary-General jread a letter from a certain 
Mr. Arturo Mendoza of Ipil, Zamboanga del Sur, seeking 
the creation of an autonomous Christian Mindanao. 

Whether he was really sincere about this proposal, I 
do not know. But it seems to me that now that the 
Gentleman wants to constitutionalize this office, there 
might be interminable cases of request like this autono- 
mous Christian Mindanao. Whatever he meant about 
this, I do not know. But does not the Gentleman think 
he would be contributing towards requests like this 
from all over our country? 

MR. OPLE. Not at all. An autonomous Christian 
Mindanao partakes precisely of this fantastic imagina- 
tion that we owe to Mr. Reuben Canoy and those who 
supported his independent Republic of Mindanao 
sometime ago. What we are dealing with here are fairly 
small tribes. A Christian Mindanao forms part of the 
dominant national community on complete parity 
with respect to the political, economic and cultural 
advantages that are mutually shared by the dominant 
national community. The reason this Commission 
has considered granting a certain measure of self- 
determination to Muslim Mindanao and to the 
Cordilleras is precisely the recognition that they do not 
belong to the dominant national community, that 
probably they should enjoy this measure of legal self- 
sufficiency, meaning self-government, so that they will 
flourish politically, economically and culturally. Then 
perhaps after a certain period of time when they will 
have matched the dominant national community, they 
may consider that having achieved complete parity and 
equality with the rest of the nation, they probably 
might want to give up their own autonomous region in 
favor of joining the national mainstream. I am not going 
to put a date to that kind of evolution, but I am not 
foreclosing the possibility that they will evolve precisely 
in that way. But the concern here is not the bigger and 
more politically, more representative and more powerful 
tribes. We are talking of lesser tribes numbering about 
two-and-a-half million people all over the country, other 
than the Cordillera people, other than the Muslim 
people in Mindanao. I am not saying that by omitting all 
mention of them in this article, we have failed to round 
the sense of the provisions on the autonomous regions 
in the Article on Local Governments. We are consigning 
them to a constitutional limbo from which it is neces- 
sary to rescue them now through this section. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, one more 
question, if the proponent does not mind. 

The Gentleman is a prominent member of the past 
administration and there were slogans of the past 
administration in Tagalog or in the national language 
that I liked such as “Sa kaunlaran ng bayan, disiplina 
ang kailangan.” But the one that is apropos to our 
debate here today is “Isang Bansa, Isang Diwa.” Being 
prominent in the past administration, I would not be 
surprised if the Gentleman has a hand in formulating 
this slogan. I am a little concerned, but would the 
Gentleman kindly tell us exactly what the slogan 
means? Would the minority groups be able to compre- 
hend it and will they be able to get into the stream of 
the thinking of “Isang Bansa, Isang Diwa” with this 
proposal of the Gentleman? 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, a Filipino Muslim 
or a Cordillera tribal member should not be regarded as 
being inferior in his sense of patriotism and national- 
ism. When we speak of “Isang Bansa, Isang Diwa,” we 
are not talking of reducing to one uniform mass the 
cultures of our country. That slogan, if the Gentleman 
agrees with it, is better served when there is a complete 
mosaic of cultures in our country so that the national 
culture is enriched from all sources. And there should 
be no demand for uniformity in order to say that we 
have risen to the level of “Isang Diwa, Isang Bansa.” 

MR. TINGSON. I thank the Gentleman for answering 
my question. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask that 
Commissioner Suarez be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

I view with admiration the Gentleman’s elevation 
from the champion of local government to a new 
champion of these tribal communities. I thank him for 
his concern for the two-and-a-half million members of 
the tribal communities. However, I can detect that he is 
still agonizing about the reappraisal of the impact of his 
proposed provision. His concern as a constitution-maker 
is colliding with his personal concern for these two-and- 
a-half million members of the tribal communities. 

MR. OPLE. I have already harmonized these con- 
flicting claims in this section, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. SUAREZ. Do I take it, therefore, that he is 
prepared to eliminate sentence one and concentrate 
only on sentence two? 

MR. OPLE. No, I have come to the realization that 
this proposed new section embodies the minimum ap- 
proach for social justice for our tribal minorities outside 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


571 


the Musliin and the Cordillera regions. Therefore, I 
would like to adhere to the entire section as now 
proposed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). May the 
Chair intervene, with the permission of the two Gentle- 
men? 

I have just received a sheet of paper, and I think 
copies of this were distributed to all the Commissioners. 
It is a proposed amendment to the Article on Local 
Governments whose proponents are Commissioners 
Ople, Bennagen, Azcuna, Rama, Uka, Alonto, Abubakar 
and Bacani. The proposed amendment reads; “SEC- 
TION . CONGRESS MAY CREATE AN OFFICE 

OF TRIBAL COMMUNITIES TO ADVISE THE PRES- 
IDENT ON POLICY PROBLEMS AFFECTING 
CULTURAL MINORITIES.” 

The first sentence has been eliminated. 

I think we need a clarification on this because this 
was evidently distributed to all the Members. Is that 
correct? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. May I give the 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, the 
Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. This was the result of a consultation with 
some Members of the Commission and of the committee 
who told me that in its present form, they would con- 
tinue to have misgivings about supporting this section. 
However, if it was confined to the creation of an office 
of tribal minorities to take care of the problems for 
these other cultural communities, then they would 
support it. 

May I inform the Presiding Officer that, as I have just 
said in response to a question from Commissioner 
Suarez, I am adhering to the earlier version. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

name of Commissioner Ople appears on this sheet as the 

first proponent. The Chair would like to know if he has 
agreed. 

MR. OPLE. No, I have not agreed. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

Chair suspends the session. 

It was 12:23 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At'12:29 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

session is resumed. 


MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

During the suspension of the session, we discussed 
the parliamentary situation. It was suggested that the 
entire section presented by the Honorable Ople be sub- 
mitted to the body for voting, and in the event that said 
section would not be accepted by the body, then voting 
would be held on the additional proposal which is 
limited to the second sentence of the original Ople 
proposal. The section reads as follows: “CONGRESS 
MAY CREATE AN OFFICE OF TRIBAL COMMUNI- 
TIES TO ADVISE THE PRESIDENT ON POLICY 
PROBLEMS AFFECTING CULTURAL MINORITIES.” 
So, our respectful suggestion is that we vote first on the 
Ople amendment and proposal. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. To avoid confusion, may we be 
clarified as to what is really the Ople amendment? Yes- 
terday we were furnished a copy captioned “All Other 
Qiltural Communities” consisting of eight lines, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. This morning we were furnished a 
copy of another amendment consisting of three lines. 
Which one is the Ople amendment? 

MR. OPLE. May I answer that, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Ople may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. May I read the text of this amendment in 
its final form. There is a subheading, “All Other Cultural 
Communities,” on top of the section. Then Section 9 
reads- “CONGRESS MAY PROVIDE CERTAIN 
FORMS OF AUTONOMY AS MAY BE APPROPRIATE 
TO OTHER CULTURAL COMMUNITIES WITHIN THE 
FRAMEWORK OF EXISTING TERRITORIAL AND 
POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS SUBJECT TO THE PRO- 
VISIONS OF THIS CONSTITUTION AND NATIONAL 
LAW. CONGRESS MAY CREATE AN OFFICE OF 
tribal COMMUNITIES TO ADVISE THE PRES- 
IDENT ON POLICIES AFFECTING CULTURAL 
minorities.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. I thank Commissioner Ople for 
the clarification. 

MR- RAMA. May I ask that we take a vote on that 
amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer? 


572 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 12 votes in favor and 20 against; the 
amendment is lost. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


of our proposed Article on the Declaration of Principles. 
It states: 

The State shall recognize and respect the rights of in- 
digenous cultural communities to choose their own path of 
development according to their political, economic, and 
cultural characteristics within the framework of national 
unity. The State shall eradicate all forms of discrimination 
against indigenous cultural communities and shall promote 
mutual respect and understanding between them and the 
rest of the Filipino people. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bennagen is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. Thank you. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Commissioner Suarez 
be recognized to propose some amendments. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Now that the Ople amendment is 
lost, 1 hope it will not be understood by anyone that we 
have forsaken the other cultural minorities. As a matter 
of fact, there is a proposed section in the Article on the 
Declaration of Principles which was originally envi- 
sioned to take care of these cultural communities to 
include even those from the Cordilleras and Mindanao. 
Since we have already approved the provisions granting 
autonomy status for both the Cordilleras and Muslim 
Mindanao, may I suggest in due time when we discuss 
the Article on the Declaration of Principles that we will 
take the Ople amendment into consideration to 
strengthen that provision in the Article on the Declara- 
tion of Principles to specifically take into account these 
cultural communities not within the two autonomous 
regions. In addition, we also have a provision in the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony to take 
care of ancestral lands and customary laws. 

I understand there is another proposal coming from 
Commissioner Sarmiento for the Article on General Pro- 
visions that will take care of an office precisely to look 
into the concerns of cultural communities outside of the 
two autonomous regions. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) r 
missioner Suarez is recognized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Offl 

In view of the rejection of the original proposal 
Honorable Ople, and with his indulgence, may I 
the last sentence of his proposal invoking the » ^ 
father doctrine. Srand- 


MR. OPLE. I give my most enthusiastic perm- 
and indorsement, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


ion 


MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Honorable Ople 

I propose that Section 9 would read- “CONrpc 
MAY CREATE AN OFFICE OF TRIBAL COMMUMt^ 
TIES TO ADVISE THE PRESIDENT ON POT irrc 
AFFECTING CULTURAL MINORITIES ” 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. ' 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I just want to acknowledge my glorious 
defeat in association with the other proponents. I want 
to put their names on record: Commissioners Bennagen, 
Azcuna, Rama, Uka, Alonto, Abubakar, Bacani, Suarez 
and Guingona. 

Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Will the honorable Comrnis " 
Suarez yield to an amendment by transposition b 
I have a similar proposal for inclusion in the A 
General Provisions. Will the honorable Comm-^ 
gladly accommodate the transposition of this se 
the Article on General Provisions? ^tion to 


MR. SUAREZ. I have no objection to that 
that the matter be submitted for resolutio 
Mr. Presiding Officer. ^ today, 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. That particular section that Com- 
missioner Bennagen referred to a while ago is Section 1 5 


MR. SUAREZ. So, if it is approved by the bod 
would have no objection to its transposition 
Article on General Provisions? 

MR. RAMA. What does the committee say? 


573 



■ * V ‘ 1 ^ ^ ' 





“THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


MR. BENNAGEN. Mr. Presiding Officer, we will 
submit it to the body. But before we do that, may I 
propose the following amendment: “CONGRESS MAY ‘ 
CREATE AN OFFICE OF TRIBAL COMMUNITIES 
COMPOSED OF MEMBERS FROM THE INDIGE- 
NOUS COMMUNITIES APPOINTED BY THE PRES- 
IDENT FROM A LIST PREPARED BY THE INDIGE- 
NOUS COMMUNITIES THEMSELVES.” The idea is 
that since there are already professionals as well as non- 
professionals who are concerned with their own indige- 
nous communities, there are enough individuals who can 
come from the various indigenous communities to com- 
pose this advisory body. In the spirit of full equahty and 
nondiscriminatory practice on this principle, they want 
to compose this advisory body. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). This is in 
the nature of an amendment to the amendment. What 
does the proponent say? 

MR. SUAREZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, the contempla- 
tion here is that the Office of Tribal Communities 
would be only adivsory in character. In otlier words, its 
composition would be dependent exclusively on the 
executive since it is only a part of the executive depart- 
ment. So, we would rather that we leave the composi- 
tion, the number, and the membership of that advisory 
committee in the hands of the President. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). In short, 
the proponent does not accept the amendment to his 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

1 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. May I raise a point of order. The 
point of order is that the issue before the body is 
whether or not we are going to transfer this particular 
concept in the Article on General Provisions. So, we 
should not really be discussing the merits of the amend- 
ment. We should discuss that at the time when we 
discuss the Article on General Provisions. 

So, I now call for a vote on whether or not we should 
transpose this particular concept to the Article on 
General Provisions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Will the 
Gentleman please restate the motion. 

MR. BENGZON. I move that whatever concept is 
carried by the amendment of Commissioner Suarez be 
discussed and transposed when we debate on the Article 
on General Provisions. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Which 
means we will not discuss it nor vote on it now? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
body ready to vote? 

MR. OPLE. Inquiry, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I thought Commissioner Suarez made it 
very clear that the issue he is submitting to a vote is 
precisely this second sentence of the rejected amend- 
ment without prejudice to its transposition to the 
Article on General Provisions, as suggested by Com- 
missioner Sarmiento. So, we are voting on the amend- 
ment on its merits, subject to transposition later to the 
Article on General Provisions. 

MR. BENGZON. But this Representation made a 
suggestion to Commissioner Suarez to which he agreed. 

I would like to call upon him now to confirm that the 
merits of his amendment be discussed when we get into 
the Article on General Provisions. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SUAREZ. May we ask for a suspension of the 
session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended. 

It was 12:41 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 12:43 p.m., the session was resumed. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

session is resumed. 

Commissioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. After conferring with the rest of the 
Commissioners, it has been agreed that this particular 
concept as well as the amendment of Commissioner 
Suarez be referred to the Committee on General Pro- 
visions with urgent favorable recommendation. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

As a consequence, we do not discuss the concept 
now; is that correct? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. That is 
the end of the discussion. 


574 


THURSDAY. AUGUST 21, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We will 
no longer discuss this proposed amendment; it wUl be 
referred to the Committee on General Provisions. So, 
we can now vote on the whole article. 


Article on the Legislative appUes to Congress. We want 
that rule which is applicable to Congress to be applica- 
ble also specifically to the local governmental units as 
well as the autonomous regions. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I will ask the 
committee chairman. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What is 
the pleasure of Commissioner Davide? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will the Gentleman be amenable if 
we express the intent of the committee and also the in- 
tent of the Commission that all taxes imposed by local 
governments shall be uniform in accordance with the 
rule in the Article on the Legislative? Will that suffice? 


MR. DAVIDE. I have one last section to be proposed 
which we have forgotten and I think the committee will 
accept this. It will read as follows; “LOCAL GOVERN- 
MENTS AND AUTONOMOUS REGIONS SHALL 
STRICTLY OBSERVE THE RULE ON TAXATION 
PRESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) OF SECTION 29 
OF THE ARTICLE ON LEGISLATIVE POWER.” 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
section would that be? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be the last section of the 
Article on Local Governments. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May we hear it again, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR DAVIDE. The last section would read as follows: 
“LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND AUTONOMOUS 
REGIONS SHALL STRICTLY OBSERVE THE RULE 
ON TAXATION PRESCRIBED IN PARAGRAPH (1) 
OF SECTION 29 OF THE ARTICLE ON LEGISLA- 
TIVE POWER.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the commit- 
tee regrets that it cannot accept the amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I will read the 
particular rule. This is Section 29 of the Article on the 
Legislative: “The rule of taxation shall be uniform and 
equitable.” That is the rule. If we will not make this 
applicable to the local governments and to the autono- 
mous regions, I would submit that the local govern- 
mental units as well as the autonomous regions can 
provide for taxation which might not be uniform nor 
equitable. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The Gentleman will notice that in 
the discussion of the committee with the Members of 
the Constitutional Commission, it was emphasized that 
the requirement that all taxes, fees and charges shall be 
uniform is an inherent limitation. 


MR. DAVIDE. It might suffice if that would be the 
thinking of the entire Commission. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think it is the thinking of th 
entire Commission. ® 

MR. DAVIDE. So shall we submit the amendment t 
a vote that in the matter of taxation of local gove 
ments and autonomous regions, the said units m*^' 
strictly observe the rule on taxation prescribed in 
Article on the Legislative? 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to clarify the rul 
it must be uniform within each governmental unit ^ 

MR. DAVIDE. Precisely, that is why we should 
the rule on taxation within each particular 
tion - autonomous regions, within the region- lV*^i 
governmental unit, within their respective territr.^ i 
jurisdiction. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Personally, if the Gentleman d 
not mind, I teach the subject of taxation and that is^^ 
settled limitation in every republican or democra<.-^ 
government. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I ask 
Commissioner Aquino be recognized. 


that 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) 
missioner Aquino is recognized. t-oxu. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I 
the proposal of Commissioner Davide is surnh that 
is, therefore, unnecessary because it has been 
that the legislative authority being vested 
autonomous regions is just a derivative po the 

from the legislative authority of Congress doming 


MR. DAVIDE. If that proposal is the sen 
Commission, I would have no objection re n ^ 
incorporate this. But let it be understood that th 
meaning, that is the significance, that is how y ^ 
be interpreted when that particular rule is mad 
ble to the local governmental units and the 
regions. ^“tonomous 


MR, DAVIDE. That is why a clear incorporation of 
the proposal is necessary because the provision on the 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr, Presiding Officer. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


575 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would like to call the attention 
of Commissioner Davide to the first part of Section 4 
which says: “Within its territorial jurisdiction and 

subject to the provisions of this Constitution and 
national laws.” 

The portion the Gentleman referred to regarding the 
legislative department that taxation should be uniform 
is part of the Constitution. That is precisely inserted by 
the honorable committee in order to exercise some 
form of limitation on the powers of the autonomous 
regions. And I think this is very proper so that the fear 
of Commissioner Davide does not have to be that way. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I comment on that. Section 4 
will apply only to the autonomous regions, but not to 
the local governments. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, on the same sub- 
ject. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 

recognized. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I would also say that the proposed 
amendment is really not necessary because the sense of 
the proposed amendment is sufficiently covered by the 
equal protection clause of the Bill of Rights, which 
governs all local governments. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I understand that 
Commissioner Davide has withdrawn that amendment. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 

amendment is withdrawn. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer, with all the 
inputs contributed, the interpretations being very clear 
that that particular rule will be followed by the local 
government units and the autonomous regions, I am 
withdrawing. 

MR. OPLE. Before Commissioner Davide withdraws 
his amendment, may I be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). He has 
already withdrawn the amendment. 

MR. OPLE. I just want to remind the committee that 
in a previous interpellation yesterday - or was it the 


day before — the chairman of the committee agreed to 
entertain an amendment that would make this uniform 
taxation standard for local governments explicit in this 
article. Earlier, maybe Chairman NoUedo will recall that 
in the debates concerning the Article on the Legislative, 

I proposed a sentence to make the uniform standards of 
taxation applicable to local governments. But the com- 
mittee said, “Why do we not relocate that amendment 
to the Article on Local Governments? It would be more 
appropriate.” The reason I feel that the withdrawal of 
the amendment of Commissioner Davide was unseason- 
able and unwarranted is that there is a lot of confusion 
in the local governments right now concerning the uni- 
formity rule. I think Commissioner Bernas must be 
aware that there are cases in the Supreme Court pro- 
liferating precisely because in many local governments, 
because of lack of experience with uniform standards in 
taxes, the error of ignoring or disregarding or cavalierly 
treating the sanctity of the uniformity rule is commit- 
ted. So in the interest of eliminating all of this con- 
fusion once and for all, why can we not state it in the 
form of a brief sentence? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, there was a 
promise indeed by the committee that we would enter- 
tain an amendment to that effect from Commissioner 
Ople, if the amendment of Commissioner Padilla would 
not be accepted and approved. But Commissioner 
Padilla inserted the term “subject to limitations” and so 
the committee withdraws the promise. The “limitations” 
will take care of it. Besides, I emphasized that “limita- 
tions” may include settled limitations. 

I would like Commissioner Ople to know that even 
under P.D. No. 231, which is the Local Tax Code, as 
amended by P.D. No. 426, there are provisions requiring 
local government units to observe the rule on uni- 
formity I am not aware of serious cases violating this 
rule because I teach the subject of taxation. There are 
only two or three cases and they were decided by the 
Supreme Court in favor of local government units. 

MR OPLE. I will not thank the Committee for 
reneging on its pledge, but I am satisfied with the 

answer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank Commissioner Ople. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. The parliamentary situation calls for a 
closure of the period of amendments. So, I move that 
we close the period of amendments on the Article on 
Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 


576 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move that we 
vote on the whole article unless the chairman would ask 
for clean copies. 

\ 

MR. NOLLEDO. The chairman has no objection to 
the motion because at any rate, all provisions have been 
read before the Members of the Commission. In order to 
accelerate the proceedings, I hope no Member of the 
Commission will object to that reasonable motion. 

MR. RAMA. With that clarification, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, I move that we vote on the whole Article on 
Local Governments. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I object, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, to the motion because just a few minutes ago. 
Commissioner de los Reyes noticed an error in the 
Journal. So, it is possible that there are also errors which 
we have not observed. So I move that we be furnished a 
clean copy. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I inform 
Commissioner Sarmiento that in the past, even after the 
Second Reading we made corrections before we would 
proceed to the Third Reading. I hope Commissioner 
Sarmiento will withdraw his objection. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Subject to corrections and with 
that manifestation, I humbly yield to my master. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I thank the honorable Commis- 
sioner. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I do not object to the motion, 
but it is my understanding that in the presentation of 
the Article on Local Governments, the sections should 
be numbered consecutively up to the last? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I notice that we have a separate 
numbering in the draft. For example, in the provisions 
for the autonomous regions, we start with Section 1 . 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, they will 
be numbered consecutively. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I reiterate the 
motion to vote. 

FR. BERNAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, just two clari- 
ficatory questions before we vote. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I have gone over the minutes, the 
Journal, and I have asked myself a question: Does what 
we have approved say that we are allowing only two 
autonomous regions? I heard two conflicting answers. I 
found conflicting answers in the Journal. Could we 
settle that before we vote? Are we allowing only two, or 
are we allowing more than two autonomous regions? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The committee has made a cate- 
gorical statement that the committee adheres to the 
decision of the Constitutional Commission that onlv 
two autonomous regions shall be recognized: namelv 
Muslim Mindanao and the Cordilleras. If there should h 
any other aggrupation that would seek autonomy in th^ 
same manner that Muslim Mindanao and the Cordill 
are granted autonomy, that aggrupation should 
constitutional amendment. ^ 

FR. BERNAS. I thank the Commissioner. 

The second question is: Did we settle the m 
representation in the House of Representatives 
metropolitan units or is it something to be cons^n 
later? ^ 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, that will be decided h 
Committee on the Legislative. I think there 
provisions here that will hinder any decision 
part of that committee. °h the 

FR. BERNAS. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer 

MR. GASCON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) 
missioner Gascon is recognized. ^oni- 

MR. GASCON. I recall that we agreed that 
only provide for autonomous regions for the C 
and Muslim Mindanao. But I remember during th 
pellations, we mentioned that there are alread^ 
autonomous regions in Muslim Mindanao at presen^t 

MR. NOLLEDO. When we talk of Muslim Mind 
we are talking collectively. anao, 

MR. GASCON. That is right. So, it is possible that 
there would be more than two autonomous regions 

MR. NOLLEDO. Within Muslim Mindanao. 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


577 


MR. GASCON. Within Muslim Mindanao and within 
the Cordilleras. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Within Mindanao — the Gentleman 
is right. 

MR. GASCON. Tliat is the clarification of Com- 
missioner Bernas, I believe. So, which is which? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No, the Cordilleras will be one 
autonomous region, and with respect to Muslim Minda- 
nao as contemplated by the Ople resolution, there 
should only be one in the entire Muslim Mindanao. 

MR. OPLE. There should only be one for Muslim 
Mindanao; not two, but one. Even m the case of the 
so-called two autonomous regions now in Mindanao, I 
think Commissioner Nolledo will bear this out. There is 
a Lupong Tagapagpaganap imposed upon both, so that 
in effect, there is only one authority for the two 
autonomous regions. So, it can be classified right now 
as just one autonomous region. 

FR. BERNAS. I asked this because of the response 
precisely of Commissioner Alonto that there could be 
two autonomous regions in Mindanao. So I wanted 
the issue settled clearly before we vote. Will it be one 
autonomous region in Mindanao or are two autonomous 
regions in Mindanao possible? 

MR- NOLLEDO. I will tell the Gentleman frankly 
that within the committee, the members do not agree. 

I feel that Congress should be given the leeway to deter- 
mine whether there should be only one autonomous 
region in Muslim Mindanao or two or three. 

MR. OPLE. Since the committee is here, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer, can we settle this now? 

MR- NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. OPLE. I urge that the committee adopt the 
position of one of the proponents that only one autono- 
mous region for Mindanao is contemplated in this 
article. 

MR- NOLLEDO. We submit tliis to the body for 
decision. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Abubakar is recognized. 

MR- ABUBAKAR. I would like to inform the body 
that there is now operating an autonomous region for 
Southern Mindanao which, as I stated in my previous 
interpellations, is composed of the Provinces of Tawi- 
Tawi, Sulu, Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur, 
the City of Zamboanga. 


Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for a suspension of the 
session. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 1:01 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 1:05 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Bernas be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bernas is recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. I will repeat the question and address 
it to the committee. Are we allowing only one autono- 
mous region in Muslim Mindanao? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Ihe final and categorical answer is 
“yes.” 

FR. BERNAS. Is that, therefore, the intent of our 
article? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. Under that clarification, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, the body is now ready to vote on the whole 
article. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
previous motion is to vote on Second Reading? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, subject to 
correction when we get the clean copy. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Corrections as to clerical errors. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, before the Third Reading. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Not only for clerical errors be- 
cause we do not have the clean copy here. We will vote 
on Second Reading subject to correction when we get 
the clean copy. 

MR. RAMA. That is the understanding. 


578 


THURSDAY, AUGUST 21, 1986 


MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the 
word “correction” should refer only to an instance 
where what is written there does not reflect what has 
been truly agreed upon in the committee. 

MR. RAMA. That is correct- Now the body is ready 
to vote. 


APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 470 
ON SECOND READING 
(Article on Local Governments) 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the article, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor, none against 
and 1 abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 470, the Article on Local 
Governments, is approved on Second Reading. 


MR. RAMA. Before adjournment, I ask that Com- 
missioner Bengzon be recognized for some announce- 
ments. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like 
to announce that tomorrow we are going to go back to 
the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. If 
there is a sufficient number of Members tomorrow, we 
can already vote on Third Reading on the Article on the 
Executive as weU as the Article on Social Justice. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That is 
noted. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I move for 
adjournment of the session until tomorrow at nine- 
thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the 
morning. 

It was 1:08 p.m. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


579 


R.C.C. NO. 63 
Friday, August 22, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:47 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 
NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 


and if there is silence among us, let it be the silence of 
shared understanding, not the absence of sound but the 
absence of self. 

Today is the first day of the rest of our lives. Help us 
to begin anew for Your greater glory. This we^ ask of 
You through Jesus Christ, Your Son our Lord, now and 
forever. Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will remain standing 
for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable Christian S. 
Monsod. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 


PRAYER 

MR. MONSOD. Lord, allow me to draw from the 
wisdom of others. 

It is said that only those who are willing to be fools 
for You truly give You glory. Only those who can 
accept humiliation can find humility. Only those who 
empty their cups fill them to the brim. So today we ask 
You to make us fools who accept being diluted among 
the many, who make no pretensions of erecting our 
own monuments, who do not use our superiority of 
language or knowledge for our personal advantage. Help 
us to forget ourselves and to love in more than words. 
Give us the grace not to succumb to the temptation of 
excitement that involves cost to others, that sacrifices 
persons for the advancement of a purpose. 

Lord, we are here by Your divine plan. Sometimes we 
forget. How can we love 55 million faceless Filipinos if 
we cannot love 47 others among those in this Assembly? 
How can we tell our countrymen that this is a Constitu- 
tion born of patience and trust and compassion if we 
cannot be all of that to those we work with? 

Merciful Father, forgive me for all the unkind 
thoughts and all the unkind words I have said to my 
fellowmen. Forgive me for my lost opportunities to 
break down the walls of distrust that are rising among 
us. Now, more than ever, we need You to be with us. 
Let Your love dwell in us all, even when we disagree. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Bacani 

. Present* 

Bengzon 

. Present* 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present* 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Calderon 

. Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Colayco 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Garcia 

. Present 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 


Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Quesada .... 

. . Present* 

Rama 

. . Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present* 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . Present* 

Tan 


Tingson . . . . 

. . Present 

Uka 


Villacorta . . . 

. . Present* 

Villegas 



The Secretariat is in receipt of the official advice of 
absence of the following Members: Commissioners 
Rosales and Trehas. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 3 1 Members responded to the call. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


580 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 

REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 

COMMUNICATIONS 

Letter from Mr. Sonny dela Cruz of 1912 S. Charlotte 
Avenue, San Gabriel, California 91776, U.S.A., submit- 
ting his proposed amendments to the 1935 Constitution 
with the hope to find some of these amendments in- 
cluded in the new Constitution. 

(Communication No. 606 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Romulo D. Plagata, Room 4, 2nd 
Floor, CVF Bldg., Gov. Lim Ave., Zamboanga City, 
pointing to the atrocious use of the term “Muslim Min- 
danao,” saying that, except for Lanao del Sur and Sulu, 
Mindanao is predominantly inhabited by non-Muslims, 
particularly the Christians, suggesting therefore that a 
plebiscite should be conducted to let the people in the 
area determine the kind of government to govern them. 

(Communication No. 607 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Vicente D. Millora, President of the 
Integrated Bar of the Philippines, transmitting a resolu- 


tion urging the Constitutional Commission to include no 
provision in the Constitution on the matter of United 
States military bases in the Philippines. 

(Communication No. 608 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Wilfred D. Asis of the People’s Con- 
sultative Conference on the New Philippine Constitu- 
tion, Buenavista, Nasipit, Carmen, Agusan del Norte, 
submitting approved proposals and recommendations 
for consideration and inclusion in the new Constitution. 

(Communication No. 609 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Angel L. Lazaro III of LL Building, 
comer EDSA and Panay Avenue, Quezon City, recom- 
mending that the practice of the professions shall be 
strictly Umited to citizens of the Philippines, except in 
cases where reciprocity between the Philippines and a 
foreign country exists. 

(Communication No. 6 1 0 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and 
Agencies. 

Telegram from Provincial Governor Bantas W. Suanding 
reiterating the stand of the Province of Benguet for 
administrative regionalization, not autonomous region 
(Communication No. 611 — Constitutional Comm^cc• 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Letter from Mr. Felixberto M. Serrano, signed by U' 
Confidential Secretary, Conchita Baby Bustarnant^^ 
submitting for consideration by the Constitutional Corn” 
mission the first part of his comments on the New 
Constitution covering the Preamble and the National 
Territory, saying that he would be greatly relieved from 
the agonies of his ailments if the Constitutional Com- 
mission could give a modest share of its attention to the 
consideration of the views expressed therein. 

(Communication No. 612 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) ^ 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Hilarion A. Gusto of Grace Evangelical 
Mission, Inc., 2nd Street cor. 5th Avenue, East Grace 
Park, Caloocan City, Metro Manila, urging the Constitu- 
tional Commission to incorporate in the new Constitu- 
tion a provision on the inviolability of the separation of 
Church and State as embodied in the 1 973 Constitution. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


581 


(Communication No. 613 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on General Provisions. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Romulo be 
recognized for a privilege motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER ROMULO 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, I am constrained 
to rise on a question of privilege. A newspaper report 
appeared in yesterday’s issue of Business Day under the 
byline of Mr. Tara A. Singli who wrongly accused Com- 
missioner Villegas of changing Section 1 5 of the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony by adjusting the 
two-thirds to one-third (2/3- 1/3) ratio for public 
utilities to 60-40. It was then falsely alleged that Com- 
missioner Monsod and myself were “eager to approve” 
the alleged surreptitious change made by Commissioner 
Villegas as Chairman of the Committee. Nothing could 
be farther from the truth. 

Allow me, Madam President, to read Committee 
Report No. 34, copies of which all the Commissioners 
have. The first portion of Section 15 reads as follows: 

No franchise certificate or any otlier form of authoriza- 
tion for the operation of a public utility shall be granted 
except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or 
associations organized under the laws of the Philippines, at 
least two-thirds of whose voting stock or controlling in- 
terest is owned by such citizens. 

Where is the alleged unauthorized revision? It is plain 
for all who wish to see that the ratio stipulated in Sec- 
tion 15 by the committee report remains at two-thirds 
although the Committee had previously announced that 
a proposed amendment was filed to reduce the ratio to 
60-40. This is very different, however, Madam President, 
from saying that Commissioner Villegas covertly 
changed the ratio. The distortion of fact and sloppy 
reporting does not end there. Mr. Singli goes on to cite a 
so-called “parliamentary precedent which rarely revises 
a Committee’s final report,” implying thereby that the 
Commission, as a whole, seldom disagrees with a com- 
mittee recommendation. Again, nothing could be 
farther from the truth. 

The committee report on the definition of “national 
territory” was revised to drop the Sabah claim. The 
committee’s recommendation for a unicameral legisla- 
ture was changed to a bicameral one. The requirement 
for the President to seek the concurrence of Congress 
before he can declare martial law was again amended so 


that the President can declare martial law unilaterally 
for 60 days. These are basic, fundamental revisions 
made by the Commission on the floor contrary to those 
reported out by the committees concerned. 

I deplore the distortion and misleading allegations in 
the news report. Madam President. It does no credit to a 
newspaper which has earned a reputation for pro- 
fessionalism and for accurate reporting. It is to be 
regretted that those who oppose us resort to the smear 
tactics of the McCarthy era and to the “big lie” 
employed so effectively by the communists. 

The issue is straightforward. Some of us believe that 
foreign investments, as a supplement — and may I repeat 
that, as a supplement — are necessary for our economic 
progress because there is not enough domestic savings 
to create the industries and the jobs we so desperately 
need. Others do not subscribe to that view. Well and 
good. But in the discussion of this question, is there 
need to resort to smear tactics and character assassina- 
tion? Are their arguments so devoid of merit? We have a 
saying in law which states: 

If the facts are against you, argue the law; if the law is 
against you, argue the facts; if the facts and the law are 
against you, pound the table, shout like hell and abuse the 
other lawyer. 

It seems to me, Madam President, that those who 
oppose our views are doing just that. 

Madam President, let me repeat what I said in the 
caucus the other day. I yield to no one in my devotion 
to the national interest and certainly I apologize to no 
one for my political and economic views. I vote as my 
conscience dictates, and not as pressure groups, vested 
interests or lobbyists would wish me to, no matter how 
they may ridicule and vilify me in public. Such under- 
handed tactics will not deter me from my chosen path. 
Indeed, it only reinforces my determination to do what 
I believe is right for the common good. The object of 
'this deplorable and sneaky tactics is to silence those 
who disagree with them by intimidation and black 
propaganda. 

So in closing, Madam President, let me quote from an 
eminent jurist: 

If there is any principle of the Constitution that more 
imperatively calls for attachment than any other, it is the 
principle of free thought, not free thought for those who 
agree with us, but freedom for the thought that we hate. 

I pray this Commission will not forsake that principle. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I move that 
a copy of the privilege speech of Commissioner Romulo 


582 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


be transcribed by the Secretariat and a copy of it 
be immediately forwarded by the Secretary-General 
to the editor of the Business Day for the latter to make 
the necessary rectification. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz desires to be 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propound some questions to the 
chairman and members of the committee. I have here 
a copy of the approved provisions on the Article on the 
National Economy and Patrimony. On page 2, the first 
two lines are with respect to the Filipino and foreign 
equity and I said: “At least sixty percent of whose 
capital or controlling interest is owned by such citizens.” 


MR. FOZ. I would like to amend the motion of Com- 
missioner Davide to include not only the editor but also 
the publisher of the newspaper concerned. 

MR. DAVIDE. Accepted, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF 
PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 496 

(Article on the National Economy and Patrimony) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
continue the consideration of the Article on the Na- 
tional Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
proceed to continue the consideration of the Article on 
the National Economy and Patrimony? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The body will continue the consideration of Commit- 
tee Report No. 24 on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. The Chair requests the honorable Chairman 
and members of the committee to please occupy the 
front table. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDENT. We suspend the session for a few 
minutes. 


It was 10:07 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


I notice that this provision was amended by Com- 
missioner Davide by changing “voting stocks” to 
“CAPITAL,” but I still notice that there appears the 
term “controlling interest” which seems to refer to asso- 
ciations other than corporations and it is merely 50 
percent plus one percent which is less than 60 percent. 
Besides, the wordings may indicate that the 60 percent 
may be based not only on capital but also on controlling 
interest; it could mean 60 percent or 5 1 percent. 


Before I propound the final question, I would like to 
make a comment in relation to Section 1 5 since they are 
related to each other. I notice that in Section 15, there 
still appears the phrase “voting stock or controlling 
interest.” The term “voting stocks” as the basis of the 
Filipino equity means that if 60 percent of the voting 
stocks should belong to Filipinos, foreigners may own 
more than 40 percent of the capital as long as the 40 
percent or the excess thereof will cover nonvoting stock. 
This is aside from the fact that under the Corporation 
Code, even nonvoting shares can vote on certain in- 
stances. Control over investments may cover aspects 
of management and participation in the fruits of 
production or exploitation. 


So, I hope the committee will consider favorably m 
recommendation that instead of using “contrail- ^ 
interests,” we just use “CAPITAL” uniformly ^ 
where foreign equity is permitted by law, because 
purpose is to 'really help the Filipinos in the exploitat' ^ 
of natural resources and in the operation of public ut^^ 
ties. I know the committee, at its own instance 
make the amendment. ’ 


What does the committee say? 


MR. VILLEGAS. We completely agree with th 
Commissioner’s views. Actually, it was really an o ^ 
sight. We did decide on the word “CAPITAL.” I th’^k 
it was the opinion of the majority that the phrS 
“controlling interest” is ambiguous. 


At 10:14 a.m., the session was resumed. 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


So, we do accept the Commissioner’s proposal to 
eliminate the phrase “or controlling interest” in all the 
provisions that talk about foreign participation. 


The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo be recognized first. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Not only in Section 3, but also with 
respect to Section 15. 

Thank you very much. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


583 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In view of the manifestation of 
the committee, I would like to be clarified on the use of 
the word “CAPITAL.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that was the word used in the 
1973 and the 1935 Constitutions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Let us delimit ourselves to that 
word “CAPITAL.” In the Corporation Law, if I remem- 
ber correctly, we have three types of capital: the author- 
ized capital stock, the subscribed capital stock and the 
paid-up capital stock. 

The authorized capital stock could be interpreted 
as the capital of the corporation itself because that is 
the totality of the investment of the corporation as 
stated in the articles of incorporation. When we refer to 
60 percent, are we referring to the authorized capital 
stock or the paid-up capital stock since the determinant 
as to who owns the corporation, as far as equity is con- 
cerned, is the subscription of the person? 

I think we should delimit ourselves also to what we 
mean by 60 percent. Are we referring to the authorized 
capital stock or to the subscribed capital stock, because 
the determination, as I said, on the controlling interest 
of a corporation is based on the subscribed capital 
stock? I would like a reply on that. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Suarez, a member of 
the committee, would like to answer that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

We stated this because there might be a misunder- 
standing regarding the interpretation of the term “CAPI- 
TAL” as now used as the basis for the percentage of 
foreign investments in appropriate instances and the 
interpretation attributed to the word is that it should be 
based on the paid-up capital. We eliminated the use of 
the phrase “voting stock or controlling interest” because 
that is only used in connection with the matter of 
voting. As a matter of fact, in the declaration of divi- 
dends for private corporations, it is usually based on the 
paid-up capitalization. 

So, what is really the dominant factor to be con- 
sidered in matters of determining the 60-40 percentage 
should really be the paid-up capital of the corporation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. 1 would like to get clarification 
on this. If I remember my corporation law correctly, 
we usually use a determinant in order to find out what 


the ratio of ownership is, not really on the paid-up 
capital stock but on the subscribed capital stock. 

For example, if the whole authorized capital stock 
of the corporation is PI million, if the subscription is 
60 percent of PI million which is P600,000, then that is 
supposed to be the determinant whether there is a 
sharing of 60 percent of Filipinos or not. It is not really 
on the paid-up capital because once a person subscribes 
to a capital stock then whether that capital stock is 
paid up or not, does not really matter, as far as the 
books of the corporation are concerned. The subscribed 
capital stock is supposed to be owned by the person 
who makes the subscription. There axe so many laws on 
how to collect the delinquency and so on. 

In view of the Commissioner’s answer, I would like to 
know whether he is determined to put on the record 
that in order to determine the 60-40 percent sharing, we 
have to determine whether we will use a determinant 
which is the subscribed capital stock or the paid-up 
capital stock. 

MR. SUAREZ. We are principally concerned about 
the interpretation which would be attached to it; that 
is, it should be limited to authorized capital stock, not 
to subscribed capital stock. 

I will give the Commissioner an illustration of what 
he is explaining to the Commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Let us say the authorized capital 
stock is PI million. Under the present rules in the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, at least 25 per- 
cent of that amount must be subscribed and at least 25 
percent of this subscribed capital must be paid up. 

Now, let us discuss the basis of 60-40. To illustrate 
the matter further, let us say that 60 percent of the 
subscriptions would be allocated to Filipinos and 40 
percent of the subscribed capital would be held by 
foreigners. Then we come to the paid-up capitalization. 
Under the present rules in the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, a foreign corporation is supposed to sub- 
scribe to 40-percent share which must be fully paid 

up. 

On the other hand, the 60 percent allocated to 
Filipinos need not be paid up. However, at least 25 
percent of the subscription must be paid up for pur- 
poses of complying with the Corporation Law. We can 
Ulustrate the matter further by saying that the com- 
pliance of 25 percent paid-up of the subscribed capital 
would be fulfilled by the full payment of the 40 percent 
by the foreigners. 

So, we have a situation where the Filipino percentage 
of 60 may not even comply with the 25-percent require- 
ment because of the totality due to the full payment of 
the 40-percent of the foreign investors, the payment of 
25 percent paid-up on the subscription would have been 


584 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


considered fulfilled. That is exactly what we are trying 
to avoid. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I appreciate very much the 
explanation but I wonder if the committee would sub- 
scribe to that view because I will stick to my thinking 
that in the computation of the 60-40 ratio, the basis 
should be on the subscription. If the subscription is 
being done by 60 percent Filipinos, whether it is paid- 
up or not and the subscription is accepted by the corpo- 
ration, I think that is the proper determinant. If we base 
the 60-40 on the paid-up capital stock, we have a 
problem here where the 40 percent is fully paid up and 
the 60 percent is not fully paid up — this may be con- 
trary to the provisions of the Constitution. So I would 
like to ask for the proper advisement from the Commit- 
tee as to what should be the proper interpretation 
because this will cause havoc on the interpretation of 
our Corporation Law. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. We go by the estabhshed rule which I 
believe is uniformly held. It is based on the subscribed 
capital. I know only of one possible exception and that 
is where the bylaws prohibit the subscriber from voting. 
But that is a very rare provision in bylaws. Otherwise, 
my information and belief is that it is based on the 
subscribed capital. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is it, therefore, the understanding 
of this Member that the Commissioner is somewhat 
revising the answer of Commissioner Suarez to that 
extent? 

MR. ROMULO. No, I do not think we contradict 
each other. He is talking really of the instance where the 
subscriber is a nonresident and, therefore, must fully 
pay. That is how I understand his position. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My understanding is that in the 
computation of the 60-40 sharing under the present 
formulation, the determinant is the paid-up capital 
stock to which I disagree. 

MR. ROMULO. At least, from my point of view, it is 
the subscribed capital stock. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then that is clarified. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Tingson be 
recognized to propose an amendment to Section 4. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, this amendment to 
Section 4 would call for an additional sentence to the 
section. The said amendment is cosigned by Commis- 
sioners Ople, Davide, Rigos, Trenas, Rodrigo, de los 
Reyes, Uka, Aquino, Natividad, Rosales, Rama, Quesa- 
da. Tan, Gascon, Tadeo, Rosario Braid, Garcia, Abubakar 
and Bacani. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner state the 
line where the amendment would be placed? 

MR. TINGSON. It would be an additional sentence 
after the last line, line 1 7 of Section 4 on page 3. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. The additional sentence would be: 
“FOR A PERIOD OF TEN YEARS IMMEDIATELY 
FOLLOWING THE RATIFICATION OF THIS CON- 
STITUTION, LOGGING FOR EXPORT SHALL BE 
PROHIBITED IN ENDANGERED FORESTS AND 
WATERSHED AREAS.” I have presented this amend- 
ment to the committee, and I understand that they have 
studied and considered it. May I read it again. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. TINGSON. “FOR A PERIOD OF TEN YEARS 
IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING THE RATIFICATION 
OF THIS CONSTITUTION, LOGGING FOR EX- 
PORT SHALL BE PROHIBITED IN ENDANGERED 
FORESTS AND WATERSHED AREAS.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. First of all, the committee accepts 
in principle the tenor of the Commissioner’s amend- 
ment. This IS just a minor change. We think it could be 
more appropriately placed in Section 5 where we ar 

mandating Congress to fix forest lands and naf 1 
parks. tonal 

MR. TINGSON. The Commissioner would prefer th 
this be taken up in Section 5? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, in Section 5. 

MR. TINGSON. Rather than in Section 4? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It should be in Section 5. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I then request 
that I take up Section 4 so I will not take the time of 
those who may have amendments in Section 4. 

MR. VILLEGAS. But we can already give the Com- 
missioner a minor change in his phraseology which is as 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


585 


follows: “CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE, FOR SUCH 
PERIOD AS IT MAY DETERMINE, PROHIBITION 
AGAINST LOGGING IN ENDANGERED FORESTS 
AND IN WATERSHED AREAS.” 

First of all, we think that it would be more appro- 
priate to allow Congress, whom we are mandating, to 
study what is the more prudent period, rather than for 
us to determine the period itself. It could be longer; it 
could be 1 5 years or 20 years. 

Secondly, we think logging should be prohibited, 
whether it is for domestic use or for export. If there are 
endangered forests, then these must really be protected 
from any logging. So, those are the changes we would 
like to propose. 

MR. TINGSON. Will this change that the committee 
would like to make still remain as a mandate for the 
next Congress? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, definitely. 

MR. TINGSON. Although the chairman of the com- 
mittee did not mention the number of years for the 
prohibition, would it be that the sense of this Com- 
mission, which is greatly disturbed by the destruction 
of our forests, that the destiny and future of our 
country will not be ignored by the next Congress? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is a very strong mandate. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, inasmuch as there 
were twenty of my colleagues who signed this amend- 
ment with me, and they told me personally that they 
were in complete agreement with it, is it possible for me 
first to personally go around and at least confer with 
them in the light of what the committee has suggested? 

the PRESIDENT. Then we will call Commissioner 
Tingson’s proposed amendment later on when wb come 
to Section 5 because that is the recommendation of the 
committee. 

MR. TINGSON. I appreciate that. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

So, is there any amendment to Section 4? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Colay CO be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

This may be a typographical error; I am referring 
to line 1, page 3, the classification into agricultural, 
forest or mineral lands. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this line 1? 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes, this is on line 1 . After the word 
“forests,” we delete the word “or.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Upon the suggestion of Com- 
missioner Concepcion, we also added “Forest or TIM- 
BER, mineral lands and national parks.” 

MR. COLAYCO. That will be all right. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, that will be “forest or TIM- 
BER, mineral lands and national parks.” 

MR. RAMA. It is accepted by the committee, so we 
could submit it to a vote. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is accepted by the committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is -there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Davide be 
recognized. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The first amendment will be on line 6 of Section 4 on 
page 3, but my omnibus proposed amendments could be ^ 
on page 4. After the word “lease” at the end of the line, 
insert a comma (,) and the phrase “FOR A PERIOD 
NOT EXCEEDING TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, RENEW- 
ABLE FOR NOT MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE 
YEARS.” So it will read: “hold alienable lands of the 
public domain except by lease, FOR A PERIOD NOT 
EXCEEDING TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, RENEWABLE 
FOR NOT MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 

amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 10, I seek the substitution of 
the word “twenty -four” with TWELVE.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is this a homestead? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, this is a homestead. 


586 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MR. DAVIDE. I seek for the reduction of homesteads 
from “twenty-four” to “TWELVE” in order that more 
and more people can enjoy the benefits of homestead 
grants, especially now that the population is increasing. 

MR. MON SOD. Does the Commissioner have any 
technical basis for “TWELVE”? The phrase now says: 
“in excess of twenty-four.” We were wondering if there 
have been any studies on the size of economic and 
viable units. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Although the phraseology used is 
“in excess of twenty-four,” the fact of the matter is that 
many of the grants of homesteads are at exactly twenty- 
four. It has always been the maximum that had been 
given. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, Commissioner Davide will 
limit that maximum now from twenty-four to twelve? 

MR. DAVIDE. To twelve, yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment which is “TWELVE” hectares. This is really 
in the spirit of the provisions under social justice which 
would want a wider distribution of public lands in the 
Philippines. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment on line 10 to reduce “twenty-four” 
to “TWELVE”? 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I just ask Commissioner 
Davide and the members of the committee some clari- 
ficatory questions? There are cases where applicants 
have already cultivated twenty-four hectares and their 
applications are pending before the Bureau of Lands. 
Considering that they have practically complied with 
existing laws regarding twenty-four hectares, what will 
be the effect of Commissioner Davide’s amendment on 
those cases? 

MR. DAVIDE. Upon the approval of the Constitu- 
tion, only twelve hectares can be granted. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Even if the applicant has 
cultivated and cleared twenty-four hectares, will it 
be just and consistent with the humane and equitable 
thrust of our Constitution? 

MR. DAVIDE. A possible exception can be incor- 
porated, but I would prefer that such exception be in 
the Transitory Provisions. 


MR. DE LOS REYES. So the understanding is that 
this amendment should apply only to future applica- 
tions? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that would be the proper inter- 
pretation. It is without prejudice to perfected applica- 
tions. I say perfected because probably what is only 
lacking is the approval of the appUcation. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is precisely my point. 
There are several cases of that nature pending before 
the Bureau of Lands where the delay is only due to 
some bureaucratic requirements but the applicants have 
already complied with almost everything. 

MR. DAVIDE. We will work together for that in the 
Transitory Provisions. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. With that understanding, I am 
satisfied with the Commissioner’s amendment. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment on line 10 reducing the number 
“twenty-four” to “TWELVE” hectares? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 12, Madam President, after 
the word “resources,” insert the following: “AND 
SUBJECT TO THE PRINCIPLES OF AGRARIAN 
REFORM.” Necessarily, we delete lines 16 and 17. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. This is a 
transposition of that last phrase. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. • 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I know the reason for 
changing “requirements” to “PRINCIPLES”? j think 
the first word is better as in “SUBJECT TO THE RF 

QUIREMENTS OF AGRARIAN REFORM” in«t h 
of “PRINCIPLES.” insxead 

MR. DAVIDE. I accept “AND SUBJECT TO thp 
REQUIREMENTS OF AGRARIAN REFORM.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
read line 12 now? 

MR. DAVIDE. So, line 12 will read as follows: “of 
the natural resources, AND SUBJECT TO THE RE- 
QUIREMENTS OF AGRARIAN REFORM, shall deter- 
mine by law the size ...” 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22. 1986 


587 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I Just want to call the attention 
of Commissioner Davide and the members of the com- 
mittee that we are using the word “requirements” twice 
on this line 12 as amended: “and developmental require- 
ments of the natural resources, AND SUBJECT TO THE 
REQUIREMENTS.” Could we not use some other term 
because it does not look elegant to me using the same 
word twice? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is why my original amendment 
was “SUBJECT TO THE PRINCIPLES OF AGRARIAN 
REFORM.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could we leave it to the Committee 
on Style to work out the phraseology of this line 1 2? 

MR. DAVIDE. All right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. So, lines 16 and 17 would be deemed 
to be deleted in view of the transposition. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. I have nothing more on Section 4, but 
I will have my amendments on Section 5, if there are no 
anterior amendments. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Line 5 states: 

No private corporation or association may hold alienable 

lands of the public domain except by lease, not to exceed 

one thousand hectares. 

Anong ibig sabihin nito tungkol dito sa panig ng Dole 
at Del Monte? Nilalabag ng Dole ang seksyon na ito na 
nagsasabing ang isang korporasyon ay maaari lang 
umupa ng isang libong ektarya, ngunit ang sinakop ng 
Dole ay 30,000 ektarya; ang Del Monte ay 24,000 ektar- 
ya; ang Sime Darby at Guthrie, 8,000 ektarya; ang 
Manila Paper Mills, 43,000 ektarya; at ang Aguinaldo 
Development Corporation, 27,000 ektarya. Paano po 
ngayon ang mangyayari rito? Nilalabag nila mismo ang 
ating Saligang Batas sa pamamagitan ng Amendment 
No. 6. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Those would not be possible any- 
more under this present Constitution. 

MR. TADEO. Ang tanong ko po ay ano ang mangya- 
yari sa Dole at Del Monte? 

MR. VILLEGAS. They will have to comply with the 
Constitution. The law will make sure that they comply 
with the present Constitution. I think those corpora- 
tions were able to go around some of these provisions 
through these service contracts, by applying service con- 
tracts to land. It is very clear in this Constitution that 
those service contracts no longer are applicable to 
agricultural lands. 

MR. TADEO. Kasi po nakalulungkot na ito ay 
renewable for another 25 years. Ang pangalawang 
tanong ko ay ganito: Are they to be exempted because 
of prior rights? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. The law is very clear. Even if the 
abovementioned corporations have prior rights, the 
adjustment might be in the case of those who dis- 
tributed these hectares of lands. That is where we 
consider just compensation or progressive or fair com- 
pensation. But the law is quite clear. There is a limit on 
what these corporations can hold. So, there are no 
exceptions to that. 

MR. TADEO. Nililinaw ko lang ito. Section 6 of the 
Article on Social Justice, under Agrarian Reform states: 

The State shall apply the principles of agrarian reform 
or stewardship whenever applicable in accordance with law 
in the disposition or utilization of other natural resources, 
including lands of the public domain suitable to agricul- 
ture under lease or concession. 

Nilagyan po natin ito ng “subject to prior rights” 
ngunit ang ibig naming sabihin sa “prior rights” ay hindi 
ang prior rights ng Del Monte o ng Dole. Ang ibig 
naming sabihin sa “prior rights” ay iyong prior rights 
referred to the previous rights of indigenous cultural 
communities and safeguards over the land which they 
cultivate and use for livelihood. 

MR. MONSOD. That has nothing to do with this 
section, and if I may correct the Commissioner, the 
constitutional provision says “prior rights.” If the Com- 
missioner remembers, the phrase that he mentioned was 
dropped. When we talked about “prior rights,” we ex- 
plained during the interpellations on the j^ticle on 
Social Justice that in the event that it was an unjust 
acquisition, then the law will deal with that as an unjust 
acquisition. Hence, said corporations are not entitled 
really to justice. If it is a just and legal acquisition, then 


588 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


there could be room for compensation, but the law 
must be applied. 

MR. TADEO. Pagkaraang mapagtibay ang Saligang 
Batas na ito, ang puwede lamang angkinin ng Dole at 
Del Monte ay maliwanag na 1 ,000 ektarya lamang? 

MR. MONSOD. Ito po ang nakalagay. lyan po ang 
ating batas ngayon. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. As a follow-up to the question of 
Commissioner Tadeo, may I seek a clarification from 
the committee? Under the scenario that he has con- 
templated where these landholdings of Dole and Del 
Monte would now just be reduced to a thousand hec- 
tares, and pending the application of the agrarian reform 
program in that particular area, would the committee 
be amenable to a proposal to incorporate in the Transi- 
tory Provisions that until Congress shall have so pro- 
vided, reversion proceedings may be instituted by the 
State insofar as the excess area is concerned? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think that would be a just provi- 
sion. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, and, I think, just because there 
is going to be a distribution of the land does not mean 
that the plantation will break up. The plantation can 
continue but this time it would be owned by Filipinos. 

MR. REGALADO. Yes. At least we provide for the 
right of the State to institute reversion proceedings 
because, as presently provided, reversion proceedings 
refer only to public lands illegally acquired. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. We want an expanded view of 
reversion proceedings, that even if the land was sup- 
posedly legally acquired under the previous regime, 
since it exceeds the maximum limits, the State shall also 
have the right to institute reversion proceedings, pre- 
cisely for an implementation of the agrarian reform 
program. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree with that position. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

SR. TAN. May I ask the committee. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recog- 
nized. 


SR. TAN. Would private corporations in this section 
include family corporations which own thousands of 
hectares of land? So, even if they got it from the King 
of Spain, they would have to give part of it; is that the 
understanding? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, whatever corporation. 

SR. TAN. That is wonderful. Does it include friar 
lands that the Church got from the King of Spain? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

SR. TAN. Thank you very much. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would just like to clarify the 
question of Commissioner Tadeo. It is as if this pro- 
vision, providing for 1 ,000 hectares, is a new one. But 
this was already existing in the 1973 Constitution under 
Section 1 1 which states: 

No private corporation or association may hold alienable 

lands of the public domain except by lease not to exceed 

one thousand hectares in area. 

So, when these lands were given to Dole, was it bv 
virtue of Amendment No. 6 or by virtue of the marti^ 
law powers of the President when he imposed mart' 1 
law? ^ 

MR. VILLEGAS. I do not know the real farto 
cannot comment. ’ ^ 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I ask that question bee 
it is as if we are discussing the same on the premise 
it is only now that we are limiting to 1 ,000 hectares^^^ 
area lands which may be acquired by lease by a prjy 
corporation, which is not so. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The question of fact is whether 
not some of these lands were leased under this pr°^ 
cedure of the service contract, which the committ^' 
found as a way that some corporations were able t^ 
circumvent specific provisions in the 1 973 ConstitutioiT 
That is really a question of fact. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized 

MR. OPLE. Since almost fortuitously the Commis- 
sion has now come upon this fact that this provision of 
the Constitution, even as early as the 1973 Constitution 
has been successfully circumvented through service con- 
tracts, will the committee entertain an amendment that 
will place a very strong safeguard against the abuse of 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


589 


service contracts so that a constitutional principle is 
circumvented in this manner? 

MR. VILLEGAS. First of all, there is no longer the 
possibility of applying service contract arrangements on 
agricultural lands. 

MR. OPLE. Given that assurance, what about these 
service contracts overtaken by this new Constitution? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is where the recommendation 
of Commissioner Regalado comes in, providing reversion 
proceedings in the Transitory Provisions. 

MR. OPLE. Hence, it is a reversion process in the 
Transitory Provisions. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just one point to the committee. 
The Chair would like to be clarified. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Are we pursuing a principle that 
our Constitution now is being given retroactive effect 
rather than a prospective effect? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is not the thinking. Madam 
President. It is just that if it can prove that some of 
these acquisitions were unjust, then there is where the 
Transitory Provisions could be able to deal with them. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TADEO. Madam President,- ito pong minister 
noong panahon ni Ginoong Marcos at minister pa rin sa 
ilalim ng pamahalaan ni President Corazon Aquino ay 
nakapag-angkin ng 2,000 hectares. Alam naman nating 
hanggang 24 ektarya lang ang maaaring angkinin at 
paunlarin pero isa pong minister na hanggang ngayon ay 
minister pa rin ang nakapag-angkin sa Basilan City ng 
2,000 ektaryang lupa. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Calderon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. CALDERON. I would like to ask this committee 
a question in connection with the previous question of 
Commissioner Tan. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. CALDERON. Commissioner Tan asked whether 
or not the so-called friar lands which were a gift from 
the King of Spain are covered by this provision. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Tan was asking 
whether or not the phrase “private corporation” applies 
to family corporations or friar lands. If they were or- 
ganized as corporations they definitely would be in- 
cluded as private corporations. That was the question. 

MR. CALDERON. I see. In connection with the 
so-called friar lands-since not only this type of lands 
was deeded by the King of Spain but also so many of 
our people, in their desire to have their souls acquire a 
heavenly repose, deeded in their last will and testament 
several parcels of land to the Church— I would like to 
know whether or not these lands are within the purview 
of the narrations. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Those are not covered by this 
specific provision. I think they can be tackled under the 
provisions of the Article on Social Justice under agrarian 
reform. This specific provision talks about land of the 
public domain which is alienable. 

MR. CALDERON. So, donations to the Church or to 
any other group are not covered. 

MR. VILLEGAS. They would not be covered by this 
specific provision. 

MR. CALDERON. Thank you. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Azcuna is recog- 
nized. 

MR. AZCUNA. In relation to the amendment of 
Commissioner Davide on the limit of homesteads to 1 2 
hectares, I would like to ask the members of the com- 
mittee if they are willing to include aside from acquisi- 
tion by purchase or homestead the wording of the 1973 
Constitution which says: “purchase, homestead or 

GRANT” in order to cover other modes of disposition 
of public lands such as free patent, so as to plug a 
loophole. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment to the 
amendment. How will the amendment read? 

MR. AZCUNA. It will now read: “purchase, home- 
stead, OR GRANT. 

the PRESIDENT. I beg the Commissioner’s pardon. 

MR. AZCUNA. On page 3, line 9, we insert the word 
“GRANT” after “homestead” so that it will read: 

. . purchase, homestead or GRANT, in excess of 
twelve hectares.” 


590 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There are no more proponents of 
amendments to Section 4 except Commissioners Foz 
and Sarmiento who are requesting that they be allowed 
to present their amendments later because some Com- 
missioners would like to join them. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we shall defer the approval of 
the entire Section 4 until we receive or consider those 
amendments. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Shall we proceed now to Section 
5? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


MR. VILLEGAS. No, we are not using that phrase. 

MR. MAAMBONG. We are not; we are not using it 
anymore. 

THE PRESIDENT. The phrase “controlling interest” 
has been deleted. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “Capital” is used here as a specific 
word. 

MR. MAAMBONG. My thinking is like this: Com- 
missioner Romulo who is well-entrenched in Corpora- 
tion Law and practice could, perhaps, correct me on 
this, but as far as my recollection serves me, under the 
present Corporation Law and under the ruling of the 
Supreme Court, a person who subscribes to capital stock 
of corporation can vote already even if he has not yet 
paid fully, and that is a departure from the previous 
rulings of the Supreme Court. So, once we fix the 
subscription at 60 percent Filipino and 40 percent 
foreign, it does not really matter whether it is paid 
up or not because the recent provisions of the Corpo- 
ration Law is very specific and the ruling of the 
Supreme Court is also very specific. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Before we go to Section 5, I am 
still a little bit worried about our discussion on Section 
3 regarding the 60-40 sharing and I have appealed to the 
committee to solve that problem by inserting the word 
SUBSCRIBED before the word “capital” in order to 
make it aligned with the decision of the Supreme Court 
on this matter. I wonder if the committee has decided 
on it now. 


MR. MAAMBONG. So, it could solve a lot of pro- 
blems regardless of the paid-up situation? 


mix. ivv^^iviu 


vviidL Liic v^ommissioner is saying is 
correct. The only thing is, we are trying to handle the 
use of capital as a genenc term because what is involved 
is not only corporations but also noncorporations nr 
associations. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. We would prefer to stay by the 
traditional wording which is “thirty-five” and “seventy- 
three,” inasmuch as both the Corporation Law and 
jurisprudence are very clear that it is really based on 
subscribed capital. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then if that is the case, why can 
we not make it more specific by just saying “subscribed 
capital” because it will solve a lot of problems? 

MR. ROMULO. But it also applies to associations 
which may not have shares of stock. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but I thought we have solved 
that problem already by the use of the words “control- 
ling interest.” 


MR. MAAMBONG. Anyway, with the underst 
that the word “capital” has really reference 
scribed capital stock, then I wiU not insist on that 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recoe 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I just clear up one point with 
Commissioner Maambong regarding the suggestion to 
use the word “subscribed” referring to capital. What 
bothers this Member is the possibility that Filipinos who 
are subscribers and incorporators in that 60-40 corpora- 
tion may not pay at all any of their subscriptions 
because it may come to a point where the 40 percent 
fully paid up would indeed represent at least 25 percent 
of the paid-up subscribed capital of the entire corpora- 
tion. Does the Commissioner have that in mind also? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


591 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, that is precisely the point I 
raised, Madam President. The problem would have 
arisen if the Corporation Law had not been amended or 
the Supreme Court had not reversed its previous stand. 
At present once one subscribes to a capital stock of a 
corporation, as long as there is no declaration that the 
subscription is declared delinquent, then the person 
has the right to vote his shares of stock based on his 
subscription and that right will not be taken away from 
him. So, there is no problem there. 

MR. SUAREZ. I go beyond that. In other words, the 
Filipino subscribers did not even pay a single centavo 
from their subscriptions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. But that is not possible, because 
the Commissioner has mentioned earlier that when one 
subscribes, there is a 25-25 ratio which has to have some 
paid-up capital. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, that is just exactly what I am only 
trying to clear up. In other words, even if not a single 
centavo was paid on the 60-percent stock subscription 
by the Filipino subscribers, nonetheless, for purposes of 
interpreting the word “capital” under this Section 3, 
that is tantamount to a holding of 60 percent. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will again have to make clarifi- 
cation of that, because when we subscribe, we do have 
to pay a certain percentage. 

MR. SUAREZ. No, that is why I said in my example 
that I go beyond that. If it is on a 60-40 basis, the 40- 
percent share of foreigners is already fully paid up. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. That will satisfy the 25 percent 
paid-up requirement under the Corporation Code on the 
totality. Therefore, there is no necessity to require the 
60-percent Filipino subscription to be paid at all. That 
is the possibility that I am trying to picture before us. I 
asked that even under that situation, our interpretation 
that it should be based on subscribed capital stock will 
prevail. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It will still prevail. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I have some clarification 
from Commissioner Suarez with respect to this subscrip- 
tion? 


1 do not know if I heard correctly that even if the 
subscriber does not pay a centavo on his subscription, 
the stocks to which he has subscribed shall already be 
considered for purposes of the computation? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is in practice. 

MR. REGALADO. Then can a so-called subscriber 
who has not paid even the minimum 25 percent under 
the Corporation Code be considered a subscriber? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, that is exactly the point that I 
was trying to raise with Commissioner Maambong. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under the present Corporation Code, 
the normal requirement is that 25 percent of the author- 
ized capital stock must be subscribed and 25 percent of 
the subscribed capital stock must be paid up irrespective 
of who is holding the 25 percent. That is the possibility 
that I was picturing to Commissioner Maambong when 
we come to interpret this 60-40 percent sharing based 
on capital. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, on a collective 
basis? 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. And not on an individual basis? 

MR. SUAREZ. The Commissioner is right. 

MR. REGALADO. We might be misled by the phrase 
“subscription by a subscriber who has never paid a 
centavo.” 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but Commissioner Maam- 
bong sticks to his own personal views about it. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes; I just want to interject a 
statement that I disagree with the statement that an 
individual subscriber may be given a share of stock 
based on his subscription without paying a single 
centavo. A corporate practice is always that he has to 
pay a certain percentage, and I think that should be the 
clarification to Commissioner Regalado. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Would Commissioner Padilla wish 
to add something to this discussion? 

MR. PADILLA. No, not on Section 3, not on capital, 
but on Section 4. 

Madam President, this Member was inquiring whether 
Section 4 has prospective or retroactive effect when 


592 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


Commissioner Davide proposed to reduce 24 hectares to 
12 on a question propounded by Commissioner de los 
Reyes. The answer was that it refers to prospective or 
future applications. 

Madam President, this limit of 1 ,000 hectares in area 
on line 7 of Section 4 is the same provision of 1 ,000 
hectares in area in Section 1 1 of the 1973 Constitution. 
But prior to the 1973 Constitution, there were private 
Filipino domestic corporations which were granted, 
under the Public Land Law, 1,024 hectares. I do not 
really know why the area was 1 ,024, but that is a fact 
based on the 1935 Constitution. Now, does this mean 
that upon the ratification of this Constitution, said areas 
of 1 ,024 hectares held by domestic corporations would 
be reduced to 1 ,000, especially, considering the propos- 
al of Commissioner Regalado that there be a reversion 
of the excess? 

Madam President, I believe it would be improper and 
difficult, if not unreasonable, to reduce the holdings of 
Filipino corporations. I am not concerned with foreign 
corporations but with Filipino corporations which had 
been granted the 1,024 hectares to have that small 
excess hectarage of 24 hectares deducted from it. As a 
matter of fact, notwithstanding the provision of Section 
11 of the 1973 Constitution, the rights previously 
granted under the 1935 Constitution had been respected. 

MR. ROMULO. I think that one must distinguish 
between rights which are derived from the Constitution 
itself such as the case the Commissioner is describing. If 
I recall the Supreme Court decisions, that is not affected 
by a new Constitution, and such rights, because they 
were vested by virtue of the Constitution itself, are not 
retroactively affected. 

MR. PADILLA. Even if the grant was really under the 
Public Land Law? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, but specifically authorized by 
the Constitution. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized to amend Section 5. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

On Section 5, I propose the deletion of the words 
“upon recommendation of the President.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. When this amendment was done, the 
understanding was the Ministry of Natural Resources 
would really do it, but I believe that was understood 
even when we took out the first phrase. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that would be the effect because 
the Ministry of Natural Resources is in a better position 
to make the delimitations or delineations. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the amendment 
again. Commissioner Davide? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is just the deletion of the first line, 
line 18, which reads: “Upon recommendation of the 
President” and insert a comma (,). 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that accepted by the commit- 
tee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, in order that 
Congress shall immediately act on this very grave 
rnatter, I propose that on line 19, before the word 
“Congress,” we insert the following: “THE FIRST”; 
and after “Congress,” add the following: “ELECTED 
UNDER THIS CONSTITUTION.” So, the entire section 
will read: “THE FIRST Congress ELECTED UNDER 
THIS CONSTITUTION shall determine by law tlie 
specific limits of forest lands and national parks, 
marking clearly their boundaries on the ground. There- 
after, such forest lands and national parks shall be 
conserved and not be diminished.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. ^ 

MR. RODRIGO^ Suppose the First Congress fails to 
act, may the Second Congress no longer act? 

MR. DAVIDE. We have to give emphasis so th t tl 
First Congress must really act on this particular m 
in order that we do not deplete further our forests^and 
cause more denudation. 

MR. RODRIGO. On the understanding that if the 
First Congress fails to act, we cannot penalize it. 

MR. DAVIDE. And the Second Congress? 

MR. RODRIGO. The Second Congress may act. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22. 1986 


593 


MR. MAAMBONG. I want to share the concern of 
Commissioner Rodrigo that this proposed amendment 
seems to be very limiting. To avoid this confusion, I 
would suggest that the amendment should nol be placed 
there at all, if the committee agrees. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The thinking also in response to the 
original amendment by Commissioner Tingson is that 
the problem is a very urgent problem and that the whole 
country is really being devastated by denudation. And 
so this is really for emphasizing tjie urgency of the 
problem. It is understood that if the First Congress does 
not act, then the Second Congress will have to act. 

THE PRESIDENT. What happens to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Tingson which is to be 
part of Section 5? 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the new formula- 
tion now would be: “CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE 
FOR SUCH PERIODS AS IT MAY DETERMINE 
measures to prohibit LOGGING IN EN- 
DANGERED FORESTS AND WATERSHED AREAS.” 

Madam President, just for the record, may I again 
read the names of those who joined me in this very 
important amendment: Commissioners Ople, Davide, 
Rigos, Trenas, Rodrigo, de los Reyes, Uka, Aquino, 
Natividad, Rosales, Rama, Quesada, Tan, Gascon, 
Tadeo, Rosario Braid, Garcia, Abubakar, Bacani and 
Guingona. 

the PRESIDENT. Yes, we had that already. Com- 
missioner Tingson. 

What the Chair will clarify is whether or not the 
group agrees to the rephrasing of the amendment sub- 
mitted by Commissioner Romulo. 

MR. TINGSON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, let me read: “CONGRESS 
SHALL PROVIDE FOR SUCH PERIODS AS IT MAY 
determine MEASURES TO PROHIBIT LOGGING 
IN ENDANGERED FORESTS AND IN WATERSHED 
areas.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this an additional sentence? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that an additional sentence. 
Commissioner Villegas? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Tliat is an additional sentence to 
Section 5. 

MR. TINGSON. May I just ask the chairman again, 
if this would be a mandate for the very First Congress? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, which is really a continuation 
of the first sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, may we now have the entire 
Section 5? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Section 5, as amended, reads: 
“THE FIRST Congress, ELECTED UNDER THIS 
CONSTITUTION, shall determine by law the specific 

limits of forest lands and national parks, marking 
clearly their boundaries on the ground. Thereafter, 
such forest lands and national parks shall be conserved 
and not be diminished. 

“CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE FOR SUCH 
PERIODS AS IT MAY DETERMINE MEASURES 
TO PROHIBIT LOGGING IN ENDANGERED 
FORESTS AND IN WATERSHED AREAS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Have those amendments been 
accepted by the committee as is? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Just for clarity, may we ask what 
the contemplation of the committee is on the word 
“conserved”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. To take care of the trees because, as 
we probably remember, there were all sorts of decrees 
asking people to plant trees. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Would that include also the 
utilization and development projects? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Does it refer to management? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Would that also include the 
possibility of changing the specific limits of national 
parks in regard to the total boundaries of forest lands 
and national parks, or will the limits remain as is? I 
asked that because there is some danger here in the 
statement “Thereafter, such forest lands and national 
parks shall be conserved and not be diminished.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 


594 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MR. BENNAGEN. Is that also the understanding? As 
formulated, it is rigid and possible that with the de- 
velopment of management technology, soft technology 
for forestry, there could be some alterations in the 
boundaries. There should be some flexibility in the 
provision. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. What would Commissioner 
Bennagen propose? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, it should be 
with the understanding that Congress, depending on 
development in management technology, forest tech- 
nology, shall be empowered to make the necessary 
adjustments or shall be empowered to pass laws to 
respond to changing requirements of forest develop- 
ment and national economy. 

Thank you. 

MR. LAUREL. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Laurel is recog- 
nized. 

MR. LAUREL. The changes on Section 5 would 
require “THE FIRST Congress, ELECTED UNDER 
THIS CONSTITUTION, shall determine by law. . .” et 
cetera. This Constitution is supposed to govern not only 
the immediate future but also the succeeding genera- 
tions. Can we not think of better words instead of 
referring to the First Congress? After the First Congress, 
there will be no other First Congress and it may lead 
people, who might be adversely affected, to say: “The 
Congress can no longer do it.” 

Instead of referring to the First Congress, why do we 
not just say, “THE Congress shall AS SOON AS POSSI- 
BLE determine by law. . .” We should not refer to the 
First Congress only because this Constitution we are 
now drafting is supposed to govern the future. We are 
not supposed to change the Constitution after every 
Congress. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am willing to accept the amendment 
if the committee will also accept it. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, we will accept the amend- 
ment: “THE Congress shall, AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, 
determine by law.” Is that amendment acceptable? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. We have to take a vote on the new 
amendment presented by Commissioner Laurel if there 
is no objection. 


THE PRESIDENT. Has the amendment, as amended, 
been accepted by the committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment, as amended. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDE^IT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have my misgivings about the 
answer of the committee to the question of Commis- 
sioner Bennagen on whether Congress, after this provi- 
sion is ratified, may subtract from the area determined 
or declared as forest lands and national parks. Was this 
the answer of the committee to that question? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. This was discussed in previous 
committee meetings, and that was the understanding, 
that Congress is empowered after a certain period of 
time, if it deems fit, to actually change the specific 
limits. 

MR. RODRIGO. But the wording of the provision is 
very categorical — “Thereafter, such forest lands and 
national parks shall be conserved and not be dimin- 
ished. So, I do not see how it can be subject to inter- 
pretation. With this provision, I think that Congress, 
unless it proposes a constitutional amendment, may not 
subtract even a hectare. 

THE PRESIDENT. In fact, the Chair shares the 
observation of Commissioner Rodrigo. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Since this is really the thinkine we 
can add the phrase “UNLESS SUBSEQUENT! Y 
CHANGED BY LAW.” Would that be clear enough? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. Or we can say “AND THE LIMITS 
DETERMINED BY CONGRESS” or the terms “AS 
DETERMINED BY CONGRESS shall not be dimin- 
ished.” In other words, it is Congress who always 
defines “forest lines.” 

MR. ROMULO. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why do we not just put a period (.) 
after the word “conserved”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 22, 1986 


595 


THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Rodrigo more explicit, if those are the changes that are con- 


through? 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose an amendment? It 
should be worded “and MAY not be diminished EX- 
CEPT BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, not by executive 
fiat? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Should it always be “by law”? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. The issue of forest lands and 
national parks is not just a matter of diminishing. It 
could also be expanded. I think a more flexible amend- 
ment is needed due to the development in technology or 
even due to the status of the forest themselves. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, the amendment should be: 
“MAY not be CHANGED EXCEPT BY LAW.” 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, Madam President, the amended 
line will read: “Thereafter, such forest lands and nation- 
al parks shall be conserved and MAY not be CHANGED 
EXCEPT BY LAW.” 

MR. RODRIGO. “CHANGED”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, we use the word “CHANGED.” 

MR. RODRIGO. The word “CHANGED” is a word 
that does not refer to area. “MAY not be diminished 
would be better because, with that, it means it can be 
increased by law but may not be diminished except by 
law. The word “CHANGED” can refer to quality, not 
necessarily to area. 

MS. NIEVA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nieva is recog- 
nized. 

MS. NIEVA. Can it not be “and MAY not be dimin- 
ished OR INCREASED EXCEPT BY LAW”? I think 
that was the sense of Commissioner Bennagen — it may 
be increased or it may be diminished, depending on the 
developments in technology. So perhaps that would be 


templated. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is it acceptable to Commissioner 
Bennagen? 

MS. NIEVA. Unless there are other ways of expand- 
ing or diminishing. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, one kibitzer 
here says: “SHOULD not be INCREASED NOR dimin- 
ished EXCEPT BY LAW.” 

MS. NIEVA. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. At any rate, I think the principle 
is there. 

MS. NIEVA. Yes, that is the sense. 

THE PRESIDENT. In the process, maybe we can find 
a better term. So, it will be subject to that. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. But the principle that Com- 
missioner Bennagen has stressed, I think, is acceptable 
to everybody. Is that correct? 

MR. BENNAGEN. Yes. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. So without prejudice to finding a 
happier term or a better term can we now proceed to 
vote? 

Yes, Commissioner Padilla. 

MR PADILLA. Maybe the better term would be 
“shall not be ALTERED EXCEPT BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. I beg the Commissioner’s pardon? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Is it “MAY not be ALTERED”? 

MR PADILLA. A better term is: “shall not be 
altered except BY LAW.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

the PRESIDENT. We have the whole Section 5 now. 
MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote on the 
whole Section 5 , as amended? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Section 5 now reads: “Congress 
shall AS SOON AS POSSIBLE determine by law the 
specific limits of forest lands and national parks. 


596 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


marking clearly their boundaries on the ground. There- 
after, such forest lands and national parks shall be 
conserved and MAY not be INCREASED NOR dimin- 
ished EXCEPT BY LAW. CONGRESS SHALL PRO- 
VIDE FOR SUCH PERIODS AS IT MAY DETERMINE 
MEASURES TO PROHIBIT LOGGING IN EN- 
DANGERED FORESTS AND IN WATERSHED 
AREAS.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular Section 5 as read, please raise thek hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand). 

PiS many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

Is Commissioner Maambong opposing it? 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 31 votes in 
favor, none against and one abstention; Section 5, as 
amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. There are no proponents of amendments 
to Section 6, Madam President, so I ask that we approve 
it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we just clarify 
some points with respect to Section 6 because of some 
changes in the use of the terms “lands of the public 
domain” and “agricultural lands of the public domain” 
which are now incorporated in Section 4 of the pro- 
posed Article. 

In Section 6, the term “private lands” is utilized, and 
I suppose this has reference to private agricultural lands. 
Is my understanding correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. And when we say “hold 
lands of the public domain,” are we referring exclusively 
to agricultural lands of the public domain as mentioned 
in line 2 of Section 4? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The phrase there is “acquire or 
hold.” My own interpretation is “to hold” also includes 
the possibility of leasing. So, that means any public land 
that is alienable. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, when we use the term 
‘lands of the public domain,” it could contemplate 
lands which are not necessarily agricultural in character. 
It could refer to grazing lands, for example, or to 
pasture lands, but not to forest or timber lands. 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, it is something that is 
basically agricultural in character which may include, as 
I said, pasture lands or grazing lands. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. And these could be transferred to 
individuals, corporations or associations who are quali- 
fied to acquire the same. 

MR. VILLEGAS. To acquire or to hold. 

MR. SUAREZ. When one says “qualified to acquire,” 
it means those qualified to acquire public agricultural 
lands or any lands of the public domain because in 
Section 3, on lines 2, 3, 4 and 5, it is stated that the 
agricultural lands of the public domain are limited to 
citizens of the Philippines. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. And yet in the last portion of Section 
6, vve are allowing corporations or associations to 
acquire lands of the public domain, provided they are 
qualified to acquire the same. 

So, we are not limiting this to the citizens of the 
Philippines provided under Section 4. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I think the intent 
of line 13, Section 4, is that there are now four classifi- 
cations in the generic sense of agricultural lands; agricul- 
ture, forest, mineral and national parks. 

So, we would be willing to entertain an amendment 
that will insert the word “AGRICULTURE” before 
“lands” on line 13. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is in Section 4. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. And does the Commissioner think 
that this will be consistent with the provision of Section 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, and also with line 2 of the same 
section. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes. And would the Commissioner 
not thmk of changing the phrase “lands of the public 
domain; to. “PUBLIC AGRICULTURAL LANDS” or 
something in order to jibe and harmonize with Section 


MR. MONSOD. Does the Commissioner mean hne 
26? 


FRIDAY. AUGUST 22. 1986 


597 


MR. SUAREZ. I am referring to line 26, Madam 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. That is also agricultural land, Madam 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Yes, that is it. Is the Commissioner 
not thinking of changing the term “lands of the public 
domain” to “AGRICULTURAL LANDS”? 

MR. MONSOD. We are also willing to entertain an 
amendment to that effect in order to clarify the intent 
of the article. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I suggest that to the members of 
the Committee, Madam President? 

MR. VILLEGAS. All right. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Suarez proposing 
an amendment? 

MR. SUAREZ. With respect to Section 6. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Section 6. 

MR. SUAREZ. If it is reflective of the thinking of the 
Committee insofar as Section 4 is concerned, we pro- 
pose that the words “lands of the public domain” ap- 
pearing on line 26 of Section 6 be changed to “PUBLIC 
AGRICULTURAL LANDS”; but basically, it is “agri- 
cultural land.” 

MR. MONSOD. Maybe to be consistent and to 
harmonize, we just use the same phrase as we used in 
Section 4: “AGRICULTURAL LANDS of the pubUc 
domain.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I call at- 
tention to the fact that the words “public domain” are 
the words used in the 1935 as well as in the 1973 
Constitutions. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We retained it that way. 

MR. RODRIGO. So, they have already adopted a 
meaning and I suppose there is even a jurisprudence on 
this matter. Unless it is absolutely necessary, I do not 
think we should change that. 

MR. SUAREZ. What we are suggesting. Madam Pres- 
ident, is to retain the words “public domain” but 
qualify the word “lands” with “AGRICULTURAL 
lands of the public domain.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. We are retaining “public domain.” 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. If the Committee does not in- 
tend to change the original implication of this provi- 
sion — and by original I mean the Constitutions of 1935 
and 1973 — may I suggest the advisability of retaining 
the former phraseology. Otherwise, there might be a 
question as to whether the same meaning attached 
thereto by jurisprudence will apply or anotlier meaning 
is sought to be imparted to this provision. 

MR. VILLEGAS. As long as it is clear in our record 
that we really mean agricultural lands, can we ask 
Commissioner Suarez to just retain the existing phraseo- 
logy? 

MR. SUAREZ. I would have no objection to that. I 
just want to make it very clear, whether in the record or 
in the constitutional provisions, when we speak of 
“lands of the public domain” under Section 6 we are 
thinking in terms of agricultural lands. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, there will be no need anymore 
to insert the word “AGRICULTURAL”? 

MR. SUAREZ. That is right. We will not press on our 
amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We already have that interpreta- 
tion. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. There are no more registered speakers 
for Section 6; so we may now vote on Section 6, Madam 
President. 

the president. Will the honorable Chairman 
please read Section 6? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Section 6 will read: “Save in cases 
of hereditary succession, no private lands shall be trans- 
ferred or conveyed except to individuals, corporations, 
or associations qualified to acquire or hold lands of the 
public domain.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this par- 
ticular section? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
section is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. I ask that Commissioner Padilla be 
recognized to speak on Section 7. 


598 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I have a proposal 
for a second exception — Section 7 is the first exception 
to Section 6 — that is in favor of a natural-born citizen 
who may acquire a residential lot not to exceed 1,000 
square meters. 

I had a proposal which I filed as a resolution regard- 
ing industrial lots of foreign investors used in the 
manufacture of export products to be allowed with a 
limited area under conditions to be prescribed by law 
which may be necessary for an export-oriented industrial 
enterprises. 

During the period of interpellations. Commissioner 
Suarez said that this was not favorably considered 
because it can be covered by long-term leases. 

Madam President, this would not be a sufficient 
incentive for foreign investors in the manufacture of 
export-oriented products, which will not only be dollar- 
saving but may be dollar-eaming. Moreover, it is very 
difficult to have a long-term lease, say, for 25, 50 or 99 
years because even a private owner may not enter into a 
long-term lease with a fixed monthly or annual rental. 
This is subject to the economic and financial conditions 
prevailing. So, as a long-term lease may not be adequate 
incentive and there being no danger that this lot, plus 
the improvements thereon, may ever be removed from 
the country by the foreign investor, I will repeat the 
proposal that will read as follows; “FOREIGN IN- 
VESTORS ENGAGED IN THE MANUFACTURE OF 
EXPORT PRODUCTS AS CERTIFIED BY THE 
BOARD OF INVESTMENTS MAY BE ALLOWED TO 
ACQUIRE, HOLD OR OWN PRIVATE LOTS WITH 
LIMITED AREA REQUIRED IN THE OPERATION 
OF THEIR EXPORT-ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL 
ENTERPRISES UNDER SUCH CONDITIONS AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

I wonder if the committee will accept the proposed 
resolution that I have filed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Before the committee makes 
the decision, would the proponent yield to some ques- 
tions? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, gladly. 

MR. VILLACORTA. The implication. Madam Pres- 
ident, is that there is a direct correlation between for- 
eign investment being attracted to a particular host 
country and the ownership of industrial lots. Am I right 
in my interpretation? 


MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President. The general 
rule is found in Section 5. In other words, inasmuch as 
he is not qualified to hold lands of the public domain, a 
foreigner, even if he be a foreign investor, is disqualified 
under the present provision. 

MR. VILLACORTA. In order that the committee as 
well as the body may make a decision on the matter — I 
am a member of the committee — we would like the 
Honorable Padilla to present facts with respect to coun- 
tries that attract foreign investment and which allow 
foreign investors to own industrial lots in their national 
territories. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President,* as a matter of 
fact, the rule is that in most countries foreigners may 
even acquire private lands. I agree with the general rule 
under Section 5 that foreigners should not be allowed to 
acquire private lands as was held in the Krivenko vs. 
Register of Deeds decision. But considering that we 
want a progressive economy and we want to give our 
people job opportunities, we are looking forward to- 
wards more productivity to create more wealth for the 
country and for the people to enjoy the blessings of an 
advanced and progressive economy. These can only be 
realized when domestic and even foreign capital will be 
engaged in productive industrial enterprises. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I remember 
that in one of the public hearings that was sponsored by 
the Committee on the National Economy and Patri- 
mony, this same proposal was brought up by some 
•business groups, a few of which were foreign business 
groups, and I raised this very same question. I even said 
that if I was not mistaken, countries that are very suc- 
cessful in inviting as well as developing foreign invest- 
ments do not allow these foreign investors to own lots 
of any kind. I named Singapore, Taiwan, Japan, Malay- 
sia, and I do not think I was refuted by the resource 
persons who were present there. That is why I am asking 
for facts and statistics from the Honorable Padilla, 
because the implication seems to be that there is a 
causal relationship between allowing foreign investors to 
own land and the deluge of foreign investments in a host 
country. 

My second reservation. Madam President, is that we 
discussed during the deliberations on the Article on 
Social Justice that there are millions of Filipinos who 
are landless. Now we are allowing foreign investors to 
own big tracts of land. Of course, they would be limited 
as provided by law, but from the experience of the past 
legislatures, aggressive lobbying and all sorts of incen- 
tives that could be provided by foreign lobbyists would 
imperil the idea of reserving our prime land to our own 
nationals, if the proposal of the Honorable Padilla is 
accepted. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, this does not 
contemplate any big tracts of land; it does not con- 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


599 


template big areas. It would be limited to what is 
strictly and necessarily required for the construction 
of manufacturing plants which will be engaged in the 
manufacture and export of products produced in the 
Philippines with local labor. The idea is not only for a 
limited area, but what is required by the operation of 
these export-oriented industrial enterprises. And, again, 
this is still subject to the phrase “as may be provided 
by law.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the committee ready to react to 
this or is there a need to confer with the other members 
of the committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, Madam President, this issue has 
been thoroughly discussed in the committee, and as 
Commissioner Villacorta mentioned, we did have a lot 
of resource persons, and really the information given 
to us has been divergent that even the committee itself 
was divided. So I would like to ask the body to vote on 
this. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments, 
Commissioner Suarez? 

MR. SUAREZ. May we ask a few questions of the 
distinguished Vice-President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SUAREZ. We already heard about the suggestion 
that in situations like what the Vice-President is en- 
visioning, it is proposed that instead of an alienation, 
they should only enter into a lease which could even 
extend up to 99 years if justly warranted. Would the 
Vice-President not think of extending that privilege of 
these export-oriented manufacturers. Madam President? 

MR. PADILLA. The problem is that that is not 
practical. If one were a property owner in an industrial 
site and a foreign investor would ask for a term of 50 
years, I am almost certain that the lessor-owner will not 
grant a long-term lease, first, because it is not possible to 
fix at this time what is the reasonable rental for the next 
succeeding years, especially if it is a long-term lease. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

The Honorable Villacorta has also already observed 
that at one time in the committee meeting an English 
businessman, who had set up an export-oriented 
business in our country, was not really complaining 
about not making any profits here, notwithstanding the 
fact that he did not own the land on which the indus- 
trial project had been established. In other words, I am 
trying to point out that there is absolutely no need for 
these export-oriented businessmen to own the lands on 
which they do business, because independent of their 
owning the land, they are already making and creating 
profits for our country. Nonetheless, und§r the pro- 


posal, would the Vice-President go beyond this leasing 
business and grant to them the right to own the land on 
which they put up the business? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, it says: “TO ACQUIRE, HOLD 
OR OWN PRIVATE LOTS WITH LIMITED AREA RE- 
QUIRED IN THE OPERATION OF THEIR EXPORT- 
ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES UNDER 
SUCH CONDITIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY 
LAW.” In other words, it is just to permit and not to 
impose an absolute prohibition. 

MR. SUAREZ. And would the Vice-President limit 
the extension of this privilege to those engaged in the 
manufacture of export products? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, as a further limitation because I 
would not want any foreign investor to just acquire even 
private lots. It is a further limitation to encourage the 
production and exportation of products that should be 
competitive using materials of the Philipines and also 
Filipino labor. This will add to the productivity, which 
I have always been talking about, to create more work 
because we cannot be sharing wealth and the benefits 
of economic development unless we first produce 
wealth and have economic development. 

MR. SUAREZ. And the Vice-President would want 
this to constftute an exception to the principle, which 
the Commissioners have been trying to establish here, 
that lands should be limited to Filipino citizens? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, this will be a second exception 
to Section 6. 

MR. SUAREZ. Section 6, yes. 

MR. PADILLA. Section 7 provides for one exception. 
MR. SUAREZ. Yes. 

MR. PADILLA. And my proposal is just to create or 
to provide another exception. 

MR. SUAREZ. The three exceptions would be; one, 
in cases of hereditary succession; second, in the case of 
balikbayan, natural-bom Filipino citizens; and what the 
Vice-President is proposing now would constitute the 
third exception. 

MR. PADILLA. It is really a second exception be- 
cause the phrase save in cases of hereditary successions^ 
has always been there since the 1935 and 1973 Consti- 
tutions. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does the Vice-President not see any 
danger of abuse by those engaged in these so-called 
export-oriented industries in the matter of owning 
private agricultural lands in the Philippines? 


600 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MR. PADILLA. First of all, I do not foresee any 
abuse because it is very restrictive. First, it is limited to 
foreign investors in the manufacture of foreign products 
that are export-oriented; second, it says: “with a limited 
area”; third, it is only as required in the operation of 
their business or manufacturing enterprises; and fourth, 
it is still subject to the conditions that Congress may 
, provide. So, there are many limitations, but the purpose 
'is to give additional incentives and attraction for the 
production of more goods in the Philippines especially 
those that are foreign or export-oriented because this 
may improve our economy. This may give more oppor- 
tunities for employment to the unemployed and under- 
employed. This will produce more wealth to the 
country and the benefits of that economic expansion 
will be shared by all. That is why I have always been 
talking about progress and prosperity concomitant or 
consistent with the common good,. 

MR. SUAREZ. One more question. Madam President. 
Does not the Vice-President think it is more prudent to 
encourage these venturers or entrepreneurs to move over 
to the export processing zone where quite a number of 
multinational companies engaged in the same export- 
oriented business have been prospering and flourishing? 


MR. PADILLA. Well and good, but as I understand it, 
t e Bataan Export Processing Zone has not been very 
^ccessful. Now, they have another area, I think, in 
Dasmannas, Cavite. But this does not preclude or 
prevent the establishment or continuance of export- 
oriented areas. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


pr<^osal?^^^^^^"^^ May I briefly speak against the 

President, the section on agrarian reform has 
icized by sectors because of its loopholes. They 
Hn«/r> \ on agrarian reform has been watered 

hnHv ’ repeat these loopholes before this 

we take aw’av foreign investors this privilege, 

land that r.™ M k niarginalized sectors parcels of 

privilege at the expense of our people. 

wri«en''^hir^J? Qnote, Madam President, an article 
lessor at the Leonor Briones, an Associate Pro- 

irof PhfflpS “d- 

The roots of the present crisis can be traced to a politico- 
economic system characterized by the dominance in con- 


trol of foreign capital. Such dominance is immediately 
visible in all sectors of the economy — private financial 
institutions, industry and manufacturing, agriculture, 
general services, public finance and financial institutions 
and public enterprises. 

I humbly submit. Madam President, that we will 
aggravate our people’s problems if we give this privilege 
to foreign investors. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada desires to 
be recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, Madam President, thank you. 

Is it probably our hospitality trait as a people that 
has, among others, encouraged Commissioner Padilla to 
present this kind of proposal? We are known to be very 
hospitable people and I suppose that this is an extension 
of the hospitality that we afford foreigners to our 
country. 

I think that the other speakers against this particular 
provision has already mentioned the reasons they op- 
pose this particular provision. But, in addition to what 
they have already expressed, one of our concerns is 
that the consequence of more foreign investors coming 
to the Philippines, even if they are engaged in export- 
oriented industries, will be the degradation of our 
environment. What is now to prevent the bringing into 
the country of industrial plants that actually contribute 
to the ecological imbalance of our environment and t e 
degradation of our land, waters, air? So this, again, 
a consideration in our decision that the more these 

foreign investors come in and own the Z 

will put up their business, the more they will contribute 
to such a consequence to our environment. 

Secondly, of course, is the problem 
open up our land, our public domain, not only to 

lease but for ownership to forei^ TT ror^misto 
more we will deplete the land which the Commis i 
has already said is not enough for distribution for 
individual ownership through agrarian re orm. 

So, I would really move against the 
particular amendment to the Constitution anise 

will not be accused of giving more incentives i 
of national development, the benefit of whic , 
long run, will not trickle down to the ordinary 
of our country. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, Commissioner Tan 
will be the last speaker en contra. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 


SR. TAN. Madam President, with due respect to 
Commissioner Padilla, I object violently against this pro- 
posal on two grounds. First, I cannot understand why 
we should be breaking our heads in trying to give privi- 
leges to the foreigners. I think they are wealthy enough. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


601 


The second ground is, I think, more important. I 
wonder if there will really be a better distribution of 
wealth because of the business with the foreigners. In 
my experience with the workers, those employed in the 
manufacture of Barbie dolls, brassieres, and the elec- 
tronic factories, our women have lost their eyesight 
before they reach 26 years old, and our men have 
developed cancer. Our workers have also not become 
any richer. I do not want this kind of business with the 
foreigners; I think we should stop it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Tliank you. Madam President. I 
think the line of argument of the proposal of Com- 
missioner Padilla is premised on the altruism of foreign 
investors and the assumption that they are here to 
benefit a large number of the population of the host 
country. I think the record of foreign investors in the 
host countries is at best confusing. In any case, I recall 
that in the committee hearings that we had. Dr. Mahar 
Mangahas of the social weather station and the De- 
velopment Academy of the Philippines argued very 
strongly against foreigners owning lands and natural 
resources in the Philippines, for tire simple reason that 
these are scarce and nonrenewable resources and should 
be left alone for Filipinos for the benefit of Filipino 
citizens. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I think we are overreacting to the alleged foreign 
carpetbaggers. I do not know why we have to assume 
that every foreigner who wants to invest here is out to 
rob us. The proposal of Commissioner Padilla is not 
exactly opening the doors completely ajar. It is condi- 
tioned on the action of Congress to impose whatever 
conditions it may think would be necessary not only to 
safeguard our interests but to determine whether or not 
the proposal of the foreign investor will, in effect, 
benefit our country economically. So, it is too early to 
say that we are going to cause ecological harm, that we 
are going to degrade our population and many other 
things that have been so freely branded about. The 
proposal, I believe, merits more attention than it has 
received from the committee. I believe that if Com- 
missioner Padilla will accept a proposal wherein the 
property will revert to Filipino ownership after the 
business of the foreign investor is finished, we should 
receive the proposal with more sympathy. That is why 
I would like to ask Commissioner Padilla this question. 
Would he agree that one of the terms should be that 


after the termination of the business, the ownership 
of the property should revert to Philippine ownership? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President, I have 
absolutely no objection to that. There is no intention to 
allocate our industrial lots forever to foreigners especial- 
ly if they do not need them anymore for the operation 
of their industrial enterprises. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

SR. TAN. May I ask one question. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Does business ever terminate? 

MR. PADILLA. There are some businesses, be they 
foreign or local, that either close or withdraw once they 
cease to be profitable. 

Madam President, may I just say a few words with 
regard to the objections of some Members. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Padilla may 
respond to all these objections that have been given. 

MR. PADILLA. Commissioner Sarmiento speaks of 
the loss of agricultural lands that should be available to 
our people. This only refers to industrial lots, of course, 
or subdivision of agricultural lands only when required 
for the construction of the manufacturing plant. He says 
that there is no benefit to the people. What will benefit 
the people is economic advancement, the production of 
more wealth, the development of our economy, and 
that will inure to the benefit not only of the workers 
but even of our people. 

Commissioner Quesada speaks of environment or the 
pollution of our water or air. This should be subject to 
zoning ordinances. One foreign investor should not 
be allowed to put up an industrial plant that emits 
dangerous or obnoxious substances within a residential 

area. . , . 

The other nientions about depleting our own agrarian 

system with no benefit to the people. This is not true; 
this is even imaginary and sometimes emotional. Madam 
President, in my opinion, we all want to be nationalists; 
we all want to help our people, but sometimes our poor 
people cannot help themselves. We need domestic 
capital and if domestic capital is not available, we 
should attract foreign capital not to dominate, much 
less, exploit our country to their exclusive benefit, but 
for the production of more wealth to be shared by all, 
including the workers and the poorer segments of our 
population. 

Madam President, we are not talking of altruism on 
the part of foreign capital. We must accept the proposi- 
tion that when business and capital come in, they are 
for profit; there must be always a profit motive. But 


602 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


that is natural and we cannot eliminate that, otherwise, 
we will never have increased productivity. But so long as 
that enterprise is good for the country because it may 
be dollar-saving and more dollar-eaming, it will afford 
more opportunities for employment and increase our 
productivity, we have to be more practical rather than 
emotional. And I beUipe that although I was not present 
in any of these committee hearings Jsecause I was not a 
member of the committee, and notwithstanding the 
opinions of others who are theoretical, many times 
idealistic, we have to face the problem. Will this sug- 
gestion to allow foreign investors on export-oriented 
products to own a private lot necessary for the establish- 
ment of their manufacturing plant be against the 
interest of our people? Or wUl it help advance the 
economic development of the country? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, can we put this 
to a vote? 

MR. TADEO. Madam President. 


MR. SARMIENTO. With due respect to the Acting 
Floor Leader, I was alluded to by Commissioner Padilla 
in his brief remarks. So, may I make a brief rejoinder? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed, just one minute. 

MR. SARMIENTO. One minute. Madam President. 

Commissioner Padilla speaks of creating more wealth, 
of increasing productivity by means of export-oriented 
industries. Madam President, we are precisely in this 
economic rut because of these export-oriented indus- 
tries, labor-intensive and export-oriented development 
strategy. It is my humble submission that what we need 
are capital-intensive industries, not export-oriented 
industries. Capital-intensive industries would mean 
industries that would create machines, tools, hand tools, 
trains, steels, etc. So I intei^ose my objection to the 
comments made by Commissioner Padilla. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Padilla now 
read the proposed amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tadeo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. TADEO. Minsan pa babasahin ko ang sinulat ni 
Alexander Padilla, anak ng kagalanggalang na Com- 
niissioner Padilla para sa Philippine Society in Perspec- 
hve. A National Situationer. Ito ang isinasaad ng 
ag anggalang na anak sa isang kagalanggalang na am a: 

There shall be a strict implementation of the rule that 
no oreign entity can own land or exploit the country’s 

natural resources. Loopholes such as the admissibility of 
service contracts and leasing of lands shaU be plugged. 

Padilla. Madam President, may I just say one 


• president. Commissioner Padilla 
mzed. 


IS recog- 


T H PADILLA. I am very grateful to Commissioner 
a eo m quoting some of the statements of my son, 
exander Padilla. I am grateful to him because that is 
^ of some leadership that has been exempli- 

le y rny son. But many of those statements were 
a ements against the Marcos regime. I also have been 
against the abuses and excesses of the 
regune but we are now providing for a Consti- 
that ^ Aquino administration and others 

advanrpm ^^^^^rial peace and economic 

prrf*t- that this issue will not be judged 

theoretical basis but on what it 

P ^ ^ practical solution to advance the 

economic mterest of the country. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, Section 7 has been 
sufficiently debated upon and I ask that we vote on it 
now. 


MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, I was also 
alluded to, with due respect to the Acting Floor Leader 
and the Chair. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta may 
proceed. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I was alluded to, so may I give 
ny one-minute rejoinder. I would just like to say or t e 
guidance of our colleagues in the Commission, as we are 
/^oting on this issue, that the proponent has not a a 
ittempted to answer my question - whether or no 
;here really is a causal relationship between owners ip 
Df land by foreign investors in a host coun 
/olume of foreign investment in that particular ^ 

[ do not think this is a theoretical question. “ is ^ ^ 

impirical, real, practical question and I do no 
ire being emotional, idealistic or theore ica ^ 
matter and I think that is an ad hominem non s q 
r»n thp nart of the oroDonent. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

We will call for a vote. Will Commissioner Padilla 
please read the proposed amendment because er 
a change? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Would Commissioner Padilla like to 
read the whole amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. His proposed amendment with 
the amendment of Commissioner Colayco. 

MR. PADILLA. May I request Commissioner Colayco 
to state his amendment to my proposal which I have 
accepted. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, my amendment 
was: “AFTER THE TERMINATION OR THE CLOS- 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


603 


ING OF THE BUSINESS, THE OWNERSHIP OF THE 
PROPERTY SHALL REVERT TO FILIPINO OWNER- 
SHIP.” 

MR. PADILLA. Which I have accepted. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have the proposed amend- 
ment now, Commissioner Padilla, with the amendment 
of Commissioner Colayco? 

MR. PADILLA. The amendment will read: “FOR- 
EIGN INVESTORS ENGAGED IN THE MANUFAC- 
TURE OF EXPORT PRODUCTS AS CERTIFIED BY 
THE BOARD OF INVESTMENTS MAY BE ALLOWED 
TO ACQUIRE, HOLD OR OWN PRIVATE LOTS 
WITH LIMITED AREA REQUIRED IN THE OPERA- 
TION OF THEIR EXPORT-ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL 
ENTERPRISES UNDER SUCH CONDITIONS AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” I would ask Commissioner 
Colayco to repeat his amendment which will be the 
second sentence. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think the stenographer is taking 
that down. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may we ask for a 
clean copy of the entire provision? 

THE PRESIDENT. I think it is very simple. May we 
have the stenographer’s copy now? 

MS. QUESADA. I withdraw my motion. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I think we can 
vote now because Commissioner Quesada withdrew her 
request. 

THE PRESIDENT. If I will be permitted, I would like 
to have it read again as the stenographer has taken it 
down. That is why I have asked the stenographers to 
please immediately transcribe. Anyway, it is only 
one brief paragraph; even in writing only, not necessa- 
rily to be typed, unless the honorable Chairman has 
taken it down. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I have not completed it. I am sorry. 

THE PRESIDENT. We do not want to make any 
mistake on this. The Chair will read the amendment as 
taken down by our stenographer: “FOREIGN IN- 
VESTORS ENGAGED IN THE MANUFACTURE OF 
EXPORT PRODUCTS AS CERTIFIED BY THE 
BOARD OF INVESTMENTS MAY BE ALLOWED TO 
ACQUIRE, HOLD OR OWN PRIVATE LOTS WITH 
LIMITED AREA REQUIRED IN THE OPERATION 
OF THEIR EXPORT-ORIENTED INDUSTRIAL 
ENTERPRISES UNDER SUCH CONDITIONS AS MAY 
BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 


MR. PADILLA. And then add the amendment of 
Commissioner Colayco: “PROVIDING, THAT AFTER 
THE TERMINATION OF THE BUSINESS. THE 
OWNERSHIP SHALL REVERT TO FILIPINO OWNER- 
SHIP.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular amendment of Commissioner Padilla, please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(A Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 8 votes in favor, 27 votes against 
and 1 abstention; the amendment is lost. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I ask that we call 
on Commissioner Maambong for his amendments on 
Section 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Maambong 
have any other amendment to Section 7? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I think I have a second one after 
Commissioner Padilla, Madam President. On Section 7, 
page 3, line 30, I propose to delete after “lands” the 
words “solely for residential purposes, not to exceed an 
area of one thousand square meters” and in its place add 
the clause: “SUBJECT TO LIMITATIONS PROVIDED 
BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Maambong 
mean the first sentence? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, there is only one sentence. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, that is right. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It will now read: “Notwithstand- 
ing the provisions of Section 6 of this Article, a natural- 
born citizen of the Philippines who has lost his Philip- 
pine citizenship may be a transferee of private lands 
SUBJECT TO LIMITATIONS PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

the president. Is the Commissioner omitting 
“solely for residential purposes. . .”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 


604 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22. 1986 


MR. VILLEGAS. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any comment? Is there 
any objection to the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Maambong which has been accepted by the 
committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want to indicate for the 
record that this amendment is proposed not only by 
myself but also by Commissioner Davide. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I do not think 
there is anyone else who wants to propose an amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. For Section 7? 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, before we vote on 
the amendment, I just want to ask one or two questions. 

THE PRESIDENT. Which amendment? 

MR. RODRIGO. On Section 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. We voted already 
on the amendment of Commissioner Maambong. 

Yes, but not yet on the whole 

section. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote on the whole 
phrase “natural-bom citizen of the 
hiiippmes who has lost his PhiUppine citizenship,” a 
ura -bom citizen who has become an American 
citizen comes under this? 

VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

^^^I^IGO. If his children are American citizens, 

c\r under Section 6. So, if this natural-bom 

became an American citizen dies, his chUd- 

inha natural-bom but American citizens 

mhent the land. 

Pre^ident^^^^^^^^ under Section 6, Madam 

MR. RODRIGO. Yes, that is all. 

THE PRESIDENT. I beg the Gentleman’s pardon? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that was covered by Section 6. 
The American child inherits the land under Section 6. 


MR. TINGSON. So, Madam President, I think we can 
now vote on the whole Section 7. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. Will the honorable 
Chairman please read Section 7 with the amendment of 
Commissioner Maambong? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

The section will now read: “Notwithstanding the 
provisions of Section 6 of this Article, a natural-bom 
citizen of the Philippines who has lost his Philippine 
citizenship may be a transferee of private lands SUB- 
JECT TO LIMITATIONS PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just for the 
record, I notice that there was also a proposed amend- 
ment of Commissioner Treftas to the same effect. So, I 
include him as one of the proponents. 

Thank you. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, unless it is the 
overwhelming desire of the Commission, I move that we 
suspend the session for our lunch and to come back at 
two-thirty. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

It was 12:21 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:50 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. We move on to Section 9 and the 
first speaker is Commissioner Rosario Braid. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I still have amend- 
ments to Section 8. 

THE PRESIDENT. So let us proceed first to Section 

8 . 

Commissioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On Section 8, the following are my 
amendments: Before the word “The” at the beginning 
of the section, insert the following: “CONGRESS MAY 
ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC AND 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


605 


PLANNING AGENCY HEADED BY”; do not capitalize 
the “T” in “The” before “President.” Before “after,” 
insert the following: “WHICH SHALL,” then put a 
comma (,). 

On line 3, delete the word “shall” before “recom- 
mend.” On line 4, after “Congress,” insert a comma (,) 
and after “implement,” insert another comma (,); then 
delete the “and” and “an” and insert “CONTINUING.” 
On line 5, delete “approach to” and in lieu thereof 
insert “PROGRAM AND POLICIES FOR” so that the 
entire section will read as follows: “CONGRESS MAY 
ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC AND 
PLANNING AGENCY HEADED BY the President, 
WHICH SHALL, after consultations with the appro- 
priate public agencies and the private sector, including 
labor and peasant organizations, recommend to Con- 
gress, and implement, A CONTINUING integrated and 
coordinated PROGRAM AND POLICIES FOR national 
development.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could Commissioner Davide read 
that again, please? 


MR DAVIDE. It will read: “CONGRESS MAY 
ESTABLISH AN INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC AND 
PLANNING AGENCY HEADED BY the President, 
WHICH SHALL, after consultations with the appro- 
priate public agencies and the private sector, including 
labor and peasant organizations, recommend to 
Congress and implement, A CONTINUING integrated 
and coordinated PROGRAM AND POLICIES FOR 
national development.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT. Are there any comments on this 
proposed amendment which has been accepted by the 
committee? Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid be recognized also on Section 8. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 

recognized. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. I believe, on the same section. Com- 
missioner Bennagen has a proposed amendment but he 
is not here yet. Can we just reserve for him that right 
when he comes back, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will take that into account. In 
the meantime, can we have Commissioner Rosario 
Braid? 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I wiU not 
insist on my amendment if the committee can ensure 
that this suggested amendment is taken care of by the 
NEDA or other planning agencies in the other provi- 
sions. But my proposed amendment wiU be on line 8, 
page 4. After “government.” insert the foUowing; 

“WHICH SHALL PROMOTE COMPREHENSIVE DE- 
VELOPMENT PLANNING, SET PRIORITIES FOR 
AGRICULTURE AND INDUSTRY, PROVIDE ADE- 
QUATE INFORMATION CONCERNING THE MAR- 
KET, INCENTIVES FOR LOCAL INVESTORS, AND 
AN EFFECTIVE REGULATORY SYSTEM FOR 
EXTERNAL INVESTMENT INSTITUTIONS.” 

The reason for this is: this is what the business sector 
is seeking; that is, clearer signals on priorities for agricul- 
ture and industry, adequate information, incentives for 
local investors, as weU as an effective regulatory system 
especially for multinationals. So, if these types of 
concerns are taken care of, I wiU not insist on my 
amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. The thinking is, especiaUy 
since the private sector will be consulted, if we are 
mandating the Congress and the President to consult 
the private sector, all the ingredients that the Com- 
missioner mentioned are really part of the continuing 
integrated and coordinated programs and policies that 
are already referred to in this section. So it wUl be 
definitely in the record that all the specific points 
mentioned wiU be part of these programs and policies. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. I just wanted it for the 
record. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, except for the 
reservation of Commissioner Bennagen on Section 8, we 
could move on to Section 9. And I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, I would like to 
amend Section 9 by deleting the entire section and 
substituting a new sentence in its place. I understand 
that this is the same as the one in the old 1973 Constitu- 
tion. I have no objection to that, except that perhaps 
the wording can be improved. 

In the committee recommendation, the wording 
is: “The Congress shall reserve to citizens of the Phil- 
ippines ...” And if we jump to line 13, it reads 

. . certain areas of investments . . .” We would like to 
substitute this paragraph with the following: “ALL 
areas of INVESTMENTS SHALL BE RESERVED 
TO CITIZENS of THE PHILIPPINES OR TO CORPO- 
RATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS WHOLLY OWNED 


606 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


BY FILIPINOS EXCEPT AS NOW OR MAY BE PRO- 
VIDED BY LAW AND THIS CONSTITUTION.” 

My coauthors are Commissioners Nolledo, Sarmiento 
and Gascon. The committee has a copy of the proposed 
amendment and we seek the response of the committee 
to this. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, can we ask for a 
suspension of the session so we can confer with the 
proponent? 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 2:58 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:05 p.m., the session was resumed. 


THE PRESIDENT. All right. But can we proceed to 
vote on this particular amendment or does it affect the 
whole section? 

MS. AQUINO. It will affect substantially Section 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. So we defer the voting on this 
one. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Acting Floor Leader is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. We ask that Commissioner Nolledo 
be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Rigos be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recognized. 


RIGOS. Madam President, after conferring with 
e members of the committee, we hereby withdraw oui 
proposed amendment and with the consent of the com- 
mittee we are happy to amend Section 9 by changing 
which reads: “sixty percent of whose voting 

wtose CApTta°i“^* 

cfAr,, i-- owned by such citizens,” per ob- 

a ion of Professor Nolledo and the other coauthors 
oi the proposed amendment. 


So, we now present this new amendment on line 1 1 
y eleting the words “voting stock or controlling 
interest and putting the word “CAPITAL.” So that it 
wiu read: “sixty percent of whose CAPITAL is owned 
by such citizens.” 


MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
amendment of Commissioner Rigos and others 
w ic as been accepted by the committee? Is Com- 
missioner Aquino objecting? 

c request a reservation on 

ec ion . e amendment will be proposed by Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento, collectively with the other Commis- 
sioners, but for the moment. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
not yet here. I have previously consulted with the 
committee about this and they are amenable to the 
reservation. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have an amendment to offer. Madam President, 
coauthored with Commissioners Wgos, Gascon, Sar- 
miento and Aquino. I would like to add a sentence to 
line 14 after the word “dictates,” which shall run as 
follows: “IN THE GRANT OF RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES 
AND CONCESSIONS COVERING THE NATIONAL 
ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY, THE STATE MUST 
GIVE PREFERENCE TO QUALIFIED FILIPINOS.” 
The term “Filipinos” refers to Filipinos as individuals 
and to entities wholly owned by Filipinos. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, can we use 
“SHALL”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. Instead of 
“MUST,” it will be “SHALL - THE STATE SHALL 
GIVE PREFERENCE TO QUALIFIED FILIPINOS. 
This embodies the so-called “Filipino First’ policy. 
That means that Filipinos should be given preference m 
the grant of concessions, privileges and rights covering 
national patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. How does the entire sentence 
read? 

MR. NOLLEDO. The entire sentence. Madam Pres- 
ident, reads, as a continuation on line 14, “IN THE 
GRANT OF RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES AND CONCES- 
SIONS COVERING THE NATIONAL ECONOMY AND 
PATRIMONY, THE STATE SHALL GIVE PREFER- 
ENCE TO QUALIFIED FILIPINOS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President, the commit- 
tee agrees with the proposed amendment. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1 986 


607 


MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. For the record, Madam President, 
could we be informed on why the proponents of the 
amendments on Section 9, as read by Commissioner 
Rigos, have changed their position concerning the 
proposed amendment? Obviously, there has been a 
change during the consultation. So, will the Com- 
missioners be informed on the change of position of the 
proponents? 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

MS QUESADA. There is definitely a big difference 
between “WHOLLY-OWNED BY FILIPINOS” and a 
“sixty-forty” equity share, so we just like to be in- 
formed. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, my advisers and I 
were satisfied with the explanation of the committee, 
and so, we will request the committee to make the same 
explanation to Commissioner Quesada. 

MS. QUESADA. I suppose it should not be just an 
explanation for me but for the rest because we are not 
party or privy to the clarifications made during the 

consultation. 

the president. Yes, the committee will now 
explain whatever has transpired between Commissioner 
Rigos and the others and the committee. Will Commis- 
sioner Monsod please answer Commissioner Quesada. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the first one is on 
the question of 60 percent or wholly owned, and this 
article which dates back to 1935 merely says that it is 
up to the Congress to determine in specific cases 
whether they will specify 60, 75, 90 or 100, giving the 
Congress the leeway and the flexibility to dictate higher 
percentages than 60 percent for these activities. The 
second point is that, as proposed by the proponents 
reversing it and saying “all areas are prohibited except 
those that may be allowed,” this imposes a heavy 
burden on Congress to look at the entire economy and 
to say which activities will be allowed or not, which 
brings us back to a question of central planning, the 
breadth and width and comprehensiveness of looking 
at the entire economy which is virtually impossible. As 
we see it, the Congress should look into areas that 
should be Filipino and not say, “Anything we do not 
say should not be Filipino.” Tliat is a very difficult 
thing to do. There are approximately 400,000 enter- 


prises in this country, and we are going into very diffi- 
cult areas there and putting a very heavy burden on 
Congress. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Quesada satis- 
fied? 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to introduce an amend- 
ment to the Noiledo amendment. And the amendment 
would consist in substituting the words “QUALIFIED 
FILIPINOS” with the following: “CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES OR CORPORATIONS OR ASSOCIA- 
TIONS WHOSE CAPITAL OR CONTROLLING 
STOCK IS WHOLLY OWNED BY SUCH CITIZENS.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Noiledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, apparently the pro- 
ponent is agreeable, but we have to raise a question. 
Suppose it is a corporation that is 80-percent Filipino, 
do we not give it preference? 

MR. DAVIDE. The Noiledo amendment would refer 
to an individual Filipino. What about a corporation 
wholly owned by a Filipino? Why should it not be given 
the same preference also? 

MR. MOf^SOD. My understanding of “Filipino” is 
it is not only to individuals but to corporations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Then I would seek this clarification. 
When we say “Filipino corporation,” does it refer to a 
corporation or association whose capital or controlling 
interest is wholly owned by Filipino citizens? 

MR. MONSOD. At least 60 percent. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. DAVIDE. Is that the intention? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, because, in fact, we would be 
limiting it if we say that the preference should only be 
1 00-percent Filipino. 

MR. DAVIDE. I want to get that meaning clear 
because “QUALIFIED FILIPINOS” may refer only 
to individuals and not to juridical personalities or 
entities. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree. Madam President. 


608 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Then can we go back now to the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Nolledo; that is, 
the additional sentence which has been accepted, I 
understand, by the committee? 


MR. NOLLEDO. Will I read it again, Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. RODRIGO. Before we vote, may I request that 
the amendment be read again. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The amendment will read: “IN 
THE GRANT OF RIGHTS, PRIVILEGES AND CON- 
CESSIONS COVERING THE NATIONAL ECONOMY 
AND PATRIMONY, THE STATE SHALL GIVE 
PREFERENCE TO QUALIFIED FILIPINOS.” And 
the word “Filipinos” here, as intended by the pro- 
ponents, will include not only individual Filipinos but 
also Filipino-controlled entities or entities fully con- 
trolled by Filipinos. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I am asking this 
question as the Chairman of the Committee on Style. ' 
If the wording of “PREFERENCE” is given to “QUAL- 
IFIED FILIPINOS,” can it be understood as a prefer- 
ence to qualified Filipinos vis-a-vis Filipinos who are not 
qualified. So, why do we not make it clear? To qualified 
Filipinos as against aliens? 


^ suggestion of Com- 

IFIED”? remove the word “QUAL- 


MR. RODRIGO No 
QUALIFIED FILIPINOS 
aliens or over aliens? 


no, but say definitely “TO 
as against whom? As against 


MR NOLLEDO. Madam President, I think that is 
understood. We use the word “QUALIFIED” because 
e existing laws or the prospective laws will always 
lay down conditions under which business may be 
done For example, qualifications on capital, qual- 
1 ica ions on the setting up of other financial structures. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Nolledo which 
has been accepted by. the committee, adding a sentence 
to Section 9 on line 14, which has been read? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, still on Section 9, 
I ask that Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. This 
is a very simple amendment. 

After the word “shall” on line 9, insert a comma (,) 
and the following words: “UPON RECOMMENDA- 
TION OF THE ECONOMIC AND PLANNING 
AGENCY.” So the whole line will read: “The Congress 
shall, UPON RECOMMENDATION OF THE ECO- 
NOMIC AND PLANNING AGENCY, reserve to citizens 
of. . .” 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, what is this 
agency? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The economic and planning agency 
referred to in Section 8. 

MR. RODRIGO. Referred to in Section 8? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So we limit the power of Congress 
here. Unless there is a recommendation. Congress may 
not act. Is that it? 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be the effect. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does the committee accept such a 
situation to limit the power of Congress? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. RODRIGO. It is just a matter of style. 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 


MR. RODRIGO. If we say ‘‘PREFERENCE " 
QUALIFIED FILIPINOS," I, Vl“ood 

giving preference to qualified Filipinos as against F 
pinos who are not qualified. 


MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, that was the 
intention of the proponents. The committee has 
accepted the amendment. 


THE PRESIDENT. May we have the sentence, Com- 
missioner Davide? How will it read now? 

MR. DAVIDE. The first sentence of Section 9 will 
read: “The Congress shall, UPON RECOMMENDATION 
OF THE ECONOMIC AND PLANNING AGENCY, 
reserve to citizens of.” 

THE PRESIDENT. This has been accepted by the 
committee? 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


609 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I would like to ask Commissioner 
Davide whether he finds this kmd of amendment helpful 
to Filipinos. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will be helpful to the Filipinos 
because if we leave this to Congress, as presently 
worded, without even a recommendation from the 
economic and planning authority. Congress may, in 
the light of the proposal earlier given, expand the scope. 
And so, since we have adopted the National Economic 
and Planning Authority which shall be responsible for 
a continuing program of economic planning, then it 
would become very logical that any recommendation 
must be made by that body, which is headed by the 
President, by the way, for Congress now to determine 
whether certain areas of investments must be reserved 
to the parties therein stated. 

BISHOP BACANI. But may the effect not be this 
way: that if there is no recommendation from the 
economic planning agency, then the Congress will not 
necessarily have to reserve to Filipino citizens, cor- 
porations or associations at least 60 percent of its voting 
stock, et cetera, certain areas of investments. In 
other words, there will be no reservation by Congress 
and so there will be a greater leeway even for foreigners 
or foreign corporations. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, because this particular provision 
is subject to the general restrictions in the matter of 
utilization, disposition and exploration of natural 
resources. 

BISHOP BACANI. If it is seen that way, it is all 
right. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, with the reserva- 
tion on Section 9 for Commissioner Sarmiento, we can 
move now to Section 10. I ask that Commissioner 
Quesada be recognized. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

the president. My attention is called to the 
Nolledo amendment, that we have not yet approved 
it. Is there any objection? 

MR. TINGSON. I do not think we have voted on 
that, Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. There has been a reservation. 

MR. TINGSON. There was a reservation, I think, 
for Section 9. 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. TINGSON. That is why I thought we could not 
vote on that now and I asked for Commissioner Quesada 
to be recognized for Section 1 0. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will reserve the voting on 
that. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, I would like to 
propose an amendment on line 17, Section 10. After 
“from the private sector,” insert the phrase “REPRE- 
SENTING FILIPINO INTERESTS AND OF KNOWN 
PROBITY AND PATRIOTISM.” So, there shall be a 
period (.) after PATRIOTISM. Then the next sentence 
would read: “IT shall provide policy direction in the 
areas of money, banking, and credit.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us take up the first portion. 
Commissioner Quesada will please repeat. 

MS. QUESADA. The entire sentence would then 
read: “The Congress shall establish an independent 
central monetary authority, the majority of whose 
members shall come from the private sector, REPRE- 
SENTING FILIPINO INTERESTS AND OF KNOWN 
PROBITY AND PATRIOTISM.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this acceptable? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, Commissioner 
Davide has a very long amendment to this section. We 
are wondering if we can incorporate the amendment 
of Commissioner Quesada with that of Commissioner 
Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will be incorporated with my pro- 
posed amendment, and I will be very glad to join 
coauthorship with Commissioner Quesada. 

MR. MONSOD. Our only comment is: Is it not 
redundant to say “REPRESENTING FILIPINO IN- 
TERESTS” and, at the same time, “PATRIOTISM”? 
If we say “OF KNOWN PROBITY AND PATRIOT- 
ISM,” does that not include already a pro-Filipino 
sentiment? 

MS. QUESADA. If the phrase “FILIPINO IN- 
TERESTS” would already encompass all the principles 
that make one patriotic, I would settle to remove 
“PATRIOTISM” here. 

MR. MONSOD. The other question is: Is there no 
absolute possibility of appointing a foreigner? 


610 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MS. QUESADA. We are not saying that we are going 
to have foreigners as members of the Monetary Board 
but there could be dummies; there could be Filipinos 
who might be representing foreign interests. So, this 
is the reason the qualification has been made. 


The session is suspended for a few minutes. 
It was 3:27 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 


MR. MONSOD. It mi^t be a bit paranoid for us 
to put in the Constitution the suggestion that there 
are Filipinos who do not represent Filipino interests. 


At 3:51 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MS. QUESADA. I think that is something debatable. 
We know of Filipinos who have served as dummies, so 
we would like this to be clear, especially the matter 
of monetary and banking issues of the country. We feel 
that this is a very important body which makes deci- 
sions on international transactions entered into by the 
country, hence, these particular qualifications. Since 
we have removed it from Congress and from the Office 
of the President so that it will be an independent body, 
we would like to be assured that those representing 
the Filipinos from the private sector would truly repre- 
sent Filipino interests. 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I think it was 
Commissioner Davide who was on the floor. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

This is now an amendment proposed by the follow- 
ing: this Representation, Commissioners Quesada, 

Azcuna, Villacorta and Foz. May we be allowed to read 
the first sentence so we can have the full picture. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, can we ask Com- 
missioner Quesada to sit down with Commissioner 
Davide and incorporate their ideas so we can take the 
whole article? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair recommends that 
Commissioners Davide and Quesada confer on this 
matter. 


MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

mav^P^r ^ meantime. Madam President 

Oiipcafi • statements of Commissionei 

Quesada just so we will have it straight on the records? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. The first sentence will read: “SEC. 10. 
The Congress shall estabhsh an independent central 
monetary authority, THE MEMBERS OF WHOSE 
GOVERNING BOARD MUST BE OF KNOWN 
PROBITY, INTEGRITY AND NATIONALISM, the 
majority of WHOM shall come from the private sector. 
And then, on line 1 8, it will now read as follows: THE 

AUTHORITY shall provide poUcy direction in the ^^eas 
of money, banking, and credit.” Insert „ 

AUTHORITY"before “provide,” with the “T in the 

in capital letter. That is a new sentence. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Would the proponent mmd if we 
retain the word “patriotism”? 


MR. BENGZON. It is understood that people who 
will be appointed in the Monetary Board will be Fili- 
pmos of probity, independence and that they are also 
patriots, that they are not dummies. And if ever it will 
be prwen that these people are dummies, we have the 
Anti-Dummy Law. Next, for us to put in very specific 
^ms that the members of the Monetary Board will be 
FUipmos representing Philippine interest, 1 think, 
smacks of an mferiority complex. And I think we do 
no want to appear to have an mferiority complex. 

would like to caution the proponents on this 
matter. We would be willing to entertain amendments 
a wou ensure such a thing but we should be 
cautious m the use of our words. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. May we suspend the session for a 
few minutes while the parties are conferring? 


MR. DAVIDE. “Patriotism”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Instead of “NATIONALISM” we 
use “PATRIOTISM.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we submit an amendment to the 
amendment? The amendment would consist of the 
following: before the words “OF KNOWN PROBITY,” 
insert the words “NATURAL-BORN CITIZENS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. We already changed “NATIONAL- 
ISM” to “PATRIOTISM.” Personally, I am wUling to 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


611 


accept the proposal if only to emphasize the relation- 
ship between “PATRIOTISM” and the members being 
natural-born citizens. But I would leave it to the com- 
mittee, having accepted the same. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment to the 
amendment. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So it will read: “WHOSE GOV- 
ERNING BOARD MUST BE NATURAL-BORN CITI- 
ZENS, OF KNOWN PROBITY, INTEGRIXy AND 
PATRIOTISM.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we address a clariflcatory ques- 
tion to the Honorable Foz? 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Foz 
say? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. There is sense in introducing the 
phrase “NATURAL-BORN CITIZENS” to apply to 
the membership in the central monetary authority. 
And I take it that this refers also to those coming 
not only from the public sector but also from the 
private sector. 

Is my understanding correct, Madam President? 

MR. FOZ. That is right, Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, all the members of 
the central monetary authority must be natural-bom 
citizens? 

MR. FOZ. That is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. May I call the Commissioner’s atten- 
tion to Section 8, especially lines 2 and 3, wherein the 
phrase “the private sector” is attended with a comma 
and that this is without prejudice to representatives 
from the labor and peasant organizations from being 
appointed representatives of the private sector in the 
central monetary authority. 

# 

MR. FOZ. I would have no objection, but I think 
the burden of having this accepted falls on the shoulders 
of the committee which has accepted the amendment 
to the amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, may we address the question to 
the honorable chairman of the committee? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Suarez, we will leave 
it in the record that “private sector” includes “labor 
and peasant organizations.” 

MR. SUAREZ. Without necessarily amending Section 
10 ? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Can we state clearly in the record 
that when we speak of “private sector” under Section 
10, we also have in mind the inclusion of the appro- 
priate representatives from the labor and peasant 
organizations? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I am, of course, sympathetic to 
the idea of having appropriate representatives from 
peasant and labor organizations. I think their voice 
should be heard but may we know from the committee 
what would be a minimum requirement in terms of 
professional training for somebody to be a member of 
the monetary board. Does one have to know something 
about the monetary theory? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No. The original amendment 
proposed by Commissioner Davide actually enumerates 
the requirements, and among them is a sufficient 
knowledge of banking and finance if he is going to set 
directions for money and credit. 

MR. BENNAGEN. The requirement presupposes at 
least a modicum of knowledge in these areas. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, of banking and finance. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a 
question for clarification? This section says, “The 
Congress shall establish an independent central mone- 
tary authority.” My question has reference to the word 
“independent.” How is the independence of this 
authority supported by this Constitution? 

In the case of the Judiciary, the Members are in- 
dependent because they have a fixed term and they 
may not be removed except by impeachment or some 
very difficult process. This applies to the different 


612 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


constitutional commissions. But in the case of this 
central monetary authority which we call “in- 
dependent,” how is that independence maintained? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The thinking is: Congress, in 
establishing that independent central monetary 
authority, should provide a fixed term. Actually that 
was contained in the original Davide amendment but we 
thought of leaving it up to Congress to determine 
that term — a fixed term of probably five years or 
seven years serving in the monetary board. 

MR. RODRIGO. Does this include that they may 
not be removed except by impeachment by the 
Congress? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Exactly. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just like the members of the other 
constitutional commissions? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Probably we could take it as a 
separate section. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Right now, we have the Davide- 
Quesada amendment. Are there any comments on this 
particular proposed amendment of Commissioners 
Davide and Quesada? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, may I inquire 
who will appoint the members of the Monetary Board? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The President will appoint them. 
Madam President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. That is why we say that they 
shall be subject to the same disabilities or disqual- 
ifications as the members of the constitutional com- 
missions. 


MR. PADILLA. But it does not say so. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We leave that to Congress to specify 
in the law. 


MR. RODRIGO. And 
Congress? 


we are leaving that to 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 
MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 


SaiW Madam President, Commissior 

c^i^? ^ manifestation 

on thp Section 9 and after that we may vc 

on the whole Section 9. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, but 
May we have the opinion of the 


what about Section 10? 
committee? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Could 
then vote on it? 


we just finish Section 10 and 


that we Madam President, then I 

that we recognize Commissioner Garcia. 

nized.^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is rec 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you, Madam President. 

addition which ^ray not proD^r^K amendments 
10, but upon consultation wfih ^the thaf 
committee, this could belong after^ SectS^Tm 
before Section 1 1 . Would tL comSfieTj^Jo^ 
tegrate it into Section 10 or could we have a sen^ 
section? ^ 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, when we use the 
words “HONESTY,” “PROBITY,” “NATIONALISM,” 
“PATRIOTISM,” are those words not superfluous 
and redundant? They sound good, but are these not 
too many words without real substance? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We think they are there for em- 
phasis. 

MR. PADILLA. But as members of the Monetary 
Board which is the central authority of money, inance 
and banks, it is understood that they must not be even 
ordinary businessmen; they should be highly qua i le 
in their knowledge of these subjects rather an or 
mere honesty or probity. Congress will not nomma e 
nor the President appoint persons who are not even p 
Filipino. 

THE PRESIDENT. There are other 
have to be resolved. Is Commissioner Padilla r 

MR. PADILLA. That is what is disturbing me. Madam 
President. I am leaving this matter to the cornmi 
for consideration because sometimes amendrnen s 
which do not add substance to the provision have been 
accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Davide wish 
to have a vote on his proposed amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Commissioner please 
read the whole of Section 10. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


613 


MR. DAVIDE. The whole of Section 10, as reform- 
ulated, reads as follows: “The Congress shall esta- 
blish an independent central monetary authority, the 
MEMBERS of whose governing board MUST BE 
NATURAL-BORN FILIPINO CITIZENS, OF KNOWN 
PROBITY, INTEGRITY AND PATRIOTISM, the 
majority of WHOM shall come from the private sector. 
THEY SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME DIS- 
ABILITIES OR DISQUALIFICATIONS AS MEMBERS 
OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS. THE 
AUTHORITY SHALL PROVIDE POLICY DIRECTION 
IN THE AREAS OF MONEY. . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. We shall now have the first 
portion read by Commissioner Davide voted upon. 

Is there any objection to that first portion that has 
been read by Commissioner Davide and which has been 
accepted by the committee? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, the following 
amendment will be a new sentence on line 18. 1 propose 
to insert the words “THE AUTHORITY SHALL,” 
then we now proceed with the original wording of the 
committee. So the whole of line 18 wUl read: “THE 
AUTHORITY SHALL provide policy direction in the 
areas of money, banking, and credit.” Nothing more 
has been amended thereafter. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the com- 
mittee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
second proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide 
which has been accepted by the committee? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, that particular 
amendment is jointly authored by Commissioners 
Quesada, Azcuna, Villacorta and Foz. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we know from the honor- 
able Chairman if, with these two amendments, the 
whole of Section 1 0 is completed? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Gascon would like to have the floor in connection with 
Section 10. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
propose either an additional sentence or a separate 
paragraph to Section 10, with the same matter of style 


which would read as follows: “FILIPINOS SHALL BE 
GIVEN PREFERENTIAL RIGHT TO ACCESS TO 
FINANCIAL RESOURCES.” The basic reason why 
I would like to encourage the Commission to agree to 
this is that it is hoped that in providing financial 
resources, which would include credit, Filipinos will be 
given preferential priority or right in attaining credit. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask 
Commissioner Gascon one clarificatory question. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with the 
approved new section which reads “In the grant of 
rights, privileges and concessions concerning the 
national economy and patrimony, the State shall give 
preference to Filipinos,” does the Commissioner not 
think his proposal is covered by this new section? 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
concentrate my discussion on the issue of access to 
financial resources and, to my mind, it does not coyer 
totally the spirit of what I would like to encourage. 
My point is that preferential treatment must be given 
to nationals as far as credit is concerned so that there 
could be aid for Filipino nationals in the development 
of their enterprises. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. We defer to Commissioner Rosario 
Braid. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, in the 
Article on General Provisions, there is a provision 
which states that “wholly-owned Filipino corporations 
shall be given priority to domestic credit facilities.” 
Will this express the Gentleman’s concern? 

MR. GASCON. Yes. But I was thinking that since we 
are now discussing the central monetary board and the 
issue of banking, finance and credit, perhaps this is 
an opportune time to discuss such a provision. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in our committee 
meetings, we agreed on an omnibus provision that is 
why we have Section 1 . What we are afraid of is that 
we shall be repeating in this article the pro-Filipino 
sentiment which is becoming redundant, and also 
unproductive at some point. 

Secondly, the act of lending money is a voluntary 
act. If we say that there should be discriminatory types 


614 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


of incentives, that is ultimately bad for the Filipinos 
and the country if that will be taken as a mandate for 
such things. Perhaps, we should be silent about this 
because the sense of this whole article is very pro- 
Filipino. 

MR. GASCON. I realize that. Madam President, but 
I do not mean that when we speak of providing credit 
to Filipinos, we will bar credit to nonnationals. My 
only point is in attaining credit, all things being equal, 
there should be preference for Filipinos. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, in view of the fact 
that this is in the Article on General Provisions, the 
committee regrets that it cannot accept that amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Gascon insist 
on his amendment? 

MR. GASCON. After conferring with Commissioner 
Rosario Braid, I shall await that opportune time to 
discuss this when we go into the Article on General 
Provisions. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

nized?' President, may I be recog- 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 


Securities and Exchange Commission insofar as 
securities are concerned. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I believe that the 
reconciliation is already being resolved because they 
are making a distinction between regulatory authority 
and supervisory authority. The Securities and Exchange 
Commission has supervisory authority over finance 
companies, for example, whereas the regulatory 
authority is still with the Central Bank. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission shall not be granted the regulatory juris- 
diction or authority? 

MR. MONSOD. That is the present situation. Madam 
President. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the distinction is, we vest 
authority on the Securities and Exchange Commission 
insofar as supervision is concerned, and we grant to 
the Central Monetary Authority the power of reg- 
ulation. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for making clear the dis- 
tinction. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, we do not seem 
to have anybody else speaking on Section 10. Per aps, 
this is already clear to the body. 


MR. SUAREZ. May we just clarify some points with 
respect to Section 10, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

01 There is a statement here on lines 20, 

21 and 22, which reads: 

f supervisory authority over the operations 

o a s and exercises such regulatory autliority as may 
e provided by law over the operations of finance com- 
panies and other institutions performing similar functions. 

is: When we make reference to 
"jimUo itutions performing functions which are 
nanipc ^ ^^^twe vyith the operations of finance com- 
> o we have in mind investment companies? 

Mad^ ftSdem^^' houses, for example, 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

My second question is: Would this not collide with 
the regulatory authonty granted to the Securities and 
Exchange Commission under the Securities Act“^ In 
other words, there might be a conflict of jurisdiction 
between the Central Monetary Authority and the 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. This will be submitted 
As many as are in favor of Section ^ P 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 33 votes in favor and 1 abstention; 
Section 10, as amended, is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the Floor Leader 
would like to give the information that Commissioner 
Bennagen has a manifestation to make on Section , 
Commissioner Sarmiento has a manifestation to make 
on Section 9 before voting is done. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am withdraw- 
ing my reservation with respect to Section 9. 

THE PRESIDENT. Therefore, we can go back to 
Section 8. Commissioner Bennagen is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 
On lines 2 and 3, place a comma (,) after “agencies’ 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


615 


delete the word “and” before “the” then insert the 
word “VARIOUS” between “the” and “private”; add 
“S” to “sector,” and continue with “AND THE LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT UNITS.” Then delete the phrase 
“including labor and peasant organizations, shall.” 
The amended portion shall now read: “the appro- 
priate public agencies, the VARIOUS private sectorS 
AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT UNITS.” 

It should be understood that “VARIOUS private sec- 
tors” include management, peasant, and labor or- 
ganizations, cooperatives, indigenous communities, 
academies and others, which should be part of the 
consultation. We already have the experience with this 
in the case of NEDA which came out with its people- 
powered development plan; local government units 
would include the autonomous regions. The signi- 
ficance of this was highlighted during the deliberations 
on the relationship between the development plans of 
the autonomous region level and the national plans. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I ask a 
question? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. How many sectors or how many 
people will the President have to consult before he can 
act? 

MR. BENNAGEN. It is the Congress which shall 
conduct public hearings. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, there has been an 
amendment to this section that was introduced by 
Commissioner Davide. I guess the consultations are 
undertaken during the process of formulating the 
program before it is presented by the President to 
Congress and then Congress will also conduct hearings. 
That is actually happening now in the formulation of 
the program — there are consultations going on in all 
the regions. So, it does not mean that the President 
himself or herself conducts the consultations. 

MR. RODRIGO. This means that all the provinces, 
cities and municipalities, including the autonomous 
regions, will have to be consulted. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, and this is actually happening. 
There are regional consultations where representatives 
of the provinces and the cities are asked to attend 


because they are the ones who are supposed to present 
the projects that make up the total national develop- 
ment program. 

MR. RODRIGO. If the committee believes that this 
is practical and that this is not imposing too many 
conditions on tlie President who, after all, would be 
elected by our people, I pose no objection. 

MR. MONSOD. It is a process that includes a lot 
of people and is actually being practiced today. 

MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Bennagen amendment has 
been accepted by the committee. Is that correct? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to said 
amendment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

MR. VILLEGAS. May we now vote on the entire 
Section 8, Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Villegas 
please read the entire Section 8? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Section 8 now reads: “CONGRESS 
may establish an INDEPENDENT ECONOMIC 
and planning agency headed by THE 
PRESIDENT WHICH SHALL, after consultations 
with the appropriate public agencies, the VARIOUS 
private sectorS AND THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
UNITS, recommend to Congress and implement CON- 
TINUING integrated and coordinated PROGRAMS 
AND POLICIES FOR national development. 

“Until Congress provides otherwise, the National 
Economic Development Authority shall function as 
the independent planning agency of the government.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
8, please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(One Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 30 votes in favor, 1 against and 
1 abstention; Section 8, as amended, is approved. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, before we vote on 
Section 9, Commissioner Foz has some clarificatory 
questions to ask. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


616 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I would like to request 
Commissioner NoUedo to please restate his amend- 
ment so that I can ask a question. 

MR. NOLLEDO. “IN THE GRANT OF RIGHTS, 
PRIVILEGES AND CONCESSIONS COVERING THE 
NATIONAL ECONOMY AND PATRIMONY, THE 
STATE SHALL GIVE PREFERENCE TO QUALIFIED 
FILIPINOS.” 


that in weighing and evaluating competing requests for 
grants, when we say “QUALIFIED,” it would cover 
all aspects, including the benefits to the country. 

Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I also want 
a clarification. When we say “CAPITAL,” do we refer 
to subscribed capital? 


MR. FOZ. In connection with that amendment, if a 
foreign enterprise is qualified and the Filipino enter- 
prise is also qualified, will the Filipino enterprise still 
be given a preference? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Obviously. 

MR. FOZ. If the foreigner is more qualified in some 
aspects than the Filipino enterprise, will the Filipino 
still be preferred? 


MR. NOLLEDO. The answer is “yes.” 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments 
on Section 9? Are we ready to vote on Section 9? 

VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

May I read Section 9, as amended. 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

Congress shall, UPON 
ECONOMIC ANE 
PLANNING AGENCY, reserve to citizens of the Philip- 
pmes, or to corporations or associations at least sixty 
per cent of whose CAPITAL is owned by such citizens, 
or sue higher percentage as Congress may prescribed, 
cer am areas of investments when the national interest 

GRANT OF RIGHTS, PRIVI 
CONCESSIONS COVERING THE 
economy and PATRIMONY, THE 

fiupincT^^^ give preference to QUALIFIEE 


VUllMCi 

9 are in favor of Secti 

their hand honorable Chairman, please ra 

their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 37 votes in fnvnr 
o *• n , . . iri lavor and none again 

Section 9, as amended, is approved. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I just want to 
clarify. I refer to Commissioner NoUedo’s answer to 
Commissioner Foz regarding qualifications. I assume 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to make two proposals concerning two 
critical areas of the national economy: the foreign 
debt question and foreign trade poUcy. The first amend- 
ment I would like to make, a copy of which I submitted 
to the chairman of the committee, reads as follows: 
“SECTION FOREIGN LOANS SHALL BE CON- 

TRACTED ONLY TO FINANCE VITAL UNDER- 
TAKINGS IN LINE WITH THE NATIONAL DEVEL- 
OPMENT PROGRAM. A CEILING ON FOREIGN 
BORROWINGS SHALL BE FIXED BY CONGRESS 
AND FOREIGN LOANS OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR 
SHALL BE SUBJECT TO STATE REGULATION. 

“CEILINGS ON INTERESTS AND PRINCIPAL 
PAYMENTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF EXPORTS 
SHALL BE IMPLEMENTED AND INFORMATION 
AS TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF FO^ 
EIGN LOANS OBTAINED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, during the dis- 
cussions on the Article on the Executive, we had a very 
lengthy and exhaustive discussion on the incurring o 
foreign loans. If the Gentleman will recall, we approved 
in that article a section that reads: 

The President may contract or guarantee foreign loans 
on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with the 
prior concurrence of the Monetary Board and subject 
to such limitations as may be provided by law. The Mone- 
tary Board shall, within thirty days from the end of every 
quarter of the calendar year, submit to the Congress a com- 
plete report of its decisions on application for loans to be 
contracted or guaranteed by the government or govern- 
ment-owned and controlled corporations which wUl have 
the effect of increasing the foreign debt and containing 
other matters as may be provided by law. 

Madam President, this is quite a comprehensive pro- 
vision that already implements the sense of the Com- 
mission with respect to foreign loans. We are sorry that 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


617 


we cannot accept the amendment of the Gentleman 
because the features of his amendment already take the 
form of a legislation. Tliese are the things that Congress 
should go into after much discussion and hearings. 
For example, on the question of ceilings on interest 
and principal payments as a percentage of exports, 
there are other formulas that are now being tried by 
Peru and Mexico, arid the Philippines is also exploring 
these areas. In the case of Mexico, it has linked its 
formula of payment to oil. In the case of the Philip- 
pines, we are looking at linking our repayments to the 
current account. There are formulas linking payments 
to the deficit of the national budget, depending on the 
circumstances and the state of the economy. 

With the proposed amendment, we are going into 
the details of economic policy, economic strategy, and 
foreign debt negotiations which have no place in the 
Constitution. Added to these is tlie fact that the pro- 
posal is amply covered by Section 20 of the Article on 
the Executive. 

MR. GARCIA. Can I respond briefly. Madam Pres- 
ident? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. I realize that this is amply discussed 
and covered by Section 20 of the Article on the 
Executive. I fully appreciate that fact. But since we are 
right now discussing the Article on National Econ- 
omy and Patrimony, and since the very heart of the 
economic crisis is the foreign debt question, I think 
this issue should be addressed. In fact, if we look at 
the proposal very carefully, it does not go into details. 
It simply states very vital points: first of all, that 

loans are only for vital undertakmgs; secondly, that 
there is a ceiling fixed on the amount of the loans; 
and, thirdly, the amount of interest payments is fixed 
on ability to pay, which I think is not asking too much. 
It is simply saying that a country’s borrowing should 
be based on its ability to pay. Of course, one of the 
indices or one of the indicators is the ability to earn 
foreign exchange. That, I think, can be stated. And, 
finally, information as to whatever terms and conditions 
made must be made public. In other words, these are 
not secret negotiations so these should be made public. 

For an Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony not to consider the question of foreign debt 
would be lacking or would be rather inadequate because 
our foreign debt is a very critical aspect of our economic 
crisis. I felt this deserves a place or a statement at least 
in this article. As I said earlier, I do not think it goes 
into very many specifics. It simply states those four 
vital issues which any sound economy must be able 
to address. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, another reason 
why we have a reservation about accepting the amend- 
ment is that the foreign debt problem is not going to 


be forever. I hope the Gentleman is not that pessimistic 
to suggest that this foreign debt problem is going to 
continue for the next century. It is a very specific 
problem that we are facing today, which is properly 
addressed by legislation, but it does not really fit into 
the basic law of the land. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the economy is a 
very complicated set of transactions. For example, 
foreign loans may be incurred for reasons other than 
the importation of equipment for vital undertakings. 
Is it being suggested here that we cannot use foreign 
loans for the importation of raw materials, for inter- 
mediate goods, for the importation of certain products 
that may be needed, like the importation of medicine? 
What I am saying. Madam President, is that a statement 
may be innocuous. It may say foreign loans shall be con- 
tracted only to finance vital undertakings. But there are 
many uses of foreign loans which are also good for the 
country. And here, we are already going into economic 
policy. This is a very complicated issue and it is not the 
proper subject of a constitutional provision. 

MR. GARCIA. In fact, what it states very simply is 
that we should not take to the path of foreign loans. 
One of the reasons why many Third World countries 
are now very deeply tied to dependent development 
and uneven and unequal development is the fact that 
before any solution towards borrowing is taken, they 
did not make sure that there was sufficient public 
discussions. That is why the terms and conditions must 
be made public because the repayment terms are 
normally shouldered by the great majority. Secondly, 
it must be considered vital. That, I think, is broad 
enough. Here, there is no statement as to what are the 
ventures that will be considered outside the realm of 
laws. No, we are not saying that. We are simply saying 
that the terms must be considered vital both by the 
executive and the legislative departments. I think it 
is a necessity here now because our experience in the 
past, and not only us but many other countries, is that 
we have taken to the path of borrowing rather lightly. 

I think this is a check to that tendency. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are prepared 
to sit down with Commissioner Garcia on a general 
statement of foreign loans which we can harmonize 
and which is consistent with Section 20 of the Article 
on the Executive. But we do not think that it is proper 
for us to go into such details in this section that would 
limit or restrict or modify Section 20 because, as I 
said, this is a very complicated subject. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

May we request Commissioner Garcia to furnish the 


618 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


Commissioners a copy of his propose because we 
may find merit in it and probably many of us could help 
in the formulation of an acceptable amendment. 

MR. GARCIA. I shall furnish the Members of the 
Commission a copy of the proposal. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

In the meantime, can we defer consideration of the 
Garcia proposal, Madam President? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we would like to 
sit down with the proponents and see whether we can 
work out a good provision on this matter. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we proceed then to the next 
section? 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I have the following 
as a second part of this proposal which concerns foreign 
trade policy: “THE STATE SHALL ADOPT A TRADE 
POLICY THAT WILL GIVE PRIORITY TO THE 
PRODUCTION OF GOODS FOR DOMESTIC RE- 
QUIREMENTS OVER EXPORT. IMPORTS SHALL BE 
geared TOWARD HASTENING NATIONAL IN- 
DUSTRIALIZATION 


STATE SHALL MAKE FULL USE OF ALL 
FORMS OF EXCHANGE INCLUDING COUNTER- 

COUNTRIES ON THE BASIS 
OF EQUALITY AND MUTUAL BENEFIT ” 


independent national economy effectively controlled 
by Filipinos.” Self-reliance is not the same as self-suf- 
ficiency. The Gentleman’s sentence on domestic require- 
ments and on imports suggests self-sufficiency as con- 
trasted with self-reliance. Secondly, there is already a 
sentence in Section 1 that says: 

The goals of the national economy are a more equitable 
distribution of opportunities, income and wealth, a sus- 
tained increase in the amount of goods and services pro- 
duced by the nation for the benefit of the people. 

If we recall when this omnibus provision was first 
drafted — I think it was Commissioner Suarez who was 
the main author — it was precisely written this way 
to put in the same ideas but in a manner that was not 
extreme. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I realize that in 
Section 1 there is a general statement regarding a 
self-reliant and independent economy under the ef- 
fective control of Filipinos. But in this proposal that I 
am making, I believe this gives life precisely to that 
self-reliant policy. Self-sufficiency is a desired objective 
— if a nation can provide the basic necessities of its 
people, that is a desired objective. I mean, if our re- 
sources can provide that kind of economic re^ty, 
then that can be made an objective for our national 
economy. 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask Commissioner Suarez 
to take the floor? 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is this a new section? 

lu This is a section after Section 10, 

Madam President. I had hoped that there would be two 
pohcies - principle statements on foreign loans and 
loreign trade as part of the Article on National Econo- 
my Patrimony, and the second, which I just finished 
readmg, would address the issue of foreign trade. 


R. MONSOD. Madam President, the Gentleman’s 
proposal on the State’s adopting a trade policy with 

o ^se of all forms of exchange 

n e basis of equality and reciprocity could be a good 
sentence on imports being geared 
. ^ . sstening national industrialization is already 

i <5 Section 1; the policy on industrialization 

IS already there. 


of priority to the productioi 

of goods for domestic requirement over export involve 
a veiy senous question of government economic police 
and foreign trade which is more complicated thii jus 
saying we must produce for domestic requirement ove 
export. 


I would like to refer to a statement in Section 1 
which says: “The State shall develop a self-reliant and 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. We have already addressed a request 
to Commissioner Garcia to furnish us a copy o 
proposal. Can we also address the same . 

respect to the second proposal? And may we r 
our request that discussions on the two 
deferred until copies thereof be furnished e 
missioners. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, please furnish us copies. 
Commissioner Garcia. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, I will do so. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, Commissioner 
Ople would like to make a manifestation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, as early as four or five 
days ago, I submitted to the committee a number of 
proposed amendments to the Article on the National 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


619 


Economy and Patrimony. I believe that some of these 
may have been overtaken by subsequent amendments 
when I was in no position to call the attention of the 
committee because of a brief absence from the floor. 
May I, therefore, reserve the right tomorrow morning to 
present these amendments without prejudice to the 
committee locating them later, if these are acted upon 
favorably in the proper places in the article. That is all. 
Madam President. 

Thank you. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. ^ 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

On Section 11, line 26, substitute “may” with the 
words “SHALL NOT”; then after the comma (,), insert 
the word “EXCEPT,” so that the whole line will read: 
“The Congress SHALL NOT, EXCEPT by general law, 
provide. . .” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment. This was also the recommendation of the 
UP Law Center with whom we discussed this specific 
section. 

the president. May we have that voted upon? Is 
there any objection to this first amendment proposed 
by Commissioner Davide which has been accepted by 
the committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 29, Madam President, I pro- 
pose to insert between the words “established” and 
“only” the phrase “BY SPECIAL CHARTERS AND,” 
so that the whole line will read: “may be created or 
established BY SPECIAL CHARTERS AND only in the 
interest of the common good.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Will Commissioner Davide accept 
an amendment to his amendment? I suggest that on line 
28, the phrase should be “Government-owned or con- 
trolled corporations OR THEIR SUBSIDIARIES.” The 
phrase “OR THEIR SUBSIDIARIES” was already pro- 
posed by Commissioner Davide, and I support him along 
that line. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I explain? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. In the course of the interpellation, it 
was clearly stated by the committee that subsidiaries of 
government-owned or controlled corporations may be 
organized under the general law, and government-owned 
or controlled corporations may be so organized by 
special charters only. That was my understanding. 

MR. REGALADO. So under that understanding, I 
will withdraw my proposed amendment to Commis- 
sioner Davide’s amendment. But may I have another 
proposal. Madam President? Since the proposal of Com- 
missioner Davide ends at the phrase “to the common 
good ” may I propose a further amendment by adding 
the following: “AND, UNLESS PROVIDED OTHER- 
WISE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE SAME RE- 
QUIREMENTS, OBLIGATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
AS PRIVATE CORPORATIONS.” The reason for this is 
that there had been instances in the past when govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations were created 
supposedly with the powers of private corporations but 
not with the obligations of private corporations. I illus- 
trate this with the case of the Experimental Cinema of 
the Philippines, which I had the occasion to sue in 
court. It was created by an executive order but which 
was never published in the Official Gazette. The ECP 
was given the powers of a private corporation, but never 
had a board of directors, but only a director-general and 
an assistant director-general. In other words, the pur- 
pose of my further amendment is that in the absence of 
a specific provision otherwise in the special charter, then 
the provisions of the corporation code may have supple- 
tory effect at least to protect private interests. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may we clear up 
one point with the proponent? Does the Gentleman not 
believe that when we speak of the creation of these 
government-owned or controlled corporations under a 
special charter, the fears and apprehensions expressed 
by him may have already been covered? 

MR. REGALADO. Not necessarily, because while the 
charter and the Congress may be well-meaning, there 
may be some lacunas in the provisions which they over- 
looked. In the absence of a contrary specific provision 
in the special charter, and in order to protect private 
interests, then the same shall be subject to the provi- 
sions of the corporation code which will merely have 
suppletory effect. But, of course, if the entire range of 
the obligations of that government corporation is 
properly spelled out in the charter; then the corporation 
code will have no effect. 

I just want to have a backer-up provision because 
there had been a number of instances when, because of 


620 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


the lack of a corresponding provision, intentionally or 
perhaps by oversight, a private individual who happens 
to be caught in the coils of the operations of that 
government-owned or controlled corporation may be 
without recourse. 

MR. SUAREZ. I agree with Commissioner Regalado’s 
observations, but I am concerned about cluttering up 
this Section 1 1 with what I feel may be a surplusage. 
Would the Commissioner be satisfied with what he 
already stated in the record without adding his amend- 
ment on the understanding that when Congress enacts 
the special charter it would already have in mind exactly 
what Commissioner Regalado is declaring to us this 
afternoon? 

MR. REGALADO. Very well. Madam President. Let 
the record, therefore, show that when this provision 
here states that these government-owned or controlled 
corporations are created or established by special 
ch^ters, in the absence of specific and controlling pro- 
visions m the special charters creating them, and for the 
protection of the private interest, then the provisions of 
iJie corporation code or any other pertinent provision of 
law relative to the transaction in question shall have 
supple tory effect. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I am going to that direction. 
Madam President. And then Section 2 of P.D. No. 2029 
provides further: 

Provided , that a corporation organized under the general 
corporation law under private ownership at least a majority 
of the shares of stock of which were conveyed to a govern- 
ment corporation in satisfaction of debts incurred with a 
government financial institution, whether by foreclosure or 
otherwise, or a subsidiary corporation of a government cor- 
poration organized exclusively to own and manage, or lease, 
or operate specific physical assets acquired by a government 
financial institution in satisfaction of debts incurred there- 
with, and which in any case by enunciated policy of the 
government is required to be disposed of to private owner- 
ship within a specified period of time, shall not be con- 
sidered a government-owned or controlled corporation 
before such disposition and even if the ownership or 
control thereof is subsequently transferred to another 
government-owned or controlled corporation. 

MR. REGALADO. The provision that Commissioner 
Maambong just read has not yet been given jurispruden- 
tial interpretation in the light of the provisions ot e 
corporation code on the consolidation and merger o 
corporations. 


MR. SUAREZ. I thank Commissioner Regalado for 
his reasonable approach to the problem. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. ^ 


^ direct a few questions to 
Commissioner Regalado and, perhaps, we can clear this 

I have with me a copy of Presidential Decree No. 2029 
which was promulgated on February 4, 1986. Would the 
Commissioner agree to this definition under P.D. 

*• »?* ^ "‘government-owned or controlled 

corporation,” which says: 

SECTION 2. Definition. A government-owned or con- 

wh fn corporation is a stock or a nonstock corporation, 

. ^ governmental or proprietary func- 

r!ro^n‘ ^ dnectly chartered by special law or if 

rnntr^f H ^ K u ^ general corporation law, is owned or 

government directly, or indirectly 

or subsidiary corporation, to 

!mrror nf > outstanding capital 

stock or of Its outstanding voting capital stock. 


MR. REGALADO. That is a general definition of a 
government-owned or controlled corporation which in 
certain instances, however, may be subject to qualifica- 
tive features. As a general proposition, yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Then probably, the next provi- 
sion will solve the problem. It says: 

Provided , further , that a corporation created by special 
law which is explicitly intended under that law for u 
transfer to private ownership under certain speci ie 
tions shall be considered a government-owned or con ro 
corporation until it is transferred to private owners ip. 

Does that solve in a way the concern of the 
missioner? 


MR. REGALADO. But, Madam .President, tha^ys 

precisely the objection and the SHALL 

amendment which provides that ^the forma- 

NOT, EXCEPT by general law provide for t 

tion, organization, or regulation of ctated in 

tions.” That is advisably taken because ^ ^ . 

Section 4, Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution. As was 
pointed out in the deliberations, 

provision was to insulate Congress ^ ® ^ jj^^tead 

into creating favored corporations. Inat is ^^rnittee 
of the permissive phrase used here by the co . , 
which says “The Congress may, by general ^ 

for the formation, organization, or regulation o P , 
corporations,” I support fully the view of Commission 
Davide in his amendment based on the 1973 
tion. Commissioner Davide’s view is that Congress s 
not do so except by general law to avoid favoritism m 
the creation of special corporations avowedl^y tor 
governmental purposes but actually intended to favor a 
particular group or class or sector in the government. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, the Com- 
missioner mentioned that a government-owned or 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


621 


controlled corporation may have to register under the 
Securities and Exchange Commission. Probably this last 
provision of P.D. No. 2029 may answer the concern of 
the Commissioner, and I quote: 

Provided , finally , that a corporation that is authorized 
to be established by special law, but which is still required 
under that law to register with the Securities and Exchange 
Commission in order to acquire a juridical personality, shall 
not on the basis, of the special law alone be considered a 
goverrunent-owned or controlled corporation. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, it depends on 
the type of the corporation because a corporation may 
be created by general law or by a special congressional 
act. If that special congressional act by itself already 
creates the goyernment-owned or controlled corporation 
and confers juridical personality on it, then there will be 
no need for registration under the general law for cor- 
porations under the corporation code. What I am after, 
however, is that even if the corporation is conferred 
juridical personality without the need of registration, it 
must still comply with certahureportorial requirements. 
It must be subject to auditing if there has been private 
exposure in that governmental corporation, as there are 
some such situations. Then it must comply with the 
corporation code provisions on divestiture of acquired 
assets, on the matter of appraisal values or the right of 
appraisal in the absence of a specific provision in the 
charter itself. However, if all those things are set out in 
the charter, then there is no need for a suppletory 
application of the corporation code. That is my 
purpose. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, this clarification 
in P.D. No. 2029 does not address and solve the concern 
of the Commissioner? 

MR. REGALADO. In the first place. Madam Pres- 
ident, that is statutory. In the second place, its interplay 
with whatever corporation laws and commercial laws 
may later be passed by the new Congress will open that 
specific presidential decree to a review and a revisiting 
of its propriety. But since we are after the guidelines 
here, I am just making a stopgap provision that in the 
absence of any other contrary provision, at least we 
have a suppletory provision. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we ask some questions of Com- 
missioner Davide. 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, by not including or by 
excluding the term “SUBSIDIARIES” after the words 


“Government-owned or controlled corporations” which 
was proposed earlier, are we saying that subsidiaries of 
government corporations cannot be organized by special 
law? 

MR. DAVIDE. They can be organized. 

MR. FOZ. Do they have to be organized only under 
the corporation code? 

MR. DAVIDE. As a general rule, a subsidiary can be 
organized under the general law, but there is nothing 
that can prevent Congress from granting a special 
charter for the creation of another corporation. 

MR. FOZ. What is the accepted meaning of the term 
“subsidiaries” in relation to a government-owned or 
controlled corporation? 

MR. DAVIDE. It has the same meaning as the Com- 
missioner had elucidated to the Commission when we 
took up the Article on the Constitutional Commissions, 
under which, especially in relation to the duty of the 
Commission on Audit — to exercise power, authority 
and duty to examine, audit and settle all accounts 
pertaining to the revenue and receipts of and expendi- 
tures or uses of funds and property — we included 
government-owned or controlled corporations and their 
subsidiaries. 

MR. FOZ. Are we saying that “subsidiaries,” in 
relation to government-owned or controlled corpora- 
tions, are mere creatures or creations of these govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, to a certain extent as may be 
required by law. For instance, the law may define what 
is a subsidiary corporation, meaning, a corporation 
created pursuant to law; that is, even under the general 
law, where a certain percentage of the outstanding 
capital stock must be owned by a government-owned or 
controlled corporation. 

MR. FOZ. And these subsidiaries which were created 
or deemed necessary by the government-owned or 
controlled corporations were formed under the general 
corporation law? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. And, therefore, they may be considered 
not as government-owned or controlled corporations 
but as private corporations. 

MR. DAVIDE. During its organization under the 
general law, a subsidiary may on the face be considered 
a private corporation, but we must have to look into the 
particular function of this corporation. For instance, if 
it performs practically the same activity as the mother 
corporation or the government-owned or controlled 


622 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


corporation, the fact that it was organized under the 
general law will not make it merely a private corpora- 
tion. 

MR. FOZ. If the subsidiary is going to perform the 
same functions as the government-owned or controlled 
corporations, then there is no need to create the subsi- 
diary. 

MR. DAVIDE. There might not be a need. 

MR. FOZ. The purpose of creating subsidiaries by the 
government-owned or controlled corporation is that 
of a necessity — the government-owned or controlled 
corporation caimot perform a special function and, 
therefore, it is necessary to create those subsidiaries to 
perform those special functions. 

Does not the Commissioner think so? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is so, but we have to distinguish 
what is that particular function because if it will be 
perfonning a function which is just an extension of the 
principal function and power of the mother corpora- 
tion, then, necessarily, it is a subsidiary performing the 
very act of the mother unit; and, therefore, its being 
organized under the general law will not convert it into 
a purely private corporation. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, I think that is the thrust 
of our amendment to the original provision under the 
Civil Service Law when we defined the scope and 
extent of the term “civil service.” I refer to a clause 
there which says: “mcluding government-owned or con- 
troUed corporations with original charters ” By 
providing such a definition we are, therefore, excluding 
the subsidianes of government-owned and controlled 
corporations from the scope or definition of the civil 
service and therefore, being outside the civU service, 
these SMbsidianes are private corporations. However 
mimed, m whatever manner these subsidiaries are organ- 
ized or formed under the general corporation law or by 
special charters, they remain as private corporations. 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the reason why my amend- 

SSrifr insertion of the words “BY 

. ARTERS and the establishment of govern- 

controlled corporations.” I did not 
include other subsidiaries.” 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President max/ • + 
one point? I'resident, may we just ( 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is re 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, in Section 1 1 
are practically requiring government-owned or 


trolled corporations to comply with two requirements 
in order to be organized: One, they must be created or 
organized by means of special charters and, second, 
because of the conjunction “and,” it must only be in 
the interest of the common good. Am 1 correct? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

Can I assume that this particular provision would 
apply prospectively? 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Then may I ask what would happen 
to those government-owned or controlled corporations 
which proliferated under the Marcos administration, 
since they have not been created by a special charter, 
and in all probability they may not be in the interest of 
the common good? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I think certain 
realignments will have to be done and the Committee on 
Amendments and Transitory Provisions of which the 
Gentleman is the chairman can make the necessary 
harmonization. 

MR. SUAREZ. I think I provoked a hornet’s nest in 
that connection, but at any rate, would Commissioner 
Davide consider the advisability and practicality of see - 
ing the reestablishment or the recreation under 
charters of these government-owned or contro e 
corporations which have not been created under 
charters and which may not be in the interes o e 
common good? 

This is necessary in order that they can comply with 
this constitutional provision. Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. I join Commissioner Suarez in that. 
Madam President. Perhaps, in the Article on Transi ory 
Provisions we could provide for a section man ^ 
compliance with this particular provision by exis mg 
government-owned or controlled corporations organize 
without special charter. 

MR. SUAREZ. Is the Commissioner excluding from 
that what are considered by Commissioner Foz as t ose 
other subsidiaries of these present corporations. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would not make a general commit- 
ment now, but we would go into the activities of the 
so-called subsidiaries to determine if these were done in 
violation of existing laws, or if these were intended to 
protect the interests of cronies. Then we might go as far 
as including the subsidiaries in the Article on Transitory 
Provisions. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, as of now, the Gentleman would 
not extend the need to enact a special charter to those 
subsidiary corporations. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


623 


MR. DAVIDE. There is a need for that, but I guess a 
certain time must be given to them. Perhaps, in the 
Article on Transitory Provisions we could give a time 
limit within which they must be converted into corpora- 
tions organized under special charters. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. May I put a question to the proponent of 
the amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly. 

MR. OPLE. Commissioner Davide is aware that there 
are about P200 billion of nonperforming assets that 
have to be segregated and taken over by the national 
government from government corporations. Tliis is a 
millstone around the neck of the nation. Will Com- 
missioner Davide, therefore, consider raising the 
standard for the enactment of special charters to create 
new government corporations by qualifying the 
common good, which I think is a standing invitation for 
government corporations to lose money m the interest 
of the common good? Will he consider putting in the 
standard of economic viability together with the 
common good? 

MR. DAVIDE. I would leave it to the committee. 
Madam President, because my only amendment is to 
require two conditions: one, by special charter and, 
second, that it is organized only in the interest of the 
common good. Perhaps, Commissioner Ople’s amend- 
ment may be accepted by the committee. 

MR. OPLE. I so propose, Madam President, and I 
submit. 

Tliank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, I support the proposal 
to insert “ECONOMIC VIABILITY” as one of the 
grounds for organizing government corporations. I 
would like to give the information that a report has 
been submitted by the Presidential Commission on 
Reorganization which precisely makes recommendations 
for the rationalization of the public corporate sector by 
seeking the abolition of certain government corpora- 
tions and realigning some of them, meaning, merging 
some of them into new corporations. One of the 
grounds recommended for so doing is economic viability. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the reason for this 
concern is really that when the government creates a 


corporation, there is a sense in which this corporation 
becomes exempt from the test of economic perform- 
ance. We know what happened in the past. If a govern- 
ment corporation loses, then it makes its claim upon 
the taxpayers’ money through new equity infusions 
from the government and what is always invoked is the 
common good. That is the reason why this year, out 
of a budget of PI 15 billion for the entire government, 
about P28 billion of this wUl go into equity infusions to 
support a few government financial institutions. And 
this is all taxpayers’ money which could have been 
relocated to agrarian reform, to social services like 
health and education, to augment the salaries of grossly 
underpaid public employees. And yet this is aU going 
down the drain. 

Therefore, when we insert the phrase “ECONOMIC 
VIABILITY” together with the “common good,” this 
becomes a restraint on future enthusiasts for state 
capitalism to excuse themselves from the responsibility 
of meeting the market test so that they become viable. 
And so. Madam President, I reiterate, for the commit- 
tee’s consideration and I am glad that I am joined in this 
proposal by Commissioner Foz, the insertion of the 
standard of “ECONOMIC VIABILITY OR THE ECO- 
NOMIC TEST,” together with the common good. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, may I just ask 
Commissioner Ople a question? When we say “ECO- 
NOMIC VIABILITY,” is this not synonymous with 
“financial viability”? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I consider it more or less syno- 
nymous, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Then maybe we should make a 
distinction because a project may be economically 
viable but not financially viable. There are what we 
call economic externalities which are pluses and minuses 
taken into consideration in government-owned and 
controlled corporations. 

MR. OPLE. If financial viability is a more stringent 
standard, then I am sure Commissioner Foz and I will 
be happy to support it. 

MR. MONSOD. The economic viability test is more 
liberal because it allows for consideration of variables 
that are not translatable in financial terms. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 5:15 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5.52 p.m., the session was resumed. 


624 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, the parliamentary 
situation is, if the amendments of Commissioner 'Davide 
and Commissioner Ople are accepted by the committee, 
then we will be ready to vote on Section 1 1 . 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we accept both 
amendments. Can we ask Commissioner Davide to read 
the whole section? 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you, Madam President. 

Section 11 now reads: “The Congress SHALL NOT, 
EXCEPT by general law, provide for the formation, 
organization, or regulation of private corporations. 
Government-owned or controlled corporations may be 
created or established BY SPECIAL CHARTERS AND 
only in the interest of the common good SUBJECT TO 
THE BEST OF ECONOMIC VIABILITY.” 


VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment, Madam 
President. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may we be clarifi- 
committee on what is meant by economic 

viabihty? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. MONSOD. Economic viability normally is 
e ermmed by cost-benefit ratio that takes into con- 

si eratiop all benefits, including economic external as 
benefits. These are what they cal! 
ex emalities in economics, so that these are not strictly 
inancial criteria. Economic viability involves what w« 
ca economic returns or benefits of the country that an 
quantifiable in financial terms. For example, th( 
mav of a copper smelter in an area in Leyt( 

buUd roads, resulting in ai 
lpaHincT+ ®^°uomic activity along the road 

i«! tn Ka ° t ^ place and around the area where the plai 
with some relationshii 

These retii^ ^ anning and with dispersion of industry 
thev invnlvp^K^^^ captured by the firm itself, bu 
other entemri«!^”^^^^^ surrounding areas and t< 

terms Quantifiable in financia 

MS. QUESADA. May the rest of the Commission an. 

I be on the reason for this particular shift 

mstead of the one already provided earlier and which i 
only in the interest of the common good? Has the mear 


ing changed? That it is no longer for the interest of the 
common good; that economic viability is the main 
consideration in the creation or establishment of 
government-owned or controlled corporations? 

MR. MONSOD. No. The number one criterion is still 
the common good. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes. 

MR. MONSOD. I did not say efficiency but eco- 
nomic viability. This would include the nonfinancial 
returns. 

MS. QUESADA. Does the Gentleman think that this 
particular formulation now will be easily understood by 
noneconomists or lay people who will be reading this 
particular provision, or do we need economic inter- 
pretations? 

MR. MONSOD. We have another section that was 
introduced by Commissioner Sarmiento where we talk 
about the re^ contributions to the economy in the case 
of contracts involving foreign financial and management 
cooperation. That is also an economic term used when 
talking about real contributions beyond financial 
returns. 

MS. QUESADA. So, would this particular formula- 
tion now really limit the entry of government corpora- 
tions into activities engaged in by corporations? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, because it is also consistent with 
the economic philosophy that this Commission ap- 
proved — that there should be minimum govemmen 
participation and intervention in the economy. 


MS. QUESADA. Sometimes this Commission would 
just refer to Congress to provide the particular require 
ments when the government would get into corpora 
tions. But this time around, we specifically nien 
economic viability. Would not the earlier foimu 
proposed by Commissioner Davide which states 
SPECIAL CHARTERS AND only in the interest or me 
common good” already cover this particular cn enon 
of economic viability? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Ople will restate the 
reason for his introducing that amendment. 

MR. OPLE. I am obliged to repeat what I said earlier 
in moving for this particular amendment jointly with 
Commissioner Foz. During the past three decades, ^ere 
had been a proliferation of government corporations, 
very few of which have succeeded, and many of which 
are now earmarked by the Presidential Reorganization 
Commission for liquidation because they failed the eco- 
nomic test. For example, I already pointed out the P28 
billion of new equity infusions this year out of a budget 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


625 


of PI 15 billion in order to support some of these 
government corporations, DBP and PNB in particular, 
and this money could have gone into health care, for 
example. 

Now, if we do not provide for an additional standard 
of economic viability, the words “common good,” so 
wonderful, so elevated a principle, wiU be used as a 
license by some people to set up more government 
corporations that will have to be funded by taxpayers’ 
money ad infinitum because there is no standard of the 
economic test. This merely means that there will be 
fewer government corporations that will fail in order to 
become an albatross around the neck of the taxpayers 
and of the nation. But the common good is still the 
principal standard. 

MS. QUESADA. But would not the Commissioner 
say that the reason why many of the government-owned 
or controlled corporations failed to come up with the 
economic test is due to the management of these corpo- 
rations, and not the idea itself of government corpora- 
tions? It is a problem of efficiency and effectiveness of 
management of these corporations which could be 
remedied, not by eliminating government corporations 
or the idea of getting into state-owned corporations, but 
improving management which our technocrats should be 
able to do, given the training and the experience. 

MR. OPLE. That is part of the economic viability. 
Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. So, is the Commissioner saying then 
that the Filipinos will benefit more if these government- 
controlled corporations were given to private hands, and 
that there will be more goods ^d services that will be 
affordable and within the reach of the ordinary citizens? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. There is nothing here. Madam 
President, that will prevent the formation of a govern- 
ment corporation in accordance with a special charter 
given by Congress. However, we are raising the standard 
a little bit so that, in the future, corporations esta- 
blished by the government will meet the test of the 
common good but within that framework we should 
also build a certain standard of economic viability. 

MS. QUESADA. So, Madam President, are we now 
intending to just put, as requirement here, “ECONOMIC 
VIABILITY” and remove the phrase “only in the 
interest of the common good”? 

MR. BENGZON. No, we are not removing that, 
Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. The phrase “in the interest of the com- 
mon good” remains, subject to the test of economic 
viability. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I make a minor suggestion on 
the first sentence to make it positive instead of nega- 
tive? I would say: “The Congress SHALL,” then 
eliminate the words “NOT” and “EXCEPT.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. That was the original phraseology 
and it changes the meaning a little. That is why we are 
going back to the 1973 formulation, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, the Gentleman still prefers the 
negative. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right, because it has a very 
specific meaning. 

MR. DE CASTRO. What is the purpose for the nega- 
tive rather than the positive? 

MR. VILLEGAS. To say precisely that government 
corporations should be exceptionally created by a 
special charter, but that as a general rule this cannot be. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. This is an inquiry to the committee. 
With regard to corporations created by a special charter 
for government-owned or controlled corporations, will 
these be in the pioneer fields or in places where the 
private enterprise does not or cafinot enter? Or is this so 
general that these government corporations can 
compete with private corporations organized under a 
general law? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, that was already 
discussed the other day, but we would like to repeat our 
answer to that. There are two types of government 
corporations — those that are involved in performing 
governmental functions, like garbage disposal, Manila 
waterworks, and so on; and those government corpora- 
tions that are involved in business functions. As we said 
earlier, there are two criteria that should be followed for 
corporations that want to go into business. First is for 
government corporations to first prove that they can be 
efficient in the areas of their proper functions. This is 
one of the problems now because they go into all kinds 
of activities but are not even efficient in their proper 
functions. Secondly , they should not go into activities 
that the private sector can do better. 

MR. PADILLA. There is no question about corpora- 
tions performing governmental functions or functions 


626 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


that are impressed with public interest. But the question 
is with regard to matters that are covered, perhaps not 
exhaustively, by private enterprise. It seems that under 
this provision the only qualification is economic 
viability and common good, but shall government, 
through government-controlled corporations, compete 
with private enterprise? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President. As we said, the 
government should not engage in activities that private 
enterprise is engaged in and can do better. 


MR. OPLE. However, for the record, I do not want it 
to be understood that I am endorsing the copper smelter 
project in Leyte, Madam President, because that was 
the example given. This is losing a lot of money and the 
copper producers in this country, most of them anyway, 
are not in favor of this copper smelter. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. But that is not mentioned here. As it 
is now, there are only two standards — economic 
viability and the general phrase “common good.” As it 
is, special charters may be granted to government 
corporations in fields of economic activity where the 
private sector is already engaged in, and a private 
corporation cannot compete with a government-owned 
corporation. 


MS. QUESADA. Could we stiU have some clarifica- 
tion? I am StiU bothered, so I feel that I need to talk as 
a consumer this time. Would these government-owned 
or controUed corporations include utilities Uke water, 
electricity and telephone? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. Madam President, the com- 
mittee feels that the common good” provision already 
subsumes the meaning that the government should not 
p mto ^ activity where it competes with business 
because that is not their proper area of activity. 


h ^ precisely my point - govem- 
ment should not be in business, especially in fields 
where there are pnvate enterprises. But the term “com- 

^ know how many 

u 71 good” appears in the Consti- 

thft ^ specific reference to the effect 

Hoi government-owned or controUed corpora- 

ml to engage in private business, 

may be stifl^g compering with and destroying private 
miriative and pnvate enterprise. That is my clnlm. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the key to tl 
answer to the Gentleman’s question is found in tl 
answer given by Commissioner Monsod about the di 
ference between financial viabUity and econom 

MHMTr precisely why the phrase “EO 

NOMIC VIABILITY” was used. Private enterprise mu 

Whuf must be making profn 

hile the use of that phrase “ECONOMIC VIABILIT’^ 

corporation cannot recover all 

rLult of bunt in Leyte as 

ZZ caVstVp~^ -P. the govei 

because it is beneftcial to so~L„V" 

able to capture that benefit +u J’ , 
market force*} or through the SO-Call( 

the iustification for th financial channels. This 
the justification for the government to go into the 

types of businesses - either because it Is Z Vvit 

intensive that it wUl not be financially viable for 

pnvate corporation, or it has a lot of these exterr 

benefits that are not captured by the market I 

government would stiil be enutled to ta “ftc 

types of businesses precisely for the common good 


MS. QUESADA. My concern now as a consumer is 
that these particular enterprises would be tak«n over by 
private enterprise. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is not mentioned here. 

MS. QUESADA. The Gentleman said these are part of 
those covered by government-owned or controUed 
corporations which wUl be created only if they pass the 
test of economic viabUity. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. WUl there be the assurance that if 
they are taken over W private enterprise, the cost o 
electricity, water ancAelephone - aU these 
services - wUl be cheaper than those P^'^vid^d- 
concern is not the viabUity but how this wUl affect tne 
ordinary citizen of this land. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Definitely, there is a regulatory 
board that makes sure that in those instances w en 
pubUc utUities are in the hands of the private sec or, 
these private enterprises cannot increase prices at eir 
wUl. They are completely regulated by the government. 

MR. MONSOD. If it is a corporation that delivers 
utUity services — they would be monopolies, for 
example — that would fall under Section 14 which 
states: “The State shall regulate or prohibit monopohes 
when the public interest so requires.” 

MS. QUESADA. Will the Gentleman give a com- 
parison of countries who have corporations estabUshed 
by the government and those established by private 
enterprises, especially those that relate to utUities? 

MR. VILLEGAS. What does the Commissioner mean 
by countries? There are countries in Europe where most 
public utUities are in the hands of the government. 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


627 


There are countries like the United States where a lot of 
utilities are in the hands of the private sector. So, there 
are different practices. Madam President. 

MS. QUESADA. Which will benefit the common 
good, those run by government or those run by private 
enterprises? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There is no hard-and-fast rule. The 
circumstances have to be studied. 

MS. QUESADA. So, even if these were given to 
private enterprises, there is no assurance then that it will 
be for the common good or the general welfare? 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right; it has to be studied. 
Congress in a study on the special charter will precisely 
have to study the specific circumstances which would 
warrant public corporations. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Many of us feel that the debate and 
discussions on this particular issue or section has really 
been adequate and we would like to take a vote on it. 
Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Com- 
missioner Maambong? 

MR. MAAMBONG. I have a very serious conceptual 
difficulty in the last sentence where we say “Govern- 
ment-owned or controlled corporations may be created 
or established BY SPECIAL CHARTERS.” 

I can live with the idea that government-owned 
corporations may be created or established by special 
charters. But when we say “Government-controlled 
corporations may be created or established BY SPE- 
CIAL CHARTERS,” I immediately have some difficul- 
ties because earlier, I read a provision of P.D. No. 2029 
which defines government-owned or controlled corpo- 
rations and which identifies their role in national 
development. 

In Section 1 — and this is also borne out by corporate 
practice — govemment-controUed corporations are 
not really created by special charters. Government- 
controlled corporations are controlled by the govern- 
ment because the government holds on to a majority of 
its outstanding capital stock. As a matter of fact, the 
proviso provides that majority of the shares of stocks of 
corporations under private ownership organized under 
the general corporation law were conveyed to a govern- 


ment corporation because of several reasons. It is not 
exactly correct to generalize that government-controlled 
corporations may be created or established by a special 
charter. I hope the committee can enlighten me; perhaps 
Commissioner Romulo can give Ids comment on this 
because he has extensive corporate practice. But as far 
as I am concerned, as far as the law is concerned and as 
far as corporate practice is concerned, this provision is 
simply not correct. We just cannot say in general terms 
that government-controlled corporations may be created 
or established by special charters because it is against 
the law. It is against corporate practice. I am glad 
Commissioner Aquino is nodding her head. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I make a statement on that, 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think when we say “owned or 
controlled” we mean ownership of shares. So “govern- 
ment-controlled” means the government owns 50 
percent plus 1 percent. But whether there is control or 
no control, there is ownership of shares. 

So I think the Honorable Maambong is delving into 
legal hermeneutics. We are not bound by those decrees 
containing many erroneous provisions. I teach corpora- 
tion law, and I have never recognized those provisions 
of Mr. Marcos. They are contrary to the corporation 
law, and we do not talk of matters contrary to corpo- 
rate practice or to law. We are drafting the fundamental 
law of the land, with which all jurisprudential rules or 
legal provisions must comply. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I would accept that Commis- 
sioner Nolledo teaches corporation law and, as a matter 
of fact, he is a reviewer. I am just a humble professor of 
law in a provincial school. But we read the same law, we 
teach the same corporate practice and I am presenting 
the problem to the committee because I am not dealing 
here in legal hermeneutics, whatever that means, and I 
would like the problem resolved. We would become a 
laughing stock if we pass a provision which is incorrect. 
We just cannot make a general statement, as I said, 
regarding the creation of a corporation by saying that 
government-controlled corporation may be created or 
established by special charters. It just is not done, as far 
as my knowledge of corporation law is concerned. That 
is why I was asking the help of Commissioner Romulo 
because he is well-entrenched in corporate practice. 1 do 
not pretend to know corporation law vei'y well; that is 
as far as my knowledge goes. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Romulo 
say? 

MR. ROMULO. My own interpretation is that it is 
in the alternative really. “Owned” or “controlled” 


628 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


means the same thing. That is with regard to the shares 
of the corporation. That is the only way one corpora- 
tion can control another. But if it bothers the Gentle- 
man that much, the committee is willing to just say 
“government corporations.” 


MR. MAAMBONG. No problem at aU, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. SUAREZ. The problem is with respect to 
government-controlled corporations. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, could we not 
probably solve the problem by just deleting the phrase 
“BY SPECIAL CHARTERS”? In our jurisprudence, 
government-owned corporations have always been by 
special charter. The words “BY SPECIAL CHARTERS” 
damaged the whole thing. 

I was previously reading the understanding under a 
presidential decree of what a government-owned or 
controlled corporation is. The problem is not really on 
what we mean by “owned or controlled.” That is not 
the problem. The problem is in the creation, and I 
would like to specify that kind of problem by probably 
eliminating the phrase “BY SPECIAL CHARTERS.” 
The general corporation law and decisions of the 
Supreme Court are very specific on this. So probably 
we can solve this problem. 

The committee has already accepted it. I do not think 
Commissioner David e would like to interfere. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Suarez 
say? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, which started out as private 
corporations. 

MR. SUAREZ. So, the suggestion is that the words 
“BY SPECIAL CHARTERS” be deleted. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That will solve the whole prob- 
lem. 

MR. SUAREZ. It will not solve the whole problem 
because government-owned corporations must still be 
created by special charter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is correct, but the decisions 
of the Supreme Court and other laws already specify 
that government-owned corporations are usually created 
by special charters. So it is actually a surplusage as far as 
I am concerned. Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Gentleman for the clarifi- 
cation. 


MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, may I just raise 
one point of clarification? I do understand the Gentle- 
man s fear about government-controlled corpora- 
tions bemg organized only by special charters. I suppose 
e as in mind what is originally a private corporation, 
organized in accordance with the corporation law, and 
then thereafter it becomes controlled by the govem- 
ment because the government subscribes to 5 1 percent 
o t at private corporation. And he feels that there is no 
necessity to create or organize that corporation by 
charter since from the beginning it was only a private 
corporation. Is that what the Gentleman has in mind? 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I move that we 
vote on Section 1 1 . 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Did I get it correctly that the com- 
mittee had accepted the deletion of “BY SPECIAL 
CHARTERS”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We are asking the Gentleman first. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I have that in mind, but let me 
speci 1 C. What I am saying is that govemment-owr 
corporations are usually created by special charters 
am so saying that there are government-control 
which are created by special charters, 1 
there. There are government-control 
T defined under the presidential dec 

thev nwl originally private corporations, 1 

indehtprJ ^ government so much money and t 
5 1 nerr into equity to the extent tl 

fov/Xn, 1 with , 

corDoration, Th become government<ontrol 

^ problem area I am talk 
about. Madam President. 


MR. SUAREZ. So, the Gentleman has no problem 
about government-owned corporations being organized 
only by special charter. e b 


MR. DAVIDE. So, it will stand as is. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We are asking the Gentleman to 
respond. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am now presenting the problem 
to the committee. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. May we ask Commissioner Davide his 
opinion on the deletion of “BY SPECIAL CHAR- 
TERS”? 

MR. DAVIDE. I strongly object because the authori- 
ties and the question presented by Commissioner 
Maambong to the committee would refer to corpora- 
tions owned or controlled by the government pursuant 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


629 


to the existing provision of the 1973 Constitution. 
Section 4 of Article XIV reads: 

The Batasang Pambansa shall not, except by general law, 
provide for the formation, organization, or regulation of 
private corporations, unless such corporations are owned or 
controlled by the government or any subdivision or instru- 
mentality thereof. 

The clear meaning is that government-owned and 
controlled corporations can be organized by special law, 
and the fact is that all existing government-owned and 
controlled corporations excluding privately owned 
corporations which were taken over by the government 
were organized under a special law. The matter of a 
private corporation being taken over by the government 
is not a problem because the Constitution itself in the 
Article on Transitory Provisions may provide that 
privately owned corporations subsequently taken over 
by the government may be reorganized under a special 
charter. 

MR. MONSOD. This section does not preclude the 
possibility of a government-owned and controlled 
corporation being established under the general corpora- 
tion law. 

MR. DAVIDE. It will not necessarily preclude. 

MR. MONSOD. Because there are government corpo- 
rations that are and will be established under the general 
corporation law. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President, if it is not per- 
forming governmental functions. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. May we ask now for a vote. Madam 
President. 

MR. FOZ. Before we vote, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we still add some more statements? 

If we follow what has just been said a few minutes 
ago, we will create a lot more confusion like the present 
situation. There has been a proliferation of government 
corporations created either by special law or by special 
charters, and the difficulty has arisen as to whether all 
or some of them are indeed government corporations or 
whether they are private corporations. That is a source 
of confusion, even the application of labor laws. So, if 
we can more or less avoid or dispel the confusion right 
now, perhaps we can save Congress and the administra- 
tive agencies a lot of trouble later on. 

MR. MONSOD. We tried to eliminate some of the 
possible confusion in the Article on the Civil Service 


Commission where the coverage of the civil service-only 
includes government-owned and controlled corporations 
with original charter. 

MR. FOZ. That is a step in the right direction because 
we are then trying to delimit the scope of the civil 
service by so declaring, by so providing. 

MR. MONSOD. All we are saying is that this does not 
stop the government from organizing government- 
owned and controlled corporations under the general 
corporation law. That is all. 

MR. FOZ. If we say that, then we open the door 
again. 

MR. MONSOD. I am sorry but that is the case. We 
are saying that the government may go into certain 
activities which are not necessarily government func- 
tions for certain reasons that can be justified in the 
national interest. For example, it may be a structural 
monopoly like the copper smelter. One would not 
organize the copper smelter under a special charter 
because eventually, he wants to make it private. 

MR. FOZ. Tlie question arises whether these corpora- 
tions which are organized by the government under 
the general coiporation law may now be amenable to 
the Labor Codfe of the Philippines, for instance. 

MR. MONSOD. Of course, they are. All the govern- 
ment corporations organized under the general corpora- 
tion law are treated like private corporations for pur- 
poses of the Labor Code. 

MR. FOZ. Are we then now subscribing to the 
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of National 
Housing Corporation vs. Hugo that all government 
corporations, whether organized by special charter or by 
the general corporation law, come under the jurisdiction 
of the Labor Code and all labor laws? 

MR. MONSOD. That is why we made that provision 
in the Civil Service Code. We made that distinction 
precisely in order to get away from the possible con- 
fusion. 

MR. FOZ. I thank the Gentleman. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I will now 
submit to the ruling of the committee but I will just put 
in one word. If the committee feels that government- 
owned or controlled corporations may, after all, be 
created by general law or special charters then I would 
reiterate my statement — why put special charters at 
all? If it can be created by the general corporation law 
and by special charter, why do we have to specify “BY 
SPECIAL CHARTERS”? That is all, Madam President. 


630 


FRIDAY, AUGUST 22, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. In other words, what is the thrust 
of this particular section? 

MR. VILLEGAS. As a nonlawyer, the thrust is to 
specify that only in very exceptional cases should the 
government be allowed to organize corporations under 
the general law. But in ordinary situations, the govern- 
ment should organize corporations under a special 
charter. That is the way I understand the thrust of this 
provision. 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 1 1 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
proposed amendment is lost. 

MR. BENGZON. May we vote on the whole section 
now. Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we read again the whole 
section? 


MR. BENGZON. May we ask for a vote now. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman will please restate 
his amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “The Congress SHALL NOT, 
EXCEPT by general law, provide for the formation, 
organization, or regulation of private corporations. 
Government-owned or controlled corporations may be 
created or established BY A SPECIAL CHARTER in the 
interest of the common good AND SUBJECT TO THE 
TEST OF ECONOMIC VIABILITY.” 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I ask first 
that we take a vote on whether or not we are going to 
delete “BY A SPECIAL CHARTER” because it is not 
necessary anyway as far as the committee is concerned. 
Then after we resolve that issue, we can vote on that 
particular provision. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. “The Congress SHALL NOT, 
EXCEPT by general law, provide for the formation, 
organization, or regulation of private corporations. 
Government-owned or controlled corporations may be 
created or established BY A SPECIAL CHARTER in the 
interest of the common good AND SUBJECT TO THE 
TEST OF ECONOMIC VIABILITY.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
section, please raise their hand. ( Several Members raised 
their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 1 1, as amended, is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 


MR. BENGZON. We submit. 

THE PRESIDENT. In other words, the committee is 
not keen on keeping the phrase “BY A SPECIAL 
CHARTER.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, we would like to keep them 
but we can subject it to a vote. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of delet- 
ing the phrase “BY A SPECIAL CHARTER,” please 
raise their hand. (Few Members raised their hand.) 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, before the Floor 
Leader asks for adjournment, there is an announcement 
from your office that our proposed Puerto Azul ex- 
cursion tomorrow is postponed until further notice. 


Madam President, I understand from the committee 
members who have been working long and hard today 
that their tiredness is irreversible- for tonight. So, we ask 
for adjournment until tomorrow at nine o’clock in the 
morning. 


THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
tomorrow at nine o’clock in the morning. 

It was 6:32 p.m. 


SATURDAY. AUGUST 23, 1986 


631 


R.C.C. NO. 64 
Saturday, August 23, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:37 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by tire Honorable 
Ma. Teresa F. Nieva. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MS. NIEVA. From the Twenty-Third Psalm: “The 
Lord is my Shepherd; I have everything I need. He lets 
me rest in fields of green grass and leads me to quiet 
pools of fresh water. He gives me new strength. He 
guides me in the right path, as He has promised. Even if 
I go through the deepest darkness, I will not be afraid, 
Lord, for You are with me. Your shepherd’s rod and 
staff protect me. You prepare a banquet for me where 
all my enemies can see me. You welcome me as an 
honored guest and fill my cup to the brim. I know that 
Your Goodness and Love will be with me all my life and 
Your House will be my home as long as I live.” 

Almighty God, we. Your children, thank You for the 
privilege You have given us to be Your mstruments in 
this Constitutional Commission; for the spirit of camara- 
derie even if sometimes strained by our different views 
and opinions; for the nationalism that inspires us in our 
work; and for the deep yearning in our hearts to be of 
service to You and our people. 

Grant that we may continue to do our very best and 
that we may act in the light of our best judgment with 
charity in our hearts towards those who may not agree 
with us. 

In Jesus’ Name we pray. Amen. 

♦Appeared after the roll call 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . Present* 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 


Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo .... 


Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 


Bacani 

. Present* 

Padilla 


Bengzon 

. Present* 

Quesada .... 

. . Present 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Present 

Rama 


Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado .... 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Present 

Foz 

. Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Present 

Gascon 

. Present 

Tan 


Guingona . . . . 

. Present 

Tingson .... 


Jamir 

. Present 

Trefias 


Laurel 

. Absent 

Uka 


Lerum 

. Present* 

Villacorta . . . 


Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 



Monsod Present 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 3? Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 

recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


632 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


(Communication No. 616 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Commu- 
nications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Utter from Mr. Jovencio G. Bernardo of DYVL Radio 
Matron, Tacloban City, transmitting a petition, signed 
by three hundred eleven residents of Leyte, seeking the 
exclusion from the new Constitution of Proposed Reso- 
iJ! which bans foreign military bases in the 

Phihppmes and urging the Constitutional Commission to 

retention of the U.S. Military Bases in 
Clark Air Base and Subic Naval Base. 

614 - Constitutional Commission 

SctoSrr/iSdpir,"™'’*'’ ““ 

S.vChua, President of 
Inr Philippine Physicians in America, 

IT c Street, Merrillville, Indiana 

“^^mg inclusion in the Constitution of a 
that would make a natural-bom citizen of the 
^ Philippine citizenship a 

transferee of private lands. 

~ Constitutional Commission 
Patrimony!°"^*^^^^^^ National Economy and 


Telegram from Mr. P.E. Torres, Sr Vice-President for 
Management Affairs, Universitv m “ n 
City, saying that the students facultv 
personnel and administration of 
Mindanao strongly endorse the 

U , PhUi...,; &*r ciiuorse me amendments submitted 

by the Phdippme Association of Colleges and Universi- 
ties under Communication No. 572. 


Telegram from one Keiko Ezaki, Japan, urging the 
Constitutional Commission to include in the Constitu- 
tion the bases-free and nuclear-free provisions in order 
to see a demilitarized and nuclear-free world. 

(Communication No. 6 1 7 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from two thousand two hundred fifty- 
one signatories with their respective addresses, seeking 
inclusion in the Constitution of a provision to protect 
the life of the unborn from the moment of conception. 

(Communication No. 6 1 8 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Communication from the Permanent International 
Conference for Judicial Review, Paris, France, signed by 
Dr. Morton F. Meads, submitting its observations and 
studies on the constitutional and judicial system of the 
Philippines, and its views and opinions in the writing of 
a constitution. 

(Communication No. 6 1 9 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Communication from the Albay First District Inter- 
Evangelical Christian Church Fellowship, Tabaco, 
Albay, urging the Constitutional Commission to incor- 
porate in the Constitution the provision on the inviola- 
bility of the separation of the Church and State as 
embodied in the 1973 Constitution. 

(Communication No. 620 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Ccmmittee on General Provisions. 

Letter from Mr. Roman L. Kintanar, Chairman of the 
Philippine National Committee on Man and the Bio- 
sphere, expressing full support to Proposed Resolution 
No. 222 — “Adopting Provisions on Science and Tech- 
nology for Inclusion in the Proposed New Constitution 
of the Republic of the Philippines.’’ 

(Communication No. 621 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication from Mr. Romeo C. Balandra, Popula- 
tion Programs Coordinator, Commission on Population, 
transmitting the resolutions of the Philippine Hospital 
Association, Misamis Occidental Council; Philippine 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


633 


Medical Association, Oroquieta City Chapter; Whiz 
Family, Oroquieta City; Bai Lawanen Jaycees, Cagayan 
de Oro City; and Rotary Club of Oroquieta City, which 
resolutions seek to amend Section 4, Article II and 
Section 10, Article XV of the 1973 Constitution. 

(Communication No. 622 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Steering Committee. 

Letter from Mr. Martin R. Reyes of 1 1 Forestry Street, 
Vasra Village, Quezon City, containing reaction to a 
reported inclusion in the new Constitution of an amend- 
ment providing for 1 0-20 years log ban, saying that such 
amendment should be reconsidered to make logging one 
of the ways of conserving the forest. 

(Communication No. 623 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on the National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

Communication signed by Mr. Fred M. Magbanua, Jr. 
and the other officers of the Christian Leaders Alliance 
of the Philippines, Valenzuela, Metro Manila, endorsing 
the position paper on “Religious Instruction in Public 
Schools,” prepared by Dr. Isabelo F. Magalit, Chairman, 

Konsiyensiya ng Febrero Siete (KONFES) Con-Com 
Committee on Religious Instructions in Public Schools. 

(Communication No. 624 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

Communication signed by former Congressman Miguel 
Cuenco, containing a plea to the Committee on Human 
Resources and the Constitutional Commission of 1986 
to consider favorably Proposed Resolution No. 451. 

(Communication No. 625 - Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Human Resources. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Regalado be 
recognized for a parliamentary inquiry. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

When I came this morning, I found on my desk a 
joint Committee Report No. 39, submitted by the Com- 
mittee on Social Justice and the Committee on Human 
Resources, which appears to bear the signatures of 21 
Commissioners. I wish to state right at the outset that I 
am in favor basically of the provisions therein but my 


inquiry is as to the procedure, because under Rule II 
of our Rules, we have specified what are the organic 
committees and what are the matters that fall within 
their primary or secondary jurisdiction. 

Here I have noticed that the matter of family rights— 
number one is the right of the parents to educate their 
children — was incorporated in the proposed article. 
And I suppose that is the justification for putting it 
under the sponsorship of the Committee on Human Re- 
sources. And then, the matter of the right of the family 
to a decent family living wage is I think the reason why 
it is supposed to be sponsored by the Committee on 
Social Justice. But my basic question is whether this 
procedure is authorized because under Rule II, it is 
specifically provided under Section 8 that; 

Whenever a proposal covers subject matters falling with- 
in the jurisdiction of more than one committee, said pro- 
posal ^all be referred to the committee within whose 
jurisdiction the principal subject matter falls. The commit- 
tee which acquired original jurisdiction over any proposal 
shall be mainly responsible to submit a report to the Com- 
mission incorporating therein the appropriate recommenda- 
tions of the other committee which has jurisdiction over 
the same proposal. 

I find here that this is jointly sponsored by two 
committees. And even as a matter of pragmatic research 
— we have our resource materials here — we have diffi- 
culty finding out sometimes what were the antecedents. 
Did it come from the former Declaration of Principles? 
Did it come from the former Article on General Provi- 
sions? Did it come from the Article on Social Justice? 
But here we have a situation where a new article is now 
sponsored by two committees. And that was why 
yesterday I was asking how this could come about when 
there is no such mention in the Rules. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will suspend the session 
for a few minutes in order to afford the Chair an oppor- 
tunity to confer with the respective chairmen concerned. 

It was 9:51 am. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:08 a.m., the session was resumed. 

the PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. In connection with my parlia- 
mentary inquiry and it appearing that there will be a 
need for some discussions and conference between the 
chairmen of the two committees involved, I move that 


634 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1 986 


the matter be deferred until the next session and until 
they will have the opportunity to confer on the proper 
jurisdiction over the proposed article. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 496 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony) 
Continuation 


PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
continue the consideration of Proposed Resolution 
No. 496 on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

May we request the honorable chairman and members 
of the committee to please occupy the front table now 
so that we may continue the consideration of the pro- 
posed Article on National Economy and Patrimony. We 
are in the process of settling amendments to the com- 
mittee report. I believe we are through with Section 1 1 

MR. R./^A Madam President, Commissioner 
Rosario Braid should be recognized. She was the one 
who had the last amendment yesterday. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, my 
amendment consists of a new provision. 

THE PRESIDENT. What particular section? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. After Section 1 1 . It will be 
between Sections 1 1 and 12. 

I have conferred with the chairman who is basically 

m agreement with the concept, and my amendment by 

“RECOGNIZING THAT DE- 

^RE INSTRUMENTS 

MFNT ^ ECONOMIC DEVELOP- 

FICE\mCH^^«H^^ CREATE AN OF- 

CROWTH^AMn^i^A^A^x CHARGE OF THE 

G OWTH AND EXPANSION OF COOPERATIVES.” 

thiramen^ment- nam coauthors of 

this an^ndment, namely. Commissioners Nolledo Nati- 

vidad. Tan Villacorta, Quesada, Sarmiento Foz Su^ez 
Tingson, Gascon, Azcuna DaviHp p- ’ 

Alonfo. Nieva and Tadeo 

May I be allowed to explain my proposal? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It is the creation of an office 
which shall take charge of the growth and expansion of 
cooperatives. 

As we know, during the past years, the cooperatives 
scheme had been implemented with very little success 
by the Bureau of Cooperatives under the Ministry of 
Agriculture. But we are aware that several types of 
cooperatives have come up in various sectors as well as 
in industry. In addition to the usual credit, marketing, 
consumers, producers, workers and service cooperatives, 
we now have fishery, electric, transport, media, and 
other emerging economic structures, as nucleus states. 
In short. Madam President, there is a felt need among 
many sectors, particularly in the private sector, that we 
do not have to conform with the usual structure that is 
mandated by the government now in terms of the pure 
type of cooperatives. In fact, we could have a combina- 
tion and blend of cooperative principles in existing 
corporations. The problem, therefore, is found in the 
present structure. 

According to the recommendations of the National 
Cooperatives Congress, a private multisectoral organiza- 
tion, during its last congress, cooperatives constitute a 
potential and practical vehicle for harnessing people 
power into a tangible and positive form for economic 
recovery and development. Cooperatives also constitute 
a long-range system for the social and economic amelio- 
ration of the masses and the democratization of the 
economy, with a more equitable distribution of eco- 
nomic wealth through better income for producers and 
greater buying power for the consumers. 

We have of late been talking about concepts on 
decentralization and people’s participation. Today, 
cooperatives are perhaps the most important mechanism 
for promoting the participation of people and for 
working towards self-management of groups. 

In the past, cooperatives have suffered constraints 
such as negative image due to failures of past programs, 
such as the FACOMA and the Samahang Nayon, and the 
lack of public projection of successful cooperative 
ventures, such as those in the credit and producers 
sectors. Likewise, the lack of consistency in the promo- 
tion of cooperatives, the lack of orientation, experience, 
resources and manpower, the lack of appropriate legal 
mandate and a coordinating entity that could unify all 
cooperative efforts in both public and private sectors 
have hampered the growth of cooperatives in a country 
where bayanihan is a prevailing value. Perhaps, Congress 
could create a multisectoral office and can mandate 
where it could be situated and where it could function. 
My proposal, however, is that it be placed above a 
bureau level, with the following functions: it should 
encourage the growth of independent and voluntary 
cooperatives; it would assist in the registration and 
regulation of cooperatives, the formulation of coop- 
erative development programs such as in the area of 
cooperative education and training, the coordination 
and implementation of such development programs; and 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


635 


to provide incentives and other forms of assistance to 
cooperatives. It could also prepare a cooperative code. 
The code should take into consideration the peculiari- 
ties of each type of cooperatives. As I said, it could be 
a blend of structures that could fit the prevailing 
Filipino values. I think the problem is that in the past, 
cooperatives were transferred with no adaptation. They 
were transferred from areas where they have been 
successful hke Japan and Taiwan, but the conditions 
there are very different from the Philippines. This 
authority or office should work also towards the adapta- 
tion of cooperatives into the present sociocultural 
milieu. 

So, I submit that we now have an infrastructure 
which is quite strong but which has to be strengthened. 
There are at present 23,000 cooperatives with 5 million 
members. There are 20,000 Samahang Nayon which 
could be restructured and strengthened. And there 
are 3,000 credit, consumers, producers and service 
cooperatives. 

With this explanation, I hope the committee would 
consider this provision which is signed by 18 other 
fellow Commissioners. 

Thank you. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We would hke to introduce some 
minor amendments to the amendment. Let me read 
the committee’s suggestion: “RECOGNIZING THAT 
DEMOCRATIC COOPERATIVES ARE INSTRU- 
MENTS FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AND ECONOMIC 
DEVELOPMENT, THE CONGRESS SHALL CREATE 
AN AGENCY WHICH WILL PROMOTE THE VIABI- 
LITY AND GROWTH OF COOPERATIVES.” I think it 
is very important to emphasize what the proponent 
already said that the cooperative movement should be 
left very much to individuals and groups in the private 
sector and what the State should do is to promote an 
atmosphere conducive to the growth of cooperatives. So 
that we think “PROMOTE” would be clearer than 
“TAKE CHARGE” because “TAKE CHARGE” might 
repeat the problems that were already enumerated. The 
government may keep thinking that it is the one that 
should take the lead in cooperative development. 

f 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The amendment is accepta- 
ble. 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, we accept this amendment, as 
amended, by the committee. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment 
accepted without any change, Mr. Chairman? 

MR. VILLEGAS. With the change that I indicated. 
Madam President. So, I will read the new text. 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment reads: “RECOG- 
NIZING THAT DEMOCRATIC COOPERATIVES ARE 
INSTRUMENTS FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AND ECO- 
NOMIC DEVELOPMENT, THE CONGRESS SHALL 
CREATE AN AGENCY WHICH SHALL PROMOTE 
THE VIABILITY AND GROWTH OF COOPERA- 
TIVES.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. May I offer an amendment to 
that. Can we not delete the first part which says: 
“RECOGNIZING THAT DEMOCRATIC COOP- 
ERATIVES ARE INSTRUMENTS FOR SOCIAL 
JUSTICE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT” and 
simply start from “CONGRESS SHALL CREATE AN 
AGENCY . . .” considering that this is already part of 
the explanation of the proponent? I think in constitu- 
tion-making we do not place these preparatory state- 
ments in sections and articles. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I accept; I just wanted to 
emphasize the importance. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it is accepted; anyway it 
is in the record. So the text shall be: “CONGRESS 
SHALL CREATE AN AGENCY WHICH SHALL 
PROMOTE THE VIABILITY AND GROWTH OF 
COOPERATIVES.” 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will eliminate “RECOGNIZ- 
ING”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA Do we have to create an agency? 
That might add to further bureaucracy. Why not just 
say “CONGRESS SHALL PROMOTE. . .” instead of 
mandating the creation of another agency? 

the PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Rosario 
Braid say? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. The various representatives 
of the cooperative sectors strongly feel that we should 
have an agency that should coordinate all the efforts of 
many agencies that are almost running helter-skelter. 
There is no coordination, and unless we have a body or 
an agency that shall handle this kind of coordination, I 
am afraid we will perpetuate the status quo where 


636 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


ccxjperatives will be left to tend for themselves without 
any legal mandate. So this is the spirit of this proposal. 


MR. PADILLA. Why not leave it to Congress whether 
it be necessary to create an additional agency? As the 
rephrasing goes, it mandates Congress to create another 
agency; and in my opinion, government should be as 
simple or as simplified as possible with less government 
bureaus, offices and agencies because sometimes there 
are so many agencies that are overlapping in their func- 
tions and even some people are perplexed to find which 
of the different government offices is the proper place 
or agency to go to. I have no objection to promoting 
and encouraging the cooperative movement. But should 
we mandate the Congress to create another agency? 
That is my inquiry. Madam President. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, if we do 
not explicitly state this, I am afraid we will go back to 
the situation where it will be the Bureau of Cooperatives 
under the Mimstry of Agriculture that will handle the 
registration of all cooperatives. It is a very limited struc- 
ture and this has hampered feven the registration of 
private cooperatives which felt that the requirements 
are too rigid. 


What I am saying is that all cooperatives have to be 
registered and they have to be registered under an 
agency that handles cooperatives and not the Securities 
^d Exch^ge Commission. ITiis agency that will be 

wilhhf ^ not 

aaencv whirh Agriculture but as a separate 

done^in other efforts that are 

and Industrv^^^^”®l°^ Agrarian Reform and Trade 
that are now worv^ many other private initiatives 
Madam President maintain, 

Charter, I am afraid thlft'^® ^ 

erative movement will h* ^®P^fsentatives of the coop- 
of Comu^ss t^nH * knocking at the halls 

attend to thf>ir heard. We hope that we could 

of the land P^^Wems through the fundamental law 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, 
reco^^ed^^^*^^^^' Commissioner Maambong is 


committe^^iv^^^’ ^ address a query to the 
aiTv soult t amendment? This 

office of it be under the 

u VILLEGAS. It would be under the Office of 
the President, as su^ested in the Explanatory Note and 
very much function„g u^e ,he National Economic and 
Development Authonty but charged with the develop- 
ment of cooperatives in all phases of economic Ufe We 
agree with the observations of Commissioner Rosario 


Braid that cooperative development is so vital to the 
economic development of the Philippines. As we know, 
cooperatives have failed in the past because of a lack 
really of an atmosphere conducive to their growth. And 
I think this is a very welcome recommendation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Would it be a regular line agency, 
Madam President? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it would be. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is this agency sought to be 
created the same as the agency which is now in opera- 
tion in our government? 

Let me explain. These cooperatives have been in 
existence way back in the early 1900s. I have here the 
Cooperative Marketing Law, Act No. 3425, as amended 
by Act No. 3872, RA 702, starting way back in 1927, 
and finally, we have P.D. No. 175 which was pro- 
mulgated on April 14, 1973. So, this concept of coop- 
eratives is alive and well in this country for a very long 
time. As a matter of fact, mechanisms for the creation 
of cooperatives have been published in several volumes 
of books. I was wondering if the concept in this 
Cooperative Law, which is now in existence under P.D. 
No. 175, as I said, promulgated on April 14, 1973, is 
the same concept that we are envisioning in the present 
formulation of this Constitution. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I think 
that if such an office is mandated, it would review all 
existing laws. We are aware of the history of coop- 
eratives in the country. It lacked the appropriate man- 
date which would locate it beyond the bureau structure 
in the government; the climate was not conducive to me 
growth of cooperatives. They became tools for politi- 
cians. As we know, the Samahang Nayon was used for 
that, and it never had enough leverage to really work 
towards the goals of cooperative development. Likewise, 
it hampered the growth of the cooperatives in the 
private sector which have refused to register with the 
Bureau of Cooperatives because the rules are so 
stringent and Umiting. And because of this, we hope to 
really review all the cooperative laws and make them 
more responsive to present needs, like the need for 
greater private sector participation and to strengthen its 
organizational mechanisms. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I would Uke to 
inform the Commission that I am very much in favor of 
the cooperative movement. In fact, I notice that there 
are cooperatives sprouting all over the Philippines. And I 
think it is good for our country. We have electric 
cooperatives serving us very well in the Province of 
Cebu. And I am very happy that the Commissioner is 
saying now that she will review these decrees and other 
laws on cooperatives that I have mentioned, and we will 
leave it at that. I understand the situation very well. 

Thank you for the elucidation. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


637 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. I ask, Madam President, that Commis- 
sioner Quesada be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 

MS. QUESADA. May I introduce an amendment to 
the accepted formulation by the committee? It will 
read: “CONGRESS SHALL CREATE AN AGENCY 

WHICH SHALL PROMOTE THE VIABILITY AND 
GROWTH OF COOPERATIVES WHICH SERVE AS 
INSTRUMENTS FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE AND ECO- 
NOMIC DEVELOPMENT.” I feel that this particular 
phrase need to be included because this is part of an 
article which should be recognized as such, that it is part 
of this consideration of the economic development and 
social justice. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I will be 
very happy to have the phrases back agahi. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it acceptable? How about the 
committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. So, it is just a transposition. 

MS. QUESADA. Yes, transposing the original pre- 
fatory statement which was eliminated by Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I have no 
objection to the transposition suggested by Commis- 
sioner Quesada. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The committee accepts it. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted. 

MS. QUESADA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Colayco wants to be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. One clarificatory question for 
Commissioner Rosario Braid. What is the principal 
purpose that is intended to be accomplished by this new 
office? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. This new office will coor- 
dinate past efforts, streamline existing procedures 


which are really very Limited, provide more training in 
professional development to cooperators and ensure 
that the private sector particularly becomes more 
actively involved, because the private sector, as a matter 
of fact, has been left out in many of the cooperative 
development efforts of the government. 

MR. COLAYCO. But did I not hear the Commis- 
sioner say that there are about 25,000 cooperatives now 
existing? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, there are 25,000. 

MR. COLAYCO. And these are from the private 
sector? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No. Of the 23,000 coop- 
eratives, 20,000 are Samaliang Nayon, which are 
government cooperatives; only 3,000 are credit or 
producer or service cooperatives, which are both public 
and private. Perhaps, we do not have the accurate 
figures but I would expect that there are not more than 
1,000 privately led or privately initiated cooperatives. 

MR. COLAYCO. This progress and increase in the 
number of cooperatives took place under the old and 
existing laws. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. COLAYCO. I thank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rodrigo would like to be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just a question or two. Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid mentioned the Bureau of 
Cooperatives. This is existing now. In case Congress 
creates this new agency, will the Bureau of Cooperatives 
continue to coexist with this agency or do we expect 
Congress to aboli^the Bureau of Cooperatives? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I expect it would be phased 
out. This agency would take over most of its existing 
responsibilities. In other words, it would be an ex- 
panded Bureau of Cooperatives which would not fall 
within the present Ministry of Agriculture structure. 

MR. RODRIGO. And, of course, we expect that the 
customary procedure will be followed, whereby the 
personnel of the Bureau of Cooperatives, as much as 
possible, will be absorbed in the new agency. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. It may be so; yes. 


638 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


MR. RODRIGO. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 


MR. PADILLA. My objection is regarding the 
creation of an additional agency. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. May I direct one or two questions 
to the distinguished proponent? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Certainly. 

MR. GUINGONA. When the proponent refers to the 
establishment of this agency to promote the growth and 
viability of cooperatives, is she also thinking of the par- 
ticipation of this agency in the encouragement of the 
establishment of cooperatives? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. Actually, that will be 
one of its most important functions. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular new section, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( One 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and 1 against; the 
proposed new section is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, on the same Section 
11,1 ask that Commissioner Garcia be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Do we go back to Section 11? 
This was already approved yesterday. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think it is a new section.. 


MR. GUINGONA. And would this involve participa- 
tion in assisting the cooperatives that will be established 
in obtaining financial assistance in the form of loans and 
other support? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready now to vote on this 
proposed new section? 


Pr^dem?^^^^^^' ^ section, Mad£ 

unlumbw^-f^^^^^' Section 12 or s 


R- VILLEGAS. Still unnumbered. Madam President. 

the president. Please proceed. 


SHAL/rifrff^^’ section reads; “CONGRI 

MOTE^THtf^^A agency which SHALL PI 

ERATIVE^ cftiWTH OF CO< 

MENT<j shall serve as INSTl 

deveLpSLt^’^*^^ justice and ECONO^ 


particular ^propoSd^sectio^^^ objection to 
chairman and accepted by the c'^ommittee? 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, Madam President. 


the PRESIDENT, 
nized. 


Commissioner Padilla is recog- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you. Madam President. 


Yesterday there were two proposals that I made: the 
first regarding foreign loan policy, and the second re- 
garding foreign trade poUcy. I discussed the proposals 
with the committee and they proposed a rewording of 
the foreign loan and also the foreign trade formulations. 
And I would also like to invite the other Members of the 
Commission, in case they have other suggestions regard- 
ing the two very important and critical areas of the 
national economy. 


I would like to read the original proposal made 
esterday and the suggestion which was made by the 
ommittee, in case others might wish to participate m 
he discussion of this particular amendment: FC^ 

^IGN LOANS SHALL BE CONTRACTED ONLY TO 

Finance VITAL undertakings in line with 

[HE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM. A 
:EILING ON FOREIGN BORROWING SHALL BE 
HXED BY CONGRESS, AND FOREIGN LOANS OF 
fHE PRIVATE SECTOR SHALL BE SUBJECT TO 
5TATE REGULATION. CEILING ON INTEREST 
VND PRINCIPAL PAYMENTS AS A PERCENTAGE 
DF EXPORT SHALL BE IMPLEMENTED AND IN- 
FORMATION AS TO THE TERMS AND CONDI- 
nONS OF FOREIGN LOANS OBTAINED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT SHALL BE MADE AVAILABLE TO 

rue PTim ir ” 


The committee came back with a proposal regarding 
this same area on foreign loans which reads as follows: 

“FOREIGN LOANS MAY ONLY BE INCURRED IN 

accordance with law and the regula- 
tions OF THE MONETARY AUTHORITY. IN- 
FORMATION ON FOREIGN LOANS OBTAINED OR 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


639 


GUARANTEED BY THE GOVERNMENT SHALL BE 
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.” 

It can be observed that the committee’s proposal 
takes into account two things: the regulation of foreign 
loans and public information — that the information 
regarding foreign loans be made public. 

I will accept this proposal with the understanding 
that the section would treat as serious matters the 
nation’s ability to pay and the fact that foreign borrow- 
ings are matters of interest to the majority, many of 
whom have to shoulder the actual payment. And, there- 
fore, ceilings are being imposed on interest and principal 
payments so that the priority will be placed on eco- 
nomic development, unlike economies in the Third 
World which very often have to sacrifice the benefits, 
the goods, the productive growth of the economy for 
the sake of repayment and debt servicing. 

So, that is the position I am taking regarding this 
particular amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree completely with the Com- 
missioner’s sentiment on this and, as a matter of fact, 
the present government is already implementing this 
kind of strategy and approach, as he well knows. We are 
only trying to say here that Congress will enact — they 
alr eady have — a Foreign Borrowings Act, and put all 
the conditions under which loans may be incurred. We 
also added regulations of the monetary authority 
because this is the authority that imposes the economic 
criteria, the terms and conditions, and so on, on the 
loans. 

With respect to linking it to the capacity to pay, that 
is the very essence of the regulations and the law on 
foreign borrowings, and we just wanted to say that there 
are many alternatives to implement that. We do not 
want to preempt Congress or the monetary authority 
on these alternatives, but we agree with the principles 
and we make it of record. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I simply would like to state this: The reason I believe 
this is important as a constitutional provision on the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony is that this 
must be the guideline for all governments to come. This 
government we will not always have with us, so that no 
matter which government is here, the principle of a 
country relying on itself more than on outside sources 
should be, I think, a very basic guideline for economic 
policy. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments on 
this? 

So, is the proposed formulation by the committee 
acceptable to Commissioner Garcia? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, Madam President, I would like to 
invite the other Members of the Commission, if they 
have any other ideas, to strengthen this particular part. 


THE PRESIDENT. In fact, the formulation of the 
committee already covers two principal things: regula- 
tion by the State and public information. 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly, that is the intent of the 
original proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I just want an enlightenment 
from the committee. We have a Philippine Foreign 
Loan Guarantee Corporation created under P.D. No. 550, 
dated September 11, 1974. Will the committee en- 
lighten me on the role of this Philippine Foreign Loan 
Guarantee Corporation because I am in the dark as to its 
role in the scheme of foreign loans? 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. It has quite a wide-ranging function. 
For example, it guarantees the performance of Philip- 
pine contractors abroad ; it guarantees compliance with 
international agreements entered into by private enter- 
prises. I understand that the functions and the scope of 
the PHILGUARANTEE are now being reviewed in this 
context because, as we well know, they were misused. 
The functions were misused and it guaranteed a lot of 
enterprises and a lot of contracts that were really crony 
contracts. Right now that institution is not operational 
in terms of additional or new guarantees because the 
entire institution is under review. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, this corporation 
will be affected in the totality of the provision that we 
are now formulating on foreign loans? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. There are no more proponents. Madam 
President. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I ask for some clarification 
from the committee on the matter of foreign loans be- 
cause in the Article on the Executive we also have a pro- 
vision regarding the power of the President to contract 
foreign loans or to guarantee foreign loans, also with the 
prior concurrence of the Monetary Board. That is 
Section 20. I am making this inquiry not only in behalf 


640 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1 986 . 


of myself but of some Commissioners who would like 
to find out the interdependence or the complementary 
application of this proposed section now under dis- 
cussion because Section 20, under the Article on the 
Executive, says: 

The President may contract or guarantee foreign loans 
on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with the prior 
concurrence of the Monetary Board and subject to such 
limitations as may be provided by law. 

We understand that it may be a loan of the govern- 
ment itself for its use or a loan by a private borrower 
but with the guaranty of the government. In both cases, 
the concurrence of the Monetary Board is required 
subject, of course, to the quarterly reportorial duties 
under said section to Congress. 

May we know what is the contemplation on foreign 
loans, that these can be incurred in accordance with law 
and the regulations of the monetary authority? 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the section oi 
the executive department refers to loans incurred oi 
^aranteed by the President of the Philippines, whethei 
tor pubhc or private purposes. The first sentence of thif 
section refers to all loans, whether or not they are in 
President or by private companies. Ac 
tually this process is already in place right now. Private 

f a govemmeni 

LcTTh. they cannot borroi. 

hat ^ IS reached. And, secondly, they still 

term« Central Bank in order to align the 

ofThe Snt'rdB^r 


tion in thp ^ private corpora- 

tion or ^^tliPPines with no governmental interven- 
its own^^f whatsoever, obtaining a foreign loan on 
still hciv ®rtakings and its own collaterals, does i1 
e o obtain the approval of the Monetary Board? 

MR. MONSOp. Yes, Madam President, because ever 
a pnvate borrowing imposes foreign exchange burdens 
rpoiii ^s a whole. And, therefore, the preseni 

for an ^‘^Irides the approval of the Monetary Board 
t»ovpmr.?^”f ~ foreign loans — whether incurred by th« 
situation^K private sector. That is the presem 

the countr^^^^^Vv ^ exchange budget tha 

a burden ^e with and any foreign loan impose; 

a burden on that foreign exchange budget. 

thif ta fhPcof,Suee onlh '"f'” 

Governor «5in«c^ u- ® Executive with Deputj 

of the Monetary"i7Md?hr*?“‘‘‘’®“‘®"°"‘‘“ 
requirements to Co„^esratfu:rr^;’rfS^C 
which were contracted by the President for govern 
mental guaranty Md which would result In an tocreas. 
m the foreign debt ceilmg of the Philippine government 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. But we were not made to under- 
stand that it applies even to a purely private transaction 
wherein the government has no exposure or liability 
whatsoever. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. We have to 
distinguish between the first and the second sentence 
of the proposed article. 

Under the first sentence, all foreign loans can only 
be incurred in accordance with law and regulated by the 
monetary authority. This applies to both public and 
private loans, guaranteed or not guaranteed by the 
government. 

The second sentence on information applies to loans 
obtained or guaranteed by the government which is in 
alignment with Section 20 of the Executive Department. 

The reason we make this distinction is, in the case of 
private loans other than the general statistics on that, it 
might be unfair for the general public to have a full 
disclosure on what the Monetary Board requires of them 
because this could involve competitiveness of some 
companies. 

MR. REGALADO. Under Section 20 of the Article 
on the Executive, there is a further requirement that the 
Monetary Board shall submit to the Congress a complete 
quarterly report of its decisions on applications for 
loans to be contracted or guaranteed by the government 
or government-owned and controlled corporation. 

Does the reportorial requirement to Congress ^so 
apply with respect to purely private borrowings bu 
which, although approved by the Monetary Boar , 
are not guaranteed by government or govemmen 
owned or controlled corporations? 

MR MONSOD. The Monetary Board goes through all 
the loans. 

We also added there, if the Commissioner will notice, 
the phrase “in accordance with law” because the da a 
and the information to be made available should be con 
sistent also with the principle of confidentiality on 
private information. But right now the statistics on our 
foreign debt are already being made public — how muc 
we owe; how much is for commercial banks or for inter- 
national organizations. They are classified according to 
function, source, terms and so on. These are already 
made available right now. And these include private 
debt. 

MR. REGALADO. Under the Foreign Borrowings 
Act? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. I am not aware that the reporto- 
rial requirements to Congress were included in the 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


641 


Foreign Borrowings Act. Tliat was a proposed bill which 
was overtaken by the abolition of the Batasan. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR REGALADO. And which is now incorporated in 
Section 20 of the Article on the Executive. 

MR. MONSOD. Tliat is riglit, but this is bemg under- 
taken now by the Central Bank and the Philippine 
government and we are constitutionalizing the access to 
information. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. May I ask two or three questions for 
my own information? Are foreign laws negotiated on\ 
the initiative of the President in consonance with tlie 
recommendation of, say, NEDA and also Congress as it 
takes into consideration the comprehensive and syn- 
chronized national economy and the needs of the 
country? Is this how it should be done? 

MR MONSOD. With respect to the loans obtained 
or guaranteed by the government, yes, Madam Pres- 
ident. But with respect to private loans, they are nego- 
tiated by private companies. They are the ones who 
study their viability, and then bring these to the Central 
Bank for approval and harmonization with the rules and 
regulations of the Central Bank. 

MR. TINGSON. I am referring to the big, big public 
debt or loans that we do get. These are initiated by the 
President primarily? 

MR MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

The second sentence reads: “INFORMATION ON 
FOREIGN LOANS OBTAINED OR GUARANTEED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT SHALL BE AVAILABLE TO 
THE PUBLIC.” Does this mean that previous to this the 
statistics were not made available to the public at all, 
the $26-billion debt that we have, for instance? Was that 
all mysteriously negotiated? Is that what this means? 

MR MONSOD. Unfortunately, yes. Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Quesada is recog- 
nized. 


MS. QUESADA. I would Like to bring to the atten- 
tion of the Commissioner that during the discussion on 
the Article on the Executive, we put into tlie record 
that Congress would conduct public hearings whenever 
the Monetary Board goes into such transactions. I re- 
member it was Commissioner Natividad who cited the 
need for public hearing which the Congress should call 
before such foreign loans are entered into by the govern- 
ment. So, this information would be obtained when 
such public hearings are conducted by Congress. I just 
want to put that on record while we are discussing 
foreign loans. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA It is time to have a formal approval of 
this unnumbered section regarding foreign loans. May I 
ask that we submit it to a vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we request Commissioner 
Garcia to read the new formula or new section? 

MR. GARCIA. The proposed section wBl read: 
“FOREIGN LOANS MAY ONLY BE INCURRED IN 
ACCORDANCE WITH LAW AND THE REGULA- 
TIONS OF THE MONETARY AUTHORITY. INFOR- 
MATION ON FOREIGN LOANS OBTAINED OR 
GUARANTEED BY THE GOVERNMENT SHALL BE 
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
new section which has been accepted by the committee, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 33 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed new section is approved. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, yesterday, if the 
Chair recalls, there was a discussion also on trade 
policy. I would Like to revise the proposal I made 
regarding trade policy. And there are two other separate 
sections following the trade policy proposal which I 
have distributed to the body. So, if I may, I would like 
to read the paragraph. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. It wm read: “THE STATE SHALL 
ADOPT A TRADE POLICY BASED ON MUTUALLY 
BENEFICIAL EXCHANGE OF GOODS AND SER- 
VICES. TOWARDS THIS END, THE STATE SHALL 


642 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


ENDEAVOR AT ALL TIMES TO REALIZE FAVOR- 
ABLE TERMS OF TRADE BY MINIMIZING OVER- 
RELIANCE ON THE EXPORT OF RAW MATERIALS 
AND ON THE IMPORT OF UNWANTED SURPLUS 
PRODUCTION AND INAPPROPRIATE TECHNO- 
LOGIES.” 

This is the first section of this proposal. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will this be another section? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. A proposed section. 


WELFARE AND UTILIZES ALL FORMS AND AR- 
RANGEMENTS OF EXCHANGE ON THE BASIS OF 
EQUALITY AND RECIPROCITY.” 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. For our information, may we request 
the committee to clarify us on the intention of the word 
“FORMS” in the phrase “ALL FORMS AND AR- 
RANGEMENTS OF EXCHANGE.” 


MR GARCIA. I would like to read additional 
sections regarding the same thing. I understand there are 
others who have made proposals which we must try to 
collate. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. We just want to say that the com- 
mittee has a proposed amendment, which does not gc 
into details of economic policy, that incorporates the 
Commissioner Garcia. Our proposal is: “THE 
Sn SHALL PROMOTE A TRADE POLICY THAT 
SERVES THE GENERAL WELFARE, IS OPEN TO 
fxi COUNTRIES ON THE BASIS OF EQUALITY 

twn UTILIZES ALL FORMS 

AND ARRANGEMENTS OF EXCHANGE.” 

Madam President, we would like to request a two- 

mmute recess so that we can discuss and reconcile these 
proposals. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 
It was 10:55 a.tn. 


MR MONSOD. Here are some examples of “FORMS 
AND ARRANGEMENTS OF EXCHANGE.” aher 
than normal trade would be countertrade, common 
market arrangements and multicountry arrangements. 
In some cases, some countries which may be producing 
the same product get together to try to improve their 
terms of trade. 

MS. AQUINO. So these are alternative modalities of 
trade that we can adopt according to this formula. 

MR MONSOD. Yes. Those options would be avail- 
able both to the executive department of the govern- 
ment and to the legislature. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, how about this 
concept of general welfare? Will this contemplate like- 
wise the possibility of a policy that will prohibit the use 
of the Philippine market as a dumping ground or 
unwanted surplus production or also disallow obso e e, 
inappropriate and backward technology? Is that con 
templated? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, and that is also covered by 
Section 1 . 


resumption of session 

At 11:21 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

M^R. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the commit- 
tee be recognized. 

MR VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod will read the 
new section on trade policy that the committee has 
accepted. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, I just want to say 
that it is proper to have a sentence or two on trade 
policy because we are silent about this matter. So we 
propose to say: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE A 
TRADE POLICY THAT SERVES THE GENERAL 


MS. AQUINO. And the “GENERAL WELFARE”? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, that would constitute unfair 
competition and unfair trade practice. 

MS. AQUINO. Is it possible likewise to interpret 
“GENERAL WELFARE” as a policy of minimizing 
over-reliance on the export of raw materials? 

MR. MONSOD. We think that what we should really 
promote is self-reliance. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. May I also add that “GENERAL 
WELFARE” includes national health, national safety 
and national security. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


643 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is 
recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Will the committee please explain 
the contemplation on the use of “EQUALITY AND 
RECIPROCITY”? I ask that because “RECIPROCITY” 
could mean nothing more than exchange, unfair or fair, 
and other forms. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we have to read 
“EQUALITY AND RECIPROCITY” together. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Could we just say “MUTUAL 
BENEFIT” to take care of the two? 

MR. MONSOD. Actually, when we say “MUTUAL 
BENEFIT,” we have to have another subject. And here 
we are talking about “TRADE POLICY,” not trade 
between nations. 

MR. BENNAGEN. But we will be trading with other 
nations and when we do that, the basis would be in 
terms of mutual benefit. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it means the same, 
and we prefer “EQUALITY AND RECIPROCITY.” 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we call for a 
vote now? 

MS. QUESADA. Madam President, may we still be 
clarified on some of the terms used here, because I feel 
that we have to explain these to people, and unless all 
of us are clear on what are the meanings behind words, 
then we might still be confused when we try to explain 
these to others. Earlier I learned that the word “SELF 
RELIANCE” was included as part of the basis of 
arrangements of trade transactions. What happened to 
the word “SELF-RELIANCE”? 

MR. MONSOD. It is an inappropriate term when 
talking about trade. There is no such thing as a “self- 
reliant” trade. Conceptually, Madam President, there is 
no such thing as a “self-reliant” trade. When we are 
trading, it is precisely because we need to exchange 
goods. 

MS. QUESADA. But why is there a big objection to 
the term “mutually beneficial trade relationship”? 

MR. MONSOD. There is no big objection, Madam 
President. All we are saying is that they mean the same 
thing, and the committee prefers the present wording. 

MR. VILLEGAS. And the use of the term is ungram- 
matical if we are referring to all countries of the world. 

MS. QUESADA. But is it not an objective in our 
trade policy that will benefit both parties? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Which is expressed by “EQUAL- 
ITY” and “RECIPROCITY.” 

MS. QUESADA. Is there going to be equality be- 
tween unequals? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There is always equality when it 
comes to our defending precisely our terms of trade 
against others. 

MR. MONSOD. Tliat is also the same idea in “mutual 
benefits,” is it not? 

MS. QUESADA. At least both parties are benefited 
by this kind of trade transactions. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the phrase “GENERAL 
WELFARE” takes care of that. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you, Madam President. 

Fellow Commissioners, essentially I am only a lawyer; 

I am not an economist, and I appreciate the efforts of 
the committee in formulating economic principles for 
the Commission. I just would like to be comfortable 
about this particular section. Are we saying that the 
formulation of these trade policy principles for the 
Philippines is beneficial to the Filipinos? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, that is the meaning of “GENER- 
AL WELFARE.” It serves the general welfare — whether 
one is a producer, a consumer, a fanner or an indus- 
trialist. That is the meaning of “GENERAL WEL- 
FARE.” 

MR. SUAREZ. In other words, we are trying to 
protect both the domestic industries and also the 
domestic consumers? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you very much. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I would like to address one 
question to the committee. Like Commissioner Suarez, 
I am not an economist but a lawyer, so I would like to 
be clarified on certain economic terms. Commissioner 
Monsod said that the phrase “THAT SERVES THE 
GENERAL WELFARE” would cover protection of 


644 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


Filipino enterprises against unfair foreign competition. 
Am I correct? 

MR. MONSOD. I said “unfair foreign competition 
and unfair trade practices,” which is in Section 1 . 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair rules that what we will 
submit to a vote is whether to defer or not because 
there is a motion to defer and also a motion to proceed 
to a vote. 


MR. SARMIENTO. So, this phrase covers Section 1 

( 2 ). 

MR. MONSOD. It is consistent with Section 1 . 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, with the kind 
indulgence of my fellow Commissioners, mine will be an 
unpopular move. I would like to request a deferment 
of our voting on this section. There are terms which to 
me need further ^clarification. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the committee 
would like to request that we take a vote on this section 
now. 


MR. GARCIA. Madam President, before we take i 
vote may I further clarify this phrase which I woulc 

STATE SHALL PRO 
POLICY THAT SERVES THI 

ENTERPmsF^^^AM^.^^’ PR^^TECTS DOMESTIC 

utilizes ALL FORMS ANE 

HP exchange ON THE BASH 

OF EQUALITY AND RECIPROCITY”? 


As many as are in favor of deferring action on this 
proposed section on trade policy, please raise their 
hand. ( Few Members raised their hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 13 votes in favor and 21 against; the 
motion to defer action is lost. 

Let us proceed to vote on these few sections, and 
may we request Commissioner Villegas to read the com- 
mittee amendment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE 
A TRADE POLICY THAT SERVES THE GENERAL 
WELFARE AND UTILIZES ALL FORMS AND AR- 
RANGEMENTS OF EXCHANGE ON THE BASIS OF 
EQUALITY AND RECIPROCITY.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, before we vote, 
may I speak against this amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


re^fs Madam President, the committ 

regrets it cannot accept the amendment because it 
already covered by Section 1 . 

ad^d President, the phrase that w 

anv wav hf ° ®^P^cate that foreign trade must not, 
zation ' ' diminish our efforts at industria 


wh^^ monsod That is already covered in Section 
pntpm ^^at the State shall protect Filipir 

nraplf/"'®" Competition and trac 

in h promote industries that are competitr 

m both domestic and foreign markets. 

Madam President, could we, therefoi 
Sarmiento^^^^ ^ would like to join Commission 

on^ak'inll^^n^^^^i; President, we would insi 

on takmg a vote nght now. 

to reristeya r^m ^ President, I also would lil 

to register a request that we defer. This is a very impc 

e\1o“ we"" that^ there a?eTh 


MR. MONSOD. May we have 
Madam President? 


a ruling from the Chair, 


MR. SARMIENTO. To me, this amendment further 
strengthens Section 1 (2). In the words of Commissioner 
Monsod, this should be related or connected with 
Section 1 , particularly on protecting Filipino entei^rises 
against unfair foreign competition and the promotion of 
industries that are competitive in domestic and foreign 
markets. 

Madam President, I will not repeat the arguments 
we raised against Section 1 (2). On that basis, I object 
vehemently to this proposed amendment. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. It might assuage the apprehension of 
some of our colleagues if we put on record that the 
polar star in expounding the concept of general welfare 
in foreign trade includes, among others, 1 ) the general 
concept of police power which would contemplate 
national health, ecology, balance and order; the speci- 
fic and definitive economic policy towards the drift 
of self-reliance, as previously mentioned, might present 
a conceptual imbalance if we put it in the formula so let 
it be put on record to be that; 2) minimization of over- 
reliance on export of raw materials; 3) prohibition of 
the use of the Philippine market as a dumping ground 
for unwanted surplus production and inappropriate and 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


645 


obsolete technology; 4) protection of local enter- 
prise. 

MR. MONSOD. And tlrat is against unfair competi- 
tion and trade practice. 

MR. BENGZON. And by agreement, we mean that it 
means all that. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
proposed amendment of the committee which has been 
read by the honorable chairman, please raise their hand. 

( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(Two Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 31 votes in favor, 2 against and 2 
abstentions; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Aquino be recognized to amend Section 12. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. We are in Section 12 of the draft. 

MS. AQUINO. Do we proceed according to the draft? 

I was informed that there is a second paragraph. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes. Let us proceed according to 
the draft so we will not get lost. 

MS. AQUINO. In that case. Madam President, I pro- 
pose to delete from lines 1 and 2 of Section 12 the 
phrase “the common good and the people’s security 
against external aggression” and in its place to use the 
phrase “NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE.” In 
other words, I propose a reversion to the formulation in 
the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask Commissioner 
Aquino to repeat her proposal. 

MS. AQUINO. If the amendment is accepted, the 
section will now read: “The State may, in the interest 
of NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE, estabUsh 
and operate vital industries, and upon payment of just 
compensation, transfer to public ownership utilities and 
other private enterprises to be operated by the govern- 
ment.” 

Madam President, in this section, the right of eminent 
domain is utilized by the Constitution for a purpose and 
objective distinct from those recognized under the 
inherent right of the State to expropriate private pro- 


perty. Now, the phrase “NATIONAL WELFARE OR 
DEFENSE” as it appears in the 1935 and 1973 Consti- 
tutions has already acquired a settled usage, such that it 
has become well-established in law that the phrase 
“NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE” is beyond the 
competence of judicial interpretation. In other words, 
“NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE” is entirely a 
political question left to the wisdom of the executive 
and the legislative for that matter. I am afraid that if we 
change the formulation as it is being proposed by the 
committee now, it might disturb the settled usage and 
might even allow the possibility of judicial interpreta- 
tion of these concepts. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The committee accepts the amend- 
ment, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bennagen is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, just a little 
footnote to that. I was the one who suggested that we 
use “PEOPLE’S SECURITY” instead because during 
the discussion, something came out about the use of 
“NATIONAL SECURITY” and I argued that “NA- 
TIONAL SECURITY” has been so used to refer to the 
security of a few. But with the explanation, I think the 
committee is accepting the use of “NATIONAL DE- 
FENSE” instead, with the understanding that what we 
are trying to protect is the security of the people and 
not a few individuals or families. 

MS. AQUINO. Yes. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. The Article on the Judiciary has 
determined that nothing involving abuse of discretion 
amounting to lack or excess of jurisdiction is beyond 
judicial review. I cannot accept the interpretation that 
anything related to national defense or national security 
is beyond the jurisdiction of the courts. That was always 
the main argument of Marcos — national interest, 
national welfare, national security, national defense. 
That was the reason Section 1 of the Article on the 
Judiciary specifies that judicial power includes the 
power to settle all controversies involving abuse of 
discretion amounting to lack of jurisdiction or excess of 
jurisdiction. The judicial power is meant to be a check 
against all powers of the government without exception, 
except that the judicial power must be exercised within 
the limits confined thereto. A matter of national 


646 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


defense, national interest, national welfare is not THE PRESIDENT. Has this been accepted by the 
necessarily beyond the jurisdiction of a judicial power. committee? 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Suarez first? 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. 

I was about to speak up, little realizing that the 
former Chief Justice had already picked up the issue. In- 
deed, it is rather alarming to attach to the use of the 
phrase “NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE” the 
interpretation that this is beyond the power of judicial 
review because under the Article on the Judiciaiy, we 
saw to it that the Supreme Court is vested with the 
power to review these arbitrary exercises in the event 
there is abuse of discretion amounting to lack or excess 
of jurisdiction. 

So, if that is the interpretation to be attached to the 
utilization of the phrase “NATIONAL WELFARE OR 
DEFENSE,” I would be compelled to object to the 
insertion or substitution of this phrase. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does Commissioner Aquino 
say? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President, before we vote, it 
is the understanding that the use of the phrase “NA- 
TIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE” is in accordance 
with the interpretation clarified by Commissioner 
Aquino. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, that is the interpretation. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Aquino on lines 
1 and 2, Section 12, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and none against; 
the proposed amendment is approved. 


MS. AQUINO. With all due deference to Commis 
sioner Concepcion, I think I was misinterpreted. M> 
clanfication was to affirm that judicial review will lie or 
t e matter of arbitrariness, but not on the wisdom. Il 

^ Baguio vs. 

N AW ASA where the ruling was that the courts can in- 
quire mto the arbitrariness of the act which is the 
proper province of judicial review, but not the wisdom 

ot the act. I do not see any issue on this point, Madam 
President. 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 


MR. REGALADO. With regard to the proposal 
Aquino to restore the term “NATIONi 
A f 1 DEFENSE” as it was under Section 

^*^® Constitution, I speak 

pp r o the same because the phrase, in the light 
Ktf here on just compensation, was constru 

t^n ^ Court, for purposes of just compen 

^ f the term “public use.” In the c; 

^ Philippines vs. Philippine Long L 

tance Telephone Company in the Supreme Coi 
Reports Annotated Wol 26, page 620, the Suprei 

“NATIONAL WELFAI 
OR DEFENSE was the proper term because in effe 
it was equivalent to “public use” and justifies the ji 
compensation mentioned in Section 1 2. 


MR. RAMA Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Regalado be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, that was the 
very same amendment that Commissioner Aquino 
already proposed, and that is why I spoke in support of 
it — the restoration of the phrase “NATIONAL WEL- 
FARE OR DEFENSE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. So then, for the record, wUl 
Commissioner Aquino have any objection to have Com- 
missioner Regalado as a cosponsor? (Silence) 

Can we now approve the whole Section 12? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. There are no 
more proponents of amendments, so we can vote on 
Section 12. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ask the chairman to read 
Section 1 2 with the amendments. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “The State may, in the interest of 
NATIONAL WELFARE OR DEFENSE, establish and 
operate vital industries and, upon payment of just com- 
pensation, transfer to public ownership utilities and 
other private enterprises to be operated by the govern- 
ment.” 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


647 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
12, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 35 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 12, as amended, is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Jamir be recognized on Section 13. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President, my proposed amend- 
ment to Section 13 is on line 7. Between the words 
“may” and “temporarily,” insert a comma (,) and the 
words “UNDER REASONABLE TERMS PRESCRIBED 
BY IT” and another comma (,). The entire section will 
now read; “In times of national emergency, when the 
common good so requires, the State may, UNDER 
REASONABLE TERMS PRESCRIBED BY IT, tempo- 
rarily take over or direct the operation of any privately 
owned public utility or business affected with public 
interest.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted by the 
committee. Madam President. 

MR. JAMIR. Tliank you. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, may I know what 
is meant by “IT” in the phrase “PRESCRIBED BY 
IT”? 

MR. JAMIR. I refer to the State. The State will deter- 
mine the reasonable terms upon which it will take 
public utilities temporarily. 

MR. RODRIGO. But how will the State act? WUl it 
be through the Congress and the President? 

MR. JAMIR. I suppose it will be through an appro- 
priate agency of the government. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 
nized. 

MR. SUAREZ. May we just clear up a few matters 
with my distinguished colleague from Cavite? 


MR. JAMIR. I will try to do so. 

MR. SUAREZ. Under Section 13, what is contem- 
plated is a time of national emergency, with emphasis 
on national emergency, and that is the character of the 
exercise of the power. " 

MR. JAMIR. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Does not the Gentleman believe that 
if we insert the phrase “UNDER REASONABLE 
TERMS PRESCRIBED BY IT,” this might serve as a 
limitation rather than a free exercise of this authority 
demanded under a state of national emergency? It might 
enable the privately owned public utility or business af- 
fected to take up this matter with the judicial authori- 
ties and claim that the terms are not reasonable and, 
therefore, they can successfully resist the exercise of 
this authority. 

MR. JAMIR. I do not think so, because under my 
proposal the State can temporarily take over and then 
prescribe the terms under which it will take over. The 
owner may contest that later on but cannot prevent the 
takeover during the period of emergency. 

MR. SUAREZ. That is exactly what I am trying to 
say. Tlierefore, as envisioned by the Commissioner, 
the phrase “UNDER REASONABLE TERMS PRE- 
SCRIBED BY IT” would not serve to stop the State 
from taking over the operation of any privately owned 
public utility or business. 

MR. JAMIR. That is correct. 

MR. SUAREZ. Thank you for the clarification. 

MR. JAMIR. Thank you. 

MR. BENGZON. There are no more proponents. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment ac- 
cepted by the committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner Benias is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Just one question. The section uses 
the phrase “. . . public utility for business affected with 
public interest. Just what is meant now by “business 
affected with public interest”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It means business that has a lot of 
repercussions on the public, whether it be public utility 
or other businesses which may partake of the character- 


648 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


istics of public utility but which is not yet considered 
public utility. 

FR. BERNAS. The phrase seems to have a history in 
jurisprudence. In early American jurisprudence, business 
affected with public interest was a very limited concept. 
They included such things as railroads and public utili- 
ties, lotteries, billiard parlors, liquor stores, ferries, 
wharves, carriers, practically equivalent to public 
utilities. In subsequent decisions, however, this very 
limited concept of public utilities has been expanded so 
that in the later decisions it was said that the notion 
that the business is clothed with the public interest and 
has been devoted to public use is a little more than 
fiction intended to beautify what is disagreeable to the 
sufferers. In other words, business affected with public 
interest is any business that is subject to police power 
which really means any business. 

So, are we saying here that the State may take over 
any business when the State thinks that it is necessary? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, this is a very simple 
amendment to Section 13, lines 6 and 7. I propose to 
change the phrase “the common good” with “PUBLIC 
INTEREST.” 

THE PRESIDENT. On line 9, there is also the phrase 
“public interest.” Is this all right? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. The amend- 
ment is accepted. 

MR. BENGZON. When we say “PUBLIC IN- 
TEREST,” we really mean the common good, do we 
not? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is even less broader than “com- 
mon good” because if the basis will be “common good,” 
it might be an undue restriction. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I do not think that is the interpreta- 
tion of the committee. But I think any business that has 
the characteristics of a public utility, which concerns a 
mass-based consumer group, would be included under 
me phrase “. . . business affected with public interest.” 
Entoe business operations which are not treated as 
public utilities do not fall under the pubUc utility 
regulation, but may already be so massive in terms of 
1 s consumption, especially as regards the low-income 
groups, that they should also be subject of the specific 


FR. BERNAS. 
concept? 


So, is this intended to be a limited 


MR. VILLEGAS. It is. 


FR. BERNAS. Thank you. 

^fion?*^^^^^' President, may I ask one 


MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I have some perfect- 
ing amendments. I propose to delete the sentence begin- 
ing with the word “Such,” and on line 7, after the 
amendment of Commissioner Jamir, insert the phrase 
“FOR THE DURATION OF THE EMERGENCY.” The 
section, as amended, would now read: “In times of 
national emergency, when the PUBLIC INTEREST so 
requires, the State may FOR THE DURATION OF THE 
EMERGENCY AND UNDER REASONABLE TERMS 
PRESCRIBED BY IT take over or direct the opera- 
tion . . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment accepted? 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is accepted. Madam President. 


the president. Commissioner Tingson 


nized. 


IS recog- 


emer^ei^^’^r3^ ^ committee if “nai 

could this hp P rnilitary national emergen( 

could this be economic emergency? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, it could refer to both mi 
or economic dislocations. ° ™ 


THE PRESIDENT. So, will the chairman please read 
now Section 1 3 with the proposed amendments so that 
we can submit the entire section to a vote? 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner [ 
seeks to be recogmzed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is i 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA. May I just say that the Davide 
amendment which was accepted by the committee 
restores the term “public interest” as provided in 
Section 7 of the 1973 Constitution. Similarly, the term 
“public utility or business affected with public interest” 
is the same expression in said Section 7 of the 1973 
Constitution. Now, the term “public interest” appears 
on Une 7 and again on line 9. Probably, the reason the 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


649 


committee changed the first “public interest” to 
“common good” is to distinguish it from the “public 
interest” in the phrase “or business affected with public 
interest.” I am calling attention to the use of the term 
“public interest” twice but, perhaps, not exactly 
synonymous. 

MR. VILLEGAS. In order to avoid a repetition, 
would the phrase “GENERAL WELFARE” on line 7 
be acceptable to Commissioner Davide, since there is a 
“GENERAL WELFARE” clause? 

MR. DAVIDE. It can be, but I should only like to 
state for the record that even in the 1973 Constitution, 
the words “public interest” appears twice. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. It was precisely because of the dif- 
ferent meaning given to either. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Benias is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, just one final clarifi- 
catory question. Does this section have anything to do 
with the power of sequestration? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We do not think so. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

FR. BERNAS. Does this not authorize sequestration? 

MR. BENGZON. No. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, that is covered by another 
section, if ever, in the Transitory Provisions. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. May I suggest to the committee that 
we delete the phrase “when the common good so re- 
quires” or “when the PUBLIC INTEREST so requires, 
so that the section will read: “In times of national 
emergency, the State may temporarily take over or 
direct the operation of any privately owned public 
utility or business affected with public interest.” Tlie 
reason for this is that national emergency would 
naturally also mean that the interest of the public is at 
stake. So, in order to avoid repeating those two phrases, 
I move that we delete said phrase. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we are sorry we 
cannot accept the proposed amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does the Gentleman insist on his 
amendment? 


MR BENGZON. We insist. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I mean, does Commissioner 
Tingson insist on his proposed amendment? 

MR TINGSON. I wanted the committee to accept, 
Madam President. 

MR BENGZON. No, we are not accepting. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee does not accept. 

MR TINGSON. Tlierefore, I withdraw my proposed 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

MR VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. We are now ready to vote. Madam 
President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the chairman please read 
Section 13, embodying the proposed amendments of 
Commissioners Davide, Aquino and others. 

MR VILLEGAS. “In times, of national emergency, 
when the PUBLIC INTEREST so requires, the State 
may FOR THE DURATION OF THE EMERGENCY 
AND UNDER REASONABLE TERMS PRESCRIBED 
BY IT, temporarily take over or direct the operation of 
any privately owned public utility or business affected 
with public interest.” 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 
13, as amended, please raise their hand. (Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 38 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 13, as amended, is approved. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, I ask that we approve 
Section 14, since nobody has registered to comment or 
to amend said section. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. I would like to seek clarification 
on this which, if satisfactorily answered, may avoid any 
further amendment. The progenitor of this is Section 2 
of Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution which provided 
that ‘The State shall regulate or prohibit private moiio- 


650 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


polies.” May I know from the committee why the word 
“private” was deleted here, so that this now refers to all 
kinds of monopolies, public or private, as the case may 
be? 

MR VILLEGAS. Madam President, it has been the 
experience that some government monopolies, like the 
National Power Corporation, should also be regulated 
by the equivalent regulatory body of the government. 
So, all monopolies, whether they be run by the private 
sector or by the government, should be subject to 
regulation for the good of the consumers. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. 


franchise, certificate, or any other form of authoriza- 
tion for the operation of a public utility shall be granted 
except to citizens of the Philippines or to corporations 
or associations organized under the laws of the Philip- 
pines at least SIXTY PERCENT OF WHOSE CAPITAL 
is owned by such citizens.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the committee is 
divided on this specific issue and I would like to have 
the body vote on it. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Jamir desire 
to explain his proposed amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MjAAMBONG. I have just one clarification to 
make. Madam President. During the period of interpella- 
tions, the committee answered my query to the effect 
that the words ‘ monopolies,” “restraint of trade or 
unfair competition ’ are to be understood according to 
their definition in the Revised Penal Code. Is the answer 
of the committee to this query still the same? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. After Commissioner Jamir, I was one 
of those in the committee who voted for a 60-40 ratio, 
so I would support the amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Jamir first 
explain? 


MR. RAMA. We are ready to vote. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Will the 
Section 14. 


chairman please read 


^^^LEGAS. “The State shall' regulate or pro- 
mbit monopolies when the public interest so requires. 

o com inations in restraint of trade or unfair competi- 
tion shall be allowed.” 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of Section 

, p ease raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand. ) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand. ) 

results show 39 votes in favor and none against; 
Section 14 is approved. 


President, I ask that Commis- 
Section 1*5 ^ recognized to propose an amendment to 


MR. JAMIR. Yes, in this Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony, there were two previous sections 
in which we fixed the Filipino equity to 60 percent as 
against 40 percent for foreigners. It is only in this 
Section 1 5 with respect to public utilities that the com- 
mittee proposal was increased to two-thirds. I think it 
would be better to harmonize this provision by provid- 
ing that even in the case of public utilities, the minimum 
equity for Filipino citizens should be 60 percent. At any 
rate, I understand that there are utility companies in the 
Philippines which are not in favor of two-thirds because 
they would be compelled to pay off foreign equity 
holders upon the ratification of this Constitution, and 
that amounts to quite a sizeable sum of money. I under- 
stand that it is about PI. 2 billion and their idea is that 
instead of paying off foreign equity holders, why do we 
not keep the money here and invest it in some other 
profitable undertaking for the welfare of the Filipinos? 
That is my reason for this amendment. 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recognized 

M^dam President, my proposed amend 
ment on lines 20 and 21 is to delete the phrase “two 
thirds of whose voting stock or controlling interest,’ 
and instead substitute the words “SIXTY PERCENT 01 
WHOSE CAPITAL” so that the sentence will read: “N( 


MR. ROMULO. My reason for supporting the amend- 
ment is based on the discussions I have had with rep- 
resentatives of the Filipino majority owners of the inter- 
national record carriers, and the subsequent memoranda 
they submitted to me. I would, therefore, like to share 
their views with the Commission inasmuch as it seems 
to me they are the ones who will be most affected. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1 986 


651 


Their first point is that they reject the argument that 
the international telecommunications industry is con- 
trolled by their foreign partners because such a propo- 
sition is based on the gratuitous assumption that they 
are either dummies or spineless. They make the further 
point that if they are dummies and spineless, giving 
them another six and two-thirds percent will not 
remedy the situation. In any case, they point to the fact 
that the fourth member of the international record 
carrier, Capitol Wireless, is wholly owned by Filipinos. 
So, they reject the basic premise that the industry is 
controlled by foreigners. 

If I may read from a lettter sent by the Philippine 
Global Communications, signed by all the Filipino 
directors of the company; 

We wish to emphasize that management is not in the 
hands of foreign investors. No management contract exists. 
The positions of the President and of the Senior Vice- 
Presidents in charge of finance and treasury, engineering 
and planning, and marketing are all held by Filipinos. In 
PhilCom, there is only one non-Filipino and his office 
principally relates to the technical aspects of the operations 
of our firm. 

It might be relevant at this point to mention who are 
the Filipino stockholders of these compatiies so we may 
better judge if these Filipino stockholders are mere 
dummies. In PhilCom, it is the Siguion-Reyna Group, 
the Yuchengco Group and the PhilCom employees. In 
Globe Mackay, it is the Ayala Group, the Globe em- 
ployees and the public through the stock exchange. As I 
understand it, not from firsthand, with regard to 
Eastern Communications, the 60 percent is presently 
under the control of the PCGG. 

Their second point is that under the Corporation 
Code, the management and control of a corporation is 
vested in the board of directors, not in the officers but 
in the board of directors. The officers are only agents 
of the board. And they believe that with 60 percent of 
the equity, the Filipino majority stockholders unde- 
niably control the board. Only on important corporate 
acts can the 40-percent foreign equity exercise a veto, 
such as in the case of increases or decreases of capital 
stock, sale of substantially all of the assets and volun- 
tary dissolution of the corporation. Again, I will quote 
from the memorandum of PhilCom: 

These are the only areas where the ratification by the 
shareholders representing at least two-thirds of the out- 
standing capital stock is required. If our country, however, 
expects to invite foreign investors to come in and remain, 
such foreign investors should be given the minimal veto 
power vis-a-vis the major corporate acts abovementioned. 
Any investor, irrespective of race or nationality, is entitled 
to at least this minimum say in the protection of his invest- 
ment. 

Their third point. Madam President, is that their 
partnership has worked well and they prefer that their 
foreign partners own a substantial minority position 
because their input and their interest to protect the 


business will be commensurate to their investment 
stake. In this regard, the Ayala Group has submitted the 
following memorandum and I would like to quote from 
it with the indulgence of the group: 

Considering the foregoing circumstances, we find no 
compelling reasons to disturb the equity participation of 
Filipinos in Globe Mackay. In fact, we honestly believe that 
we need our foreign partners now more than ever during 
this time when international telecommunication is under- 
going fast and comprehensive modernization, requiring 
technology transfer, technical training abroad, equipment 
upgrade and capital assistance. To reduce the foreign parti- 
cipation now would entail divestment and could very well 
result in a disincentive for our foreign partners to make 
their invaluable contribution in technology and advance- 
ment. In short, we believe that this proposed change in the 
equity ratio will do more harm than good for the industry. 

The fourth point is that they do not believe it is 
prudent policy at this time to divert either their funds 
or those of another group to an industry that does not 
need it. Capital being scarce at this particular time, it 
should be employed to create new investments and not 
just to augment an old one. Again, my understanding 
is that an increase would mean an additional investment 
of about PI billion based on current market price as 
estimated by them. The Eastern Telecommunications 
Company has this to say, and I quote: 

We are apprehensive not only on how to replace it, 
meaning the additional investment, but also that the com- 
pany will not be able to sustain the growth both within the 
company and as a contributor to the industry and the coun- 
try. Enormous equity which may not be available locally 
for the purpose would be required to finance future invest- 
ments of the company that it may cope with the latest 
state-of-the-art’s development. 

Fifth, they say that there is no danger to national 
security because these carriers deal only with com- 
mercial messages and not government messages involving 
matters of state security. Moreover, in times of emergen- 
cy, the government can take over these public utilities 
and it should also be borne in mind that these carriers 
are supervised and regulated by the National Telecom- 
munications Commission. 

Finally, Madam President, they point out that under 
Section 9 of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony, Congress, in the national interest, can in- 
crease the 60-40 ratio in favor of Filipinos in the future 
if necessary. 

Before I close, I only wish to emphasize that what I 
reflect are the sentiments of the 60-percent Filipino 
owners who feel that their partnership has been 
mutually beneficial and they want it to remain on a 
60-40 basis. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 


652 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other registered 
speaker, Mr. Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Commissioner PadiUa. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR PADILLA. Madam President, this Section 15 is 
substantially the same as Section 5 of the 1973 Consti- 
tution. In the 1973 Constitution, at least 60 percent of 
the capital is owned by such citizens. So, the Jamir 
amendment is a return or a restatement or a reversion to 
the 1973 Constitution. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, in the interest of equal 
time, may I also read from a memorandum by the 
spokesman of the PhiUppine Chamber of Communica- 
tions on why they would like to maintain the present 
equity, I am referring to the 66 2/3. They would prefer 
to Have a 75-25 ratio but would settle for 66 2/3. They 
so e to suggest that we amend this provision by 

Ronv MANAGEMENT 

CORPORATION OR ASSOCIA- 
CONTROLLED BY 
SSon™ raiLlPPINES.” I have with me 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

record braid. The three major international 

Romiiin ^ Philippines, which Commissioner 

tione ”^®^tioned — Philippine Global Communica- 
Cahf^ Telecommunications, Globe Mackay 

40-percent owned by foreign multinational 
pi... 60-percent owned by their respective 

partners. All three, however, also have manage- 
with these foreign companies — PhilCom 

CMrp Cable and Wireless PLC, and 

manao ^TT, Up to the present time, the general 
forei^^* these carriers are foreigners. While the 
own^^^^tiT common carriers are only minority 
manaoin^ foreign multinationals are the ones 
their controlling their operations by virtue of 

streneth contracts and by virtue of then- 

strength m the governing bodies of these carriers. 

to ^lowino situation where the country was led 

companies to own. 

tions has resnl. H ® record communica- 

lions has resulted m the following: 

lost, perhaps forever, its role 
as the hub or the center of international communica- 
tions in the region to a territory which is the seat of 
power of a giant which, through its part-ownership and 


management of a Filipino common carrier, appears to 
have allowed the Philippines to lose its role as the hub. 
This has resulted in huge, albeit unquantifiable, losses in 
potential foreign currency earnings to the Philippines. 
This alone, to our minds, has caused irreparable damage 
to the nation. 

b. All the international cable systems terminating in 
Currimao, llocos Norte are presently owned by a com- 
mon carrier also acting as a carrier’s carrier but which 
is owned 40-percent and managed by a multinational 
company. Even the domestic common carrier which is 
responsible for all internal facilities from the cable 
station is also owned by this giant multinational. 

In effect, our international cable facilities are con- 
trolled., not by Filipinos, but by a foreign multinational 
company. This is a serious threat to our national 
security and to our sovereignty as a- nation. 

c. These international record common carriers are 
losing foreign currency revenues due to their control by 
the giant corporations. Traffic from the Philippines is 
being transited through the foreign carriers even if there 
are other transit centers offering the Philippine carriers 
better rates or even if direct circuits are feasible. Since 
these carriers are among the most profitable enterprises 
in the country, the foreign multinational carriers are 
raking in huge profits and earnings from transit business. 
This has resulted in revenue losses in the country . 

In international conferences, the Philippines is, more 
often than not, represented by foreign executives of 
these foreign-managed carriers. Furthermore, this situa- 
tion opens the possibility that PLDT, PAL, MERALCO, 
PNR, LRT, shipping lines, even the Post Office, and 
other vital public utilities will eventually f^ into the 
hands of foreigners or of foreign multinational 
panies. This is particularly true when some of these 
public utilities are “privatized.” Please note that Thmp- 
pine Airlines and other utilities are among those which 
are to be sold by the government under its privatization 
program. 

Under modem technology, is the monitormg of 
communications text possible? Yes, it is possible par- 
ticularly when foreigners control the country s com- 
munications. During a national emergency , such as war 
or revolution, our international telecommunications 
may be subject to tapping, monitoring or “eavesdrop- % 
ping” by the foreign multinationals because foreign 
interests may be involved. 

There are many precedents here and abroad which 
involve foreign countries listening in on the telecom- 
munications between other countries. For instance, 
communications of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs from 
Manila to a Philippine embassy in another country can 
easily be listened to by a third country that has control 
over our international communications facilities. The 
argument that this can be done even if Filipinos control 
and manage these communications facilities is true, but 
it is apparent that it is a lot easier and all the more risky 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


653 


if non-Filipinos are in control. In fact, modem techno- 
logy has made these “monitoring” activities easier to do 
and more efficient. 

Therefore, the argument is that communications 
facilities are a danger to security considering the fact 
that communications facilities such as remote sensing 
can even monitor resource-rich areas of the Philippines. 
Thus, other multinational agencies, which are ahead in 
terms of knowledge about the natural resources of tlie 
country, pose a threat to our national security as well as 
economic sovereignty. 

I would like to- submit this position paper for the 
record. Madam President. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Just to clarify, would Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid support the proposal of two- 
thirds rather than the 60 percent? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I have added a clause that 
will put management in tlie hands of Filipino citizens. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We can take that amendment at the 
proper time. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

We are still on the Jamir amendment. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. I also have a 
proposal to change the ratio to 75-25. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

m 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I understand there are many other speakers, for and 
against. 

THE PRESIDENT. This is the Jamir amendment. 

MR. COLAYCO. Yes. I notice that we have a tend- 
ency of repeating the same arguments. I would like to 
invite the attention of the body to Section 26 of the 
Rules: 

After the close of debate the Constitutional Commission 
shall proceed to the consideration of Committee amend- 
ments subject to the five-minute rule. A Member who 
desires to speak against an amendment shall also have five 
minutes. 

The five-minute rule shall apply, likewise, in the con- 
sideration of an amendment to an amendment, or an 
amendment by substitution. 


I move, therefore, that this rule be observed strictly 
so that we can finish our debates on time. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair will abide strictly, 
althougli if I remember correctly, we even reduced the 
five minutes to three minutes at the caucus. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We now have tlie Jamir amend- 
ment before us. Those who wanted to speak in favor of 
the amendment, Commissioners Jamir and Romulo, are 
through. 

Has anybody registered to speak against the Jamir 
amendment? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Aquino 
would like to speak en contra. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized to speak against the Jamir amendment. 

May I ask the timekeeper to please put on the timer. 

MS. AQUINO. I will not last that long. 

Section 15 contemplates the grant of franchise, 
certificate or other forms of authorization for the 
operation of public utilities. What is vital here is that 
what the section contemplates is public utilities; in 
other words, services which are vital for the delivery of 
services for the pubUc. 

Throughout history, preferential attention has been 
given to foreign investors, and they have been enjoying 
a prolonged Indian summer. All of these clamor for the 
shifting of the corporate structure to adjust it to give 
more preference to the Filipino investors has been 
enjoying nothing more than just a nine-day wonder. 

I was inclined to propose a readjustment in the same 
way that Commissioner Davide proposed a 75-25 per- 
centile arrangement in favor of the Filipinos. 

In reply to the argument of Commissioner Jamir, and 
without intending to cause any personal offense, we 
should now rid ourselves of our neurosis that the 
welfare of the Filipino depends on the smile or on the 
frown of foreign investors. When we deal with public 
utilities, I think the primordial concern should be public 
utilities for the benefit of the Filipinos which are ef- 
fectively controlled by the Filipinos. Would it cause a 
cataclysmic consequence if we readjust the formula to a 
75-25 percentile instead of a 60-40? 

As it is, the committee report is already noteworthy 
in proposing a two-thirds formula - 66 and two-thirds 
effectively - but a 60-40 percentile would be some kind 
of a short-lived atavism. 

So, may I inquire from Commissioner Romulo if a 
7 5-25 arrangement would really cause that much conse- 
quence that will destabilize the operation of public 
utilities and rendering of public services? 


654 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


MR. ROMULO. For the reasons I have stated — and I 
only reflect the opinions of the majority Filipino 
owners — they feel very comfortable with the present 
situation and the 75-25 ratio would diminish their 
minority partners to practically nothing. They do not 
believe that minority interest would be substantial 
enough to sustain the kind of cooperation and growth 
which both partners have achieved. This has been going 
on since the middle 70’s. So, they asked that this Com- 
mission maintain what has been a good relationship for 
them, both from the technical, the managerial and 
investment point of view. 

Globe Mackay, for example, is one of the most 
popular stocks in the stock exchange, presumably 
because of the success that this partnership has had. 


MS. AQUINO. Madam President, am I correct in 
understanding that the vital aspect in public utility is 
the delivery of public services, not so much the accumu- 
lation of surplus and profit for investment? In that case, 
I would submit that the primary concern here is not 
really the comfort or the discomfort of the investors in 
utility corporation, but the imprint of the 
Fihpino-First” policy in the delivery of public services. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President, my reaction ther 
IS, precisely, they have delivered very good, if no 
supenor, services in this field, as compared, for example 
to others who may be 100-percent, 80-percent or 7C 
percent controlled. They do feel that the superiority o 
1 services is the result of this happy union betweei 
local capital and foreign technology. 

I BENGZON. Madam President, under the Rules 

Qoo- 7 speakers in favor and two speaker: 

against. ^ 

THE PRESIDENT. Who is the next speaker? 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Davide, but he is intro 
ducmg another amendment. 


BENGZON. But it is an amendment of the 75-25 

ratio we are talking about. 

It is an amendment to the proposed 

amendment, which is proper. 


THE PRESIDENT 

nized. 


Commissioner Garcia is recog- 


Secondly, it is definitely a strategic industry. It is one 
area where the concept of mixed economy can come in 
where, for the public good, both the public and the 
private sectors can work together to bring or deliver the 
goods to the people. 

Thirdly — and this is very important — it touches the 
area of national security. We should be very conscious 
and aware regarding internal security. And here our 
security, as was stated by Commissioner Rosario Braid, 
is very important. We must protect this at all times and 
not only during an emergency period. 

I would like to state the case of the ITT. In the 
“Senator Frank Church Committee Report” published 
in December 1975, it was proven beyond doubt that 
ITT was very much a participant in the coup attempts in 
Santiago, Chile in September 1973. And I think this is a 
very important item to consider — their participation 
and destabilization of a Third World government which 
they might find unfriendly at times. 

I would also like to mention the fact that when the 
40 percent is a solid block, it is tantamount to control. 
Sometimes, it does not matter whether one is in the 
minority position or not because when the 40 percent 
conforms to a solid block, it can be the dominant bloc, 
the decisive factor, the controlling factor. 

Finally, I think it is, in fact, a desired objective that 
in due time the public utilities should be 100-percent 
Filipino-owned. I do not see why we should constitu- 
tionalize the 60-40 arrangement when, in fact, being 
such a vital industry, a strategic industry, one of public 
service and one that concerns national security, they 
shall be a hundred percent Filipino in due time. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are ready to vote. I think the 
arguments are clear. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I would just like to ask the 
committee. We are made to choose between the 60-40 
and the two-thirds arrangements. 

MR. BENGZON. As it stands, 66 2/3. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes. Assuming that the 66 2/3 
arrangement prevails, will that apply only to future 
public utility corporations or will it affect also existing 
public utility corporations? 


MR. GARCIA. Thank you. Madam President, 
would like to summarize briefly the arguments \ 
we agams the Jamir amendment. BaloaUy, pu 
utlhties. as already stated by Commissioner Aqu 
must be viewed as public service and not as a pr< 
oriented enterprise. 


MR. VILLEGAS. It will affect existing public utilities. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. But that will be taken care of 
supposedly in the Article on Transitory Provisions. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, they have to divest. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


655 


MR. BENGZON. The 40 percent will have to divest. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is the pleasure of Commis- 
sioner Aquino? 

MS. AQUINO. On the query of Commissioner de los 
Reyes, the existing jurisprudence on public utilities is 
still People vs. Quasha. Commissioner Villegas was 
correct that the prohibition against the grant of a 
franchise applies not only to the creation of a corpora- 
tion that violates the required proportion but also to the 
grant of franchise to corporations that are already 
existing. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Bacani speaking 
for or against? 

BISHOP BACANI. No, I would like to ask a question 
of Commissioner Garcia so I may be able to vote intel- 
ligently on this matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Gentleman may proceed. 

BISHOP BACANI. Since 1973, the 60-40 ratio has 
been observed in the Constitution. Have there been 
actually effects detrimental to the Filipino people that 
we can demonstrate, that we can show of which we have 
evidence? I would like to ask whether with the 60-40 
ratio, as it is now, there have been any cases in the 
Philippines that have shown that this has not been 
beneficial to the Filipino people but has, in fact, been 
harmful to Filipino interests? 

MR. GARCIA. I think the position paper read by 
Commissioner Rosario Braid states some of those harm- 
ful effects. Secondly, it is very clear that in the delivery 
of public services, there is much room for improvement, 
there is a lot to be desired for improvement. And pre- 
cisely when there is sufficient motivation, when there is 
perhaps public subsidy, when there is public effort, 
together with a broader-based participation of people, 
this can be realized. 

BISHOP BACANI. In the paper read by Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid, there were dangers pointed to but 
no actual detrimental effect so far as I remember. From 
the observation of Commissioner Romulo, it would 
seem that those that have the 60-40 arrangement have 
been faring quite well in delivering the services. 

MR. GARCIA. Just to give the Gentleman one very 
brief example: the Philippines has lost perhaps forever 
its role as the hub or the center of international com- 
munications in the region to another territory which is 


the seat of power of a giant carrier which partly owns 
and manages a well-known Filipino carrier. This has 
resulted in huge, albeit unquantifiable, losses in poten- 
tial foreign currency earnings to the Philippines.. This 
alone, to our mind, has caused irreparable damage to 
the nation, a country which needs foreign exchange so 
badly because of our debt situation and other crises. 

BISHOP BACANI. I notice the words “may, perhaps.” 
Those were used by the writers themselves. “May have 
lost its possibility of being the hub of communication in 
Asia, and this is perhaps due ...” 

MR. GARCIA. No. But regarding the actual losses of 
foreign exchange earnings which could have accrued to 
the Philippines because of the fact that the control and 
ownership were not in Filipino hands is very clear. I am 
reciting to the Gentleman only one of the examples 
they give but there are other examples which the writers 
provide. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we now proceed to vote? 

BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Yes, the Rules call for a vote now, 
Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair rules that we are now 
ready to vote. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The only matter presented before 
the body is whether or not the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Jamir on the 60-40 ratio is acceptable to 
the body. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I have an 
amendment to the amendment, which I hope will solve 
this bind that we are in, if it is acceptable to the com- 
mittee or to the original proponent. May I proceed. 
Madam President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is it another percentage? 

MR. MAAMBONG. No, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will take it up later on. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Not another percentage. Madam 
President. 

I propose an amendment that after the word “citi- 
zens” on line 21, we add “OR SUCH HIGHER PER- 
CENTAGE AS CONGRESS MAY PRESCRIBE.” 


656 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


So, it will not foreclose the present percentage being 
suggested by Commissioner Jamir, and probably that 
will solve the problem that we are in. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, we think that is 
already subsumed in Section 9 because Congress may, at 
any time, reserve to Filipinos areas of investment that 
could be one hundred percent. 

THE PRESIDENT. All that this amendment calls for 
is a change from two-thirds to 60 percent. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but Section 9 speaks of areas 
of investment. 


MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to explain. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. It is not accepted by the commit- 
tee. 

But the Chair will again propose to the body another 
percentage. 

MR DAVIDE. And I can propose it later. 

THE PRESIDENT. That will be the time. 

MR DAVIDE. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Jamir accept 
this proposed amendment? 

MR JAMIR. No, I regret I cannot accept the amend- 
ment. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one point for clarification. 

^ this phrase “areas of investment” in Section 9, is 

It me thinking of the committee that this includes 
pubhc utihties? 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are m favor of the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Jamir to change 
the percentage to 60 percent, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 20 votes in favor and 19 against; the 
Jamir amendment is approved. 


VILLEGAS. Exactly. 
MR. BENGZON. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 
MR DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


to inquiry. Is it still prope 

ce an amendment to the Jamk amendment? 

the™nd^ent agreeable to accep 


MR. DAVIDE. I have 
amendment. 


a proposal to amend the Jamir 


the PRESIDENT. Is it the percentage? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is the percentage. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the Gentleman please si 
his amendment for Commissioner jS 

75 pe^'rcenu^ mpi^ ^ wl 


THE PRESIDENT. Is the amendment acceptable? 
MR. JAMIR. It is not acceptable. Madam President. 


MR GASCON. Madam President, may I request a 
nominal voting because of the closeness of the vote. 

MR SARMIENTO. May I second the motion. Madam 
President? 


NOMINAL VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. There is a call for nominal voting. 
Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the motion is approved. 

The body will now vote on the amendment, and the 
Secretary-General will call the roU. 

FIRST ROLL CALL 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Ahiihakar 

Yes 


. No 

Alonto . 

Yes 


. . No 

Aquino .... 

No 

(Gascon 

. . No 

Azcuna 

No 

Criiinffona .... 

. . No 

Bacani 


Tamir 

. . Yes 

Bengzon 


T aiirel .... 


Bennagen 

... No 

T enim 

. . . Yes 

Bernas 


Maambong .... 

... Yes 

Rosario Braid . . . . 

... No 

Monsod 

... Yes 

Brocka 


Natividad 

... Yes 

Calderon 

... Yes 

Nieva .... 

No 

Castro de 


MnllftHo .... 


Colayco 

. . . . Yes 

Qpl0 

... Yes 

Concepcion 

No 

Padilla 

Yes 

Davide 

. ... No 

MufiozPaJma . . . 



SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


657 


Quesada Rodrigo Yes 

Rama Yes Romulo Yes 

Regalado Yes Rosales 

Reyes de los No Sarmiento 

Rigos Yes 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I explain my vote, Madam 
President? 

t 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento may 
proceed. 

COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. For reasons of public interest and 
common good, I vote against the amendment. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Suarez No Tingson Y^s 

Sumulong Yes Trenas 

Tadeo No Uka Yes 

Tan '. . . . No Villacorta 

MR. VILLACORTA. May I explain my vote. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta may 
proceed. 

COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA EXPLAINS 
HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLACORTA. I vote no because most of the 
testimonies presented by the Honorable Romulo were in 
reference to the immediate present. The terms he used 
or the letters used were at this point in time. I think it is 
unfair for the Constitution to perpetually bind Filipino 
participation to only 60 percent, especially because 
Section 1 says; 

The State shall develop a self-reliant and independent 
national economy effectively controlled by Filipinos. 

the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

COMMISSIONER VILLEGAS EXPLAINS 
HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLEGAS. 1 vote yes because under Section 9, 
if in the future it is going to be considered for the 
general welfare, it can be increased by Congress to 
100 percent. 


SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will 

conduct a second call for those who have not registered 

their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Brocka Munoz-Pahna 

Castro de Quesada 

Laurel Rosales 

Nolledo Trenas 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 2 1 votes in favor 
and 19 against; the amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

I rise to present an amendment even with fear and 
trembling, but I hope the body would reconsider. It is 
just to change the ratio to 75-25, meaning, no franchise 
certificate or any other form of authorization for the 
operation of public utilities shall be granted except to 
citizens of the Philippines or to corporations or associa- 
tions, 75 percent of the capital stock of which shall be 
owned by such citizens. I am proposing this despite the 
vote to retain the 60-40 ratio. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee report states two- 
thirds. 

MR. DAVIDE. Sixty-six and two-thirds. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes. 

MR DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. I was very glad 
that the original committee report was to increase the 
present ratio, 60-40, to 66 2/3 as against 33 1/3. It was 
already a step forward for the Filipinos. Yet earlier 
there was a voting to retain the provision of the existing 
Constitution, the possible reason being the position 
paper read into the record by Commissioner Romulo. I 
would say. Madam President, that the Constitution we 
are framing today is not for Siguion-Reyna nor for 
Ayala and not for the present time. (Applause) 

It may be recalled that as early as 1935, the Con- 
stitution already allowed the 60-40 ratio. The 1971 
Constitution also allowed a 60-40 ratio. But what hap- 
pened to the Filipinos? They became the victims of 
multinational corporations to the detriment, therefore, 
of the economy of the Phhippmes. Let us consider the 
public service rendered; we may say that they have. But 
what about the security of the country, the integrity of 
the country and, above all, the interest of the Filipinos? 
I would say. Madam President, that the whole trouble 
with our discussion on Section 1 5 is that we took time 


658 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


for, we gave more time to, telecommunications. It must 
be borne in mind that Section 15 relates to all public 
utilities, not just the telecommunications. The argu- 
ments of Commissioner Romulo were only on telecom- 
munications. What about the other public utilities which 
should be in the hands of Filipinos now? Simply 
because the proponents of the telecommunications 
want to maintain the present level of 60-40; will we also 
surrender our interest in respect to the other public 
utilities? 

To me, we have not progressed since 1935, if that be 
so. We already improved somehow the national eco- 
nomy by providing in Section 1 of the proposed article 
that the national economy must be effectively in the 
control of the Filipinos. Yet, simply because of the 
demands of a few corporations in telecommunications 
controlled by multinational corporations we have to 
downgrade all the other public utilities? That, to me, 
cannot be accepted. 

Perhaps, Madam President, it is high time now that if 
we take a step forward to protect the interests of the 
^^st be a bigger leap, not only from 60 to 
66 2/3 but a little beyond. It makes no difference. The 
committee recommended 66 2/3; it rejected my original 
proposal of a 75-25 ratio pursuant to my resolution. It 
w^ a little accommodation but if we really have to have 
a Constitution that shall take into account and consider 
as paramount the interest of the Filipinos, let us, even in 

e matter of public utilities to which area I fully be- 
lieve the Filipinos have the capacity and have the 
capital, go somehow beyond. And I think the best 
compromise is 75-25. 

MR. SUAREZ. Madam President. 
ni 7 l?^ president. Commissioner Suarez is recog- 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. Madam President. Will the 
onora le Davide answer a few clarificatory questions? 

iH Davide. Willmgly and gladly. Madam Pres- 


MR. DAVIDE. The Gentleman is absolutely correct. 
Madam President. 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman wants to ensure that 
the strategic situation of public utilities both in our 
country’s economy and security be guaranteed? 

MR. DAVIDE. Definitely, Madam President. 

• 

MR. SUAREZ. The Gentleman also wants that the 
assumption of control of public utilities may, in the 
future, prove to be inimical to public interest and he 
would like to avoid this. 

MR. DAVIDE. Certainly, Madam President. As a 
matter of fact, it is not only in the future; it is even 
applicable today. The danger to our national security 
is there, clear and present, in the light of the disquisi- 
tions of Commissioners Garcia and Rosario Braid. 

MR. SUAREZ. I thank the Commissioner very much. 

MR. DAVIDE. May we know the reaction of the 
committee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The committee would like to leave 
it again to the body for voting. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. I would hke to ask a few clarificatory 
questions of the proponent. By the term “public utili- 
ties,” to what are we referring? Will the Gentleman 
give some examples? 

MR. DAVIDE. Not only these commercial telecom- 
munications, but corporations supplying electric power, 
transportation, and even ice. Those are public utilities. 
So, even in this regard, we will now allow aliens. Even 
if it is only 40 percent, that is still alien control. I know 
it is alien control. 


MR. SUAREZ. Thank you. 

is espousing a 75-25 upward 
want<f ^ public utilities. I assum 
tiPQ ^ ^ff^ctive control by Filipinos of public i 

basis? ^ espousing of such a percen 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 

Gentleman finds that it is mor< 
difficult to use dummies when the difference is mon 
than 35 percent as a control against dummies rathe 
than when the Gentleman speaks in terms of only ; 
difference of 20 percent? 


MR. FOZ. At present, are these public utilities 
required by law to be Filipino-owned? The examples 
that the Gentleman gave — ice plants, transportation -- 
what is the statutory requirement as regards ownership. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am not very familiar with spemal 
laws, but under the Constitution as worded in Section 
15, all public utilities will be included. 

MR. FOZ. Is shipping a pubUc utility? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is a public utility. Transportation, 
air transportation, is a public utility. So, foreign capital, 
foreign interest, may now come into PAL to control 40 
percent of PAL. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23. 1986 


659 


MR. FOZ. But in the case of shipping, if I remember 
right, there is a special law providing that at least 75 per- 
cent of the capital should be owned by Filipinos. 

MR. DAVIDE. That, therefore, would be in harmony 
with my proposal, 75-25. 

MR. FOZ. But I am not sure now in the case of other 
means of transportation, such as land carriers, land 
transportation, also airlines. 

MR. DAVIDE. I am not very sure about land trans- 
portation. 

MR. FOZ. I thank the Gentleman. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, could the com- 
mittee have a chance to reply to Commissioner Davide? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will hear Commissioner Maam- 
bong first. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one question. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

In answer to my query, the honorable chairman of 
the committee said that Congress can always change the 
percentage to a higher percentage in favor of Filipinos. 
Is Commissioner Davide not comfortable with that 
answer? 

MR. DAVIDE. I will not be satisfied with that be- 
cause while Congress can change it any time, depending 
on whatever would be its perception, we know for a fact 
that Congress may not act. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will call the Gentleman’s atten- 
tion to the fact that the change is towards a higher 
percentage, not to a lower percentage. Would the 
Gentleman’s answer be the same? 

MR. DAVIDE. If we approve the 75-25 ratio. 
Congress may increase. I would be very willing to agree 
to any increase because my original intention is to make 
it a 1 00-percent requirement as was also the proposal of 
Commissioner Garcia. But in order to allow Congress 
some flexibility to attain to a higher level of Filipiniza- 
tion, then we should have an irreducible minimum 
which is higher than what is being proposed, much less 
the proposal of Commissioner Jamir. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Last question. Madam President. 
Does the Gentleman’s answer perhaps reflect the dis- 
trust on the future Congress of this nation as to their 
sense of patriotism? 


MR. DAVIDE. I really do not have that in mmd. But 
my point is that we should fix a higher irreducible 
minimum. So, 60-40 is the irreducible minimum, ac- 
cording to the Jamir proposal. According to my pro- 
posal, the maximum is 25 percent for foreign interest. 

So, Congress, under Section 9, may increase this require- 
ment by reducing the foreign participation, thereby 
increasing the Filipino participation. 

MR. MONSOD. May the committee now reply? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, please. Who will respond? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod, Madam 
President. 

MR. MONSOD. There is the suggestion that those 
who want to increase the minimum to 75 percent are 
pro-Filipino; and those who want to keep it at 60 
percent are anti-Filipino. There is also the suggestion 
that if one agrees with the letter of the stockholders, he 
is not pro-FiUpino; he is pro-Ayala or pro-Siguion-Reyna 
This committee is not pro-Ayala or pro-Siguion-Reyna; 
neither is it pro-Santiago, Madam President. I do not 
know much about the business of the ones who are pro- 
posing the 100 percent or 70 percent. I just know that 
the ultimate judge is the user. It is the Filipino that we 
primarily want to protect; the user, not the investors. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Monsod 
explain how the user is affected by this percentage? 

MR. MONSOD. That is what I mean; the ultimate 
judge of whether the company should be patronized, 
whether it is efficient, should be the user. It has nothing 
to do with the ownership. We are already guaranteeing 
a 60-percent ownership of the Filipino. Many of us have 
been in business. If we own 60 percent of a company 
and we are competent, I have no fear of any foreigner 
taking over. As a matter of fact, even if we have less 
than 50 percent, if we are competent and patriotic, 
there is no fear of foreign dominance. Aid increasing it 
from 60 percent to 75 percent will not eliminate dum- 
mies. If there are people who are willing to be dummies, 
they will be dummies at 5 1 , 60, 75, 90 and 100 percent. 

Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I be allowed to 
react? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I did not telegraph a message that 
those hi favor of the 60-40 ratio are less Filipino than 
those who would be opting for the 75-25 ratio. A1 of us 
are Filipinos. My only point in making a reference to 
the position paper read by Commissioner Romulo is 
that we are not making a Constitution for any of these 


660 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


groups batting for the retention of the 60-40 ratio. As 
correctly pointed out by Commissioner Villacorta in 
that position paper, they were talking about the present; 
they were talking about now; they were talking about 
their own interests. To me, we should not be guided by 
that particular position paper if it is the quality of the 
service to be rendered, which is to be considered. The 
proponents of that position paper are not the consumers. 


the Davide amendment. About five of us here are mem- 
bers of the committee but we were not consulted, so 
can he really, without blinking an eyelash, say that the 
committee is against the Davide amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. The committee members who are 
sitting here have been appealing and begging the other 
members of the committee to sit with us here in front. 


MR. MONSOD. We agree with the Gentleman that it 
is the quality of the service that counts. What we are 
saying is that perhaps the position paper was one of the 
considerations, but the ultimate criteria are the service 
and the quality of the service. 


MR. VILLACORTA. The Commissioner has not 
made that appeal today and I do not think that there 
was any attempt to consult the other members of the 
committee on whether we are m favor or against the 
Davide amendment. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. MON SOD. What we are saying is that it is up to 
the users to decide who to patronize. The issue here is 
whether increasing it from 60 percent to 75 percent will 
improve the quality of the service or not. 


MR. DAVIDE. We will give the Filipinos a chance. Il 
they have a 75-percent equity in a corporation, we wii: 
^ve them a chance. They may not have that right pro 
bably, but I am sure they will. There was mention of an 
all-Fihpmo corporation, and I think there has not beer 
any complamt against the service delivered by that 
particular corporation. 


MR. MONSOD. We submit to the vote of the body, 
Madam President. ^ 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, the body 
vote on the amendment to the amendment. 


is ready to 


THE PRESIDENT. The Chair understands that the 
committee is against, because the body had already 
approved the 60 percent amendment. I suppose they are 
abiding by this 60 percent that has been approved by 
the committee. The Chair interprets it that way. 

But then we will submit the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Davide because a few points have also 
been raised in that the “public utility” mentioned here 
does not refer only to communications but to all public 
utilities. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, this is just a 
prejudicial question. Is it the understanding of the com- 
mittee that after this issue is voted upon, the issue is 
foreclosed? 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, the issue is foreclosed. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. BENGZON. No, it is an amendment now. 

MR. RAMA. It is a separate amendment. 

“two committee report states 

misaoL DavUe is 75 . 25 "°'’'’"®'' of Com- 


MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, will there be a nominal 
voting? 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 


that '^e Madam President, may we restate 

committee is agamst the Davide amendment. 

MR. BENGZON Mav Wf* 

Chair that the paragraph I it i ^“®"^tion of the 
for two-thirds but 60 pLcent 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is the Jamir amendment. 

MR. yLLACORTA. I have a prejudicial question 
Madam President. I do not know on what basis Com 
missioner Monsod decided that the committee is agains 


FR. BERNAS. In our conversation with some 
members of the committee, I was made to understand 
that they would be open to treating telecommunications 
separately. So I hope that while this may foreclose the 
question of public utilities in general, it will not be 
without prejudice to reopening the matter with respect 
to telecommunication. 

MR. ROMULO. No, it is the other way around. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Telecommunication is part of 
public utility. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


661 


MR. ROMULO. Telecommunication was settled this 
morning. If the Commissioner wants to raise separate 
issues with regard to other utilities, that is up to him. 

FR. BERNAS. I would like to raise questions on the 
issue of telecommunication as soon as we vote on this 
matter. 

THE PRESIDENT. That would mean a motion for 
reconsideration. 

MR. VILLEGAS. But it is no longer about the ratio; 
it could be something else like management. 

FR. BERNAS. It will be about the ratio in telecom- 
munication. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Our view is that it has been decided 
during the voting on the Janiir amendment. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 1:08 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 1:18 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

May we request the Commissioners to please take 
their seat. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bernas be recognized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, we can proceed 
to a vote on the understanding that the vote on the 
Davide amendment will not close the issue of manage- 
ment. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Tlrank you. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I respect- 
fully offer an amendment to the amendment of Com- 
missioner Davide. We substitute the 75-25 ratio with 
70-30 . 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, I sincerely feel that 
the 75-25 ratio is very reasonable, justifiable and it 
would bring luck to the Filipinos. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will submit it to a vote; 
and we request silence from our guests in the gallery. 


I think the issue is clear. The Davide amendment is 
75-25 ratio. 

MR- GASCON. Madam President, will it be a nominal 
voting? 

MR. BENGZON. Is Commissioner Davide asking for a 
nominal voting? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is not 
asking for a nominal voting. 

MR. DAVIDE. l am not asking for a nominal voting. 

THE PRESIDENT. It is just a voting by raising of 
hands. 

MR. DAVIDE. But may I just request the teller to be 
very slow in counting. 

MR. GASCON. Therefore, I would like to make a 
motion for a nominal voting if Commissioner Davide is 
not making that motion. 

THE PRESIDENT. We might as well have a nominal 
voting just to have it clear, but I would ask each Mem- 
ber to please give his answer audibly. One cannot just 
presume or assume . . . 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, since the subject 
has been discussed sufficiently, may I suggest that an 
explanation of votes be no longer allowed. 

THE PRESIDENT. We may now proceed. The Sec- 
retary-General will please call the roll. 

MR. VILLACORTA. With the Chair’s indulgence, 
may I just be briefly recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villacorta, if it has 
anything to do with the manifestation of Commissioner 
Rodrigo, the Chair did not make any ruling. It is up to 
the Chair whether to give three minutes or not to those 
who would want to explain their votes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Madam President, it is on 
another matter somewhat related, if I may just speak. I 
was just going to say that since the matter of whether 
this issue has to do with being pro-Filipino or anti- 
Filipino was brought up in the debate between the pro- 
ponent, Commissioner Davide and some members of the 
committee. May this humble Representation encourage 
our colleagues in the Commission to explain their votes 
because I think this is a very crucial vote that we are 
going to make on an issue of far-reaching importance. 

THE PRESIDENT. But we will not impose upon 
anyone. Everybody is free to do as he pleases according 
to the Rules. 


662 


SATU RDA Y, AUGUST 23, 1 986 


MR. VILLACORTA. It is just a hortatory statement, 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. I have enough trust in the Members 
of this Commission, and I do not think anybody here 
has to explain whether he is pro-Fihpino or anti-Filipino. 
Everybody here is pro-FiHpino. 

NOMINAL VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now vote on the 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide. The 
Secretary-General will call the roll. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

COMMISSIONER BACANI EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, first, the 
Members of the Commission would seem ridiculous, 
because we voted on the 60-40 ratio previously and 
now, after a few minutes, we will vote again on the 75- 
25 ratio. Second, it seems that it may not be helpful 
anymore to the Filipinos if we adopt the 75-25 although 
the 66 2/3 percent may be still helpful and may not 
discourage foreign capital. 

Thank you. 


FIRST ROLL CALL 
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Abubakar 


COMMISSIONER ABUBAKAR EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 
MR. ABUBAKAR. I vote no and I will explain my 


Sixp' percent in the hands of Filipinos is more than 
^ corporate manager or a President of a 
coiporation, I would even take 56-54 ratio. I can say 
that we must define the policy, define the objectives as 

A^e f ^ business stands for. 

tlf h! ^ compete on a 60-40 per- 

the RHninr company? Does 

2e fhaTr^lTTu^ confidence and the cour- 

the como^an^n direction of 

me company or manage the operation of any business 

el onllstst 

have marLd 1 thTpmlf 

hand<! nf C l- • The management m the 

Stives o hf ^^"‘^tion, as well as the 
Whv thpn ar ^®3ched, will be attained by Filipinos. 

Sdy a 1^ ^ 6(M0? We have 

faith that ^ advantage in mis respect. I have 

Sn? adv have, only a 5- 

the ffoal “y enterprise, could still reach 

basis? ’/Sr wl I with 1 0 percent on a 60-10 

divided, the ^ to be 

that each Member of ® achieved? I beUeve 

his faith in Commission here would assert 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bengzon No Bennagen 

COMMISSIONER BENNAGEN EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President, I am voting in 
favor of the Davide amendment in the hope that a 
greater share in the equity will enhance Filipino control. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Bernas 

. . . Yes 

Castro de 

Rosario Braid . . . . 
Brocka 

... Yes 

Colay CO . . . . 

Calderon 

... No 



COMMISSIONER CONCEPCION 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. CONCEPCION. I am in favor of increasing the 
participation of the Filipinos but gradually. I do not 
want any change that will further dislocate our eco- 
nomy. So my vote is no. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Davide Yes Jamir . . . 

Foz Yes Laurel . . 

Garcia Yes Lerum . . 

Gascon Yes Maambong 

Guingona Yes 


COMMISSIONER MAAMBONG 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 


THE secretary-general, reMr,g: 

Alonto 

Aquino Yes 


Azcuna Yes 

Bacani . . 


BISHOP BACANI. I vote no. May I explain my vote 
Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I vote against the amendment, 
Madam President. I would have voted ves for the 
amendment if it were not sufficiently explained by the 
honorable Chairman that under Section 9, Congress has 
the power to increase the percentage if it feels that there 
is a need for such increase. Likewise, I have trust in our 
legislators. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


663 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Monsod No 

Natividad 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President, may I explain 
my vote? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

COMMISSIONER NATIVIDAD EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. NATIVIDAD. We have 60 percent already. We 
are m our own country. We have the government in 
favor of the Filipino interests; we have the implement- 
ing agencies. If there is a case, we have the Supreme 
Court. Everybody and all agencies are in favor of the 
Filipino interest. We should be able to manage 60 per- 
cent. If we do not welcome any foreign investment, we 
should have 100 percent. But if we will allow for only 25 
percent, we might as well not allow them at all, because 
that is a sign that they are not welcome. If we welcome 
them, we should give 40 percent. So I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Nieva 

COMMISSIONER NIEVA EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

MS. NIEVA. I vote ito. I would like to explain 
because originally, I voted also against the 60-40. I was 
absent during most of the deliberations of this commit- 
tee last week. I was originally in favor of the committee 
report that provided for 66 2/3 percent. I thought that 
that was a real step forward from the 1973 Constitution 
and a gradual improvement, as pointed out by former 
Chief Justice Concepcion, of the Filipino position. But 
upon discussion and further clarification, it was ex- 
plained that a one-third percent only would not give the 
foreign investor any kind of effective voice in the 
management of a corporation and, hence, would send 
out signals that would completely discourage foreign 
investments. At this stage, I think we are completely 
prostrate and need everything that we can at this time. 
So we would not want to send this kind of a signal to 
foreign investors. Furthermore, on the information that 
there will be an amendment presented later on that will 
provide for the effective Filipinization of management, 
then I vote against giving a 75-percent share to the 
Filipino. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Nolledo Ople 

COMMISSIONER OPLE EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR OPLE. Madam President, may I explain my vote 
briefly. I vote no because I can see the need for real 
flexibility for this policy on Filipino shares of equity in 


public utilities at this time. The immediate implication 
in one sector of public utilities in communications, of 
proving 75-25, is a divestment of foreign equity in some 
of these existing companies upon the adoption of this 
Constitution in the magnitude of probably about PI. 5 
billion and, in the face of the protestations of those 
directly concerned that they could not raise this capital 
now and tliat if there were available means of raising 
this capital, it would be more rational to put this in 
another job-creating project. Instead of paying for 
foreign equity that would be converted into foreign ex- 
change and loss to the country, I think some pragmatic 
wisdom urges us to be flexible about this and give to 
Congress, as this article does in Section 9, the absolute 
flexibility to increase to 100 percent, if necessary. 

I look to the day, which is probably very soon, when 
Filipino shares in public utilities can rise to 100 percent. 
The MERALCO is now 100-percent Filipino. The PLDT, 

I think, is approaching 1 00 percent, the Philippine Air- 
lines is 1 00 percent and tliis is not because of any legal 
fiat but because the capital became available and the 
motivation of our entrepreneurs rose to a level that 
made it possible for them to capture 100-percent Fili- 
pino ownership. I think it is just a matter of time, 
because in telecommunication, Filipino ownership rises 
to 100 percent through Section 9 of the same article 
that is under consideration of this body. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Padilla 


COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I vote no to the 
Davide amendment of 75-25. I share the view of Com- 
missioner Bacani, that after the majority had voted to 
reduce the committee report from 66 2/3-33 1/3 to 
6040, we may appear ridiculous in voting for a higher 
percentage of 70-30. To me, it appears illogical, if not 
absurd. 

the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Mufioz-Palma Rama No 

Quesada Regalado 

COMMISSIONER REGALADO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I vote no aside 
from the other reasons already given here but bemuse at 
this present stage of our national life, emotional, in- 
tellectual or economic xenophobia, we cannot but have 
a pejorative effect upon our economy. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Reyes de los 


664 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, during the 
voting on the Jamir amendment, I voted for two-thirds 
because that was the original proposal of the Commit- 
tee, and I saw no compelling reason why it should 
change its stand. But after that voting, I think it will be 
sheer stubbornness on our part to insist on diminishing 
even more the percentage of foreign interest. Anyway 
the situation can still be remedied by giving the execu- 
tive, managing and governing positions of public utility 
corporations exclusively to Filipino citizens. 

Thank you. Madam President, 1 vote no . 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rigos No Rosales 

Rodrigo No Sarmiento Yes 

Romulo No Suarez 

COMMISSIONER SUAREZ EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SUAREZ. I vote y^ to the proposal. Madam 
President. The proposal is protective of Filipino in- 
terests m public utilities which occupy strategic posi- 
tions in our country’s economy and security. Besides, 
Madam President, it makes it more difficult for foreign 
companies to gain effective control of public utilities 
Law ^ subtle violation of the Anti-Dummy 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Sumulong Tan 


COMMISSIONER TAN EXPLAINS HER VOTE 

m^f rt- I do not have any pragmatism in 

vi 'f ^ ^ 3lso do not have logic. But with the 

ictims ot foreign investors, I vote yes . 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 
Tingson 


COMMISSIONER TINGSON EXPLAINS HIS VOT 

no'^JountJv President, I vote no beca 

vote no singly bTc^urt^ 

yf "is nor;"""’ P-dicL. 

75-_5 IS not too materially different from the 60-40 
have already approved. Besides, we are asking for edi 
liona and scientific aid from our friends abroad, 
why should we not welcome them in the econo 
realm? We allow our fair daughters to marry foreigi 
resulting in handsome grandchildren, with 60-40 bl< 


proportion. Seventy-five: twenty-five on this score is all 
right with me, too. So, I vote no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Trenas Uka 

COMMISSIONER UKA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. UKA. Madam President, I love the million Fili- 
pino users and consumers who will be most affected as 
a result of this amendment. And because of this, I vote 
no. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villacorta 


COMMISSIONER VILLACORTA 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. VILLACORTA. Ginang Pangulo, ako ay suma- 
sang-ayon sa Davide amendment sapagkat isa ako sa 
naniniwalang ang Pilipino ang may-ari ng Pilipinas. Ang 
Pilipinas ay para sa Pilipino. Nagtataka ako kung bakit 
kailangan sa Komisyong itong magmanikluhod ang 
Pilipino sa bawat isang porsiyento ng partisipasyon at 
kontrol ng ating ekonomiya. Nagtataka ako kung bakit 
para pang dapat tayo ang magpasalamat kung may 
sisenta porsiyento ang ating mga kababayan sa public 
utilities na napakahalaga sa buhay at seguridad ng ating 
bansa. 

Ginang Pangulo, nagluksa na naman ang bayan. Nadu- 
rog na namang muli ang kanilang pangarap na nabuhay 
nitong huling himagsikan. 

Mabuhay ang mga multinationals! Binabati ko ang 
mga tagapagtanggol nito. Big brother is happy! (Ap- 
plause) 

MR. OPLE. I protest. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The body will now continue 
voting. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Villegas No 

SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Brocka Munoz-Palma 

Castro de Quesada 

Rosales 

Nolledo Trenas 

BISHOP BACANL Madam President, 1 protest against 
the outburst of Commissioner Villacorta. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


665 


THE PRESIDENT. Tlie results show 15 votes in favor 
of the Davide amendment, 25 against, and no abstention; 
the Davide amendment is lost. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. We would like to refer what has 
transpired here to the Committee on Privileges. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. The Committee on Privileges will 
meet at lunchtime. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. I thmk a number of us have agreed to ask 
Commissioner Rosario Braid to propose an amendment 
with respect to the operating management of public 
utilities, and in this amendment, we are associated with 
Fr. Bemas, Commissioners Nieva and Rodrigo. Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid will state this amendment now. 

Thank you. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. This is still on Section 15. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Commissioner Guingona is 
also a cosponsor of this amendment. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, may we ask for 
an order on the floor to listen to Commissioner Rosario 
Braid? May we request those who are not Members of 
the Commission to stay in their proper places. 

THE PRESIDENT. Those who are not Commissioners 
will please clear the floor of the session hall. Will they 
please return to the gallery seats. The Sergeant-at-Arms 
is directed to enforce the Rules. We are in session. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I propose 
a new section to read; “THE MANAGEMENT BODY 
OF EVERY CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION 
SHALL IN ALL CASES BE CONTROLLED BY CITI- 
ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES.” 

This will prevent management contracts and assure 
control by Filipino citizens. Will the committee assure 
us that this amendment will insure that past activities 
such as management contracts will no longer be possible 
under this amendment? 

MR. ROMULO. Madam President, if I may reply. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. May I ask the proponent to read the 
amendment again. 

MS; ROSARIO BRAID. Tlie amendment reads: 
“THE MANAGEMENT BODY OF EVERY CORPORA- 
TION OR ASSOCIATION SHALL IN ALL CASES BE 
CONTROLLED BY CITIZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES.” 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, will Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid agree to a reformulation of her 
amendment for it to be more comprehensive and all- 
embracing? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. This is an amendment I 
submitted to the committee which reads: “MAJORITY 
OF THE DIRECTORS OR TRUSTEES AND ALL THE 
EXECUTIVE AND MANAGING OFFICERS OF SUCH 
CORPORATION OR ASSOCIATION MUST BE CITI- 
ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES.” 

This amendment is more direct because it refers to 
particular officers to be all-FUipino citizens. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. The committee sitting out here 
accepts the amendment of Commissioner de los Reyes 
which subsumes the amendment of Commissioner 
Rosario Braid. 

THE PRESIDENT. So this will be a joint amendment 
now of Commissioners Rosario Braid, de los Reyes and 
others. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I join in that 
amendment with the request that it will be the last 
sentence of Section 15 because we intend to put an 
anterior amendment. However, that particular sentence 
which subsumes also the proposal of Commissioner 
Rosario Braid can just be placed as the last sentence of 
the article. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to the commit- 
tee? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. The body is now ready to vote on the 
amendment. 


666 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


FR.^BERNAS. Madam President 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Will the committee accept a reformu- 
lation of the first part? 

MR. BENGZON. Let us hear it. 

FR. BERNAS. The reformulation will be essentially 
the formula of the 1973 Constitution which reads: 
“THE PARTICIPATION OF FOREIGN INVESTORS 
IN THE GOVERNING BODY OF ANY PUBLIC 
UTILITY ENTERPRISE SHALL BE LIMITED TO 
THEIR PROPORTIONATE SHARE IN THE CAPITAL 
THEREOF AND . . 


MR. RAMA. The body is now ready to vote, Madam 
President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment which should be the last sentence 
of Section 1 5 and has been accepted by the committee, 
please raise their hand. ( All Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and none against; 
so the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. “ALL THE EXECUTIVE AND 
MANAGING OFFICERS OF SUCH CORPORATIONS 
AND ASSOCIATIONS MUST BE CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES.” 


MR. BENGZON. Will Commissioner Bernas read th 
whole thing again? 

“™ PARTICIPATION OF FOR 
GOVERNING BODY 01 
^'T^LITY ENTERPRISE SHALL B1 
their PROPORTIONATE SHARE II 
the CAPITAL THEREOF ...” I do not have the res 
or the copy. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR DAVIDE. I still have one minor amendment on 
Section 15, line 21. After the word “citizens” add a 
comma (,) and then the following: “NOR SHALL 
SUCH FRANCHISE, CERTIFICATE OR AUTHORI- 
ZATION BE EXCLUSIVE IN CHARACTER OR FOR 
A PERIOD LONGER THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, 
RENEWABLE FOR NOT MORE THAN TWENTY- 
FIVE YEARS.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 


all THE EXECUTD 
TIONS^^^^fJ^^^ OFFICERS OF SUCH CORPOR 

CITIZENS ( 

THE PHILIPPINES.” Is that correct? 


THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The diair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

said hi President, I think that was 

ment !<? th ® language. We accept the amend- 
a nght with Commissioner Rosario Braid? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

am™ment^are'^CorJ^ ori^nal authors of this 
Reves ^^j^issioners Rosario Braid, de los 

o> atividad, Guingona and Fr. Bernas. 

MR. DE LOS RFYP<5 -n 
the board of directors and 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, before we adjourn, 
may I ask that the entire Section 1 5 be voted upon as 
amended? 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Commissioner de Castro had to leave. I 
withdraw. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any other amendment to 
Section 1 5? 


MR. BENGZON. Yes, the governing bodv refers to GASCON. We have some additional sections, 

the board of directors. ^ - 


MR. REGALADO. It is accepted. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Additional sections can be taken 
up on Monday. 


SATURDAY, AUGUST 23, 1986 


667 


MR. RAMA. There will be additional sections as far 
as Section 1 5 is concerned; it is all finished. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, may I just make a 
manifestation again that a number of amendments sub- 
mitted a week ago to the committee of which some had 
been accepted should have been presented today, but 
for lack of time, may I manifest my desire to have them 
taken up on Monday morning. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. But how about Section 1 5? Does 
it not refer to Section 1 5? 

MR. OPLE. No, subsequent sections. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. All right. Can we proceed now to 
vote on Section 1 5? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will the chairman of the commit- 
tee please read Section 15? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The entire Section 15, as amended, 
reads: “No franchise, certificate, or any other form of 
authorization for the operation of a pubUc utility shall 
be granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to 
corporations or associations organized under the laws 
of the Philippines at least 60 PERCENT OF WHOSE 
CAPITAL is owned by such citizens.” May I request 
Commissioner Bengzon to please continue reading. 

MR. BENGZON. “THE PARTICIPATION OF FOR- 
EIGN INVESTORS IN THE GOVERNING BODY OF 
ANY PUBLIC UTILITY ENTERPRISE SHALL BE 


LIMITED TO THEIR PROPORTIONATE SHARE IN 
THE CAPITAL THEREOF AND ALL THE EXECU- 
TIVE AND MANAGING OFFICERS OF SUCH COR- 
PORATIONS OR ASSOCIATIONS MUST BE CITI- 
ZENS OF THE PHILIPPINES.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. “NOR SHALL SUCH FRANCHISE, 
CERTIFICATE OR AUTHORIZATION BE EXCLU- 
SIVE IN CHARACTER OR FOR A PERIOD LONGER 
THAN T\^ENTY-FIVE YEARS RENEWABLE FOR 
NOT MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS. Neither 
shall any such franchise or right be granted except under 
the condition that it shall be subject to amendment, 
alteration, or repeal by Congress when the common 
good so requires. The State shall encourage equity 
participation m public utilities by the general public.” 

VOTING 

THE PMSIDENT. As many as are in favor of the 
entire Section 15, please raise their hand. ( Several Mem- 
bers raised their hand). 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand. ) 

The results show 29 votes in favor and 4 against; 
Section 15, as amended, is approved. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

m 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
adjourn until Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is adjourned until 
Monday at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 1:52 p.m. 


I 




MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


669 


R.C.C. NO. 65 
Monday, August 25, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:59 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by tlie Honorable 
Jose N. Nolledo. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR NOLLEDO. Ama naming makapangyarihan, sa 
panahong ito ng hidwaan at di pagkakaunawaan ng mga 
inatasang bumalangkas ng Batas ng mga batas, ibaling po 
Ninyo ngayon din ang Inyong paningin sa aming lahat, 
saan man naroroon ang mga iba sa amin. Inyo pong 
pukawin ang ammg mga isipan; Inyo pong ipatong at 
ipadama ang Inyong kamay sa puso ng bawat isa sa amin 
at Inyo pong ibulong sa amin na ang pagkakaisa ay kaila- 
ngan sa kabila ng mga masalimuot na mga pangyayari at 
sa kabila ng mga paniniwalang di magkatugma. 

Ang bawat isa sa amm, Ama, ay may sariling panmin- 
digan na handang ipaglaban nang mapayapa. Kung 
sakaling kami’y makalimot sa aming mga sarili at mag- 
hari ang apoy ng pagkapoot at paghiliiganti, Ama, gawin 
po Ninyo ang nararapat na sa wakas ay manatili ang 
tunay na pagmamalial at matapat na pagbibigayan. 

Itulot po Ninyong ang aming mga suliranin ay 
malutas sa pamamagitan ng paghanap ng mga binagong 
alituntunin na tutugon sa adhikain hangga’t maaari ng 
lahat sa amin. At kung ito’y hmdi mangyari, Sana, Ama, 
ay maging mahinalion ang bawat isa sa amin sa pagtang- 
gap ng mga pangyayaring hindi maiiwasan sapagkat 
panahon lamang ang makapagsasabi kung ang ginawa ng 
bawat isa sa amin ay tumpak o tunay na makabayan. 

Hinihingi po namin ang mga ito sa ngalan ni Hesus. 
Siya nawa. 


ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

, . Present 

Natividad . . . . 

. Absent 

Alonto 

. Present 

Nieva 

. Present 

Aquino 

. Present 

Nolledo 

, . Present 

Azciina 

. Present* 

Ople 

. . Present* 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada . . . . . 

. . Absent 

Bennagen . . . . 

. Absent 

Rama 

. . Present 

Bernas 

. Present 

Regalado .... 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los . 

. . Present* 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Rigos 

^ Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo .... 

. . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo .... 

. . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales 

. . Absent 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . 

. . Present 

Davide 

. Present 

Suarez 

. . Absent 

Foz 

, . Present 

Sumulong . . . 

. . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present* 

Tadeo 

. . Absent 

Gascon 

. . Present* 

Tan 

. . Present 

Guingona . . . , 

. . Present 

Tingson .... 

. . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Trenas 

. . Absent 

Laurel 

. . Present* 

Uka 

. . Present 

Lerum 

. . Present* 

Villacorta . . . 

. . Absent 

Maambong . . 

. . Present* 

Villegas 

. . Present 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 3 1 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 

recognized. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of the previous 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


670 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of the previous session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary -General read the following Communi- 
cations, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communication from Mr. Marlowe O. Camello of 232' 
West Beverly Blvd., Suite 204A, Los Angeles, California 
th t k’ proposing an Article in the new Constitutioi 
mat barangay governments be transformed into Citi 
zens Investigative Bodies. 

~ Constitutional Commissior 
To the Committee on Local Governments. 

Insuranrp°^ Abeando, Sr. of Pioneei 

in the CnnTt Corporation, seeking inclusior 

protect^^hp^vf ^ provision obUging the State tc 

conception ^ ^ unborn from the moment ol 

~ Constitutional Commissior 
SclL^aS^rmi^ National Territory, anc 

nacej^ ^8443 Spokane 

retention of th; U^n ^IT^c’ urging thi 

(Communication No. 628 - Constitutional Commission 

To the Committee on Pre^mhio m 

Declaration of PrinciplL National Territory, an. 


MR CALDERON. Madam President, I rise on a 
question of collective privilege. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will have any privilege speech 
later in the day. We will proceed first with the Un- 
finished Business and this is the ruling of the Chair. 

Is there any Unfinished Business, Mr. Floor Leader? 

CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 496 
(Article on National Economy and Patrimony) 
Continuation 

PERIOD OF AMENDMENTS 

\ 

MR RAMA. Madam President, the Unfinished Busi- 
ness is the period of amendments on the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the Committee on tlie National 
Economy and Patrimony ready to proceed with the con- 
tinuation of the period of amendments? May we know 
from Commissioner Villegas. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We are ready. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May I request the members of the 
committee to please occupy the front table. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized as the first registered speaker. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I have a proposal here for an additional section on 
the Article on the National Economy and Patrimony, 
and with the following proponents: Commissioners 

Azcuna, Concepcion, Rigos, Jamir, Tan, Trenas, Ting- 
son, Foz, Maambong and de los Reyes, Jr. The proposed 
new section reads: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE 
THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF FILIPINO LABOR 
AND LOCALLY PRODUCED GOODS AND MATERI- 
ALS.” This was formulated by this member of the 
committee in my attempt to enshrine in our Constitu- 
tion the Filipino-first policy. May I explain for a while 
what is the Filipino-first policy. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


MR CALDERON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recogjiized. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Tliis proposal seeks to enshrine in 
our Constitution the Filipino-first policy enunciated 
in the following existing laws: Commonwealth Act 
No. 138, dated November 7, 1936, giving native 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


671 


products and domestic entities preference in the pur- 
chase of articles for the government; Republic Act 
No. 912, dated June 20, 1953, requiring the use under 
certain conditions of Philippine-made materials or 
products in the government projects or public works 
construction, whether done directly by the government 
or accorded new contracts; and Republic Act No. 5183, 
dated September 8, 1967, regulating the award of 
contracts for the supply to or procurement by in a 
government-owned or controlled corporation, company, 
agency or municipal corporation of materials, equip- 
ment, goods and commodities to contractor or bidder 
who are citizens of the Philippines or to a corporation 
or association, 60 percent of which is owned by 
Filipino citizens. 

These laws shall give impetus to the production and 
use of Philippine products, especially in the manufac- 
ture of fertilizers, feeds for animals and poultry, meat, 
garments, et cetera. These will also lower the costs of 
importation and eventually increase the viability of our 
local industries with Filipino labor. 

May I know the reaction of the committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR VILLEGAS. Commissioner Monsod will reply. 
Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the committee 
agrees with the sentiment behind the proposal. How- 
ever, may we suggest the following: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF 
FILIPINO LABOR, MATERIALS AND PRODUCTS.” 
We do not have to say “LOCALLY PRODUCED 
GOODS.” Secondly, we would like to add the phrase 
“WITH MEASURES THAT HELP MAKE THEM 
COMPETITIVE IN THE MARKET.” May we explain. 
Madam President. 

I think the philosophy of Section 1 is for FiUpmo 
products and materials to be competitive. Sometimes, 
however, our industries are not competitive, not because 
of their own fault but because of other considerations. 
So, when we say “MEASURES THAT HELP MAKE 
THEM COMPETITIVE,” we mean measures whereby 
we help Filipino entrepreneurs design their products, 
both in substance and appearance, so that they become 
more competitive. An example is the Design Center of 
the Philippines. Second, there is a Product Standards 
Agency in the Ministry of Trade and Industry which 
tests Filipino products and most of the time the results 
show that they are at least of the same quality or even 
better. Tlris should be publicized so that Filipinos will 
know that Filipino products are just as good, if not 
better, than imported ones and remove the notion that 
only imported products are better. 

Third, there is the question of research. There should 
be more money put in research. Korea spends 2 percent 
of its gross national product in technological research 


and product research to help its industries. We are not 
doing that. The budget for our National Science and 
Technology Authority is very small and that must be 
increased. It will help make Filipino products and 
materials more competitive by helping the industries 
with applied research. Fourth, trade fairs, for example, 
trade caravans or product caravans all over the country, 
can educate our public on how good Filipino products 
are. We can advertise their appearance, their packaging, 
their contents, their quality; and thereby inform our 
people that our products can stand comparison with aU 
the products of the world. And by means of trade fairs 
abroad, we can also publicize our products and help our 
enterprises be more competitive in the market. Lastly, 
all the efforts of the government towards trade negotia- 
tions and bilateral agreements should be to try to lift 
protectionism in other countries so that our products 
will have a fair go at markets abroad. 

Madam President, this is what we mean by helping 
our Filipino products and materials to be more com- 
petitive rather than shutting off the market. This is what 
we mean by helping the Filipino producers rather than 
protecting the market. So with the permission of Com- 
missioner de Castro, if we can rewrite the section this 
way: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE THE PREFER- 
ENTIAL USE OF HLIPINO LABOR, MATERIALS 
AND PRODUCTS WITH MEASURES THAT HELP 
MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE IN THE MARKET,” we 
will accept the amendments. 

MR DE CASTRO. Madam President, I admire the 
sympathy of Commissioner Monsod to this proposal and 
I am agreeable to the examination of the quality of 
goods that our local manufacturers will make. But I 
would request that we do not eliminate the words 
“LOCALLY PRODUCED GOODS” because these may 
imply importation of goods, when actually I am refer- 
ring to those goods which we produce here. For 
example, the ingredients for the manufacture of 
fertilizers are available here. Tons and tons of fishmeal 
are imported by us for the manufacture of feeds for 
animals and poultry. Another import is coconut meal, 
which is an important ingredient in the making of feeds 
for animals and poultry. Despite the fact that we have 
enough production of com, we still insist on importing 
cornmeal. Worst of all, we import copra meal which we 
are actually exporting. 

So, I would like to keep the phrase “LOCALLY 
PRODUCED GOODS,” subject to quality control, on 
our local industries. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, when we say 

“Filipino products, we actually mean the same thmg 

locally-produced products. But if the Gentleman wants 
emphasis, we really do not mind keeping the phrase 
because we feel it means the same thing. So if the 
Gentleman prefers “LOCALLY PRODUCED GOODS,” 
that is also acceptable to the committee. 


t 


672 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you for accepting the 
amendment. 

MR FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we ask the principal proponent of the 
amendment some questions? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Gladly, Madam President. 


should have a lot of vocational courses, as well as 
seminars on upgrading skills so that our labor sector can 
offer better skills in the market. 

Madam President, these are the measures that the 
government can undertake to make our materials more 
competitive. 

MR FOZ. Since Commissioner Monsod said that the 
word “FILIPINO” describes materials, would this idea 
include materials produced locally but by foreign-owned 
companies? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR FOZ. When we speak of preferential use, do we 
have in mind preferential use by the government, as well 
as the private sector? 


MR. MONSOD. Those foreign companies who are 
allowed to come in under the rules of the Board of In- 
vestments or the Constitution would also benefit from 
our promotion of Filipino products. 


MR. DE CASTRO. The word “PREFERENTIAL” 
was actually formulated by Commissioner Monsod and 
may I request him to answer the question. 

MR MONSOD. The answer is yes. As a matter of 
existing Flag Law which provides that 
rilipmo contractors have a 15-percent advantage in 
government contracts. We are using the general rule here 
m order to emphasize the principle of preferential use. 
bo, the answer to the question is yes 


MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

I would like to find out if the suggestion of the 
ommi ee, as articulated by Commissioner Monsod, has 
een accepte by the principal proponent regarding the 

Phraseorogy of the 


MR. DE CASTRO. I accept it. 


thi? proponent has accepted the change, 
SHATT “™E STAl 

F^^IPINo^^^^l?J^ ™ preferential use ( 

PRODIirFn'r^?^^ materials AND LOCALL 

MAKE THFM^^SR? measures THAT WIl 

hem COMPETITIVE IN THE MARKET.” 

uc^^roducts^T^^ really want our locally prc 
consumers mav Quality control so that t 

products ^ ^ induced to buy our locally produc 


MATERULS doe^f “FILIPINO LABOR, 

PINO” also refer to mLriall?' “P'U- 


maKrial^more°competiaTO mTk''' jrfd 

processing is done with the right tLtaology" F, 
example, when we mine coal, we must make sure th 
we do not mix too much clay. In the area of labor, \ 


MR FOZ. Does the term or descriptive word “FILI- 
PINO” also refer to locally produced goods? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. In other words, the key concept 
here is value added; that in the case of materials, labor 
or products, the value added by Filipinos should be that 
the criterion and the quality should be improved so that 
they are competitive in the market. 

MR. FOZ. The principal proponent mentioned several 
existing laws in explaining the intendment of this 
amendment. Does the Gentleman mean that this amend- 
ment would not only cover the preferential use, as is 
now worded, of Filipino labor, materials and locally 
produced goods, but would also include in its coverage 
the awarding of contracts in the construction of proj- 
ects, so that Filipino contractors — Filipino-owned 
construction companies — would enjoy a degree ot 
preference over foreign entities or foreign bidders? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we just answered 
that the Flag Law provides a preferential treatment o 
1 5 percent for Filipino contractors. 

MR FOZ. Tliis amendment, therefore, has in mind 
the Flag Law. 

MR. MONSOD. Tlie amendment does not only have 
that in mind but all other measures that would make 
our Filipino products and materials competitive. Tire 
reason there is a 15-percent advantage in contract is 
because we recognize the fact that we are not manufac- 
turers of heavy equipment, so that there is some penalty 
involved for Filipino contractors who bid for big 
projects. So, after a lot of calculations, they determined 
that the disadvantage Filipinos have for reasons beyond 
their control would be about 1 5 percent. This does not 
mean, however, that Congress cannot make that 50 
percent if indeed the disadvantage is not of their 
making but are factors beyond their control. We are 
leaving that to Congress, but we are establishing the 
principle in the Constitution. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25. 1986 


673 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, if we change the word 
“PROMOTE” in the amendment to “PROVIDE FOR,” 
would it mean any difference? 

MR. MONSOD. Tlie first word that was used was 
“encourage” and we used “PROMOTE.” We would 
prefer the word “PROMOTE” because we think that it 
takes in the total aspect of making them competitive. 
We do not want everybody to keep on going back to the 
government saying, “You must provide for this; you 
must give us this; you must give us that.” Yet we are 
supposed to have a lot of private initiative in the eco- 
nomy, and to fall back all the time on the government 
does not make our industries strong. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. For the record. Commissioner de 
Castro has accepted the recommendation of the 
committee to add the phrase “WITH MEASURES 
THAT HELP MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE IN THE 
MARKET.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, Madam President, so that the 
additional section shall now read: “THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF 
FILIPINO LABOR, MATERIALS AND LOCALLY 
PRODUCED GOODS WITH MEASURES THAT WILL 
MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE IN THE MARKET.” 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I propose amendments to the 
accepted amendment? My amendment shall be a re- 
formulation of the amendment to read as follows: “IN 
ALL ECONOMIC ENDEAVORS, THE STATE SHALL 
PROMOTE THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF FILIPINO 
labor, DOMESTIC MATERIALS AND LOCALLY 
MADE PRODUCTS AND GOODS AND ADOPT 
MEASURES TO MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, we think the 
phrase “IN ALL ECONOMIC ENDEAVORS” is a sur- 
plusage because we are on the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. DAVIDE. I will agree but my proposal is, in- 
stead of “WITH MEASURES,” we say “AND ADOPT 
MEASURES TO MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 


MR. VILLEGAS. We accept the amendment. Madam 
President. I think the words “DOMESTIC MATERI- 
ALS” also make it clearer. 

MR. MONSOD. That is a good amendment. Madam 
President; we accept it. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, the amendment 
now reads as follows: “THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
MOTE THE PREFERENTIAL USE OF FILIPINO 
LABOR, DOMESTIC MATERIALS AND LOCALLY 
PRODUCED GOODS AND ADOPT MEASURES THAT 
HELP MAKE THEM COMPETITIVE.” 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Tingson would like to say something before we vote. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I am glad to 
cosponsor with Commissioner de Castro this particular 
amendment, if only to further strengthen the overriding 
philosophy and thinking of this Commission that our 
national economy and patrimony is a gift from God for 
Filipinos, and we have the full right to use and enjoy 
their benefits; and, further, to demonstrate that we are, 
in the language of our Con-Com President, writing a 
charter that is pro-Filipino, pro-people and pro-God. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we ready to vote? 

MR. RAMA. We are ready to vote. Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. The new section has been read by 
the honorable chairman of the committee. 

As many as are in favor of this proposed new section, 
which has been accepted by the committee, please raise 
their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 27 votes in favor and none against; 
the new section is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, one of the pro- 
ponents is not here, but there is one amendment which 
the committee has already indicated to him that we 
would accept. How shall we handle that. Madam Pres- 
ident? Can it be a committee amendment but the author- 
ship of the amendment is attributed to Commissioner 
Ople? 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there only one author? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, Madam President. The pro- 
ponents are Commissioners Ople, Natividad, de los 
Reyes, Maambong, Davide and Azcuna. 


674 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we ask for 
a deferment of the consideration of that section until 
Commissioner Ople arrives? He may have comments 
on that proposal. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. So, we will defer consideration. 

MR. MONSOD. We submit. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the next registered 
proponent of an amendment is Commissioner Sarmiento. 
I ask that he be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 


and prosperity for all elements of the population, including 

the mass of workingmen. 

So, Madam President, we humbly ask that the com- 
mittee accept this proposed new section. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, as one of the 
cosponsors of the proposed amendment of Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento and others, may I be allowed to speak 
in favor of the proposed amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I propose 
ms ^endment which wiU be a new section to the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. The pro- 

mTfs toTccc FILIPINO DUM- 

CONSTITUTIONAL AND 

national economy 

SHALL RESULT IN FOR- 
fSTitv^ STATE OF FOREIGN 

PFTTTaT increments AND IN PER- 

PR DUMMY TO 

JSL ^^OFESSION IN ADDITION TO 
k rn RESPONSIBILITY.” Madam President, this 
IS cosponsored by Commissioners NoUedo, Foz, Davide, 

Uka. May I briefly explain the 
reason behind this amendment? 


the president. Please proceed. 

talk of Madam President, it is useless 

of our natu 

is pro Filini ^ ^ ^ Constitution tl 

mtes - maYTV pro-God, when du 
lawyers of Filipinos and some of whom ; 

willing partners ~ themselves to 

tution. Madam P^ Vagrant violation of our Cons 

circumvent thl^eSo^”!,’ dummies v 

tion. If yriL, -40 sharing scheme in our Consti 

domination of our 

Recto warned us of Senator Claro 

He said, and 1 would lite 

ers, a few onhenSnal''n^°”‘*"“' 

country, therefore is nn’ workingmen. Oui 

many thousandra^e obtl; 

an alien-dominated iconom’v “i'" because we have hac 
than four centnrt(»« ^ political life for mon 

dependent from Tr:igrdY;mLl^/ ^ 

with the tremendous natural resources m *rhoS™d 
they would surely have found better ways of developin, 
their economic assets to achieve a high standard of uL 


MR. GUINGONA. As a backgrounder. Madam Pres- 
ident, I expressed my view last Saturday that to me the 
ideal ratio in favor of foreign investors would be the 
ratio as contained in the original report of the commit- 
tee, which is one-third. When Commissioner Davide 
stood up to propose the amendment of that ratio to 
75-25, I had the impression that it was some sort of a 
quantum leap and it was another extreme to the 
extreme of 60-40. And so for a while I had thought of 
abstaining, but, finally, I decided to vote in favor of the 
75-25 ratio. One of the reasons was precisely because I 
believe or concur with the observation of Commissioner 
Davide that it is highly possible that although on paper 
the foreign investors would have a minority ownership, 
the fact of the matter is that, the actual ownership 
could be more than 40 percent through Filipino 
dummies. 

When I speak of foreign investors, may I please 
clarify. Madam President, that I do not allude to Amen 
can investors only because I believe that in the foresee 
able future, we will not only have a sprinkling, but qui^ 
a number of foreign investors who are not 
Chinese, Japanese, Arab investors. I believe with o 
missioner Davide that there is less chance of 
even with the help of Filipino dummies, if the ratio i 
fixed at 75-25. At 60-40, all that the foreign investors 
have to do is solicit 1 1 percent Filipino-dummy par ci 
pation. This is a part of life that we cannot close our 
eyes to. 

This has happened before and will happen again m 
the future and the consequence would be very disad- 
vantageous to the Filipinos, as alluded to by Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento. First, I stUl believe we should be 
concerned about the effect on the national security of 
too much foreign involvement, particularly in such 
activities as telecommunications. Second, if a foreign 
investor decides to invest in the Philippines, the project 
would not only be profitable but highly so, and I would 
prefer that less profits go to foreigners who are more 
entitled to bring the same out of the country than the 
Filipinos. Third, J believe we should make it clear, that 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


675 


while we certainly welcome foreign investments, these 
foreign investments are welcome only under our terms, 
and one of these is the prohibition suggested under the 
Sarmiento, et a/. amendment. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. Will Commissioner Guingona yield 
to a few questions? 

MR. GUINGONA. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I agree that we 
should prevent the use of dummies; that we should con- 
demn those who allow themselves to be used as dum- 
mies. In fact, we have anti-dummy laws, but my 
question is whether or not we should highlight the 
condemnation of Filipino dummies in our Constitution. 
This will imply that there is a plague of dummies in the 
P hili ppines. Will this not cast an ugly reflection on our 
people? Should our condemnation of dummies be in 
our Constitution and not in mere legislation? 

MR. GUINGONA. I have explained why we believe 
that this amendment should be constitutionalized. I do 
not believe that that will be a reflection; it is merely a 
preventive measure. It is a safety measure to which our 
FiUpino people are entitled. 

MR. RODRIGO. One of the criticisms of this Consti- 
tutional Commission is that we are trying to practically 
legislate. Even if we have such a provision in the Consti- 
tution, it would need legislative implementation. We 
cannot provide in the Constitution what penalty should 
be imposed. Should it be prision correccional, prision 
mayor? This will wait for legislation. In fact, we already 
have anti-dummy laws. So, why enshrine this in the 
Constitution? Does the Gentleman know of any country 
whose Constitution singles out the act of being dummies 
for condemnation in the Constitution? 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, may I react? 
MR. RODRIGO. Yes. 

to 

MR. GUINGONA. I do not agree that this is purely a 
legislative matter to be considered by the legislature or 
by Congress. But even granting, for the sake of argu- 
ment, that it is so, we know very well that we have 
passed quite a number of provisions here which under 
our criteria are legislative in character. I do not see why 
we should make an exception of this very important 
provision. 

MR. RODRIGO. I was not happy about some of 
these provisions which I thought should be left to 


legislation, but, in this particular case, I have the added 
misgivings that it might cast an ugly image on our 
people. It might create the impression that “dummy- 
ism” is so prevalent m the Philippines that we had to 
have a provision in the Constitution against this. I just 
want to have this on record. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are there any other comments? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, as one of the 
cosponsors of the provision, may I be permitted to 
speak in favor of the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

We have the Anti-Dummy Law which is Common- 
wealth Act No. 108, as amended by RA No. 6082, 
violation of which will mean merely forfeiture of the 
rights, privileges and franchise. It is agreed among 
lawyers, even among all Fihpinos, Madam President, 
that the Anti-Dummy Law has proven to be ineffective. 

I quote Mr. Romero, an economist and columnist, who 
said in his column that it is useless to talk of the 60 
percent-40 percent equity without an accompanying 
measure that will condemn and give appropriate punish- 
ment for violations of the provisions on national 
economy and patrimony. To constitutionalize this 
provision against dummies will accord great importance 
to it. We, therefore, ask the government to strengthen 
the fight against the employment of dummies who are 
guilty of a crime as heinous as treason. This cannot dis- 
courage foreign investments because when aliens come 
to invest here, they should do so in good faith, in the 
thought that they come here to respect our laws and not 
to prostitute Filipinos who are willing to be Judases for 
mercenary reasons. 

Madam President, if our government will just meti- 
culously investigate, it will be revealed that there are law 
offices, most of them in Makati, whose members are 
willing to be dummies in exchange for fat retainer’s fees. 
Shame on them. We need to constitutionalize safeguards 
against the violations of constitutional provisions 
designed to protect the interest of Filipinos in the 
wealth of the nation. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the committee ready to react? 

Commissioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President, I have made 
my stand from the very beginning of our sessions against 
means and ways that will evade the provision on con- 


676 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


servation of natural resources. Perhaps we will recall 
that when we took up the question of citizenship, I 
already warned the Commission that the biggest door 
for the circumvention of the provisions of natural re- 
sources was by naturalization as citizens of the Philip- 
pines. And so, I then suggested that we adopt a stricter 
policy on naturalization, but that appeal did not seem 
to have any effect. I suppose that with so many aliens 
that have been so easily naturalized by corrupt public 
officials, which is no secret, I am afraid that we are 
wastmg our time on these protestations of FiUpinism, 
Filipmization or nationalism. The biggest door to cir- 
cumvent the limitations to the conservation of our 
natural resources is the naturalization of foreigners. We 
have to be strict in the application of our naturalization 
law, which is far from being so, particularly in its 
implementation. Of course, insofar as sanctions are con- 
cerned, I do not know of any Constitution in the world 

at provides for sanctions. The Constitution is meant 
to provide the structure of the government and the 
guideimes. Imposmg sanctions is not a simple matter of 
of violators. One of the strongest arguments 

ic ^®sty International against the death penalty 

IS that the statistics all over the world show that the 

anv the crime incidence in 

adont^ ° f ^ important is the 

bv thf» preventive measures. A sanction imposed 

therSf for the violation of a provision 

tinnc a H meet the demands of the condi- 

Dortiona^> to the need of pro- 

SSherrfor'" 

tu/fon “duding in the Consti- 

tution a provision providing for sanctions. 

Thank you. 


MR. ROMULO. Madam President. 


niz™ ^^^ESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is rec 


accept th^^a^c^'o behalf of the committee, w 
However thpr^ • °^*^®Pts of Commissioner Sarmientc 

by SCssi:„errOo,e ™»>imen,s propose 

Quesada who arp ^ * u ’ ^^’^^agen, Maambong an 

Commissioner Sarmientn^^'f 

amendment so that h * willing to defer h 

ponents. ^ work with the other prc 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President 
request a suspension of about three niinutest’ 


THE PRESIDENT, The 
It was 10:51 a.m. 


session is suspended. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:04 a.m., the session was resumed with the 
Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo presiding. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Sarmiento be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
committee objected to the use of “FILIPINO DUM- 
MIES” and so, during the conference, we made a re- 
formulation of this additional section to read as follows: 
“THE VIOLATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS 
ARTICLE SHALL RESULT IN FORFEITURE IN 
FAVOR OF THE STATE OF FOREIGN INVEST- 
MENT AND ITS INCREMENTS IN ADDITION TO 
CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, as Commis- 
sioner Romulo said, there is another amendment that 
was proposed by Commissioners Quesada, Ople and 
Maambong. We were appealing to the proponents to 
harmonize these two views because they really are 
addressed to the same act. The proposal of 
sioner (Quesada reads: “ACTS WHICH CIRCUMVEN 
OR NEGATE ANY OF THE PROVISIONS OF THli> 
ARTICLE SHALL BE DEALT WITH BY LAW.” We 
propose that we add the phrase: “ARE INIMICAL 
THE NATIONAL INTEREST.” 

The reason why we are proposing this is that we have 
approved in Section 5 of the Article on Citizenship a 
section which says: “Dual allegiance of citizens 
inimical to the national interest and shall be dealt wit 
by law.” The act that we are talking about here of being 
dummies partakes of the same nature of dual allowance, 
where the citizens’ allegiance to the country is not 
unqualified. Therefore, in constitution-making it would 
be good to align these two provisions so that both oi 
them are addressed to the same type of problem. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just 
reply to the remarks made by the honorable Commis- 
sioner Monsod about realigning it with the other provi- 
sions of the Constitution. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


677 


When we tackled the section on local autonomy, 
there was this question that we are legislating. The 
honorable Commissioner Be'mas, a well-known constitu- 
tionalist and my idol, said that we cannot frame a 
Constitution in a vacuum. We have to contend with 
realities, with present situations. So, we have to make 
adjustments. We should not treat constitution-making 
as dogmatic; that it should be brief and concise. We 
should respond to the signs of the times. 

So, to me, the national economy is the lifeblood of 
our people and we should give more teeth to safeguards. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree that the act is against the 
national interest. All we are saying is that by making a 
very strong statement of principle in the Constitution, 
we are mandating Congress to act accordingly. And this 
is a Congress that really represents the people; they are 
voted by the people and they are answerable and 
accountable to the people. For example, there may be 
other penalties that are available to Congress so why are 
we just saying “FORFEITURE”? Maybe there are more 
severe penalties that Congress will study and look into, 
but it is not for us at this time to prescribe the penalties 
for such a crime. There is already the Anti-Dummy Law, 
which can be improved and implemented properly, 
unlike in the past. But just because it was not imple- 
mented does not mean that we should constitutionalize 
the penalties. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As the 
Chair sees the situation, there are three proposals: one 
by Commissioner Sarmiento, the other by Commis- 
sioners Quesada, Ople, et al., and the other by the 
committee, which is to synchronize the two proposals. 

The Chair believes that this can be reconciled if we 
suspend the session for a few minutes. 

The session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 11:08 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 11:13 a.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). TTie 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Sarmiento be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer, during our 
conference, the committee proposed some amendments 
to our proposal. The reformulated section will read as 
foUows: “ACTS WHICH CIRCUMVENT OR NEGATE 
ANY OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE 
SHALL BE SUBJECT TO CIVIL AND CRIMINAL 
SANCTIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I 
request Commissioner Sarmiento to elaborate on the 
words “CIVIL AND CRIMINAL SANCTIONS”? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I will ask only 
one question to aid him in the elaboration. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento may yield if he so desires. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Just one question, Mr. Presiding Officer. Does the 
civil sanction include the forfeiture of foreign invest- 
ments and its increments? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. The committee agrees with the pro- 
ponent that that is one of the sanctions that may be 
prescribed by Congress. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
body now ready to vote on the amendment? 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, point of 
information apropos of the comment of Commissioner 
Monsod that the forfeiture of foreign investments and 
its increments may be so provided by Congress. That is 
actually so provided right now - that any person who 
commits a criminal offense will be subject to the sub- 
sidiary penalty of confiscation and forfeiture under 
Article 45 of the Revised Penal Code. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Now, Mr. Presiding Officer may I 
react? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes 

Commissioner Nolledo. ’ 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

It is true that the sanctions are also provided for in 
existing laws but these are mere statutes which can be 


678 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


amended, repealed or modified. We are providing a 
constitutional basis for the punishment of dummies, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the body is ready 
to vote. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to introduce a very 
minor amendment? Instead of “MAY,” I propose the 
word “SHALL.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

say “AS PROVIDED 

Di LAW ? 


MR. DAVIDE. 
delete “MAY BE.” 


“AS PROVIDED BY 


LAW,” so we 


MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. DAVIDE. I agree. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you 


BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

sionw^Ba^^^^^*^^ OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Comn 
sioner Bacam is recognized. 



it r J^st hke to be 

Nolledo^ P the questioning of Commis 

sanction^! ^ + certainly included among 

comment of he Provided by law. It seems thau 

included by kw° maf Monsod says it may 
ment nf n "hat is the exact sense of the ame 

ment of Commissioner Sarmiento? 

it to ConCTPw^t^^ ^*^®siding Officer, we are leav 

be'p^:srfirtXT‘''“ " 

Coneress to ado,^t f ^ urgent message 

circiSnstances. '^''f^hure when warranted by 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. We agree with that interpretation. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MS 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Just for the record, may we ask 
Commissioner Sarmiento to clarify with us the coverage 
of the acts which would amount to a circumvention of 
the prohibition in the Constitution, to provide enough 
impetus for statutory implementation. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento will please proceed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The sanctions will cover all acts 
of dummyism. 

MS. AQUINO. No, not the sanctions but the acts 
which would amount to circumvention. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It will cover all acts of dummy- 
ism. For instance, 1) those who have in their names or 
under their control a right, franchise, privilege or 
property, the exercise or enjoyment of which is ex- 
pressly reserved by the Constitution to Filipino citizens 
or to Filipino-controlled corporations or who permit the 
use, exploitation or enjoyment of such right, franchise, 
privilege or property by a person or corporation not 
possessing the requisites prescribed by the Constitution; 
2) those who transfer or convey such right, franchise, 
privilege or property to a person or corporation not 
qualified under the Constitution; 3) those who, in any 
manner, permit or allow any person or corporation not 
qualified under the Constitution to acquire, use, exploit 
or enjoy such right, franchise, privilege or property 
which is expressly reserved by the Constitution to 
Filipino citizens or to corporations controlled by t^eni, 
and lastly, 4) those who permit or allow nonqualified 
persons to intervene in the management, operation, 
administration or control of such right, franchise, 
privilege or property either as officer, employee or 
laborer. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Commissioner Sarmiento. 

For the record, these are acts which would, in effect, 
be constitutionally prohibited without us providing for 
that expressly in the article, and when violated, these 
are subject to criminal punishment by imprisonment or 
fine, and as previously clarified, forfeiture of the 
property. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Wdl Commissioner Sarmiento answer one 
or two questions before the committee calls for a vote? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


679 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento may answer if he so desires. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. In the enumeration of specific acts, did 
the Commissioner use dummyism? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, that is plain enough. I do not know 
if we can find that in the dictionary, but the meaning 
is very plain to me. It seems that all of these acts are 
attributed to one party — the one that allows himself to 
be a dummy and, therefore, only this party will be 
subject to criminal and civil prohibitions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. No, it will also cover those per- 
sons who initiated the commission of dummyism. It will 
include foreigners who profit from such prohibited acts, 
including those who knowingly abet, assist or aid in 
their planning or perpetuation, who are also criminally 
liable as their dummies. 

MR. OPLE. That is very reassuring because in the 
original formulation of the Quesada amendment, we 
actually had written “in conspiracy with foreign in- 
terest,” and I think in the negotiations, this phrase got 
lost. But I think it is very reassuring that where the act 
of dummyism has been abetted by a foreign investor, 
then he can also be impleaded in a criminal and civil 
action. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is correctly stated, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Foz). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. May we ask the main proponent of the 
amendment a question? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. The Commissioner mentioned those who 
assist or collaborate in the commission of the offense of 
dummyism, as he calls it. Does he have in mind persons 
like lawyers and accountants and other professionals 
who would have a hand in the commission of such 
offense? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. FOZ. Thank you. 


MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one last 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. Just a query to Commissioner 
Sarmiento. The enumeration he has read to us is the 
coverage of the Anti-Dummy Law which was passed 
according to the advice of Commissioner Calderon when 
he was stiU a student — that must be more than half a 
decade or century ago. Is this enumeration not exclu- 
sive? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. And the contemplation of the acts 
which can be interpreted to circumvent the constitu- 
tional prohibition could be expanded to accommodate 
the sophisticated and insidious subtleties of dummyism 
that have been devised recently. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is correct, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. In other words, the statutory imple- 
mentation of this provision is not limited to the inter- 
pretation according to the Anti-Dummy Law which is 
antiquated already? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I be allowed to ask one clarifica- 
tory question? What are prohibited in the proposed 
section would be acts which would negate or circumvent 
the provisions on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony and Provision on Ancestral Lands. But we 
know for a fact, Mr. Presiding Officer, that in the 
various sections under this, article, we have mandates 
directed to the Congress of the Philippines to enact the 
necessary legislation precisely to promote or enhance 
the national economy or patrimony or to protect 
Filipino enterprises, the last of which is to promote the 
preferential right of Filipino labor. Suppose Congress 
fails in this task, would the Members of Congress be 
liable under this section? 

MR. MONSOD. No, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. I ask because that would be the best 
way of negating precisely the Article on National Eco- 
nomy and Patrimony — the failure of Congress to act 
as mandated. 


680 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1 986 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, that is not 
contemplated in this article. The accountability of 
Congress is in the elective process and in the reserve 
rights of the people to change the laws and to change 
them from their office. 


OR NEGATE ANY OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS 
ARTICLE ARE INIMICAL TO THE NATIONAL 
INTEREST AND SHALL BE SUBJECT TO CIVIL 
AND CRIMINAL SANCTIONS AS PROVIDED BY 
LAW.” 


MR. DAVIDE. Thank you for that clarification. 


MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Tingson is recognized. • 

MR. TINGSON. I have a parliamentary inquiry that 
may help our body. I notice that although it is so 
obvious that the presiding officer is not a female, we 
sometimes say “Madam President” and some “Mr. 
Presiding Officer.’ Whenever our lady President gives up 
the Chair for somebody, is it not within the parlia- 
mentary rule that we can always address the chair as 

Mr? President,” whether or not he is the actual 
Con-Com President? 

THE P^SIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair at this moment is not ready to answer that 
question because our President is absent. (Laughter) 

MR. TINGSON. I am just wondering. I just asked that 
to simplify matters. 


MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

me^t^n^^h^^r ^ aware, of course, that as 
cumvention ^ Oj^missioner Aquino, the acts of cir- 
and therpf would not be exclusive 

mentionpH u t^at may also be 

rSked r obviously not be exclusive. But 

Commis«5ionpr M 11 ciimmal sanctions, and 

Commissioner Aq^ikit^ anf h forfeiture and 

I recall that » added fine and imprisonment. 

tioT of disquaUfica- 

like to elahorato Commissioner Sarmiento would 

like to elaborate on that same question that I asked. 

MR. SARMIENTO Yen with t 
perpetual disquaUfication Af t^^’i Prejudice to the 
his profession. ^ Practice 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER fvir p ^ t tv. 

acfeDt^dlv IheT J^^^^dment whSf LslLn 

accepted by the committee? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. Let me 
read the final version: “ACTS WHICH CIRCUMVENT 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. ( One 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 32 votes in favor, one against and no 
abstention; the proposed section is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, the last registered 
proponent of an amendment is Commissioner Rosario 
Braid. I ask that she be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have 
a new provision which I would like to submit to the 
body. Earlier, I had submitted this to the committee, 
which felt that the provision may not be appropriate 
and may be better handled in legislation. But my 
cosponsor. Commissioner Regalado, helped me in 
refining the provision, which I hope is now acceptable. 
It reads: “THE STATE SHALL ENCOURAGE TECH- 
NOLOGICAL INDEPENDENCE, REGULATE TECH- 
NOLOGY TRANSFER AND ENSURE MUTUAL 
BENEFITS FOR BOTH PRODUCER AND RECEIVER 
COUNTRIES.” 

May I give a little background on this, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Commissioner will please proceed. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. As we know, most Third 
World countries, including the Philippines, are often at a 
disadvantage in terms of technology transfer. In the 
Philippines, particularly, the disadvantages have been 
in terms of cost, loss of control of the local citizens over 
decisions and the unsuitable characteristics of the 
technology received. There is a lack of effective, in- 
digenous and scientific and innovative capacity which, 
in itself, is a symptom of underdevelopment. 

The cost has been not only in terms of direct pay- 
ments for technology in the form of royalties and 
license fees, but also in terms of practices like over- 
invoicing and under-invoicing of imports, which have 
really amounted to large costs often absorbed by the 
developing country. 

By technology, I mean here technology of hardware 
such as equipment from producer to receiver countries. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


681 


It could also take the form of intellectual property such 
as what is seen in terms of patents, copyrights, formulas, 
designs, trademarks, franchises and manufacturing 
rights. 

May I quote from a paper, “Critique on Technology 
Transfer,” written by the Deputy Minister of Trade and 
Industry, Lilia Bautista: 

In 151 agreements, there were 124 restrictive clauses, 
although restrictive clauses are not allowed in these agree- 
ments. These restrictive clauses are those which restrict the 
use of technology supply after the expiry of the agreement, 
those which require payments for patents and other indus- 
trial property rights after expiration, termination or in- 
validation, and those which restrict technology recipient 
from access to continued improvements in techniques. 

There are about nine or ten of these which I will 
submit for the record, but I will not bore the listeners. 
What I am saying is that 124 out of 151 agreements 
have restrictive clauses, and these, therefore, facilitated 
the problem now faced by the developing country 
which fails to benefit from the technology know-how. 

As a matter of fact, if I may continue to read, it 
states: 

The U.S. particularly is in the business of selling royal- 
ties to countries which already have technocratic and in- 
tellectual support to demand, and it is not in the business 
of selling pure information such as know-how and show- 
how to the LDCs — less developed countries. Multinationals 
are more interested in setting up direct affiliates and with- 
drawing branch earnings than in turning information over 
to less developed countries. 

So these sellers of information products, such as 
royalties, do not turn over patented processed informa- 
tion and techniques; rather, they hire out multinational 
consultants and managers to assist less developed 
countries in their domestic operations. 

What happens is that we are deprived of the know- 
how, and in terms of outflow of foreign investments, 
from 1961 to 1980 it has been negative. It is estimated 
that the sum of $95 1 million is the total sum of outflow 
of earnings. 

According to Ms. Bautista, and I quote: 

. . Foreign investors are not the best users of domestic 
resources. Several domestic industries such as coconut oil, 
cigars, leather products, ready-made clothings and others 
are more efficient users of domestic resources. 

So what I am saying is that there is very little transfer 
of technology because of the control of transnational 
corporations. The position of transnational corporations 
is due to the worldwide systems of operations. They are 
reluctant to engage in local sourcing that might initially 
be less profitable and to part with technologies over 
which they have monopolistic control. This is true not 
only in manufacturing industries but also in cultural 
information such as film and television rights. 


So I propose, Mr. Presiding Officer, that we have a 
provision on technology transfer because the present 
board, the Technology Transfer Board, which is an 
interagency body with representatives from the Ministry 
of Trade and Industry, the Central Bank of the Philip- 
pines, the Philippine Patent Office, the NEDA, the 
National Science Technology Authority and the Tech- 
nology Resource Center, has not really functioned the 
way it should in terms of preventing restrictive clauses 
in technology transfer agreements. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say on the proposed amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. There is another amendment 
proposed by Commissioner Ople in which Commissioner 
Rosario Braid is one of the cosponsors. We would like to 
incorporate her appropriate technology into this total 
provision on promoting the development of appropriate 
Philippine technology. 

May I call Commissioner Rosario Braid’s attention 
that we already had approved under Section 3 a state- 
ment which states: “The State shall promote the de- 
velopment and use of local scientific and technical 
resources.” So this is one very important provision 
under Section 3, and we can definitely include the 
Commissioner’s appropriate technology in Commis- 
sioner Ople’s amendment. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, as long 
as the amendment of Commissioner Ople, of which I am 
a cosponsor, really addresses itself to the promotion of 
a potential pool of entrepreneurs. 

My provision focuses more on the need for regulation 
in the existing Technology Transfer Board because of 
such practices like the violation of technology transfer 
agreements in the form of restrictive clauses which, of 
course, results in benefits which always accrue to the 
producer country. So if this is included in the amend- 
ment, I will be happy to withdraw this proposed 
provision and incorporate it in the other provision. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, while the commit- 
tee is having a conference with Commissioners Ople and 
Rosario Braid, may I ask that Commissioner Calderon 
be recognized? 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Calderon is recognized. 

QUESTION OF PRIVILEGE 
OF COMMISSIONER CALDERON 

MR. CALDERON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I rise on a 
question of collective privilege. 


682 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1 986 


I stand up to articulate the sense of outrage and 
dismay that I personally and the majority of this Com- 
mission, collectively, feel over the campaign of vilifica- 
tion and calumny that has been launched against us by 
certain Members of this Commission. 


In a joint statement released to the press by five 
Members of this Commission and reported out in 
yesterday’s papers, they claimed, and I quote: 

The democratic ideals and nationalist aspirations of the 
Filipino people no longer stand a chance in that deliberative 
body. 


The deliberative body they mean is, of course, this 
Constitutional Commission. The worst of it, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer, is that even certain sectors of the media 
seemed to be falling into a propaganda trap. One news- 
paper yesterday headlined: “Nationalist Con-Com men 
resigning.” While the word “Nationalist” is enclosed in 
quotation marks, indicating that it may not be the 
truth, how many of the ordinary newspaper readers wiU 
take note of the difference? 


Aether newspaper headlined in giant letters: “Ten 
Con-Com Members to resign,” and under it is a drop 
ea in big bold letters: “Over Anti-Filipino Provisions.” 
ms time there are even no quotation marks, which 
mdicates that the headline writer agrees that those 
provisions we passed here are indeed anti-Filipino and 
lie IS passing on this bias to the public. 


fh f ^ Hnplication of all this, Mr. Presiding Officer, is 
^ we in the majority who opposed their stand are 
un ernocratic and antinationalist. This is a scurrilous 

deceive our people into thinking 
e Members of this Commission who, because of 
in their votes, have become the majority 

Filinin engaged in a conspiracy to sell the 

muhinatioS.^ 


gii^mick^!fpc-^^ !f ^ ‘distorted and mean propagand 

S thev whff ^ thinkin 

who failed t minority in this Chamber, the 

them are greater number to vote wit 

cy and nationaS^^^""’ champions of democn 

deception. The^ daii^'^to^^bl 

against what they cT th. t democracy and ra 
not democracy Mr majority. . 

the majority mles' Whv^S® the principle the 

submit to the will of thl^ then cannot these coUeaguf 
expressed in the n n ^^Jonty of this Commission e 

to 

the kind of demoerLv Cat democracj 

appended to the nres^SfertS^ 

Democrat! 


They claim they are nationalistic. Do they have a 
monopoly of nationalism, of patriotism, of love of 
country? Are they the only ones who love the Philip- 


pines and the Filipinos? What about our President, 
former Supreme Court Justice, Cecilia Munoz Palma? 
How about former Senators Ambrosio Padilla, Francisco 
“Soc” Rodrigo, Ahmad Domocao Alonto, Decoroso 
Rosales and Lorenzo Sumulong? How about the 
religious leaders. Pastors Cirilo Rigos and Gregorio 
Tingson of the Protestant Church and Bishop Teodoro 
Bacani of the Catholic Church? How about our Muslim 
brothers, former Senator Ahmad Domocao Alonto, 
Commissioners Yusup Abubakar and Lugum Uka. How 
about Former Speaker Jose B. Laurel, Jr. and Com- 
missioners Jose Bengzon, Jr., Alberto Jamir, Christian 
Monsod, Ricardo Romulo, Bernardo Villegas, Crispino 
de Castro, Jose Colayco and Florenz Regalado? How 
about the political oppositionists. Commissioners Bias 
Ople, Teodulo Natividad, Rustico de los Reyes and 
Regalado Maambong? How about former Chief Justice 
Roberto Concepcion and Floor Leader Napoleon Rama? 
Are these people and the others whom I failed to 
mention any less nationalistic than the self-proclaimed 
patriots who do not have the grace to accept a parlia- 
mentary defeat? 

Some of our colleagues here, notably. Floor Leader 
Napoleon Rama, Commissioner Rodrigo and myself, 
actually suffered incarceration in the hands of the 
dictator, Mr. Marcos, because of our fight for the restor- 
ation of democracy and nationalism. Where were these 
self-proclaimed fighters for democracy and nationalism 
during those dark days? And yet, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
we do not proclaim to the world that we have a 
monopoly of nationalism and love for democracy. 

As a matter of fact, we believe in the democratic 
principle that the marketplace of ideas should be open 
even to those ideas that we oppose; open even to those 
ideas that we abhor. But ascribing based motives to the 
other side, just because we do not win the votes, is the 
most undemocratic practice in the world. 

These people, Mr. Presiding Officer, claim that they 
are doing their best to cooperate, but it has become 
apparent that their proposals are not judged on their 
merits but on the basis of black politics. 

This is a most undemocratic and dangerous attitude, 
Mr. Presiding Officer. It implies that they alone possess 
what is meritorious, what is correct and what is true. 
How about us who do not agree with them? Even in the 
Supreme Court, disagreements are resolved by the vote 
by which everybody afterwards abides. Can they not 
understand that this practice of democracy — finding 
the collective will by majority vote — observed even in 
the Supreme Court should also be followed in this 
parliamentary body and out there among our people 
through general elections? 

But they claim that they are the only ones who are 
right. They claim they alone possess the key to the 
recovery of this nation. They claim when they are 
rejected in the voting, that there is a conspiracy against 
the Filipino people. Who authorized them in the first 
place to speak for the people? By what right do they 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


683 


arrogate unto themselves the title of nationalists, pro- 
gressives and lovers of democracy when they could not 
even abide with grace and politeness to the will of the 
majority? They claim they are trying to cooperate, and 
yet they behave so brazenly when they are defeated in a 
vote. Does this mean that they will cooperate with us 
only for as long as we accept their proposals and that 
the moment we reject their proposals, they will no 
longer cooperate? By their conduct, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, the answer to this question seems to be in the 
affirmative. 

In the future, it is possible that through our vote or 
through violence these people may capture the govern- 
ment of this country. By their conduct and the way in 
which they interpret democracy, heaven help us when 
that day comes. 

In the meantime, Mr. Presiding Officer, we are still 
living in a democracy under our definition, not theirs. 

I, therefore, wish to remind them of a portion of my 
prayer I said here sometime ago: 

As crucial issues are submitted to the vote, fortify us. 
Almighty God, with humility in victory, with grace in 
defeat, and with the wisdom to understand that every vote 
in this Chamber is a vote of conscience intended to achieve 
the common will, and certainly, not a partisan stand de- 
signed to defeat a foe. For in this Chamber, O Lord, there 
are no foes, only colleagues in the common endeavor to 
structure the foundation of this nation. 

In short, Mr. Presiding Officer, I appeal to them: Let 
us vote against each other, but let us not call each other 
names, nor claim a monopoly of nationalism and of 
merit. 

I thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you, Mr, Presiding Officer. 

In line with what the Honorable Calderon stated, 
allow me to state for the record what Mr. Adlai Steven- 
son said about patriotism : 

Patriotism is not the sudden and frenzied outburst of 
emotion, but the tranquil and steady dedication of a life- 
time. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Ople be recog- 
nized to present his joint amendment with Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, after a conference 
with the proponents of the similar amendment and the 
members of the committee — I am referring to the other 
proponents. Commissioner Rosario Braid who had taken 
the floor earlier, in association with Commissioners 
Regalado, Rigos, NoUedo, Maambong, Guingona, Ben- 
nagen, de los Reyes, and Natividad — I think we are now 
in a position to present a consolidated amendment to 
read as follows: “THE STATE SHALL AIM BY LAW AND 
POLICY TO PROMOTE THE SUSTAINED DEVELOPMENT OF 
A NATIONAL TALENT POOL OF FILIPINO ENTRE- 
PRENEURS, SCIENTISTS, MANAGERS, PROFESSIONALS, 
HIGH-LEVEL TECHNICAL MANPOWER AND SKILLED 
WORKERS OR CRAFTSMEN IN ALL FIELDS. THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY AND 
REGULATE TECHNOLOGY TRANSFERS FOR THE NA- 
TIONAL BENEFIT. 

THE PRACTICE OF ALL PROFESSIONS IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES SHALL BE LIMITED TO FILIPINO CITIZENS SAVE IN 
CASE OF RECIPROCITY BASED ON EQUALITY WITH THE 
CITIZENS OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES AS MAY BE PRE- 
SCRIBED BY LAW.” 

May I know the committee’s response to this amend- 
ment as consolidated? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Could Commissioner Ople discuss 
the second portion, the practice of profession which I 
think needs a little more discussion? 

MR. OPLE. This was incorporated from previous 
amendments of Commissioners de los Reyes, NoUedo 
and Rigos. With the Commissioner’s permission, may 
I caU on anyone of them to reply to the questions of the 
committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. This is the paragraph which reads: 
“THE PRACTICE OF ALL PROFESSIONS IN THE 
PHILIPPINES SHALL BE LIMITED TO FILIPINO 
CITIZENS SAVE IN CASE OF RECIPROCITY BASED 
ON EQUALITY WITH THE CITIZENS OF FOREIGN 
COUNTRIES AS MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 

MR. OPLE. May I caU on Commissioner NoUedo to 
answer any question concerning the second paragraph? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Do I understand it right that the 
Commissioner would hke the second paragraph to be 
deleted? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, to be elaborated upon for 
discussion. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The second paragraph reads: “THE 
PRACTICE OF ALL PROFESSIONS IN THE PHILIP- 
PINES SHALL BE LIMITED TO FILIPINO CITIZENS 
SAVE IN CASE OF RECIPROCITY BASED ON 


684 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


EQUALITY WITH THE CITIZENS OF FOREIGN 
COUNTRIES AS MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 
Actually, the original proposal included the words 
“absolute equality,” but we understand that that seems 
to be impossible to attain so we deleted the word 
“absolute.” We just put “EQUALITY” which means 
that it should be of substantial equality. The word 
“RECIPROCITY” is interrelated with the word 
“EQUALITY,” and our purpose here is to lend more 
importance to the provision that the patrimony and the 
economy of the nation must be under the control of 
Filipinos. And in the exercise of rights, privileges or 
concessions under the provisions on the Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony, necessarily, the 
exercise of the profession is also involved. So we have 
to align the exercise of the profession with the exercise 
of rights and privileges. That is the reason we are not 
deleting this provision; we are insisting. If the Chairman 
will consider it favorably, we will be grateful. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I am one of the proponent: 
ot an earlier proposed resolution with other cosponsor: 
which include Commissioners Foz, de los Reyes, Maam 
ong, Natividad, Nolledo, Ople, Rigos and also the 
^'resident herself. President Cecilia Munoz Palma. The 
rationale given us by a group from various sectors — 
engineering, ^chitecture, medicine, public accountancy 
^ ^ their position paper shows that there are 

repor s o ^egal practice by aliens in the Philippines in 

accountancy and architectural 
Drofe«!^”^i show rampant violations of 

obtained^from instance, where loans are 

The narifao °r®ign sources to finance local projects. 

^uld'^be which 

and architects^"^On Fihpino engineers 

especiallv th. i 6rants-in-aid by foreign countries, 
tacluTe such would also 

Tre^^dL of '■’e detriment and 

wto X In turn, foreign 

supplier of the f in order to assure the 

machineries and to lovidf operation of the 

While this is acceptable thl necessary guarantees, 
beyond the initial extend to services 

^eTVptiXon1oTn&^ 

also been rumored that^a h services. It has 

has been inviting foreian ? ® m Quezon City 

become aT 

operational staff. During the members of its 

bigger nrohlpm^ in tv.^ me past regune, one of the 

Digger problems m the medical profession wa<! the 

practice of inviting and allowinry a me 

r?-i- • ^ L anowmg doctors who were 

ormerly F±pmos but who subsequently became 

Amencan citizens to come to the PhiUppines and 

practice their profession here. They were allowed to go 

to the countryside to treat and give medical help. This 


practice of allowing unlicensed doctors has given the 
impression that our rural folks shall only depend upon 
Bahkbayan doctors. 

This group feels that unless we have a provision to 
this effect, it would be to the detriment of the local 
Filipino professionals. 

So this is the background of this provision. 

MR. ROMULO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
ask some questions of the proponents. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Romulo is recognized. 


MR. ROMULO. Thank you. Let me preface my 
remarks by saying that I do not mind foreign competi- 
tion but I would like to point out a consequence to the 
legal profession which I would like you to take into 
account. As I said, I have no objection to it, but suppose 
a Filipino lawyer who has had 1 2 years of practice and 
who graduated from either the UP or Ateneo may be 
allowed to practice law in New York provided he is of 
good moral character, and so on, would we allow the 
reciprocal right? I know that the Integrated Bar of the 
Philippines is against this. Personally, as I say, I do not 
mind. I feel equal to any foreign competitor. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I just report 
that according to the latest consensus of the pro- 
ponents, we now would like to eliminate the whole 
clause: “SAVE IN CASE OF RECIPROCITY BASED 
ON EQUALITY WITH THE CITIZENS OF FOREIGN 
COUNTRIES AS MAY BE PRESCRIBED BY LA^ 
The second paragraph will now read: “THE PRACTI 
OF ALL PROFESSIONS IN THE PHILIPPINES 
SHALL BE LIMITED TO FILIPINO CITIZENS SAVE 
IN CASES PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 


MR. ROMULO. That is correct, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodngo). What 
does the committee say? 


MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. Could we just make some minw 
amendments, Mr. Presiding Officer? We thm 
AND POLICY” is a surplusage. So the Paragr^h would 
now read: “THE STATE SHALL PROMOTE THE SUS- 
TAINED DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL TALENT 
POOL OF FILIPINO ENTREPRENEURS, SCIENTISTS, 
MANAGERS, PROFESSIONALS, HIGH-LEVEL 
TECHNICAL MANPOWER AND SKILLED WORKERS 
OR CRAFTSMEN IN ALL FIELDS. THE STATE 
SHALL PROMOTE APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY 
AND REGULATE TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER FOR 
THE NATIONAL BENEFIT. 


THE PRACTICE OF ALL PROFESSIONS IN THE 
PHILIPPINES SHALL BE LIMITED TO FILIPINO 
CITIZENS SAVE IN CASES PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


685 


MR. OPLE. Yes, accepted, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Tire amendment is accepted, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Are we 
ready to vote, honorable Floor Leader? 

MR. RAMA. The body is ready to vote. There are no 
more comments. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the proposed amendment, please raise 
their hand. ( Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 26 votes in favor, none against and 
no abstention; the proposed amendment is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. For the last proponent of an amend- 
ment, Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Commissioner 
Sarmiento be recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are more 
proponents for amendments and some of them are not 
with us today. As a courtesy to them, I think we should 
reserve their right to make amendments when they are 
present in our sessions. So let us not close the period of 
amendments. 

MR. RAMA. We are not yet closing the period of 
amendments because there is one more amendment. 

MR. OPLE. I have reserved with the Floor Leader and 
with the committee the opportunity to just complete 
this amendment. 

MR. RAMA. In that case, I ask that Commissioner 
Opie be recognized to complete his amendment. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

I now refer to a new section previously accepted by 
the committee several days ago. May I just point out 
that for purposes of numbering, the committee may 
have the plenary power to put it in the right location. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, the new section reads as 
follows: “THE STATE SHALL PROTECT THE NA- 


TION’S MARINE WEALTH IN ITS TERRITORIAL 
WATERS AND ECONOMIC ZONES AND RESERVE 
ITS USE AND ENJOYMENT EXCLUSIVELY TO FILI- 
PINO CITIZENS.” I just wanted to point out that this 
amendment first appeared in the draft Article on Social 
Justice with respect to fishermen, and the committee 
then persuaded the proponents to wait until the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony could be de- 
liberated upon so that the amendment could be 
considered for inclusion in that article. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. VILLEGAS. The amendment is accepted, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. This was fuUy discussed during the 
discussion on the Article on Social Justice. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to seek some clarifica- 
tions, otherwise I will present an amendment. 

The first clarification is on marine wealth. Does it 
include the submarine wealth? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, it does. 

MR. DAVIDE. So this is taken to include the nation’s 
wealth in areas below the marine areas or what we call 
the submarine areas? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, definitely, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. So it includes the seabed. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DAVIDE. And insofar as territorial waters are 
concerned, is it the contemplation of the Commissioner 
that this includes the territorial sea because under the 
Article on National Territory, we distinguished between 
territorial waters and territorial sea? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. Definitely, the 
territorial sea is included. 

MR. DAVIDE. And regarding these economic zones 
does the Commissioner refer to the exclusive economic 
zones under the Convention on the Law of the Sea? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the 200-mile economic zone as 
provided for in the Convention on the Law of the Sea, 
Mr. Presidiiig Officer. It is, of course, understood that 
there are situations where the Philippine government 


686 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


may have to negotiate with neighboring countries the 
actual delimitations of these economic zones in ac- 
cordance with the prevailing international practice. 


MR. DAVIDE. So in the light of this admission and 
to just clarify the provision, I would like to propose the 
following amendments: after “WATERS,” insert a 
comma (,) and the following words: “TERRITORIAL 
SEAS,” and before “ECONOMIC,” insert the word 
“EXCLUSIVE” and delete the “S” in “ZONE,” so the 
entire section wiU read: “THE STATE SHALL PRO- 
TECT THE NATION’S MARINE WEALTH IN ITS 
TERRITORIAL WATERS, TERRITORIAL SEA AND 
EXCLUSIVE ECONOMIC ZONE AND RESERVE ITS 
USE AND ENJOYMENT EXCLUSIVELY TO FILI- 
PINO CITIZENS.” 


MR. OPLE. I accept the amendment, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). I think 

the amendment has been accepted by the committee 
also. 


VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, the 
amendment has been accepted. 

MR. OPLE. For the record, may I just indicate the 
^oponents of this amendment; Commissioners Jamir, 
atividad, de los Reyes, Maambong, Davide and Azcuna. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacam is recognized. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Concepcion is recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I just want to call attention to 
the fact that the waters within the economic zone are 
part of the high seas. The exclusive economic zone 
refers to the exploitation of the seabed. The waters 
above that portion form part of the high seas and are 
subject to the general principles of international law. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, we agree with 
this construction by the Supreme Court’s Chief Justice. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Let that 
be on record. 

Are we now ready to vote on the proposed amend- 
ment? 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, we are ready, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 26 votes in favor, none against and 
one abstention; the amendment is approved. 

MR. OPLE. May I present my final proposed amend- 
ment now, Mr. Presiding Officer? 


visiA^f ^ whether this pi 

waters ^ ^ Prohibit foreigners from using o 

waters even if they pay a certain rent? 

allo^th^^^^ ^ afraid that this section will n 

agree^nt* will not allow even with 

MR. OPLE Yf>c Tu 

entered into bv Oni«K ® obUgation ji 

for a rent of Soviet Union, where 

rSits ta the tert, ‘hey acquired fishi 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople may proceed. 

MR. OPLE. This section, which I beUeve has also 
been given prior clearance by the committee, reads as 
follows; “IN THE INTERNATIONAL FIELD, IT 
SHALL BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE STATE 
TO HELP INDUSTRIES ATTAIN ACCESS TO TECH- 
NOLOGY, MARKETS AND FINANCE. FOREIGN 
INVESTMENTS, DETERMINED TO BE NECESSARY 
TO THE COUNTRY’S ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
ACCORDING TO THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
PROGRAM, MAY BE WELCOME TO SUPPLEMENT 
THE PRIMARY ROLE OF DOMESTIC ENTER- 
PRISES.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 


MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Mr. Presiding Officer 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, we have a 
slightly different formulation from what we received 
before from Commissioner Ople, so may we have a few 
minutes with him? 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


687 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

It was 12:09 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 12:12 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, after a conference 
with the committee and the other proponents, including 
Commissioner Nolledo, we have arrived at the following 
text and we propose this as another section: “FOR- 
EIGN INVESTMENTS DETERMINED TO BE NECES- 
SARY TO THE COUNTRY’S ECONOMIC DEVELOP- 
MENT MAY BE ENCOURAGED WITHIN THE 
FRAMEWORK OF THIS ARTICLE.” 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. OPLE. May I point out that the framework of 
this article includes Section 9 which vests in the Con- 
gress of the Philippines the power to raise to the highest 
level the equity participation of Filipino businessmen in 
all investment areas. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Does the 
committee accept the amendment? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Are we 
ready to vote on the amendment? 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Da vide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I just ask some questions? Does 
the Commissioner believe that this provision would be 
necessary since, in the various sections of the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony, we have, in 
effect, directly or indirectly, allowed foreign invest- 
ments? Is there no better encouragement than allowing 
a 40-percent participation in the development, ex- 
ploitation of natural resources, as well as in public 
utilities? And also in Section 1, we also provide for 
foreign competition provided it is fair. So, I believe, it is 
not necessary to put that in the Constitution because it 
could be easily gleaned from the various sections that 
foreign investments are welcome. 


MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. On the contrary, with that provision, 
it would look that we are providing for inconsistent 
propositions. On the one hand, we encourage adequate 
protection to the Filipino entrepreneurs and yet in 
another section we say that we will encourage foreign 
investments. 

BISHOP BACANI. The note in the end says: “WITH- 
IN THE FRAMEWORK OF THIS ARTICLE.” 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, this is putting all 
foreign investments in the future under the constitu- 
tional bridle of aU the regulatory provisions within the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). I think 
the proposed amendment has been discussed suffi- 
ciently. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Could our amendment be 
read again? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There is 
a request that the amendment be read again. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Could the entire provision be 
read also? 

MR. OPLE. The amendment reads, and this is the 

text agreed upon by the various proponents and by the 
committee: “FOREIGN INVESTMENTS DETER- 

MINED TO BE NECESSARY TO THE COUNTRY’S 
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT MAY BE ENCOUR- 
AGED WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK OF THIS ARTI- 
CLE OF THE CONSTITUTION.” 

All the rest have been deleted on the basis of the 
information furnished me before I arrived, that Commis- 
sioner de Castro had offered an amendment that was 
accepted, which partly meets the objective of the 
deleted sentence. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I be given one minute? 

The first sentence actually is a provision that would 
encourage self-reliance within the region in terms of 
helping developing countries, like the Philippines, work 
with like-minded states in the same status of develop- 
ment to come up with some schemes of their own - 
preferential trade schemes, development of local techno- 
logy — better adapted to the conditions of a developing 
country. This is a provision that is really close to the 
hearts of those who would like to see more appropriate 
innovations happening within regions in the same level 
of technological and economic state. By taking this 
sentence out, we will leave it only to the legislature to 


688 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


either work along this line, which is really what I meant 
when I said greater ASEAN, greater South to South 
trade, Third World-country cooperation in technology 
development, generation and transfer. 

MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner remembers, 
yesterday we approved a proposal on trade policy which 
states that the State shall promote a trade policy that 
serves the general welfare and utilizes all forms and 
arrangements of exchange on the basis of equality and 
reciprocity. Also, during the interpellations and explana- 
tions of the article, we already included the concepts of 
multicountry, multilateral arrangements, common 
market provisions, suppliers and buyers getting together 
to improve terms of trade, and so on, which are within 
the purview of forms and arrangements of exchange. 
However, we do not think it is appropriate to put a 
provision in the Constitution that will explicitly be 
interpreted as a mandate to form cartels, because it 
invites retaliation. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, I will agree with the 
latter statement, but I would like also to state for the 
record that the problem in the developing countries, 
even despite their economic, social, political, cultural 
eve opment, is the problem of their relationship with 

which is inequitable; 
« ^ constitutionalize it, we 

lii^^ th record that developing countries, 

should Work towards the trans- 
A - ^ inequitable international trade system. 

cartehT^tir!^''^^*^^ direction, without promoting 

countriec t”’ work quietly with like-minded 

aporoD?atI°r^?^ coming up with the generation of 
policies <!n th appropriate preferential trade 

conSallv n°‘ 

order which k international world 

order which is tied up to inequality. 

opSn^n?^^^' Commissioner’s 

on record as'ImX^^^ suggested to put it 

to look into ^ ^ discussed for the future Congress 

Thank you. 

MS. ROSARIO braid. Thank you. 

MR- SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER riu o ^ • \ 
sioner Sarmiento is recoS ' ' 

MR. SARMIENTO Mav t ^ 

respect to Commissioner Opif f ‘‘u® 

stand of Commissioner DavMe ihat t'w, f 

May I just add to the record my s?and 1 

mpntQ hv • n foreign mvest- 

ments by quotmg agam our foremost nationalist Claro 


What we need are foreign loans, not foreign investments. 

Capital is always necessary in economic development. Other 

things being equal, the greater the capital, the larger the 

production and the faster the rate of economic growth. 

In our present state, considering the scarcity of 
Filipino capital, there is a need for foreign capital if we 
expect any acceleration in our economic development, 
but the foreign capital needed is for the purchase of 
capital goods which we cannot produce or manufacture 
locally. Foreign capital, in excess of what is necessary 
to meet this particular need, will do us more harm than 
good. I have repeatedly stressed my preference for 
foreign loans at reasonable rates of interest. They are 
not the substitute for internal financing, but merely, a 
complement. It will take care only of those functions 
that internal financing cannot at present perform, such 
as the procurement of capital goods. But under any and 
all circumstances, foreign loans should be preferred to 
foreign direct investments because the latter mean 
foreign ownership of the business and the profits. 

Our opposition to foreign direct investment is not the 
result of a purely emotional nationalism. In fact, such a 
chauvinistic attitude devoid of all economic substance 
could even prove harmful in such cases. Economic sub- 
stance may be simply described as the industrialization 
of the country by Filipino capitalists and is not simply 
the prevention of industrialization by foreign capitalists; 
it is the exploitation of our natural resources by Filipino 
capital; the development and strengthening of Filipino 
capitalism and not of foreign capitalism; it means an 
increase of the national income, but not allowing it to 
go mostly to non-Filipinos. 

With that, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would like to 
pose my objection to the proposed amendment o 
Commissioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have the high^^* 
respect and admiration for the authority just quoted y 
Commissioner Sarmiento. However, it may be appro 
priate to bring up this analysis to more contemporary 
times. I think if today we are a victim of the debt cnsis 
and we look in vain for concrete results of aU t ese 
borrowings of many years, it is perhaps because we ha 
adopted the tendency of our sister countries in Latm 
America to rely almost absolutely on loans and 
much less on foreign investments. In the case of the 
so-called economic miracle countries of East Asia, they 
had followed the reverse. They had emphasized foreign 
investments especially where these came in in terms of 
capital goods. At a certain stage, we cannot yet manu- 
facture capital goods in our country. And it is precisely 
at that point that we need help from the more advanced 
countries so that we can acquire these capital goods. 

There are two ways of acquiring capital goods: first, 
we bring them in. And when we do not have the money, 
we have to rely on foreign loans or foreign investments; 
and, secondly, we fabricate our own machine tools right 
here, with capital goods made by our own industry. I 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


689 


think at this^’point in time when we are not yet able to 
manufacturq.'pur own capital goods, we need some help 
from overseas.' May I reiterate my original position that 
when we say, “FOREIGN INVESTMENTS DETER- 
MINED TO BE NECESSARY TO THE COUNTRY’S 
DEVELOPMENT MAY BE ENCOURAGED WITHIN 
THE FRAMEWORK OF THIS ARTICLE,” I have in 
mind all the regulatory provisions in the whole Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony which, therefore, 
will attach the phrase within the framework of this 
article as controls to any foreign investments in the 
future. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is rqcognized. 

'• -j 

MS. AQUINO. I have to take a strong exception to 
the amendment being proposed by Commissioner Ople, 
and may I add sornething to the comments of Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento. The proposal is not only a surplusage. 
It reeks of serious danger. On the one hand, it can be 
interpreted as providing the constitutional restraint for 
the influx of foreign investors; on the other hand, with 
the subtleties of constitutional interpretation, it could 
also be interpreted as a constitutional breakwater or 
some kind of a refuge for foreign investments. It is not 
for us; it is not up to us, the Davids, to be protecting the 
Goliaths. 

MR. OPLE. There is nothing here that can support 
such a saturnine view of the statement on foreign invest- 
ments. First of all, this must be determined to be in the 
interest of the country, to be necessary to the country’s 
economic development. And, second, that being settled 
and foreign investments having been allowed to come in, 
they are then subject to the entire range of constitu- 
tional controls that are explicitly set forth in the Article 
on National Economy and Patrimony. Anyway, that is 
how, as proponent, I interpret this amendment. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Nolledo is recognized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to make a clarificatory 
statement here because my name was mentioned by 
Commissioner Ople. I merely suggested to the commit- 
tee the use of the term “WITHIN THE FRAMEWORK 
OF THIS ARTICLE” without concurring with the 
amendment. So, I want to save the provision from 
disaster. 

Thank you. 

MR. OPLE. I submit, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Since the body is divided, I think 
we would like to put this to a vote. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We will 
vote. 

As many as in favor of the proposed amendment, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(Two Members raised their hand.) 

It appears we do not have a quorum; and so, I ask the 
Sergeant-at-Arms to please ring the bell to call the other 
Members to the Chamber. 

MR. NOLLEDO. There is a quorum. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, we 
have a quorum. The results show 12 votes in favor, 10 
against and 2 abstentions; the proposed amendment is 
approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I reserve my right to ask for a 
reconsideration later? Although I voted against, I will 
try to muster enough strength to be able to secure the 
proper motion for reconsideration perhaps in the 
afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Any- 
body who voted in favor has up to tomorrow to move 
for a reconsideration. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I join the manifestation of 
Commissioner Davide, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

Thank you. 

RULING OF THE CHAIR 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). It is 
stated in the Rules that it shall be in order for a Member 
who voted with the majority to move for the recon- 
sideration thereof up to tomorrow or the succeeding 
session day. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. The committee would like to make a 
suggestion here. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 


690 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1 986 


MR. MONSOD. Last Saturday, a phrase was intro- 
duced by Commissioner Davide in Section 15 which 
states: “NOR SHALL SUCH FRANCHISE, CERTI- 
FICATE OR AUTHORIZATION BE EXCLUSIVE IN 
CHARACTER FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER 
THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, RENEWABLE FOR 
NOT MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.” I beUeve 
his purpose was to align this with a section on the 
Article on Natural Resources. The committee would like 
to ask for a review of this phrase because by the nature 
of a “public utility,” it has to be exclusive most of the 
time. When we have a telephone company, a power 
company and such, we do not set up three sets of 
wirings for three telephone companies to be in the area. 
Precisely, the nature of a “public utility” is that it is a 
natural monopoly; otherwise, it would be too expensive 
for the country and for the consumers. 

I ^^so believe that when we talk about “pubhc utili- 
ties, telephone companies and power companies, they 
norm^y have a life longer than 50 years. A dam that is 
built in order to generate electricity lasts for hundreds 
of years. A telephone company, for example, that lasts 
m the stock exchange does it with the hope that over 
tune, it can build a chentele in order to raise funds and 
build goodwill in the stock market. This is a source of 
capital. So, we feel that perhaps this phrase does not 
utility” because by the nature of a 
public utility, these limitations are contrary to their 

^eration. We would like to request a reconsideration of 
this phrase. 


constitutionalize a monopoly in favor only of existing 
public utilities like the Manila Electric Company 
(MERALCO) and the Philippine Long Distance Tele- 
phone Company (PLOT). There must be a time limit 
because monopoly is prescribed not only by the provi- 
sion of the present Constitution but also by the previous 
Constitution. 

MR. MONSOD. If I understand correctly, the limit of 
50 years was being harmonized with the Corporation 
Law — that the life of a corporation should not exceed 
50 years. I believe that is really the origin of that 
provision. 

So there are two aspects here. On the question of 
“exclusive in character,” there are some pubhc utilities 
that are naturally exclusive in character and some which 
are natural monopoUes. Perhaps we can add the phrase 
“FOR A PERIOD AS MAY BE DETERMINED BY 
LAW” so that there will be a recognition of the dif- 
ferent types of enterprises that engage in pubhc utilities. 
An ice plant, for example, should, not even exist for 50 
years. But a power company and a telephone company 
may need to exist for more than 50 years. As a matter 
of fact, the longer it is, the more we attract pubhc 
stockholders in the company. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair wants to know if Commissioner Monsod s going to 
file a motion for reconsideration. 


MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Comir 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

du^^ ^^^ P^tcular amendment was int 

with thf> basically to align 

utuLtfon exploitation a 

Sion whinh I resources. This particular prc 

1935 Unde ^^toduced, already existed as early 

rSerat^rtotf;, -Wch" 

ticular nrrtvjo- 1973 Constitution, we had this p 
of Article Pubhc utilities. It is now Sectioi 

“f *he 1973 Constitution. It reads: 

tion or any other form of authoriza 

exceot to a public utility shall be grantee 

associations corporations oi 

least sixty percentum of Phihppines ai 

zation be exclusive in cham!r‘'^‘'^’ 

fifty years baracter or for a longer period thar 

in thTf97?Comr?'r" maximum period provided 
in me iy73 Constitution as weU as in the Too 

tution by making it 25 years renfx Ki c^^ ? 

4 .U , years renewable for not 

than 25 years, or, therefore, a total of 50 years. 

There must be a limit to these certificates 
franchises. It cannot be perpetual, otherwise we ^ 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Has the 
motion been filed? 

MR. MONSOD. No, but the committee will make the 
motion; we are just reserving it in case it is too late or 
there are not enough Commissioners in the Assem y. 

MR. DAVIDE. I would like to reserve my nght to 
o^ect to any such motion, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. GUINGONA. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 

MR. GUINGONA. I wonder if under the Rules, the 
committee can ask for reconsideration. My understand- 
ing is that the motion for reconsideration must be made 
by a Member or a Commissioner who has voted in favor 
of the provision. 

MR. VILLEGAS. All of us voted for it. 

MR. MONSOD. The committee voted for it but we 
had a rather confused stage of deliberations last Satur- 
day and it was not subjected to full debate. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


691 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). I think 
there is a suggestion that we defer consideration of this 
amendment until this afternoon. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There- 
fore, is there a motion to suspend? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. JAMIR. I move that we suspend the session until 
two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There is 
a motion to suspend the session until two-thirty in the 
afternoon. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the session is suspended until two-thirty this 
afternoon. 

It was 12:39 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:54 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

The Acting Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I request the members of the 
committee to take their seats in front. May I request 
that Commissioner de los Reyes be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, I was 
one of those who voted for the Ople amendment on 
placing something in the Constitution about foreign 
investments. 

I respectfully move for a reconsideration of the said 
amendment. Lest the Commissioners think that the four 
opposition Members of this Commission have not re- 
mained united, I would like to inform the honorable 
Presiding Officer that this is with the consent of Com- 
missioner Ople who will say something about the 
matter. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There is 
a motion to reconsider the approval of the said amend- 
ment. 

MR. OPLE. May I say a few words, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Upon further reflection, on this section 
on foreign investments which is now detached from the 
context of the fuller paragraph that had earlier been 
submitted to the committee and which, as it stands right 
now, might be susceptible to misunderstanding, I have 
decided to support the motion for reconsideration. I 
look forward to a vote that will result in the withdrawal 
of this amendment on the ground that the sense of this 
section is already expressed in other portions of the 
Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 

Thank you. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May Commissioner Ople answer a 
few questions? 

MR. OPLE. Very gladly, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Does the Commissioner intend to 
withdraw his amendment? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May we know why? 

MR. OPLE. On the ground that the sense of this 
amendment is already expressed in the other provisions 
of the Article on National Economy and Patrimony. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Having read the whole Article on 
National Economy and Patrimony, has the Commis- 
sioner not recognized right from the very beginning 
when he introduced his amendment that it is already 
provided in the other provisions of the article? 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I had a vague sense of this being 
already reflected, especially in Sections 1 , 9 and 15. The 
original formulation submitted to the committee was 
the following: 

In the international field, the State shall help national 

industries attain access to technology market and finance. 

Foreign investments may be welcome to supplement the 

primary role of domestic resources and initiative and within 

the framework of this Article. 

However, through the mill of consultations with the 
committee, the text, as earlier approved, has come out 
and it now reads: “Foreign investment may be en- 
couraged within the framework of Article 15 of this 
Constitution.” 

As I said, upon further reflection, and following 
consultations with those who voted earlier for this 
amendment, including Bishop Bacani and Commissioner 


692 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


de los Reyes, I have come to the conclusion that this 
amendment is better left out than made explicit in the 
article. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Do I understand that before the 
Commissioner filed the proposed amendment, he did 
not study it as he is saying now? (Laughter) 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, I think the tend- 
ency of the questioning is loaded with innuendos that I 
am unable to accept. 


MR. DE CASTRO. It is not loaded, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 1 voted for the amendment and it pains my 
heart to see the author of that amendment not having 
studied fully before introducing the same. 

May I know what happened during the meridian hour 
for Commissioner Ople to withdraw his amendment? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) 
session is suspended. 

It was 3:01 p.m. 


The 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. This is just a point of clarification. 
Mention was made here by Commissioner de los Reyes, 
when he made a motion for a reconsideration of the 
vote, that there are four of us here who are opposition 
Members of the Commission. With the permission of my 
colleagues, I would just like to explain that we are not 
really the opposition Members of this Commission. 
However, we were appointed from the list coming from 
the opposition party. We may be the opposition to this 
administration outside of the Commission, but I think 
Commissioner de los Reyes and the rest would agree 
with me that as far as this Commission is concerned, we 
are not the opposition Members of this Commission. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). That 
comment is duly noted. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA Commissioner Monsod would like to be 
recognized. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:03p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) T 
session is resumed. ° ^ 

amendm(»nt^r^?^^^” reconsider the approval of ; 
the section?' ^ ^ 

sen?„ce°M';\'Sdtog ^ 

motion is approved ^ 

is going^ trb?^>I!ithdrrw^^ amendme 

sidered the voting ^ because we have just reco 


MR. MONSOD. Yes it h=>c k 
formalize the withdrawal t reconsidered. Just to 
have it withdrawn. ’ * 

MR. DE LOS RFYPq x/t « 

respectfully move that we withdra Officer, 1 

Withdraw the amendment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICFR d . 
any objection? (Silence) The 
motion is approved. The amendnSrUs wlSarrm ^ 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. Just before we broke up for lunch 
before the recess, we were discussing Section 15 with 
respect to the clause “NOR SHALL SUCH FRAN- 
CHISE, CERTIFICATE OR AUTHORIZATION BE 
EXCLUSIVE IN CHARACTER OR FOR A PERIOD 
OF NOT LONGER THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, 
RENEWABLE FOR NOT MORE THAN TWENTY- 
FIVE YEARS.” During lunch, we consulted with the 
lawyers on the jurisprudence of this section which as 
been there since 1935, and also with the proponent of 
this amendment. Commissioner Davide. We believe t a 
we may have a compromise on how to clarify t e 
meaning of this phrase and I would like to ask E-om- 
missioner Davide if he can restate and explain to us t e 
jurisprudence on this phrase. Perhaps, we can resolve 
this issue with the explanation of Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The clause in question reads as follows: 
“NOR SHALL SUCH FRANCHISE, CERTIFICATE 
OR AUTHORIZATION BE EXCLUSIVE IN CHARAC- 
TER OR FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER THAN 
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, RENEWABLE FOR NOT 
MORE THAN TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.” In the provi- 
sion, on which this particular section is based, that is 
Section 5 of Article XIV of the 1973 Constitution, the 
limit is made specifically at not more than fifty years. I 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


693 


would have no objection to a modification of that par- 
ticular clause I introduced by merely incorporating the 
language of the 1973 Constitution or the 1935 Consti- 
tution, meaning to say, that it would now read as 
follows: “NOR SHALL SUCH FRANCHISE, CERTI- 
FICATE OR AUTHORIZATION BE EXCLUSIVE IN 
CHARACTER OR FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER 
THAN FIFTY YEARS.” And then, insofar as the juris- 
prudence is concerned, the unrippled jurisprudence on 
the basis of the provision of the 1935 Constitution is 
left intact. 

So there is no need to state for the record what is the 
settled jurisprudence on the matter because we have a 
wealth of jurisprudence on these provisions of the 1973 
and 1935 Constitutions. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

MR. MONSOD. We agree with the position of Com- 
missioner Davide both with respect to the issue of the 
words “EXCLUSIVE IN CHARACTER” and with 
respect to the term “FRANCHISE” as stated in the 
1973 Constitution. So we are agreeable to going back to 
the language of the 1973 Constitution. That should 
resolve any questions or issues on the matter. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Shall we 
recall the amendment of a section that was already 
approved before? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So this 
will call for a motion for reconsideration. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento is recognized. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Before we vote on the motion for 
reconsideration, may I address one question to Com- 
missioner Davide? The Commissioner’s original proposal 
was to limit the period of 25 years. 

MR. DAVIDE. But renewable for a period not longer 
than 25 years. Therefore, it has a total of 50 years. 

MR. SARMIENTO. So, this amendment is not dif- 
ferent from the Commissioner’s original proposal. 

MR. DAVIDE. The only difference is that the original 
“franchise, certificate or authority” must be for 
“twenty-five years,” but there is an option to have it 
renewed for another 25 years. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 


MR. DAVIDE. Under the proposal now, we wiU just 
follow the jurisprudence interpreting the 1973 and the 
1935 constitutional provisions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. And the Commissioner’s reason 
for adopting this new formulation is because of settled 
jurisprudence on the matter. 

MR. DAVIDE. Among others; and besides we are 
talking about public utilities. Perhaps an original period 
of 25 years may not be very sufficient. Anyway, it 
would not be exclusive in character and, moreover, it is 
subject to further conditions that the franchise, the 
certificate or the authority shall be subject to repeal, 
amendment or modification, or alteration. 

MR. SARMIENTO. When the Commissioner says “BE 
EXCLUSIVE IN CHARACTER,” will he kindly en- 
lighten us on this point? 

MR. DAVIDE. It simply means that there is no 
monopoly granted to any franchise holder to operate 
the pubUc utility. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there a 
motion to reconsider? 

MR. RAMA. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is a motion for reconsideration 
which has to be voted on. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrip). The 
Chair has not yet heard any motion for reconsideration. 

MR. MONSOD. The committee moves for a recon- 
sideration of the approval of Section 15. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. MONSOD. May the committee have the floor? 

the presiding OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
committee may have the floor. 

MR. MONSOD. The committee proposes that the 
phrase “FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER THAN 
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS, RENEWABLE FOR NOT 
more than TWENTY-FIVE YEARS,” be amended 
to go back to the wording of the 1973 Constitution: 
“OR FOR A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER THAN 
FIFTY YEARS.” noiiuJiianoO 


694 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1 986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). This is a 
committee amendment. 

Is there any objection to the amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. There is a request to read the amend- 
ment. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Commissioner may proceed. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid is recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Mr. Presiding Officer, since 
we are completing the entire section, there is a last 
phrase which is an amendment. 


MR. MON SOD. The whole sentence will now read; 
“No franchise, certificate, or any other form of authori- 
zation for the operation of a public utility shall be 
granted except to citizens of the Philippines or to corpo- 
rations or associations organized under the laws of the 
Philippines at least SIXTY PERCENT of whose 
CAPITAL is owned by such citizens, NOR SHALL 
SUCH FRANCHISE, CERTIFICATE OR AUTHORI- 
ZATION BE EXCLUSIVE IN CHARACTER OR FOR 
A PERIOD OF NOT LONGER THAN FIFTY YEARS.” 
The amendment is: “OR FOR A PERIOD OF NOT 
fifty years,” in lieu of the phrase 

period not longer than twenty- 

renewable for not MORE THAN 
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.” 


MR. MONSOD. That is still there; we are only chang- 
ing a phrase. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). As many 
as are in favor of the amendment, please raise their 
hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

The results show 22 votes in favor, 4 against and no 
abstention; the amendment is approved. 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 


MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 


th I think, as read by the chairman, 

nere IS a double negative: “NOR SHALL SUCH 

tJj” authorization BE EXCLUSIVE 

longer ^ OF not 


LONrp^^^l?D?' ^ ^ be; “OR FOR 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, 
sio™ /aambS^s^iecSr 

of sStion^^of^fciexTv 'J'® 

tee said that ihev J which I heard the comm 

SHALL SUCH%Rlw?2?ciP 
AUTHORIZATTHM CERTIFICATE C 

OR FOR A LONCFp CHARACTI 

T !u PERIOD THAN FIFTY YEARf 

s this amendment acceptable to the committee? 
MR. MONSOD. Yes. 


MR. MAAMBONG. That is it. 


MR. MONSOD. We have just 
Constitution. 


repeated the 


1973 


MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, the committee 
would like to seek a reconsideration of the approval of 
Section 10, which talks about the central monetary 
authority. The second sentence of Section 10 reads: 
“They,” referring to the members of the board, shall 
be subject to the same disabilities and disqualifications 
as members of the constitutional commissions. 
this amendment was passed, we have realized t at e 
disabilities and disqualifications of the members o 
constitutional commissions are such that they re 
people who are full-time employees or members ot tne 
commission. And, therefore, there are such r . . 

like they cannot occupy any other elective or appoin iv 
office, and so on and so forth. These are the sec ions 

tVip ponctitn tinnal rommissionS. 


In the case of the Monetary Board, right now the 
members from the private sector are on a part-time a^s 
and the ex-officio members occupy other- appom i 
offices in the government. And, therefore, there mign 
be an inconsistency here and we should leave o 
Congress the definition of the qualifications and is- 
qualifications appropriate to the board that Confess 
may provide. As of now, these are part-time mernbers 
of the Monetary Board and, therefore, the disqu^fica- 
tions and disabilities of the constitutional commissions 
would not really be applicable to them. So, we would 
like to ask a reconsideration of the approval of this 
section and delete the sentence so that the qualifications 
and disqualifications will be left to Congress. We already 
have the general qualification of probity, integrity and 
patriotism, and it might not be proper for us to apply 
the same provision in the constitutional commissions. 


MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


695 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May I know from the committee 
if there are other sections which shall be considered 
after we have approved this? 

MR. MONSOD. These are the only two that we are 
seeking for a reconsideration. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Is Section 10 the last? 

MR. MONSOD. I believe so, at least from the com- 
mittee’s point of view. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, there may be some more to be 
considered because the Gentleman’s answer is “I be- 
lieve.” 

MR. MONSOD. The committee does not have any- 
more; we do not know if other Commissioners have. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is Com- 
missioner Monsod filing a formal motion now to recon- 
sider? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrip). There is 
a motion to reconsider the approval of Section 10. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
'none; the motion is approved. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I request 
that it be read again so that we may raise our objections 
if there is something in our notes that do not conform 

with what we voted for. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We just 
voted for a reconsideration; now the amendment will be 
submitted. What is the proposed amendment? 

MR. MONSOD. The amendment that the committee 
would like to propose is the deletion of the sentence 
“They shall be subject to the same disabilities and 
disqualifications as members of the constitutional 
commissions.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. How will the section read now? 

MR. MONSOD. The section will read exactly the 
same except for the removal of that sentence, Mr. Pres- 
iding Officer: “The Congress shall establish an inde- 
pendent central monetary authority, the members of 
whose governing board must be natural-bom Filipino 
citizens of known probity, integrity, and patriotism, the 
majority of whom shall come from the private sector.” 
The next sentence will now read: “The authority shall 


provide policy direction in the areas of money, banking, 
and credit,” and so on, and so forth, up to the end of 
the article. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I was the proponent of that particular 
amendment which is now sought to be deleted. In lieu 
of its deletion, may I be allowed to present a modified 
proposal? I propose the following: “THEY SHALL 
LIKEWISE BE SUBJECT TO SUCH OTHER QUALIFI- 
CATIONS AND DISABILITIES AS MAY BE PRE- 
SCRIBED BY LAW.” 

MR. MONSOD. That is acceptable to us, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is the 
body ready to vote on the amendment, as amended? 

MR. MONSOD. Could the Commissioner repeat the 
amendment, Mr. Presiding Officer? 

MR. DAVIDE. The amendment will read: “THEY 
SHALL LIKEWISE BE SUBJECT TO SUCH OTHER 
QUALIFICATIONS AND DISABILITIES AS MAY BE 
PRESCRIBED BY LAW.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection to the amendment? 

Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the latest 
amendment of Commissioner Davide was presented, I 
would have asked, in connection with the deletion of his 
previous amendment which would have extended the 
disqualifications and disabilities of the members of the 
constitutional commissions to the members of the 
Monetary Board, whether or not this deletion would 
mean that the regular members of the board would no 
longer be subject to any disqualifications or disabilities. 
But since the latest amendment would provide that a 
law may be passed providing for certain disabilities and 
disqualifications, the question now would be whether 
this set of disqualifications and disabilities would apply 
to both the regular members as well as members coming 
from the private sector. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, that will be up 
to Congress. 

MR. FOZ. Perhaps, a relevant question is: What is the 
status of the Monetary Board, let us say, compared with 
a constitutional body such as the Commission on 
Elections? Is it on the same level or higher or is it under 
the Office of the President? 


696 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President, it is not the same 
because under this section, it is Congress who organizes 
or establishes the Monetary Board. Secondly, even the 
present law establishes it as an independent monetary 
authority. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Monsod would have 
something to say about this amendment. 


MR. FOZ. Is it an independent monetary authority? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. But it does not enjoy the same rank or 
status of, let us say , the Commission on Elections? 

MR. MONSOD. No, it does not. Madam President. As 
a matter of fact, one of the issues that will arise if we 
keep that provision is how we remove them from office 
because impeachment is only available to those officers 
^umerated in the Constitution by virtue of the 
Regalado amendment. 


MR. FOZ. So I was thinking that if it would enjoy 
e s^e ranking and status of a constitutional body, 
Its members should really be subject to the same 
disqu^fications and disabilities of members of the 
constitutional commissions. 

Thank you. 

MR. MONSOD. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo) Is tl 
Chamber ready to vote on the amendmen?? 

raise thek^hanH ^ of the amendment, plea 
aise their hand. (Several Members raised their hand.) 

Mem^rZsedMshfi^)^' 

the^e^dmlVu^ppiove^^^ ^ 

vote on the whob secfion°” reconsidered, we nc 
wuoie section as amended. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFlrpo 
sioner Monsod is recognizeT^*^ 

MR. MONSOD. There arr. . 
two amendments. ^ actually, I think, one 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER nu n . • 
any objection to the whole th< 

(Silence) The Chair hears none- The'"'"h f 
amended, is approved. ’ whole section. 


MR. MONSOD. There is one more amendment here 
that has been submitted by some of our colleagues, but 
most of the proponents are not here. As a courtesy to 
them, can we just reserve this for them in case they 
want to bring this up? We can vote on the entire article, 
but perhaps we should just keep the matter open with 
respect to this one. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. May we know from the commit- 
tee who of those proponents are now absent? 

Commissioner Monsod still speaks of an amendment, 
but the proponents are absent. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is propounding a question to Commis- 
sioner Monsod. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ani sorry. 
What was the question? 

MR. DE CASTRO. The proponents of that amend- 
ment whom the Commissioner mentioned are now 
absent. Who are they, please? 

MR. MONSOD. There are a number of them; three 
are here but the others are not. This amendment was 
submitted by Commissioners Sarmiento, Bennagen, 
Villacorta, Quesada, Tadeo, Garcia, Gascon, Tan, Suarez 
and Aquino. We are discussing this with the proponen s 
who are here and we may have a solution in a htt e 
while, so if the Gentleman will bear with us for a while. 

MR. DE CASTRO. How long shaU we wait for those 
who are absent? 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 
MR. MONSOD. May we ask for a suspension? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. 

It was 3:27'p.m. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Section 10. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 3:30 p.m., the session was resumed. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


697 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. The proponents of the amendment 
on fiscal and monetary systems who are here are with- 
drawing this amendment; however, the committee re- 
quests that we do not close the period of amendments 
and move on to other agenda at this time. Maybe we can 
resume and close the period of amendments tomorrow. 
That is a request of the committee. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

Commissioner Colayco is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. I think it would be a better policy 
for the committee to fix definitely the date, say, 
tomorrow. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, tomorrow afternoon. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). So, defi- 
nitely, until tomorrow. 

MR. MONSOD. By tomorrow morning, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Ople is recognized. 

MR. OPLE. Is it understood that the committee is 
open until tomorrow to receive proposals for amend- 
ments? 

MR. MONSOD. Just for the amendment that we 
discussed briefly with, I believe. Commissioner Garcia, 
and we would like to give him an opportunity to present 
it by tomorrow. 

MR. OPLE. Is it possible that when we do restrict 
amendments to specified individual Commissioners, this 
can raise issues of discrimination against the others? 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, there are no 
amendments on board and this is in the nature of a 
reservation. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, I have no further amendments but 
I am thinking of the rights of other Commissioners who, 


between now and tomorrow, may receive their own 
illuminations so that they will consider new proposals 
for the committee; there should be no prejudice to 
them. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Colayco is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Mr. Presiding Officer, the under- 
standing is until tomorrow noon? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is just one 
unfinished item. We have not voted on Section 15 as a 
whole section, so I move that we vote on Section 1 5 as 
amended. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). There is 
a motion to vote on Section 1 5 as amended. 

As many as are in favor of Section 15 as amended, 
please raise their hand. (Several Members raised their 
hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (Few 
Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 
(One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 21 votes in favor, 3 votes against 
and 1 abstention; Section 15 is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, in view of the 
reasons stated by Commissioner Monsod, I move that 
we defer the closure of the period of amendments until 
tomorrow at noon on the Article on National Economy 
and Patrimony. 

MR. DAVIDE. Parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. The committee also submitted Com- 
mittee Report No. 32. May we know what is the status 
of this particular committee report? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). WiU the 
committee chairman answer that? 


698 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


MR VILLEGAS. It was part of the interpellations 
and the period of amendments. We have not received 
any amendment to that specific provision unless some 
people have reserved amendments. If there are amend- 
ments, they can be among those additional amendments 
that can be taken up tomorrow. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would 
like to submit a supplemental motion on the reserva- 
tion — this committee report .providing for one section 
on the national economy for ancestral lands. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Mr. Presiding Officer, we can take it 
up right now. 

MR. DAVIDE. 1 move that the body be also given 
until noon tomorrow to submit any proposed amend- 
ment to this single section proposal. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). What 
does the committee say? 

VILLEGAS. Or we may be able to take it up 
now if some people have amendments. 

MR. BENGZON. Does Commissioner Davide have 
any amendment? 


Economy and Patrimony until tomorrow noon in- 
cluding the deferment of the closure of the period 
of amendments and, of course, the item mentioned by 
Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

MR. BENGZON. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. In view of the ruling of the Chair 
that we defer consideration of the additional amend- 
ments to the Article on National Economy and Patri- 
mony, before we move to another subject or to the 
next article for discussion, I move that we go on Third 
Reading on the Article on the Executive which has been 
ready since last week. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MR. DAVIDE. For the moment, I have none, Mr. 
esiding Officer, because in the deliberation on amend- 
ments, we never considered Committee Report No. 32. 
1 thought this was even deleted already by the commit- 
tee from its report 


consider it. In fact, 

about itT asked by Commissioner Rodrig( 

about It to Commissioner Bennagen. 


MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


inquiry ® minor parliamentary 

assigned a «r»r^+- approved, will this be 

the article? ^lumber sequentially with the rest of 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

OF RE^SCM^^^^ CONSIDERATION 
OF RESOLUTION NOS. 496 AND 533 
(Artie e on National Economy and PatrimLy 
and Provision on Ancestral Lands) 

MR. R^A. Mr. Presiding Officer, I reiterate 
motion to defer consideration of the Article on Nati 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Before we proceed to the Third 
Reading of the Article on the Executive, I would like to 
call attention to page 2, paragraph 4 which reads: 

The person having the highest number of votes shall be 
proclaimed elected, but in case two or more shall have ^ 
equal and highest number of votes, one of them shall fort 
with be chosen by the vote of a mqority of all the mem ers 
of the Congress. 

This is part of what I questioned last time and when I 
checked the transcript of August 6, 1986, 1 found ou in 
the answer of Commissioner Regalado that the jom 
session of Congress shall vote separately, not the majon 
ty vote of all the members. It is the majority vote o 
each House voting separately. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Yes, that 
is duly noted. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. That matter was brought to my 
attention by Commissioner de Castro. I checked it and 
the word “not” did not appear. So, actually it is the 
situation of both Chambers of Congress voting jointly 
and the Journal has also been correspondingly cor- 
rected. There is only one instance where the two 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


699 


Chambers vote separately; that is, in the matter of the 
disability of the President and the determination 
thereof. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Before we vote on this, may I 
request the Secretary-General for the transcript of 
August 6, 1986 where I particularly asked this ques- 
tion and the answer is, “voting separately.” Let us wait 
for the transcript of August 6, 1986. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). It is also 
the opinion of the Chair that if we have a bicameral 
legislature, as we propose in this Constitution, whenever 
we mention “Congress voting,” it is deemed to be voting 
separately. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Monsod be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Monsod is recognized. 

Meanwhile, we defer the consideration of the Article 
on the Executive on Third Reading. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. In any assembly of this type, debates 
sometimes result in an unintended results. This hap- 
pened last week and after much reflection over the 
weekend, we all know that when communications 
break down, everybody has some shortcomings. I com- 
mitted my share of impatience m the heat of the debate. 
I assure my colleagues who are not here that the friend- 
ship we have developed these past two-and- a-half 
months is not diminished by our disagreements on some 
issues. We have voted together more times than we have 
disagreed, and those moments, particularly in our 
sponsorship of the Article on Social Justice are memora- 
ble to me because they remind me that we have many 
more things in common in our aspirations and love for 
this country. 

I would like to say to my colleagues who are absent 
that their expertise and ideas are needed to enrich our 
collective effort. There is a reservoir of goodwill and 
respect for them in this Commission, most especially 
from this Member. I am sure there are other issues we 
will not agree on, but I join the appeal of Commissioner 
Calderon for their return and look forward to working 
with them. I must say that we already miss the lively 
debates and the challenge of the enlightened compro- 
mise. 

Honorable Members of this Commission, we are 
trying to help bind the wounds of a nation with this 


Constitution. Let us start with ourselves in this Com- 
mission. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Romulo be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Romulo is recognized. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

In a deliberative body like ours, particularly one 
whose membership represents a wide spectrum of 
political, social and economic opinions and beliefs, there 
is bound to be a clash of ideas which at times can 
become heated. Last Saturday was one of those days. 

I believe, Mr. Presiding Officer, that such occasions 
should not prevent a continued exchange of ideas 
amongst us, granting, however, each other’s good faith 
and sincerity in the espousal of our varied views which 
I am certain each of us believe is for the national 
welfare. 

May I say, therefore, that I hope the absence of some 
of our colleagues will only be temporary, not only for 
the sake of unity but also in the interest of providing 
balance in our deliberations and input of ideas. So for 
these reasons, Mr. Presiding Officer, I would welcome 
their return. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I ask that Com- 
missioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Tingson is recognized. 

MR. TINGSON. Mr. Presiding Officer, I for one do 
not wish to waste a single minute more of our precious 
time, considering that our deadline is fast approaching, 
but our sacred work on behalf of our anxious people 
cannot brook interference by reasons probably that 
could be personal like personal differences. Rather, let 
us accept that in a democratic assembly such as ours, 
there will always be healthy differences of opinion! 
Yes, we will disagree, but we do not have to be disagree- 
able. Let us not stubbornly unpose our will upon others 
who probably are just as honest and as well-meaning and 
just as patriotic. I do maintain — I, for one — that all the 
48 Commissioners in this Commission are true Filipinos 
who are nationalistic and patriotic. But there are always, 
may I repeat, honest differences of opinion. In the 
words of our inimitable feUow Commissioner Lugum 


700 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


Uka, when we impose our will on others, it will no 
longer be democracy, but “democrazy.” We do not 
want that. 

So, Mr. Presiding Officer, here are words of wisdom 
from the Holy Scripture which are God-bred and useful 
for teaching, rebuking, correcting and training and 
for righteousness: 

If you are angry, do not sin by nursing your anger. Do 
not let the sun go down with you still angry. Get over it 
quidcly, for when you are angry, you give a mighty foot- 
hold to the devil. Stop being mean, bad-tempered and 
angry; quarrelling, harsh words and dislike of others should 
have no place in your lives. Instead, be kind to each other, 
tender-hearted, forgiving one another, just as God has 
forgiven you. 

St. Paul writes of the greatest virtue, love, which 
covereth a multitude of mistakes and sins: 

Love is patient, love is kind, love does not envy, it does 
not boast Love is not proud, nor is it mde. It is not self- 
seekmg, it is not easily an^red and it keeps no record of 
wrongdoing on the part of others. Love does not delict in 
evil, but iq'oices with the truth. Love always protects, 
ways trusts, always hopes, always perseveres. And now, 
these three remain: faith, hope and love, but the greatest of 
these is love. 

Thank you, Mr. Presiding Officer. 


aspect of the proceedings is taking its psychological toll 
already. 

Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, there is a previous 
motion to vote on the Article on the Executive on Third 
Reading. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? 

Commissioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Let us 
now vote on Third Reading. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de los Reyes is recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. In voting on the Article on the 
Executive, it is understood that the second sentence of 
Section 17 thereof has already been transposed to the 
provisions on the Article on Local Governments, 
because the engrossed copy still contains that sentence. 


MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER 
Floor Leader is recognized. 


(Mr. Rodrigo). The 


MR. RAMA. I ask that 
recognized. 


Commissioner 


Bacani be 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair is not aware of that. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. That is the nature of my 
parliamentary inquiry, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


the presiding officer 
missioner Bacani is recognized 


(Mr, Rodrigo). Com- 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodngo). Com 
missioner Regalado is recognized. 


rative b<Sly ^^thk^ Mr. Presiding Officer, in a de 

it is almost inevhabll^'^^ar^''®"- 
precisely, because ^ 

Commission, we are 

demonstrate that^eJina^^^ h® opportuni 

in the midst of crisis anH ^econcUiation are pos 
without pointing . that is 

think it is besf for\s a?^th-® 
examine ourselves and ask wh 

this moment that has brouZ J ‘ 

brought about this crisis. 

1 just like to sufiee^t 

which we might particulars 

very conflict of ideas that occur thT™ ■ 

fact that many of us are tired “nden 

And maybe we can reduce the tenstoSSSdt^v 
wards reconciJrafion better by reconsidering our 1 
of work in tins Commission. It may be that the ph] 


MR. REGALADO. I precisely raised that point just 
about three sessions ago because that change . 
the second sentence took place when I was ^ ^ ® . 

pital. And when 1 came back here, I found out a 
the Journal there was a statement that had been agree 
upon and that sentence under the Executive Depar 
ment with respect to supervision over local govern- 
ments was to be transposed to the Article on Lo^^a 
Governments, minus the phrase “as provided by law. It 
was so confirmed, when I made the parliamentary 
inquiry ,that there was such an agreement and that was, 
I understand, approved by the Commission — the matter 
of the transposition with the elimination of the phrase 
“as may be provided by law.” So that the present 
section now in the Article on the Executive shall be 
sans that particular sentence. But it should be in the 
Article on Local Governments. 

MR. DAVIDE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


701 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Com- 
missioner Davide is recognized. 

MR. DAVIDE. I seem to recall that it is not the entire 
second sentence that should be transposed to the Article 
on Local Governments. It is only with respect to the 
general supervision. The clause “and shall take care that 
all laws shall be executed” should be retained or should 
remain in the Article on the Executive. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have my 
records here about Section 17 of the Article on the 
Executive which states: 

The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus and offices. He shall exercise general 
supervision over all local governments as may be provided 
by law and shall take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed. 

The second sentence which states: “He shall exercise 
general supervision over aU local governments as may be 
provided by law,” is deleted. And so, what is left now is 
what Commissioner Davide is saying: 

The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, and offices and shall take care that 
the laws be faithfully executed. 

That is the sentence, as approved then by the Com- 
mission, on Section 1 7 of the Article on the Executive. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Chair seems to remember now because I was the one 
who called attention to the duplication. And so, I think 
Commissioner de Castro is right that only the last 
sentence regarding supervision over local governments 
is going to be transposed but the rest of the section 
remains. 

MR DE CASTRO. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, the three of 
us seem to be in agreement as to that transposition. So, 
probably, we can ask the Vice-Chairman of the Commit- 
tee on the Executive on this formulation: there would 
be no change on the first sentence of Section 17. It 
would read the same way: 

The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus and offices and shall take care that 
the laws be faithfully executed. 

MR. REGALADO. In other words, there will be two 
sentences. 

MR. MAAMBONG. One sentence only, Mr. Presiding 
Officer. After the word “offices,” continue with the 


words “and shall take care that the laws be faithfully 
executed.” Would that be aU right? 

MR. REGALADO. Of course. I understand that was 
approved by the Commission. There wiU be no objec- 
tion on our part. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Anyway, 
the records will show that very accurately. 

With that understanding, are we ready to vote on 
Third Reading? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner de Castro is recognized. 

MR DE CASTRO. My inquiry about the Congress is 
not yet clarified because the transcript of August 6 
shows that they are voting separately. If we can delay 
for a while until we get the August 6 transcript, perhaps 
this can be clarified. 

MR. REGALADO. 1 had that verified, Mr. Presiding 
Officer, when Commissioner de Castro raised the ques- 
tion, and I recall stating that the Chairman was initially 
of the impression that they shall be voting separately, 
but the committee said that they should be voting not 
separately; in other words, jointly. When I looked at the 
transcript, the word “not” was not there, so I caused it 
to be corrected; otherwise, the sentence would have no 
sense. The original impression of the chairman was that 
they would be voting separately; but the committee 
said, “it should not be voting separately but jointly.” 
Because of the situation, as we discussed it in the com- 
mittee, since there is a tie and if the two chambers 
should’ vote separately and the Senate holds for candi- 
date A, while the House of Representatives holds for 
candidate B, then the tie will not be broken. And that 
was the reason why, and I recall that the Commissioner 
was calling our attention when we were defending the 
Article on the Executive, pointing out that it has always 
been the practice in Congress that the two Houses 
always vote separately; but then we have explained that 
for purposes of this draft Article on the Executive, we 
have agreed and the Commission eventually approved 
that in all voting procedures of both Chambers, they 
shall be voting jointly except only in one instance, in 
the matter on the issue of disability wherein they shall 
vote separately. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is it the 
interpretation of this particular section referred to by 
Commissioner de Castro that Congress here will vote 
separately? 

MR. REGALADO. No, Mr. Presiding Officer. With 
respect to Section 4, that will be “voting jointly.” 


702 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is suspended for a few minutes. The records 
will be the best evidence. 

It was 3:57 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 4:11 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. They have not yet resolved the coll- 
ision regarding certain sections on the Article on the 

xecutiye. So, I move that we defer consideration of the 
said article for voting on Third Reading until another 
date. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
motion is approved. 

The Floor Leader is recognized. 


. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer, up for consider 
ion and ^heduled this afternoon after the Article o 
a lonal Economy and Patrimony is the Article o 
rtuman Resources. But the Chairman of the Committe 
vet Resources, Commissioner ViUacorta, is nc 

SDonsnr^’tl^ move that we give him the opportunity t 
morning ^ ^ticle on Human Resources tomorrow 

motion is approvS 

item for Officer, there is no mor 

Social Justice i« oi Officer, the Article o 

the chairperson Second Reading. Howevei 

Reading be postoonoH^f^^^^^^ voting on Thir 

therefore, I join the Flr?^ tomorrow morning also. Anc 
pone the sponso sh J "^°^ion to pos^ 
on Human%e“ Sj:/"„^„,|;''7*tion on the Axticl 
morning. hour tomorro> 


MS. NIEVA. May I just make a slight correction. We 
ask for the postponement to Wednesday because we are 
still waiting for the Minutes. 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, Wednesday. And I keep forget- 
ting that tomorrow is not Wednesday. Tomorrow we 
will take up the Article on Human Resources at nine- 
thirty. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. RAMA. Commissioner Foz wishes to be recog- 
nized. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Foz is recognized. 

MR FOZ. On behalf of the Committee on Constitu- 
tional Commissions and Agencies, we would like to be 
informed when our report on the proposed Commission 
on Human Rights can be scheduled for discussion on the 
floor. 

MR. BENGZON. We will have to finish the various 
articles that are already on schedule. Then, we will 
schedule the “pahabol” reports. 

MR. FOZ. It is a very short report. 

MR. BENGZON. So, as scheduled, the 
take up the Article on Human Resources toge 
the Articles on Family Rights and take 

they are all lumped together. After that, w® 
up the Article on the Declaration of Prmcip > 
General Provisions, and the Transitory 
soon as we finish with all of these, then we can sc 
the additional reports. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER. (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. GUINGONA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Guingona is recognized. 


MS. NIEVA. Mr. Presiding Officer 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr^ Rodrigo) Is 
any objection? (Silence! The Chair hears none 
motion IS approved. 


MR. GUINGONA. Regarding the matter on family 
rights, I think it was agreed by the various committees 
that this must be handled by the Committee on Social 
Justice. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


703 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bengzon is recognized. 

MR. BENGZON. Commissioner Teresa Nieva will 
sponsor that, but it was agreed that the Article on 
Family Rights will be considered together with the 
Article on Human Resources. That was the undeistand- 
ing. Perhaps at that time Commissioner Guingona was 
already in the hospital. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I remember very distinctly that in 
a caucus the body agreed to handle the Article on 
Family Rights after the Article on the Declaration of 
Principles, the reason being that there is a provision 
there regarding the “unborn” which has a less con- 
troversial form in the Article on the Declaration of 
Principles than in the Article on Family Rights. 

MR. BENGZON. This is the first time I heard that 
because I was made to understand that the Article on 
Family Rights, which was originally under the Article 
on Social Justice, would be considered together with the 
Article on Human Resources. So, it is only now that 
there is this proposal. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr, Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am certain of this because, the 
first motion was to move the Article on the Declaration 
of Principles to the very end, and I move that instead 
of that the Article on Family Rights be put after the 
Declaration of Principles. 

MR. BENGZON. It does not really matter to the 
Steering Committee. All I am just saying is that the 
Steering Committee has been made to believe all along 
by the two committees — Human Rights and Social 
Justice — that this matter on the Article on Family 
Rights be tucked on with the Article on Human Re- 
sources. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

MR. BENGZON. May I ask now the chairperson of 
the Article on Social Justice what she has to say about 
this? 

the presiding officer (Mr. Rodrigo). Commis- 
sioner Regalado is recognized. 

MR. REGALADO. Mr. Presiding Officer, that was 
precisely the subject of my parliamentary inquiry 


yesterday morning, as to which committee will handle 
that particular committee report, and then the session 
was suspended and then later the President suggested 
that I move to defer the resolution of my parliamentary 
inquiry until the two committee chairmen shall have 
conferred. So, we are still waiting for that decision. 

MR. BENGZON. What I understood — and the Steer- 
ing Committee was made to understand — is that the 
discussion of the proposed separate Article on Family 
Rights will be tucked on together with the Article on 
Human Resources. The Article on Human Resources 
will be sponsored by the chairman of the Committee on 
Human Resources. After that, the chairperson of the 
Committee on Social Justice will take over and propose 
the proposed separate Article on Family Rights. That 
was what the Steering Committee was made to believe 
all along. It does not matter with the Steering Commit- 
tee one way or the other. If they do not want to tuck it 
on with the Article on Human Resources and they want 
to put it at the very end, that is aU right with the 
Steering Committee. We want a decision now. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Instead 
of discussing this matter in open session, can the dif- 
ferent chairmen or interested parties take this up with 
the chairman of the Steering Committee? 

MR. BENGZON. Yes, we are open to that; it is just 
that I do not like this football business. 

BISHOP BACANI. Mr. Presiding Officer, we are not 
saying that the sponsorship will change hands; it is just 
the location of it. 

MR. BENGZON. Can we talk about that, Mr. Presid- 
ing Officer? 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. There is nothing in the agenda that can 
be discussed this afternoon, so I move that we adjourn 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Is there 
any objection? 

Commissioner Bacani is recognized. 

BISHOP BACANI. I just like to refer Commissioner 
Bengzon to the August 1 8 schedule given to us where 
there is a clear indication of the location of the Article 
on Family Rights. 


704 


MONDAY, AUGUST 25, 1986 


ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). We will 
take it up with Commissioner Bengzon. 


Is there any objection to the motion to adjourn? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 4:20 p.m. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


705 


R.C.C. NO. 66 
Tuesday, August 26, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:57 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is called to order. 

NATIONAL ANTHEM 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to sing 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Teodulo C. Natividad. 

PRAYER 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Bathalang makapangyarihan sa 
lahat, kaming lyong mga anak ay muling dumudulog sa 
lyo upang minsan pa iluhog na makamtan ng bawat isa 
sa amin ang liwanag at talsik ng taUnong higit kailanman 
ngayon namin kailangan upang aming mabalangkas sa 
itinakdang panahon ang isang Saligang Batas na tunay na 
kakatawan sa pangarap, adhikain at pithaya ng aming 
lahi. 

Hinihiling namin sa lyo Panginoon na papag-alabin 
Mo ang aming mga puso sa tunay na pag-ibig sa aming 
bayan at nang sa gayon, lubos naming maiwaksi ang 
anumang pansariling hangarin at nang ang aming naisin 
sa bawat saglit ay ang kapakanan at tunay na kabutihan 
lamang sa aming bayan. 

Isinasamo rin namin na ang anomang hidwaan ng 
diwa ay huwag sanang maging daan upang kami ay 
ngayon pa magkawatak-watak at sa halip, sa ibabaw ng 
anumang pagkakaiba ng palagay, ang umiral ay ang 
tunay na kapatiran at pagmamahalan ng magkakalahing 
ngayon ay inatangan ng maselan at mabigat na saguting 
ugitin ang daong ng kapalaran ng aming bayan hanggang 
sa mga susunod pang panahon. 

Subaybayan Mo kami at patnubayan sa lahat ng saglit 
at huwag Mo po kaming itulot na mabulid sa kinusa o 
hindi man ng pagpapabaya sa aming tungkulin. 

Bathalang makapangyarihan, loobin Mo po sana na 
mamayani sa aming lahat ang kababaang loob at kami 


ay makapagpatuloy ng pagpapalitan ng kuru-kuro na 
siyang tanging paraan upang makatas ang katuwiran at 
katotohanan na hindi kami patatangay sa simbuyo ng 
aming damdamin. 

Ito po ang taimtim naming hinihiling sa pamamagitan 
ni Hesukristong Panginoon namin. Siya Nawa. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General wiU call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Absent 

Monsod .... 

. . Present 

Alonto 

. Present 

Natividad . . . , 

. . Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nieva 

. . Present 

Azcuna 

. Absent 

Nolledo .... 

. . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Ople 

. . Absent 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Padilla 

. . Present 

Bennagen .... 

. Absent 

Quesada . . . . , 

. . Absent 

Bernas 

. Present 

Rama 

. . Present 

Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Regalado 

. . Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Reyes de los . . 

. . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rigos 

. . Present 

Castro de .... 

. Present 

Rodrigo 

, . Present 

Colayco 

. Present 

Romulo . . . . . 

. . Present 

Concepcion . . . 

. Present 

Rosales 


Davide 

. Present 

Sarmiento . . . , 


1707 - - - 

. Present 

Suarez 


Garcia 

. Present* 

Sumulong ... 


Gascon ...... 

. Present 

Tadeo 


Guingona .... 

. Present 

Tan 


Jamir 

. Present 

Tingson . . . . , 


Laurel 

. Present 

Uka 


Lerum 

. Present 

Villacorta ... 


Maambong . . . 

. Present* 

Villegas 



The Secretariat is in receipt of official advice of 
absence of the Honorable Efrain B. Trenas who is indis- 
posed and who has a viral infection. 

The President is present. 

The roll call shows 33 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


706 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1 986 


THE PRESIDENT. The Assistant Floor Leader is 
recognized. 


To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


MR. CALDERON. I move that we dispense with the 
reading of the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
dispense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the motion is 
approved. 


APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. CALDERON. Madam President, I move that we 
proceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munications, the President making the corresponding 
references: 


COMMUNICATIONS 

Communic^ion from the Movement for the Recogr 
Cr^iiif^ Tm Philippine Ethno-Linguist 

Cesar^ Y P C^ezon City, signed by Mr. Benj 

eniiai seeking to put the ethnic groups c 

tioTv presenting the following for consider 

tearhilV Tagalog and halt the compulso: 

medium nf • levels; (2) Leave the choice f 

Filipino has”^to^v!^°” regions or provinces; ( 

languages- f4^ P amalgamation of the nati 

native lanenL should not be detrimental to tl 

AboUsh the Institute 

of 1 ~ Constitutional Commissi' 
To the Committee on Human Resources. 

1 1 Cardinal *StrMr"st”j Solidarity Count 

Quezon Citv stonou k' Subdivision, Novalichi 
A de PeS m S i'' 'J? ^=‘“'>"‘'1 Chahman, Emil 

put an end toVhe^TT^ ^oi^stitutional Commission 
put an end to the U.S. military bases in the Philippines 

(Communication No. 630 - Constitutional Commissi, 
of 1986) 


Communication from three hundred five students, 
teachers and employees of the PWU and Sr. Mary 
Joseph of Assumption, San Lorenzo Village, seeking to 
include in the new Constitution a provision obliging the 
State to protect the life of the unborn from the moment 
of conception. 

(Communication No. 631 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 

Letter from Mr. Fred M. Magbanua, Jr. and three other 
officers of the Christian Leaders Alliance of the Philip- 
pines, PO Box 1 , Valenzuela, Metro Manila, submitting a 
position paper recommending the adoption of a provi- 
sion on the inviolability of the separation of the Church 
and the State. 

(Communication No. 632 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) 

To the Committee on Preamble, National Territory, and 
Declaration of Principles. 


Letter from Mr. Delfin R. Manlapaz of 1707 E. Rodri- 
guez, Sr. Blvd., Cubao, Quezon City, submitting his 
observations entitled “National Development and the 
New Constitution” which seek to clarify questions of 
nationalization and protectionism and the role of 
transnational on the subject of Philippine development. 
(Communication No. 633 — Constitutional Commission 
of 1986) ,p.. 

To the Committee on the National Economy 
mony. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


MR. RAMA. I would like to correct 
nisimpression about the listing of registere s 

ast Saturday. Some Commissioners have made the 
charge that I jumped over Commissioner Aqumo to 
favor Commissioner Jamir on that very controversial 
Section 1 5 of the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony. Fortunately, I do not have the habit of 
lumping over ladies and I have a documentary evidence 
that Commissioner Jamir was ahead of everybody, 
followed by Commissioners Regalado, de los Reyes and 
Amiino. 


I would like also to correct the misimpression that I 
have been unfair during the deliberations. I have been 
trying to be very fair, as it is possible, to be fair in a 
body where people are normally loquacious and effer- 
vescent; and I do not think I have to defend that. That 
is all. Madam President. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


707 


Now, may I call on Commissioner Bengzon to state 
the schedule. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Good morning, Madam President. 

In yesterday’s Journal and in my recollection, Commis- 
sioner Monsod moved that the period of amendments 
on the Article on National Economy and Patrimony be 
left open for discussion until noon today because, 
although there was an amendment of Commissioner 
Ople that was withdrawn, there was another amendment 
which was supposed to have been presented by Commis- 
sioner Garcia. There was a previous reservation for the 
presentation of that amendment, but Commissioner 
Garcia, I believe, was not ready yesterday afternoon 
and, therefore, that reservation holds. The decision of 
the body was to allow Commissioner Garcia to present 
the amendment this morning. 

Likewise, for the clarification of everyone, it was also 
decided that if there are any other amendments, they 
could be presented today until noon. At this moment. 
Madam President, there are no amendments that have 
been presented on the Article on National Economy and 
Patrimony, and Commissioner Garcia is not yet here. 
Therefore, the next item on the agenda is what was 
taken up also yesterday. I move for the approval on 
Third Reading of the Article on the Executive, but 
there were some clarifications made. The Third Reading 
did not go through because of one clarification that has 
to be made by Commissioner Regalado. And I believe 
that Commissioner Regalado is now ready with that 
clarification which would be to the satisfaction, I 
believe, of Commissioner de Castro. 

Madam President, I ask that Commissioner Regalado 
be recognized for the clarification to be made on the 
Article on the Executive, after which we will be ready 
to vote on Third Reading on the Article on the Execu- 
tive. After we vote on Third Reading on the Article on 
the Executive, we can discuss the additional report of 
the Committee on Constitutional Commissions propos- 
ing a Commission on Human Rights, because Commis- 
sioner Villacorta has requested, through the Secretary- 
General, that the committee report on human resources 
be deferred for Thursday. In deference to that request, 
I suggest that we move back the discussion on human 
resources until Thursday afternoon. 

So, at the moment. Madam President, may I request 
that Commissioner Regalado be recognized to make his 
clarification on the Article on the Executive. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Madam President, yesterday there was a little 
question about the correctness of the provisions of 


Section 4 of the Proposed Resolution No. 5 1 7 appearing 
on page 2 thereof, which we ascertained to have been 
correctly noted by Commissioner de Castro after we 
consulted the record of the proceedings. 

The error there arose from the fact that there had 
been a renumbering of the articles so that our notes did 
not correctly reflect the changes that were effected. I 
am referring. Madam President, to page 2, second to the 
last paragraph of the article, which now states: 

The person having the highest number of votes shall be 
proclaimed elected, but in case two or more shall have an 
equal and highest number of votes, one of them shall forth- 
with be chosen by the vote of a majority of all the mem- 
bers of the Congress. 

Now the question that arose was whether the Mem- 
bers of Congress would be voting jointly or separately. 

Going over the transcript of the proceedings of 
August 1, 1986 in connection with the inquiries of the 
President and Commissioner Monsod, and the answers 
of Commissioner Bernas, it is clear that what was in- 
tended here and approved was that the vote shall be by 
the two Houses of Congress voting separately. 

Madam President, since after all these were actually 
taken up in the proceedings on August 1, but unfor- 
tunately not so indicated in the committee report which 
has been prepared for approval on Third Reading, I am, 
therefore, moving, by way of a “now for then” amend- 
ment, meaning a nunc pro tunc amendment, to include 
what was actually taken up, but which was overlooked 
in the reformulation of this resolution so that the last 
two lines will read as follows: “forthwith be chosen by 
the vote of a majority of all the members of BOTH 
HOUSES OF the Congress, VOTING SEPARATELY.” 
This is to eliminate once and for all any question which 
after all is clarified by the transcript of the proceedings 
of August 1 , 1 986 as explained therein by Commissioner 
Bernas. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
particular manifestation of Commissioner Regalado? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; let the proper correction 
be made in accordance with the minutes. 

MR. REGALADO. The other question on the Article 
on the Executive was already resolved yesterday, the 
matter on the transposition of a portion of Section 17 
to the Article on Local Governments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Are we now ready to vote on 
Third Reading on the Article on the Executive? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, just a point of 
inquiry to Commissioner Regalado. I am also a member 
of the committee. I just want to find out if we are now 
prepared to put the exact paragraph and section num- 
bers m Section 10, because right now we have blank 
paragraphs and sections. If we are not yet prepared, we 
can do it some other time. 


708 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, we still do not 
have the Third Reading copy of the Article on the Legis- 
lative. I understand there might be some changes in it, 
so there may also be a renumbering of sections. That is 
why I prefer to keep it blank in the meantime. Anyway, 
the moment the Article on the Executive is approved on 
Third Reading, we can just put the corresponding 
section number. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is all right, Madam President. 
It is purely a mechanical act anyway. 1 was just inquir- 
ing whether we are ready or not. 

Thank you. 


NOMINAL VOTING 
ON PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Executive) 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we vote 
on Third Reading on Proposed Resolution No. 517. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Printed copies of Proposed Resolution No. 517 were 
distributed on August 7, 1986 pursuant to Section 27, 
Rule VI of the Rules of the Constitutional Commission. 

Voting on the proposed resolution on Third Reading 
IS, therefore, in order. 

The Secretary-General will read the title of the 
proposed resolution. 

^^^^ETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 

No. 517, entitled: 

incorporate IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
lUTION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE DEPART- 


f’lKST ROLL CALL 

orc^^ed body will now vote on 

the roll ution, and the Secretary-General will 


THE SECRETARY 

Abubakar 

Alonto 

Aquino 

Azcuna 

Bacani 

Bengzon 

Bennagen 

Bernas 


-GENERAL, reading: 


Rosario Braid Yes 

Calderon Yes 

Castro de Yes 

Colayco Yes 

Yes Concepcion Yes 

Yes Davide Yes 

^ Poz Yes 

Yes Garcia 


MR. GARCIA. I am voting^ to the Article on 
Executive. May I explam my vote, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

COMMISSIONER GARCIA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GARCIA. I am registering a negative vote on the 
Article on the Executive because of the fact that 
Section 18 of the article vests the President with the 
power to declare martial law without the concurrence 
of Congress, which I believe was a very important provi- 
sion that we had discussed extensively, especially in our 
pubUc hearings. We also have had our experience 
regarding martial law. 

For me, the major difficulty here lies in the fact that 
once martial law is declared, it leads to a further accu- 
mulation of power and militarization of politics which 
I discussed during the debates on the floor. I believe 
this article is very important but because of this Section 
18, which I consider a very important provision, I would 
like to register a negative vote. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Gascon 


COMMISSIONER GASCON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. GASCON. Madam President, I would like to 
explain my vote. Honorable Members of the Commis- 
sion, I vote in the negative because I do not believe that 
there are enough safeguards that will prevent what had 
occurred in September 1972. The present article allows 
a unilateral declaration of martial law by the Chief 
Executive without the concurrence of 
What the present article provides “ ^ "’"““‘’Executive, 
a report to the Congress by tb® , ,. 

Although Congress may revoke such ^ 

act of revocation must await the probab PP 
time when, after the declaration of martia aw a 
occurred, many of the critical members of governmen , 
including those Members of Congress and the ju 
might have already been arrested and imprisoned. With 
the help of the military, the whole country might have 
been brought to total submission. What then is the use 
of the provision that the declaration of martial law does 
not supplant the functioning of the civil courts or legis- 
lative assemblies? The events of September 1972 are still 
too clear in our minds. The deletion of the phrase 
“imminent danger thereof” does not preclude the 
declaration of martial law. A despotic Chief Executive 
may declare martial law with no evidence of actual 
invasion or rebellion at all. All he needs is just a few 
hours to complete the scenario I have just described and 
thus perpetuate himself in power. Fellow Commis- 
sioners, in our consultations with the people there 
prevailed an overwhelming support for prior concur- 
rence by the legislature before the Chief Executive can 
declare martial law. The past 14 years saw a trampling 
of their human rights and suppression of their basic 
freedoms. The people have spoken very clearly. Should 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


709 


we again leave the declaration of martial law to the 
discretion of any one individual and, thus, open the 
doors to the tyranny and oppression of our people? 

Thank you, Madam President. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Guingona 

Yes 

Natividad .... 

Yes 

Jamir 

.... Yes 

Nieva 

Yes 

Laurel 

.... Yes 

Nolledo 

Yes 

Lerum 

Yes 

Ople 


Maambong . . . . 

Yes 

Padilla 


Monsod 

Yes 




COMMISSIONER PADILLA EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, I regret that in the 
final formulation of the Article on the Executive, par- 
ticularly Section 18, on the Commander-in-Chief provi- 
sion, the term “or imminent danger thereof,” which 
appears in both the 1935 and 1973 Constitutions, has 
been deleted in the suspension of the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus. I believe that for such suspension, 
imminent danger of invasion or rebeUion would be suffi- 
cient ground therefor. I also regret that the distinction 
between the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus and the proclamation of martial law has 
not been provided for, since Section 18, as approved, 
identifies or confuses these two stages as one based only 
on actual invasion or actual rebellion. I believe there 
should be a distinction between the three stages men- 
tioned in the Commander-in-Chief provision: 1 ) sup- 
pression of lawless violence, 2) suspension of the 
privilege of the writ of habeas corpus, and 3) proc- 
lamation of martial law. But notwithstanding these 
observations. Madam President, I vote in the affirmative. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Munoz Palma Regalado 

Quesada Reyes de los^ 

Rama Yes 

COMMISSIONER DE LOS REYES 
EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I vote yes. 
The Article on the Executive clearly provides safeguards 
against the emergence of a potential tyrant, without 
however reducing the Executive to inutility. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Rigos Yes Rodrigo 

COMMISSIONER RODRIGO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, I would like to 
state that I am happy about the provision in Section 1 8 
that Congress shall “vote jointly” if it wants to revoke 
the proclamation of marti^ law or the suspension of the 


privilege of the writ of habeas corpus or to extend the 
same. 

Voting “jointly” is not done in a bicameral legisla- 
ture. Die two Chambers may meet jointly but they vote 
separately. And so, this provision sticks out like a sore 
thumb in our Constitution. It is a very awkward provi- 
sion. It is in the record that I tried to remedy this by 
presenting an amendment that the House alone be 
empowered to do this. After all, there are matters which 
are left to the Senate alone, like the approval of treaties. 
However, my amendment was voted down. But while I 
am unhappy about this provision, I am happy about the 
provisions of the rest of the chapters, and so I vote yes . 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Romulo Yes Sarmiento 

Rosales 

COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, I am disturbed 
by one of the sections of this article, and this is with 
respect to the presidential proclamation of martial law. 

I was thinking all along that this Commission shall pro- 
vide a safeguard for this presidential proclamation, and 
that is, the concurrence of Congress before the President 
can proclaim martial law. Unfortunately, this was not so 
provided in the Constitution. The committee voted 
against its own recommendation. 

Madam President, martial law is a bane to our 
country; it spelled the doom to many of our rights. I 
was under the impression that we will provide a safe- 
guard under this new atmosphere. Because of the 
absence of this safeguard. Madam President, I vote 
against the Article on the Executive. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Suarez Tan No 

Sumulong Yes Tingson 

Tadeo 

COMMISSIONER TINGSON EXPLAINS HIS VOTE 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, I vote yes because 
in this Article on the Executive, we are, as I see it, pro- 
viding an office for the Chief Executive who is strong 
enough to lead the nation, responsible enough to satisfy 
the country’s needs, and accountable enough to give a 
good account of his accomplishments to the people. 

the SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Treflas Villacorta 

Uka Yes VUlegas Yes 

SECOND ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary-General will con- 
duct a second call for those who have not registered 
their votes. 


710 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Abubakar Ople 

Azcuna Munoz Palma 

Bennagen 

THE PRESIDENT. My vote is yes. 

THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 

Quesada Tadeo 

Rosales Trenas 

Suarez Villacorta 

APPROVAL OF PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 517 
ON THIRD READING 
(Article on the Executive) 

THE PRESIDENT. The results show 32 votes in 
favor, 5 against and no abstention. 

Proposed Resolution No. 517, which seeks to incor- 
porate in the new Constitution an Article on the Execu- 
tive, is approved on Third Reading.* 


COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 37 

The Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies, 
to which was referred Proposed Resolution No. 365, introduced 
by Hon. Garcia and Sarmiento, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE NATIONAL POLICE COMMISSION, THE 
NATIONAL POLLUTION CONTROL COMMISSION, THE 
JUDICIAL COMMISSION, THE COMMISSION ON GOOD 
GOVERNMENT, AND THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN 
RIGHTS AS ADDITIONAL INDEPENDENT CONSTITU- 
TIONAL COMMISSIONS, 

has considered the same and has the honor to report it back to 
the Constitutional Commission of 1986 with the recommenda- 
tion that Proposed Resolution No. 539 prepared by the commit- 
tee, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
HUMAN RIGHTS, 

be approved in substitution of Proposed Resolution No. 365, 
with the Committee on Constitutional Commissions and Agencies 
and Hon. Garcia and Sarmiento as authors thereof. 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that the chair- 
man of the Steering Committee be recognized to give us 
the schedule this morning. (Sgd.) Cirilo A. Rigos 

Vice-Chairman 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 


Respectfully submitted: 

(Sgd.) Vicente B. Foz 
Chairman 

Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies 


CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSED 
RESOLUTION NO. 539 
(Article on the Constitutional Commissions - 
Commission on Human Rights) 

PERIOD OF SPONSORSHIP AND DEBATE 

MR. BENGZON. I move that we consider Committee 
Report No. 37 on Proposed Resolution No. 539 as 
reported out by the Committee on Constitutional 
Commissions and Agencies 


f^^^^lDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
e hair hears none; the motion is approved. 

Consideration of Proposed Resolution No. 539 is now 
in order. With the permission of the body, the Secre- 
ary-General will read only the title of the proposed 
resolution without prejudice to inserting in the record 
the whole text thereof. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL. Proposed Resolution 
No. 539, entitled: 

RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTI- 
TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE COMMISSION ON 
HUMAN RIGHTS. 

(The following is the whole text of the proposed resolution 
perC.R. No. 37.) 


(Sgd.) Yusup R. Abubakar 
(Sgd.) Crispino M. de Castro 
(Sgd.) Christian S. Monsod 
Florenz D. Regalado 
Francisco A. Rodrigo 


(Sgd.) Roberto R. Concepcion 
(Sgd.) Alberto MX- Jamir 
Teresa F. Nieva 

(Sgd.)RusticoF.delosReyeMr. 

(Sgd.) Bernardo M.VUIegas 


l.) Decoroso R. Rosales 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION NO. 539 

ra-r- tivt thF new CONSTI- 
tESOLUTION TO INCORPOME THE 

TUTION THE PROVISIONS ON THE LUJV 

HUMAN RIGHTS. . . 

?e it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the 

nmission in session assembled to incorporate m 


ARTICLE 

THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSIONS 

E. The Commission on Human Rights 

SEC. 1. There shall be an independent Commission on Human 
Rights composed of a Chairman and two Commissioners, who 
shall be natural-born citizens of the Philippines, at least thirty- ive 
years of age and members of the Bar for at least ten years. 


*See Appendix 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


711 


The Chairman and the Commissioners shall be appointed by 
the President for a term of seven years without reappointment. 
Of the Commissioners first appointed, one sliall hold office for 
seven years, another for five years, and the third for three years. 
Appointment to any vacancy shall only be for tlie unexpired 
portion of the term of the predecessor. 

SEC. 2. The Commission on Human Rights shall have the 
following powers and functions: 

(1) Investigate all forms of human rights violations committed 
by public officers, civilian and military authorities, or by private 
parties; 

(2) Issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum to compel the 
attendance of any party to its proceedings or the production of 
materials and documents, with the power to cite for contempt for 
violations thereof in accordance with the Rules of Court pro- 
mulgated by the Supreme Court of tlie Philippines; 

(3) Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection of 
human rights of all persons within the Philippines, including 
provisions for legal aid services for indigent persons whose human 
rights have been violated or need protection; and 

(4) Establish a continuing program of education and informa- 
tion to propagate the primacy of human rights. 

(5) Perform such other duties and functions as may be fbced 
by law. 

MR. BENGZON. I ask that Commissioners Foz and 
Sarmiento be recognized to sponsor the committee 
report. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioners Foz and Sarmien- 
to are recognized, and the members of the committee 
are requested to occupy the front desk. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, may we request that 
copies of the proposed resolution be distributed to the 
Members so that they can follow our sponsorship of the 
resolution. 

SPONSORSHIP REMARKS 
OF COMMISSIONER SARMIENTO 

MR. SARMIENTO. This resolution was sponsored by 
Commissioner Garcia and this humble Representation 
and approved by the committee as shown by Committee 
Report No. 37. 

My fellow Commissioners, the creation of a Human 
Rights Commission is a timely innovation in our Consti- 
tution. It has come at a time when the recognition of 
the need to protect and promote human rights is at its 
height. Fifteen years of abuses of fundamental rights 
and freedoms have awakened us to the need for a com- 
prehensive program for the promotion, protection and 
respect for human rights. Such a program can best be 
formulated and undertaken by a specialized agency 
which is independent from the three main branches of 
government and equipped with the necessary powers 
and functions to carry out its programs. Moreover, a 


Commission on Human Rights falls squarely into the list 
of priorities of the present government and dovetails 
with the commission’s innovative work on human 
rights. As envisioned, the commission will investigate 
human rights abuses committed by any person and 
arising from any source, whether caused by private 
practices inimical to human rights or resulting from 
government policies, rules and regulations or the imple- 
mentation thereof, hi relation thereto, it can rec- 
ommend to the President or to the appropriate agencies 
the various courses of action, from the prosecution of 
guilty parties to the indemnification and adoption of 
measures for protection, and the review and repeal of 
oppressive rules, policies or even laws. In addition, the 
commission will conduct education and public informa- 
tion campaigns with a view to increasing public aware- 
ness of human rights issues consistent with its objective 
of promotion and inculcation of respect for human 
rights. Hopefully, with a permanent constitutional body 
in pursuit of long-term human rights goals through a 
continuing program, we may be able to attain what very 
few Third World countries have been able to. The 
establishment of a Human Rights Commission in our 
Constitution will be the symbol of our commitment to 
justice and peace, and the promotion and protection of 
human dignity. 


SPONSORSHIP REMARKS 
OF COMMISSIONER GARCIA 

MR. GARCIA. I would simply like to add just one 
point. I think an outstanding feature of this probable 
Commission on Human Rights is the fact that it will 
help establish a program of education and information 
to propagate human rights. In other words, we envision 
the prevention of human rights violations ia the future 
where we have a citizenry that is convinced that it must 
uphold its basic rights; that it must defend its basic 
rights because it knows what its rights are, in the first 
place. Also, for those who must uphold the law, they 
will be educated in a sense; for example, regarding the 
treatment of prisoners and detainees and the proper 
procedures according to the due process of law. So this 
responsibility that will be given to the Human Rights 
Commission will, in a way, resolve and prevent, rather 
than cure what is unjust after it has been committed. 
Secondly, I believe it is also a very important fact that 
because we have now won our basic rights as a people, we 
must also, in a sense, realize that there are many other 
peoples in other parts of the world who have not yet 
won their rights. One of the other areas of education is 
precisely to show the different forms and ways of how 
the human rights of other peoples are violated in other 
parts of the world. And we can also have a people who 
will be conscious of these violations and perhaps con- 
tribute to the protection of human rights wherever they 
are violated, because human rights have no color, no 
creed, no nationality and no boundaries. 


712 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1 986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Before we entertain questions, we 
wish to express our thanks to the following members of 
the committee who have encouraged and supported us: 
Commissioner Rigos, vice-chairman ; Commissioner 
Foz, chairman; Commissioners Abubakar, Monsod and 
Rosales; our beloved Chief Justice Roberto Concepcion; 
Commissioners Jamir, de los Reyes and Villegas. 

MR-. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. The committee is now ready to entertain 
questions from the floor regarding the committee report 
on the proposed resolution. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

I would like to propound a few questions of the 
chairman and the members of the committee. I under- 
stand that, based on the committee report, the powers 
of the Commission on Human Rights are principally 
investigative and recommendatory in nature. Am I 
right? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, the Commissioner is right. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And, therefore, after the investiga- 
tion IS conducted, recommendations are made. Can the 

coverage of these recommenda- 


ARMIENTO. These recommendations will 
artir^r,^ Others, the filing of appropriate criminal 
s o parties guilty of human rights violations. 


area. How about violations in different parts of the 
country, say, in Mindanao or the Visayas? How will 
these cases be investigated? Will the parties have to 
come to Manila? 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is a very good question. 
Madam President. We discussed that question actually 
during our committee hearings. We are thinking of 
expanding the commission to cover the various islands 
of the country so that the services will be rendered to 
victims of human rights violations in all parts of the 
country. So, possibly, extension offices will be created 
in the three islands of the country. 

MR. FOZ. At the same time. Madam President, the 
commission will be within its competent authority to 
deputize even private lawyers or public officers in the 
investigation of certain cases or incidents which might 
have taken place or might have happened in some far- 
flung parts of the country necessitating, therefore, the 
assistance of other public or private groups. For 
instance, I have m mind the Integrated Bar of the Philip- 
pines’ chapters in areas where violations of human rights 
may have been committed. So pubUc, as well as private, 
assistance may be secured by the proposed Commission 
on Human Rights in the investigation of such cases. 

MR. SARMIENTO. In addition to the IBP, we can 
ask the services of human rights organizations, lawyers’ 
organizations, for instance, the Protestant Lawyers’ 
League, which is an organization of lawyers scattered 
throughout the country. We have also the Free Legal 
Assistance Group which has a membership of about 
200 lawyers scattered throughout the country. We have 
also the group known as MABINI, Movernent of Attor- 
neys for Brotherhood, Integrity, Nationalism which can 
also assist the Commission on Human Rights. We have 
also the CLASP, Citizens Legal Assistance Society of the 
Philippines, of Vice-President Laurel. So we can ask tne 
services of these various lawyers’ organizations. 


'''ill prosecute these 

cases, the ordmary fiscals? 

aeendes The appropriate government 

Sutnw a Office and the pro- 

prosecmion”' ° government, will undertake this 

secutors^Sli^h^^' ^ that the pro- 

Human Righls?^^ Commission on 

foreclosing that 

f. possible that they can work together for 

the prosecution of various crimes against human rights. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I will expect the Commission on 
Human Rights to hold its offici in the greater Manila 


MR. NOLLEDO. May I please be enlightened on the 
nature of the Commission on Human lights? Is it a 
purely administrative body or is it a quasi-judicial body . 
I will follow this up with another question. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is a quasi-judicial body, not a 
purely administrative body. If we look at the functions 
enumerated under Section 2, we will notice that it is not 
merely an administrative body but a quasi-judicial body. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Therefore, am I right if I conclude 
that the Rules on Evidence will not be strictly followed? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. With respect to page 2, line 9, it 
says here that one of the functions of the Commission 
on Human Rights is to provide appropriate legal 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


713 


measures tor the protection of human rights of all per- 
sons within the country, including provisions for legal 
aid services for indigent persons, et cetera. I would like 
to know the coverage of this legal aid. Will it cover only 
cases filed before the commission, or will it likewise 
cover cases filed before the appropriate courts or 
tribunals? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, it will cover 
cases that are being handled by the commission. And if 
there are cases pending before other tribunals that 
would involve human rights violations, I think it is 
within the province of this commission to provide its 
assistance. 

MR. NOLLEDO. My last question. Madam President, 
is with respect to page 2, line 12 — “Establish a con- 
tinuing program of education information to propagate 
the primacy of human rights.” Did the Commissioner 
ever recommend that human rights be a part of the 
curriculum in high school or college? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, in fact, that has already been 
discussed in the committee hearings, and that is one of 
the proposals we would like to make. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rodrigo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RODRIGO. I would like to ask a few questions. 
Will this Commission on Human Rights be one of the 
constitutional commissions under Article XII which we 
already approved? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. There are now three constitutional 
commissions — Commission on Civil Service, Commis- 
sion on Elections and Commission on Audit. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. And the intention is to add this as 
a fourth constitutional commission? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Just as a matter of procedure, 
have we not already approved Article XII on Second 
Reading? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Have we approved it on Third 
Reading also? 


MR. FOZ. Yes, but the reservation was made with 
regard to the initial provision which enumerates the 
constitutional commissions in the Constitution to the 
effect that this provision wiU be subject to additional 
constitutional commissions that the body may later on 
wish to approve and include in the constitutional draft. 
Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. So there was that reservation. Is 
that on record? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. I do not remember. However, minus 
that reservation, the procedure would be to ask for a 
reconsideration of the approval of this article. I think it 
was approved also on Third Reading. 

MR. FOZ. Yes. But the record will bear us out that 
there was such a reservation. I remember it very dis- 
tinctly tliat that was made clear before we even voted 
on Second Reading on the draft — on the common 
provisions, which relates to the three constitutional 
commissions. The reservation was made. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. RODRIGO. So if the present proposal is ap- 
proved, then Section 1 of Article XII, which reads: 
“The constitutional commissions shall be the Civil 
Service Commission, the Commission on Elections and 
the Commission on Audit,” should likewise be amended. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, it should be amended to include the 
Commission on Human Rights, Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Since the Commission on Human 
Rights will come under Article XII, it will be subject to 
the common provisions under Article XII. 

MR. FOZ. That is right. Madam President. 

MR. RODRIGO. One of the provisions of Article XII 
is: 

No member of the constitutional commission shall, 

during his tenure, hold any other office or employment or 

engage in the practice of any profession. 

So, if this provision were to be followed, Atty . Diokno 
cannot practice his profession if he becomes the chair- 
man of the Commission on Human Rights. It is to be 
remembered that he is in the active practice of law. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, all the appointees will 
have to be subject to the same qualifications and dis- 
qualifications as provided in the common provisions. 

MR. RODRIGO. So let us say Atty. Diokno, who is 
now the chairman of the Presidential Committee on 
Human Rights, remains or becomes the chairman or 
even a member of that committee, he will have to give 


714 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26. 1986 


up his law practice, else he has to reject or resign the 
position as chairman of the Human Rights Commission. 

MR. FOZ. That would be the consequence, if he 
accepts an appointment in the proposed Commission on 
Human Rights. 

MR. RODRIGO. By the way, may I know who is the 
vice-chairman of the commission now? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The vice-chairman is Justice 
J.B.L. Reyes, who is now the acting chairman of the 
Committee on Human Rights in the absence of Com- 
missioner Diokno. 

MR. RODRIGO. So does the Commissioner think we 
wn get real able lawyers with the caliber of Atty. 

iokno and Justice J.B.L. Reyes, if they come under 
this prohibition that they cannot practice their pro- 
fession? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we have, I 
believe, many able lawyers. I think years of handling 
human rights cases during the dark days of martial law 
have produced lawyers who are capable, able, dedicated 
and committed to the promotion and protection of 
human rights. Aside from these lawyers, there are many 
retired Justices of the Supreme Court who can provide 
t err wisdom, their advice and their assistance. Chief 
ustice Concepcion will always be there to give his tips 
in the handling of these cases. 


MR. RODRIGO. Yes, I know that there are man 
lawyers. I handled a few cases on huma 
J R inyself. But then, Atty. Diokno and Justic 

useful as practicing lawyer; 
frnm < 4 ?^ 'Victims of violations of human rights. Bu 
Cnmm- ths committee to the queries c 

lawvpr^^^^K^^^ Nolledo, it seems that a human right 
cases win k active in defending human right 

bernmoo ^ ^ mere investigator and advisor once h 
a member of the commission. 

tio^^ ^3dam President, when I mei 

to lawvprc dedicated lawyers, I was not referrir 
There are ^ ° purely active in the practice of lav 
who do ^^^demicians, members of the academi 

they wm counseling, and I thin 

y members of this commission. 

MR. Rodrigo. Thank you very much. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you, Madam Presiden 
MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner Nieva h 

recognized, Madam President. I' 


MS. NIEVA. Madam President, I am one of the 
sponsors of this proposed resolution. When this was first 
presented, a request was made that 1 be one of the 
sponsors. I immediately acceded because I thought that 
this was a very vital commission that we would need 
especially in view of our experience during these past 
15 years. However, this is the first time that I really 
have had a chance to look at the entire article and I just 
want one or two clarifications. In this Section 2, line 22, 
what would the term “private parties” encompass? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, “private 
parties” include those persons who are not in any way 
connected with the government, who is not a military 
officer or a military personnel, but just a layman, an 
ordinary person. 

MS. NIEVA. Would this refer, therefore, to parties 
or groups like the sects that we have, those “Tadtad 
groups” and all of those who are also guilty of human 
rights violations, including even the NPAs? What I mean 
are the rightists, the leftists or whoever they are, who 
we know are not innocent of human rights violations. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is correctly stated. Madam 
President. 

MS. NIEVA. So, therefore, this would include all 
groups — the leftists, rightists or the centrists. There- 
fore, the scope of this Human Rights Commission would 
be much wider than the present Commission on Human 
Rights? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President, that is 
why it will require a full-time dedication. 

MS. NIEVA. I am satisfied with the answers. Madam 
President, because this has been the subject of debate, 
especially with the commission of Atty. Diokno. There 
have been so many protestations that they should also 
cover both sides to be fair, but that does not lie within 
their purview. In this Commission as presently consti- 
tuted, however, the committee is assuring us that it 
would cover all groups or individuals guilty of human 
rights violations. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The original intention of the pro- 
ponents was to limit the coverage to military authorities 
but because of the suggestions and comments we have 
received from other Commissioners and relying on their 
collective wisdom, we decided to include private parties. 

MS. NIEVA. Thank you very much. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT, 
nized . 


Commissioner Nieva is recog- 


SR. TAN. May I ask questions of the proponents. 
Madam President? 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


715 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, there is one thing I 
notice here and that is the proposed commission is 
similar to the Diokno Commission, but it is narrower 
in the sense of recommendatory powers. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, there are differences, Madam 
President. Section 2, paragraph (1), includes private 
parties; Section 2, paragraph (3), provides appropriate 
legal measures for the protection of human rights, in- 
cluding provisions for legal aid services; and Section 2, 
paragraph (4), provides for the establishment of a 
continuing program of education. These are not some 
of the functions of the Diokno Commission. We believe 
that we should add new functions, one of which is a 
massive information education campaign. So these are 
new provisions. Madam President. 

SR. TAN. Yes, that is great. I guess it was done on 
the assumption that we will have very many human 
rights violations which I hope would decrease. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

SR. TAN. But what is good about it is that it includes 
everybody and then it has the education role, but I was 
wondering why the recommendatory function was 
limited. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we limited the 
recommendatory function because there are other 
government agencies which can handle this duty. For 
instance, we have the Office of the City Fiscal, Office 
of the Provincial Fiscal, the Ministry of Justice, which 
can very well handle the prosecution of human rights 
cases. So this proposed commission will work closely 
with these government entities. 

SR. TAN. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, just a couple of ques- 
tions. Section 2, paragraph (3), reads: 

Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection 

of human rights of all persons within the Philippines, 

including provisions for legal aid services . . . 

I am struck by the words “within the Philippines.” 
What about those Filipinos who have been persecuted 
outside the Philippines? We will remember that the long 
arm of martial law during the time of President Marcos 
reached out to the United States to persecute, harass 
and even kill people who were fighting for freedom. So 
is it the sense of this committee that it would only 
provide legal measures and legal aid services to the 


people within the Philippines? Is there any particular 
reason for this? 

MR. SARMIENTO. As the section is phrased and as it 
is intended, what we have in mind was to provide legal 
protection to those in the Philippines. 

Right now we have so many human rights violations. 
So the massiveness of these violations would entail 
much work, much effort, on the part of the members of 
the commission. So, that alone would consume much of 
its time, but if the Commissioner has a suggestion that 
would possibly include human rights violations commit- 
ted abroad, then he can make it at the appropriate time. 

MR. RAMA. Yes. I am thinking that we should delete 
this phrase “within the Philippines,” because we should 
not stop the Human Rights Commission from making 
representations, say, with the United States government 
and sending some kind of legal aid to Filipino citizens 
who have been persecuted abroad. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, that is a very 
good suggestion because what we have in mind when the 
Commissioner raised that point is the case of Com- 
missioner Calderon who was persecuted by Mr. Marcos. 
We have other members of the government right now 
who were persecuted during the time of Mr. Marcos. 
That was why they had to leave the country and seek 
refuge in other countries. 

MR. RAMA. So when the time comes, would the 
Commissioner be amenable to delete this portion? 

MR. SARMIENTO. That will be most welcome. 
Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Natividad be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. Madam President. 

Just a few questions to the august committee. 

I am in agreement with this proposal, although I 
would like to ask whether in the enumeration of the 
commission’s powers and functions it would not be 
necessary to give the commission visitorial powers 
because cases of human rights violations are also com- 
mitted in jails, sometimes in prisons and in detention 
centers. The commission members may very well be 
excluded from actually and immediately responding 
to a complaint by visiting any complainant. So I think 
the commission should have visitorial powers over 
any and all jail and detention centers in the Philippines 
so that at any moment the people will know that if 
there is a complaint, a representative of this commission 
may visit any complainant in any detention center and 
determine his situation. 


716 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, coming from 
an expert on criminology and penology like Com- 
missioner Natividad, that suggestion will be most 
welcome. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So at the proper time, I would 
like to propose the addition of the words “VISITOR- 
lAL POWERS,” so that the Commission should visit 
any and all detention centers — military or civilian. It 
should be able to visit any of these jails without securing 
any permission from any other authority but by virtue 
of this constitutional fiat. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, although that visitorial 
power would, I think, be part of the proposed com- 
mission’s power to investigate, to make it clear that the 
commission would have such power, I agree with Com- 
missioner Natividad that it should reaUy be spelled 
out. 


When should the application be made? What are the 
evidences that are necessary to support such a claim? 
What do we do if there is insurance? These things are 
very complex in nature as implemented in other 
countries which give satisfaction to people who are 
victims of crimes. So, I do not think we should mention 
these in a general statement. The Commissioner should 
specify it and, I think, it enriches this constitutional 
provision. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Commissioner can introduce 
an amendment to cover his suggestions at the proper 
time. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. In the investigation of the 
performance of these investigative powers, what does 
the Commission on Human Rights exercise? Are these 
merely fact-finding powers or are police powers being 
used in the investigation? 


MR. NATIVIDAD. It should be spelled out because 
mvestigation is understood to include interrogation, 
interview, questioimg and gathering of evidence. But 
smce these detention centers are covered by specific 
regulations banning visitors at certain times, I think we 
should spell out that the commission may visit these 
complamants in these detention centers at any time, if 
It has a mission order. 


MR SARMIENTO. The investigative powers would 
cover fact-finding and police powers. This is an all- 
embracing term. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. The commission is going to 
exercise police powers? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 


MR. FOZ. 
President. 


agree with the Commissioner, Madam 


that I woi 

vital inn!'w^^ draft Constitution has made a v( 

vital mnovation m the field of victimology. 

vicW^?°^ of "tatters about 1 

Constitutin^^^ abuses. In another part of c 
viSs of h P^^^ided compensation 

crimes rights violations and, perhaps, 

a victim government will have to put 

board or a system, a victim compensati 

consti^tioS^^^^^^^^ to implement t 

human rights vioi^T compensatmg victims 

propose that tv. ^^tions and even of violent crimes 

tion of functtons^ of”th H ^ 

because thic ?\the Human Rights Commissi 

what damages would be the best judge as 

<lamages have been suffered by the victims 

be*covefM*bJ' sSn*2(5t''‘ v? “Sgestion can r 

form such other tote" and h,* , ' 

law.” functions as may be fixed 


MR. natividad. But this a rv , . 

to be spelled out because we ha^Tm estS 
parameters here as practiced in other countrie^ 
these are spelled out m specific terms: How much 
pay? What is the ceiling? When should they be 


MR. natividad. It is on record now. It is not 
merely fact-finding but the investigators of this com- 
mission also shall be exercising police powers insofar 
as the violation of human rights is concerned. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I would like to clarify the para- 
meters of these powers. It is a common case now tha 
prisoners are being detained in prisons because °f ® 
failure of the judiciary to hear their cases complemeri e 
by the fact that they cannot put up the bail for their 
freedom. They are being detained in prisons way be- 
yond the period of the highest penalty that they can 
be punished with. May they appeal to the commission 
to be set free? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. To me, that is a violation of 
the constitutional right to a speedy trial and, therefore, 
it is considered a violation of human rights. So, these 
detainees can appeal to the commission for appropriate 
action. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. This is because this particular 
case involves detention. But let us take the case of those 
who are victims of crimes. In the pursuit of the prosecu- 
tion of their cases they suffer extreme inconvenience 
such as being unaware of the status of their case. They 
are not informed by the prosecution agency of the 
government whether their case is postponed or not. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


717 


They are not protected from harassment of their family 
or their friends. They sometimes are on the verge of 
giving up their case because of these harassments. Would 
this constitute a violation of their rights within the 
purview of the powers of this commission? 

MR. SARMIENTO. They can seek protection and 
guidance from the commission. If we look at Section 
2(3), we have this provision: 

Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection of 

human rights of all persons within the Philippines. 

So, my humble submission is that legal measures 
would cover giving advice, assistance and counselling 
to victims of the crimes the Commissioner has men- 
tioned. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am thankful for that because I 
would like that to happen. 

Let us take another example. There is a complamt 
that the victims are being harassed. They are being 
threatened; in fact, they have been previously mal- 
treated. The powers of the commission are merely to 
request the military or the police to protect them. That 
is what Commissioner Tan referred to as “recommenda- 
tory.” Would it not be advisable for the commission to 
have the power to direct the security forces of our 
country to provide protection for victims of human 
rights rather than just to rely on the good graces and 
humanitarian hearts of these people to provide the 
protection for the said victims? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think that will be a humane 
expansion of the functions of the Commission on 
Human Rights that is contributing beneficially to the 
idea of creating a Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. That is why I am trying to draw 
the answers from the committee because these victims 
of human rights complain that they are being harassed 
and they do not know where to go to. They cannot even 
go to the courts to obtain protection from certain units 
or individuals or from police or military units. They do 
not know anybody in the police or military forces. But 
now they have a new hope because of the existence of 
this Commission on Human Rights. But if the com- 
mission merely requests that they be given protection, 
the military police unit will then say: “That is not in 
our priority because we have many other jobs and 
missions to accomplish.” So, may I draw the answer 
from the committee? Does the committee think that it 
may be advisable that in cases of this nature, the com- 
mission, being a quasi-judicial body, may direct the 
police forces to provide protection for them? The com- 
mission should not request and not merely recommend 
but directly provide security forces for a certain period 
of time as in other countries. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Rigos as well as 
Commissioner Garcia are nodding their heads. I think 


I can speak in behalf of the committee that the 
functions would cover the Commissioner’s suggestion. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Can the members of the com- 
mission enjoin people from harassing people? Can the 
members of the commission, under the enumeration 
of its powers here, not only provide protection for 
complainants but may also enjoin people and say, 
“Stop violating the rights of these people”? Can they 
do that under this enumeration of duties? 

MR. SARMIENTO. If that is necessary to protect 
human rights, why not? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Could we not specify this more in 
an amendment - that they may enjoin; they may 
protect? What I have been saying is if these vital func- 
tions — to protect them directly and to enjoin people 
from continuing the commission of violation of human 
rights - will these still need a little amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Regarding the enumeration of 
additional functions, I will confer with the members of 
the committee — the chairman and the vice-chairman. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But personally I will fully 
endorse the Commissioner’s suggestion. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I am interested in seeing that it is 
not merely a paper tiger but something that has got 
teeth to bite by enjoining people not to continue in the 
commission of violation of human rights and by 
directing protection to people. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. I ask that Commissioner de Castro be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. Madam President. 

Members of the committee and the honorable 
chairman, I think there is a little typographical error in 
Committee Report No. 37. I appear as one of the 
sponsors; I am not. Also, I am not a member of the 
committee, so I will request that my name be deleted. 

On the qualifications of the chairman and the com- 
missioners of the Commission on Human Rights, one 
should have been a member of the Bar for at least 10 
years. Can any other person other than a lawyer not be 
a chairman or member of this commission? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Since this work will involve legal 
issues and legal matters, we deemed it best that the 
chairman should be a lawyer, and so with the members. 


718 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


But my pesonal feeling is that, if there are laymen or 
persons who are qualified to be human rights advocates 
like nuns, priests and psychologists, may we not include 
them? 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, from the Commissioner’s 
answer, not only members of the Bar can be a chairman 
of the commission. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But that is my personal position; 

I still have to confer with the committee for decision. 

MR. FOZ. Actually, that was the feeling of the 
committee regarding these qualifications but we would 
welcome suggestions on this portion of this provision 
of the draft. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

In regard to the qualifications for chairman and 
members of a constitutional commission, it is stated: 

persons of integrity, of probity, of independence of 
mind, etc. And yet in this committee report, we find 
that a ch^man or a commissioner can just be a member 
^ the Philippine Bar with at least 1 0 years of practice. 
Whether he has the probity or the integrity is of no 
issue. Is that the meaning of this qualification? 


actually holding the reins of government. Our ex- 
perience during the martial law period made us realize 
how precious those rights are and, therefore, these 
must be safeguarded at all times. 

Secondly, as I mentioned earlier, we also felt that it 
was important to educate the people because human 
rights, in a sense, cannot be given. People have to know 
what these rights are and they have to safeguard, uphold 
and even defend these rights. This can only be done if 
there is a continuing human rights education program. 
So, those are the basic reasons why we would propose 
that this be in the form of a constitutional commission 
that would be above the changes of fortunes of political 
parties in this country. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just volunteer the informa- 
tion that in New Zealand they have a constitutional 
body known as the Commission on Human Rights. 
However, its specific function is limited to providing 
education and conducting information campaign. But as 
we know. New Zealand is different from our country. 
We have our own peculiarities. 

Here in our country we have violations more massive 
than those committed in New Zealand. So, I think there 
is a need for this Commission on Human Rights and for 
the expansion of its functions. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Maybe at an appropriate time, we 
can welcome suggestions like the inclusion of words like 
men of integrity, honesty and independence of mind.” 
o, we will welcome any suggestion in that regard. 


The more basic question I have 
y mmd is: Why constitutionalize the Human Righ 

thp better if they work und 

tne executive? 


^ stated in my spons( 
handle hi? ’ is a need for a specialized body 

had many”J:^es^?If^h''^°^^^^°”®' martial law, ' 

now we hav« human rights violations. Even uri 
ting which of salvaging, disappearances, haml 

violations I thinW of these human ngl 

conduct tile investigaWon ^ 

stop the commission of the ^PP^-^Priate actions 

ot these human rights violatio 

MR. DE CASTRO C 

people ciJrose'tL S 

necessary investigation all o'enS: Mippine™'’^' ' 

MR. GARCIA. Precisely one of th^ 
important for this bodv to h<^ reasons why i 

fact that reearHlecc nf ^ constitutionalized is i 
tact that regardless of who is the President or who ho 

the executive power, the human rights issueTs of s? 

importance that it should be safeguarded and it sho 

be independent of political parties or powers that 


MR. DE CASTRO. There is no question that there is 
a need for this commission. My question is: Why consti- 
tutionalize it? When we include this commission under 
the executive department, then the Commissioner will 
mention politics, and so on. When we talk of the pres- 
idency especially in our proposed constitutional pro 
vision especially of a President who shall have ^ 
reelection whatsoever, we do not talk about a P°- ^ ^ 
but of a statesman who shall look after the we 
his country. 

So when a President creates this commission ® ^ 

be under him, he should look at it as the pro ec 
this country. 

MR. GARCIA. May I answer that point. Madam 
President? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to state this fact: Pre- 
cisely we do not want the term or the power o e 
Commission on Human Rights to be coterminous mth 
the President, because the President s power 
if he appoints a certain commissioner and t a com 
missioner is subject to the President, there ore, any 
human rights violations committed under that person s 
administration will be subject to presidential pressure. 
That is what we would like to avoid - to make the 
protection of human rights go beyond the fortunes oi 
different political parties or administrations in power. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


719 


MR. DE CASTRO. I am pursuing the question of 
Commissioner Natividad and the cases he gave as 
examples which necessitated the provision for security. 
Would it not be better if the commission were under the 
executive because the armed forces and the police are 
under the President and it would be easier to provide 
the necessary security if it were the President who will 
order them? 

MR. GARCIA. Could I answer that? That is true but, 
at the same time, if the President solely had that power, 
the President could also withhold doing that function 
because it would be subject again to the discretion or 
the judgment of the President. 

Here we have a commission entrusted with the task 
of protecting human rights; and, therefore, if it so 
deems and judges necessary that there will be military 
protection against the victims of harassment, then that 
commission could provide that protection, independent 
of what the administration in power thinks, because 
normally they would be sympathetic with their armed 
forces. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Can security be provided througli 
the military and the police? I asked so, because the one 
who will provide the protection is certainly the police or 
the military. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Suppose the military would say, 
“We are too busy; we have plenty of problems other 
than to provide security.” 

MR. GARCIA. Precisely, the Commission on Human 
Rights would be empowered to direct those military 
officers concerned to give protection to human rights 
victims or to victims of harassment or to towns which 
are subjected to some kind of difficulties because of 
special circumstances in the area. 

• 

MR. DE CASTRO. There is no question about the 
authority that will be given the commission to direct 
the armed forces or the police to provide security. So, 
in case they say that they are too busy and they do not 
have the right people, we better leave it to the execu- 
tive. It will be very different if it is the President telling 
them since he is the Commander-in-Chief. 

MR. GARCIA. But if we empower this commission, 
we would, therefore, give it authority to direct the 
armed forces and to give priority to their tasks. The 
armed forces could drop this assigned task if they are 
really busy in doing other things or a new detachment 
can be sent to do this job of giving protection for 
human rights victims. On the other hand, they could 
drop other tasks in order to perform this newly assigned 
duty. 


MR. SARMIENTO. In addition to that, the com- 
mission is not precluded from securing the assistance of 
the President. As I stated before, it will work closely 
with various government entities. 

MR. DE CASTRO. We talk of the victims of human 
rights and they will have to complain to this commis- 
sion, is that right? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, this commission can inves- 
tigate. What then will be the work of the ombudsman 
which we created to investigate all complaints received 
from all sectors? There will be two bodies now: The 
Commission on Human Rights and the Ombudsman. 

MR. MONSOD. If the Commissioner still recalls, by 
virtue of the Regalado amendment, we included a 
phrase in the section on the functions of the ombuds- 
man to cover human rights offenses that are civil and 
political in nature. But during the discussion, we also 
said that there was a pending proposal for a Com- 
mission on Human Rights, and the understanding at that 
time was that, should the body agree to set up this 
Commission on Human Rights, we will adjust the 
section on ombudsman to remove the overlapping of 
functions. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Why should we create two bodies 
when one body is enough? 

MR. GARCIA. This commission has a very precise 
task. Its international instruments would be the Uni- 
versal Declaration of Human Rights, the International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the recently 
concluded Declaration of Torture of 1985. 

The commission has a very specific function which is 
the protection of civil and political rights. Due to the 
experience of 14 years of martial rule, we want to 
ensure that hereafter human rights in this country are 
not violated and, therefore, provide this very specific 
body with the function to ensure the safeguarding of 
these rights. 

MR . MONSOD. May I also add that even in the 
discussion on the ombudsman, we recognize that the 
scope of the functions of the ombudsman was already 
very wide, even without the inclusion of the functions 
that are now being proposed for the Commission on 
Human Rights, but we wanted a fall-back position in 
case there was no approval of the Commission on 
Human Rights separately. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The matter of investigating all 
complaints all over the Philippines is certainly broad. 
V ery soon we will have to create a commission on graft 
and corruption because that is a very broad subject 


720 


TUESDAY. AUGUST 26,1986 


matter which affects the very social foundation of our vestigated within six hours but for serious offenses, 
country. could take about 18 hours. Will that be the rule? 


MR. SARMIENTO. That is why we have this ombuds- 
man to protect the people, the purpose of which is to 
protect our people from grafters and to promote effi- 
ciency and prevent mismanagement. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Also, to investigate all types of 
complaints which will include complaints against 
violation of human rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The investigation of human rights 
will be conducted by the Commission on Human Rights. 
Matters involving graft and corruption, matters that 
will prevent waste and mismanagement will be handled 
by the critic and watchdog, the ombudsman, and this 
was clearly stated and explained by the honorable 
Commissioner, Justice Colayco. 

So if we give that additional power, then we will be 
expanding the powers of the ombudsman to a point 
that it will be ineffective. 


MR. SARMIENTO. We have this formula of 6-9-18, 
within which the case has to be filed with the proper 
judicial body. But as pointed out by our honorable 
chairman, this investigation does not partake of a 
custodial interrogation as traditionally conceived. The 
purpose of this investigation is to get information which 
is not in the form of a custodial interrogation conducted 
by policemen or military personnel. 

MR. DE CASTRO. After a short investigation, the 
man can say, “I want to go home now so I can take care 
of my child.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. If no crime has been committed, 
he will be allowed to go home. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Cannot this commission request 
some other investigative agencies of the government, 
like the NBI? 


MR. DE CASTRO. Let us go to the police power 
which Commissioner Natividad mentioned. 

When there is a violation of human rights and an 
investigation is to be conducted, would this investiga- 
uon be some sort of an invitation for that violator? 
How would the investigation be conducted? 

nf investigate “A” on the complaint 

+■ i violation of human rights, how will we in- 
vestigate A ? 


MR. SARMIENTO. As I said, the commission will 
work intimately with various government agencies. It 
might even invite the Commissioner who is an expert 
on police matters to assist the commission. Right now, 
the Presidential Committee on Human Rights is working 
closely with the NBI and other government agencies. 

It might solicit the assistance of an expert on victim- 
ology, like Commissioner Natividad and other experts 
on penology. 


’f Section 2(2), v 

nave this provision; 

j Coinniission shall have the power to issue “sub- 

tenHant^^"r tecum” to compel the at- 

tendance of any party to its proceedings. 

and^^^I^eT Proceedings that will cover investig 
MR. DE CASTPn t ^ 

power we have When Proceed with the poll 

take a little tiL P u '^'^estigate, certainly it w 

could be detaillLd fr?r investigate 

case is serinnc tu ^ P®*^c>d of six hours but when t 
hours. Does the could last for about 

hours for detain! ‘^^"^t^sioner foresee the number 
tor detainmg somebody to be investigated? 

efficiency^o^!n^-^^' ^®*^°dy could depend upon t 

veSo^h/s“r;eX”- ’ 

under custodial interrolfenf'^ 

investigations, as provided Tn 

Rights. ^ ^ Article on the Bill 

MR. DE CASTRO. So, on the number of hours f 
mvestigation, we stated that minor offenses could be 


MR. DE CASTRO. Under Section 2(1), I can see 
that about 90 percent or more of the people to be 
investigated are either the military or the police. 

MR. SARMIENTO. No. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Has the committee estimated that 
number? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The investigation is not limited 
to . . . 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, but in actual practice, it will 
be about 90 percent of the military or the poUce. Has 
the committee thought of that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. We have that in mind, but there 
will also be violations committed by private parties. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes. 

MR SARMIENTO. Right now we cannot make any 
numerical percentage. 

J 

MR. DE CASTRO. That is about 1 0 percent. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


721 


MR. SARMIENTO. It is hard to make an approxima- 
tion. 

MR. DE CASTRO. If the President is the Commander- 
in-Chief of the armed forces and the police, then it will 
be much better if the President is the one who should 
head this commission. 

Will this provision include the NPAs in the investiga- 
tion? 

MR. SARMIENTO. In my reply to the query made 
by Commissioner Nieva, I answered that the investiga- 
tion would cover violations committed by the NPAs. 

MR. DE CASTRO. How will the NPAs be inves- 
tigated, by invitation or by subpoena duces tecum? 

MR. SARMIENTO. We are now dealing on details. We 
will leave to the commission the implementation of its 
task. 

MR. DE CASTRO. The members of this commission 
will have restrictions, like the chairman and members of 
the COA, the Civil Service and the COMELEC — they 
cannot practice their profession. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR DE CASTRO. I am now pursuing the question of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. Section 2(3) states: “Provide 
appropriate legal measures for the protection,” and line 
9 reads: “for legal aid services.” Is this not practicing 
the profession when the Commissioner renders legal 
services? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I reply to that? That is 
correct, but it is sad to say that during martial law, 
many of our lawyers would have handled political cases 
involving the violations of political and civil rights, but 
many of these indigent persons were deprived of ex- 
pertise of legal assistance. Hence, it is now the task of 
this commission to deputize human rights organizations, 
legal aid organizations to provide legal assistance. I 
know it is the task of lawyers but we have to be honest 
enough to admit that some lawyers — I am not saying 
all — are very selective in handling cases. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I am very honest enough when I 
ask these questions. Let us say that the commissioners 
and the chairman cannot really practice their legal 
profession, but they can deputize people who may 
practice the profession. Am I correct? 

MR SARMIENTO. What does the Commissioner 
mean when he says “they may deputize the people who 
may practice the profession”? Does the Commissioner 
mean that they may deputize lawyers to handle cases 
involving human rights violations? 


MR DE CASTRO. Yes, thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bengzon be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. BENGZON. Line 10 of Section 1 mentions 
“members of the Bar for at least ten years.” I suppose 
the Commissioner means not just being a member of the 
Bar but he should have practiced. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR BENGZON. Hence, a member of the Bar who 
has not had the practice of law is not qualified under 
this article. 

MR. SARMIENTO. First, we have to clarify what we 
mean by practice. What we have in mind are members 
of the Bar who have been actively engaged in the 
practice of law, and this would include even law 
professors. 

MR. BENGZON. That is correct. I am not referring 
to a lawyer who has been in business. That means he has 
not been in the practice of law. 

MR SARMIENTO. A lawyer who has been engaged 
in business but is committed to the promotion of 
human rights can be a member of this commission. So, 
we should not exempt him from being a member of this 
commission. 

MR. BENGZON. That is precisely my question. Is the 
Commissioner not limiting this only to a member of the 
Bar engaged in the practice of law? 

MR SARMIENTO. No. 

MR. BENGZON. So, the requirement is that as long 
as he is a lawyer by profession, he is qualified. 

MR SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR- BENGZON. Section 2(1) states '^Investigate all 
forms of human rights violations,” and line 22 includes 
the phrase “private parties.” Is the intention to include 
the maltreatment of children? 

MR SARMIENTO. That is possible. 

MR. BENGZON. No. I am not talking of possibilities. 
I am talking whether or not it is the intent of the com- 
mittee. For example, a parent who maltreats his child, 
would that case be covered by this provision? * 


722 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. What we had in mind when we 
formulated Section 2(1) are violations of civil and 
political rights. My understanding is that maltreatment 
of children does not fall within the concept of civil and 
political rights; so maybe an appropriate government 
agency can handle this problem. 

MR. BENGZON. That is my difficulty because I 
think there is a hairline distinction. I would like to give 
the Commissioner another example. Let us take, for 
example, a lady who was detained as a prisoner and then 
was molested. Here, a crime against chastity was com- 
mitted upon her. Who would have jurisdiction over that 
case? 


MR. GARCIA. Actually, these civil and political 
rights have been made clear in the language of human 
rights advocates, as well as in the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights which addresses a number of articles 
on the right to life, the right against torture, the right to 
fair and public hearing, and so on. These are very 
specific rights that are considered enshrined in many 
international documents and legal instruments as consti- 
tuting civil and political rights, and these are precisely 
what we want to defend here. 

MR. BENGZON. So, would the Commissioner say 
civil and political rights as defined in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights? 


MR. SARMIENTO. I think that will be covered by 
me Commission on Human Rights because here we 
have a detainee whose rights have been violated because 
she has been molested. 

MR. BENGZON. Let us take the example of a lady 
who was detained for the crime of murder. While she 
was in jail, she was molested. What the Commissioner 
IS saying is that that particular instance of her being 
molested falls under the jurisdiction of the Commission 
on Human Rights. So, in this instance, there will be two 
cases. 'Hie first one is the case against the policeman 
who might have molested her. This case will fall under 
e ommission on Human Rights. The second case is a 
case o murder for which the woman was originally 
accused of and detained. Am I correct in that? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. BENGZON. All right. 

^ simply like to make a cl 

crimec Point. Although maltreatment or 

within tViP^ Commissioner mentioned may 
its task rm of this commission, the primacj 

human riovft niade clear in view of the important 

have beeifdl\emw?^J^®^^^^® political rij 

and hnma,, • by many international covenj 

afthe ?^ legislations in the Philippines, as ^ 
subtnuenT 'r - the BUI of Rights 

S teS.o Otherwise, if we cover su< 

thTnrSi "’teht diffuse its impact 

w:uraSo"berrrai,:i. 

task so that^p°^^^ delineate the parameters oi 
task so that the commission can be most effective. 

bec^L ci>il^^?^poi^ci 

;^tt%Tew' covercNlTand''poii1 

nghts. Every smgle nght of an individual involves 
civil nght or his political right. So, where do we d 
the line? 


MR. GARCIA. Yes, and as I have mentioned, the 
International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights 
distinguished this right against torture. 

MR. BENGZON. So as to distinguish this from the 
other rights that we have? 

MR GARCIA. Yes, because the other rights will 
encompass social and economic rights, and there are 
other violations of rights of citizens which can be 
addressed to the proper courts and authorities. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just make an additional 
comment? I think one who has been molested while 
under detention can be investigated by this commission. 
The molestation would partake of torture in another 
form. It could have been done to extract information 
or to harass. 

MR. BENGZON. Is there a legal definition of that 
particular case? This is the first time I have heard of 
the molestation of a lady partaking of torture. 

MR. SARMIENTO. During martial law, we handled 
cases involving women detainees who were molested 
for purposes of extracting information or to harass or 
to soften up her commitment. So, I think that kind of 
maltreatment would fall under the scope of the 
Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. BENGZON. Do we have jurisprudence or do we 
have definitions enunciated by international bodies as 
to what is the scope of human rights on crimes against 
chastity which partake of the nature of torture? Do we 
have any definition of jurisprudence to that effect as the 
Commissioner has stated? I ask because I know that 
crimes against chastity are covered by the Revised Penal 
Code and are prosecuted according to the laws of the 
land. That is precisely one of my questions. 

Let us say a crime against chastity is committed 
against a person who is detained because of another 
crime. I am not even talking of the reason for the deten- 
tion, be it political or not. As I said, the lady who was 
accused of murder had no money to bail herself out, so 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


723 


she had to stay in jail. The jailkeeper molested her. That 
particular crime that is committed against her is a crime 
against chastity for which the jailkeeper has to be 
answerable for. Who will investigate the case? Will it be 
the fiscal, the ombudsman, or the Commission on 
Human Rights? 

What I would like to find out are the parameters of 
the functions of the commission. When we get into a 
problem like where we would have difficulty in de- 
lineating it, then we get into the wider scope of every 
right as stated in the Bill of Rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. As I said, we will give primacy to 
civil and political rights. Since this will involve other 
issues, possibly, the commission can work closely with 
other government agencies to undertake the prosecu- 
tion of officials guilty of this crime. 

MR. BENGZON. The principal reason why I am 
bringing^ up all these difficulties, including the first 
question I have with respect to the maltreatment of 
children is that these are problems which have to be 
really spelled out. As the Commissioner said, these have 
to be coordinated with other agencies of the govern- 
ment . We cannot obviously spell these things out in the 
Constitution. But how would we word it, if we decide 
to constitutionalize this commission? How do we word 
Section 2 in such a way as not to create a confusion or 
to create an overlapping of functions with the other 
agencies of government? 

MR. SARMIENTO. To avoid confusion, the commis- 
sion will be authorized to define its functions. I under- 
stand that Commissioner Nolledo has an amendment to 
this effect to avoid confusion. 

MR. BENGZON. So, we will authorize the commis- 
sion to define its functions, and, therefore, in doing that 
the commission will be authorized to take under its 
wings cases which perhaps heretofore or at this moment 
are under the jurisdiction of the ordinary investigative 
and prosecutorial agencies of the government. Am I 
correct? 

MR. GARCIA. No. We have already mentioned earlier 
that we would like to define the specific parameters 
which cover civil and political rights as covered by the 
international standards governing the behavior of 
governments regarding the particular political and civil 
rights of citizens, especially of political detainees or 
prisoners. This particular aspect we have experienced 
during martial law which we would now like to safe- 
guard. 

MR. BENGZON. Then, I go back to that question 
that I had. Tlrerefore, what we are really trying to say 
is, perhaps, at the proper time we could specify all those 
rights stated in the Universal Declaration of Human 


Rights and defined as human riglits. Tliose are the rights 
that we envision here? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. In fact, they are also enshrined in 
the Bill of Rights of our Constitution. Tliey are integral 
parts of that. 

MR. BENGZON. Therefore, is the Gentleman saying 
that all the rights under the Bill of Rights covered by 
human rights? 

MR. GARCIA. No, only those that pertain to civil 
and political rights. 

MR. BENGZON. On page 2, line 7, whi the Com- 
missioner kindly explain the meaning of the phrase 
“Provide appropriate legal measures for the protection 
of human rights”? Can they legislate? What can the 
commission do? 

MR. SARMIENTO. What we had in mind when we 
formulated this provision is the giving of free legal aid 
services to indigents but without foreclosing the possi- 
bility of adding other services and other measures. 

MR. BENGZON. So, the phrase “appropriate legal 
measures” would actually mean services in addition or 
apart from legal aid? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. Such as what? 

MR. SARMIENTO. For instance, we have in the 
Article on Bill of Rights indemnification and rehabilita- 
tion of victims of human rights violations. This com- 
mission will assist victims to be indemnified and reha- 
bilitated by the government. So this would be covered 
by the function of providing appropriate legal measures 
for the protection of human rights. 

MR. BENGZON. Does the committee envision 
giving quasi-judicial powers to this commission in view 
of its powers to issue subpoena, subpoena tecum, 
compel attendance, and cite parties for contempt? 

MR. SARMIENTO. In reply to a previous query, I 
said that the commission is a quasi-judicial body with 
the power to issue subpoena, subpoena duces tecum and 
the power to compel parties to produce necessary 
documents. 

MR. BENGZON. I still have a lot of difficulties trying 
to delineate the parameters between the functions of 
this commission, the complaint functions of the 
ombudsman and the functions of the ordinary prosecu- 
torial agencies of the government. I hope that the 
committee can reword Section 2(1 ). 


724 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


MR. SARMIENTO. Maybe, at an appropriate time, 
the Commissioner can introduce his amendment to 
clarify this matter. 

MR. BENGZON. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Com- 
missioner Tingson be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 


brotherhood. Everyone has the right to Ufe, liberty, 
security of person; of course, in the Article on Social 
Justice it is provided that no person in our country 
should be deprived of life and property without due 
process of law. 

What I am trying to ask the committee is: Would it 
then entertain an important amendment to the effect 
that this Constitution shall take cognizance of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and that the 
adjudication of cases in violation of human rights in this 
country would be in conformity with said declaration? 


MR. TINGSON. Madam President, may I address this 
question to Commissioner Rigos, please? 

Does he agree that in essence practically all violations 
of human rights are violations against moral law? 

REV. RIGOS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Does Commissioner Rigos argue that 
as somebody said, aU the moral ills of the world can be 
cured by two tablets and the two tablets were those that 
Moses carried with him on which the Ten Command- 
ments were written? 


REV. RIGOS. I believe so. Madam President. 

fh ^ "^fter hearing that, may I then a 

e c airman of the committee the following questioi 
inere is m our proposed Declaration of Principle 
Section 2 which states: 

The Filipino people commit themselves to peace, 
equa ity and freedom. They renounce war as an instrument 

dIpc adopt the generally accepted princi- 

P international law as part of the laws of the land. 

the Untted^lqft- that we are a signatory 1 

draw UD whatever the United Natioi 

automaticallv human rights, v 

our countrv “yes.” Is that not the stance < 

uur country along that line? 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

booklet^thl^^^^' ^ inipressed, of course, with tl 

Ge*:'l 'emurey 

Rights ” Tt • ’ Universal Declaration of Hum; 
Justice and nth that the Article on Soc: 

some orfhem ^ ^ the Constitution - ai 

Reading - have ^adoS^^^ approved on Thi 

for example, mothers and^ huT® rights therei 

care and assistance in children are entitled to spec: 

missioner BeSra 

at least in the elementtw and 
compulsory. These are 

All h.trtno^ hoi *^®w Constitution no 

All huniM beings are bom free and equal in dignity ai 

rights. They are endowed with reason and conscfen 

and should act towards one another in the spirit 


MR. FOZ. We might consider it at the proper time. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

Madam President, when President Aquino assumed 
office, several leaders of organizations, who are not 
God-fearing and whose ideology was diametrically 
opposed to our Christian ideology, were immediately 
released from prison. For this, she is being criticized up 
to now because some people believe that these leaders 
were out to destabilize the government and our country. 
And yet, our President did not hesitate to release them. 
Was it because she believes that having been separated 
from their wives and children for 10 years or so, their 
rights as human beings were violated and not because 
she is sympathetic to their political ideology? 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I reply to that. Madam 
President? 

MR. FOZ. I think so, Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The President released these 
persons under detention in the spirit of reconciliation. 
That was the primary consideration which impelled 
the President to release these persons. 

MR. FOZ. In addition, if I remember right, the 
release was made because up to the time of their release, 
there had been no formal charges filed against them in 
court. In other words, they had been under detention 
for so many years without the authorities filing formal 
charges against them. They had long been under deten- 
tion and they do not even know for what charges they 
were being held. Only a few of them had charges before 
the military tribunals. 

MR. TINGSON. And that is a serious violation of 
human rights. 

MR. FOZ. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. But may I ask 
again: will the sponsor entertain an amendment towards 
mentioning the Universal Declaration of Human Rights? 

MR. FOZ. We will consider it. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


725 


MR. TINGSON. Thank you. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just comment on the state- 
ments made by Commissioner Tingson? In the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, we have an enumeration 
of economic, social and cultural rights. Violations of 
these rights will not be within the domain of the Com- 
mission on Human Rights. As we stated a while ago, this 
commission will give primacy to violations of civil and 
political rights. 

MR. TINGSON. We will so formulate the amendment 
then as to conform to what the sponsor said a while ago. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, the next registered 
speaker is Commissioner de los Reyes. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I am yield- 
ing my time to Commissioner Padilla. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. The Aquino government has the 
Commission on Human Rights under Senator Diokno, 
and the idea, I think, is to investigate prior or undis- 
covered violations of human rights during the dictatorial 
regime of the past administiation, particularly tortures 
of arrested and detained persons, including, of course, 
disappearances, salvaging, hamletting, et cetera. Is the 
function of this Commission on Human Rights the same 
but to be applied to future violations by the regime, 
whether they be the police, the military, the NPA, 
public officials or even private persons? Is that the 
concept or objective of this article? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the com- 
mission has additional functions. The Presidential 
Committee on Human Rights had limited functions. In 
this committee report, we added new functions the 
purpose of which is to investigate all forms of human 
rights violations, past and present. 

MR. PADILLA. But I suppose the past is to be 
covered by this commission. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. Of course, we speak of human rights, 
and I believe it means personal or individual rights. 
Many of these are found in the Bill of Rights, but we 


distinguish them from civil, political, economic, cultural 
and other rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. The violations under the Penal Code 
all fall under human rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. But these 
violations of the provisions of the Revised Penal Code 
can be well handled by appropriate government 
agencies. 

MR. PADILLA. That is my point. Does not the 
sponsor believe that for the adequate protection and 
repression of violations of human rights, we should 
encourage a more effective police protection and sup- 
pression of crime, and a speedy and efficient adminis- 
tration of justice under the judiciary? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. If this protection and even promo- 
tion of human rights can be effectively done by an 
improved police service, as well as efficient judicial 
system, does not the sponsor believe that this com- 
mission, consisting of chairman and two members 
who will probably be having an airconditioned room 
in Metro Manila, will not be able to prevent, much less, 
remedy violations of human rights? 

MR. SARMIENTO. But, Madam President, what we 
have in mind are men who are not confined in air- 
conditioned rooms. The men who will be appointed will 
have to go to the field; they will have to conduct fact- 
finding investigations; they will have to work with the 
people to feel their sufferings and pains to understand 
what human rights violations are. So, in this way, they 
will be effective human rights advocates. 

And I believe this cannot be handled efficiently by 
police forces considering the massiveness of human 
rights violations. We will be rendering the policemen 
inutile or ineffective if they will devote much of their 
time investigating human rights abuses. 

MR. PADILLA. Under paragraph 4, which says: 
“Establish a continuing program of education and 
information to propagate the primacy of human rights” 
would this not be included in the Article on Human 
Resources which stresses education? 

MR. SARMIENTO. There is a resolution approved 
by that committee stating that the school curriculum 
includes giving education to pupils and students about 
human rights. But I believe that schools should work 
closely with this commission so that the continuing 
program of education on human rights will be effective. 


726 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


MR. PADILLA. It may be a duplication. 

On paragraph 3, it says: “legal aid services for 
indigent persons.” I understand there is the Citizen’s 
Legal Aid Office (CLAO) which has a number of de- 
putized lawyers, some of them assigned to each branch 
of our courts and they are even paid out of government 
funds. Will this intended commission supplant or delete 
this office? 


MR. SARMIENTO. No, Madam President. As a 
matter of fact, the commission can deputize this CLAO 
to handle this kind of cases, but the assistance of CLAO 
will not be enough, and this is supported by our ex- 
perience in the past. Considering the number of human 
rights violations, CLAO does not have the sufficient 
manpower and facilities to handle this kind of cases. 
Many of the victims of human rights violations have to 
go to the IBP and ask the assistance of Chief Justice 
Concepcion, the MABINI, the FLAG, the PLL and other 
cause-oriented groups. 


MR. PADILLA. That is the point because many 
wwyers of the CLAO are not helping indigent persons. 
M^y of them are practicing law and they sometimes 
collect fees in addition to their salaries, and sometimes it 
is strange that the fiscal represents the prosecution and 
another government office represents the defense. It is 
not a very nice equilibrium of judicial representation. 

As mentioned by Commissioner de Castro, paragraph 
says. Investigate all forms of human rights viola- 
lons. That seems to be the main function of the 
om u sman under Section 1 2, paragraph 1 : “to inves- 
iga e on its own or complaint by any person, any act 

improper or inefficient. And I 
the word “illegal” can also cover criminal 
violations of human rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, in the speech 
^®*^^issioner Colayco, he explained that 
j ombudsman will be that of critic 

^og primarily to prevent waste and misman- 
u corruption in our government 

all did not contemplate in his explanation 

° human rights violations like salvaging, 
disappearances, hamletting, torture, et cetera. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President, 
nized ^ ^^^^IDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 


^ ^ reaction. 

Jhp” ^ ordinary citi 

against the inaction of the administrative departmen 

our government not to take care of human rights vi 
tions. That is, I think, spelled out very clearly in 
article. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 


MR. PADILLA. Just one or two more questions. 
Even under the Aquino administration, we witnessed 
carnappings done in broad daylight in public view. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the Vice- 
President’s son, Alexander Padilla, was a victim of 
camapping a few days ago. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes, and before him, the Minister of 
National Defense, Juan Ponce Emile. 

Does the sponsor believe that by creating this Com- 
mission on Human Rights, such deprivations committed 
with impunity against the right of property — because 
that is also a human right, I believe — could be avoided 
or minimized? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think we can leave to proper 
government agencies the investigation of camapping 
cases and the prosecution of carnappers, otherwise we 
will be expanding the functions of the Commission on 
Human Rights. As we said, we wUl be giving primacy to 
violations of civil and political rights. Camapping is 
properly covered by the Revised Penal Code. And so, 
we believe that appropriate government agencies can 
conduct the investigation, like the PC, Metrocom and 
other law enforcement agencies. 

MR. PADILLA. That is my point. If we strengthen 
and improve our law enforcement agencies, not only in 
preventing but also in detecting and apprehending, then 
bringing the culprits to justice, we will have an effective 
administration of justice. This will be more effective in 
protecting and promoting human rights rather than the 
creation of another commission whose functions might 
duplicate or overlap. I have always said that we should 
not make our government machinery more bureaucratic. 
We should simplify, and if possible, reduce unnecessary 
or overlapping bureaus and offices. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I do not think it will overlap with 
other bureaus and offices. This commission will be a 
specialized government entity that will handle all forms 
of human rights violations. As a matter of fact, the 
President, aware of the magnitude of human rights 
violations, created a Presidential Committee on Human 
Rights, specifically to investigate all forms of human 
rights violations. But as explained by Commissioner 
Garcia, we want that this commission be beyond for- 
tunes, politics, whims and caprices of politicians so that 
there is the need for an independent Commission on 
Human Rights. 

MR. PADILLA. The assumption is that the creation 
of this commission will achieve all those purposes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It may not achieve aU these 
purposes. At least it will minimize all these violations; 
not only minimize, but also promote and protect human 
rights by conducting educational campaigns. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


727 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President, one of the 
sponsor’s answer to my question contemplates a nation- 
wide agency with many deputized offices or employees 
all over the country, not only the commissioners. Will 
that not duplicate the work of the police, the NBI and 
other governmental offices and then, ultimately, a just, 
speedy and effective administration of justice under the 
judiciary? 

MR. FOZ. Tire answer to the first part of tire state- 
ment, the question of whether the commission would 
have, let us say, regional branches or offices, is some- 
thmg that should be taken care of by enabling laws or 
implementing laws, so it is not provided here. But we 
have said earlier that it is the intention that the commis- 
sion should be able to deputize public, as well as private, 
individuals or organizations to be able to really effec- 
tively carry out its functions. 

THE PRESIDENT. I am sorry we have to interrupt 
this discussion. 

MR. PADILLA. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. We will suspend the session for 
our luncheon break at the South Lounge. During the 
luncheon, we will have an informal caucus among 
ourselves. 

MR. GASCON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GASCON. We have a deadline of twelve o’clock 
for the proposed amendments to the Article on National 
Economy and Patrimony. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. We will take it up during our 
caucus. 

The session is suspended. 

It was 12:17 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:21 p.m. the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tlie session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. Til ere are still interpellators on the 
Article on Human Rights. May I ask that tlie chairman 
and the committee members take their seats in front. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioners Foz, Sarmiento, 
Garcia, Monsod and Rigos will please take their seats in 
front. 

MR. RAMA. The next registered speaker. Madam 
President, is Commissioner Bacani, who is not yet here. 
So, in the meantime, may I call on Commissioner 
Romulo to interpellate. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Romulo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. ROMULO. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to pick up on the comment, in answer 
to Commissioner NoUedo, that this is a quasi-judicial 
body. I believe that it is not because its main function 
is investigative and there is no adjudicatory function. It 
is like the Agrava Commission. It has subpoena powers 
but its main duty is to determine the facts. Would the 
committee comment on that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think with that clarification, I 
will agree with Commissioner Romulo, but as I said this 
morning, it has more than fact-finding powers. And if 
Commissioner Romulo will note, aside from conducting 
investigations, it will also provide appropriate legal 
measures; it will establish a continuing program of 
education and perform such other functions as 
mentioned this morning by Commissioner Natividad. 

MR. ROMULO. Yes, in that respect, it is a commis- 
sion with many functions. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. ROMULO. Just by way of comment, like the 
others, I am bothered only by the possible multiplicity 
of overlapping jurisdiction because of the broadness of 
the term “human rights.” But the others have com- 
mented on that, and I hope we can find a remedy for it. 

MR. SARMIENTO. That is why I think the apprehen- 
sions will be eliminated if we state that we will give 
primacy to civil and political rights, not economic, 
social and cultural rights. That is to limit the functions 
of this Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. ROMULO. With regard to Section 3, I would 
just like to call the sponsor’s attention to the provision 
in the. Judiciary Act which, if he will recall, was Com- 
missioner Azcuna’s proposal for the judiciary; that is, 
promulgate rules concerning the protection and enforce- 
ment of constitutional rights. So, again, does not the 
sponsor think that we will have an overlapping of 
functions? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think that provision in the 
Article on the Judiciary will be supplementary to the 
functions of the Commission on Human Rights. I do not 


728 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


see any overlapping or conflict between that article and 
this article on the Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. ROMULO. I do not remember the sponsor’s 
exact reply to Commissioner Bengzon, but for clarity, 
when we say legal measures, are we empowering the 
commission to issue rules, regulations or procedures? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. It will be 
recalled that the executive order creating the Presiden- 
tial Committee on Human Rights specified that func- 
tion empowering the committee to promulgate rules 
and regulations. This commission would also have that 
right. The other constitutional commissions have that 
power. So I do not see any reason why we should 
deprive this commission with that particular function 
or power. 

MR. ROMULO. Then, perhaps, we should have a 
stronger verb than “provide.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. We will welcome the amendment 
at the proper time. 

MR. ROMULO. And, finally, I ask this basic question 
which I think has already been asked: Assuming that we 
aye an effective Tanodbayan, a reformed judiciary, a 
reinyigorated prosecutorial service plus a reoriented 
armed forces, does the sponsor think we 
still need a Commission on Human Rights? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think the protection and 
promotion of human rights will be an ongoing concern. 

^ strengthened judiciary, we will still 
neea this Commission on Human Rights. Human rights 
, . be with us as long as we live as human 


formed the citizenry and those who are especially 
mandated to enforce the law, the better. I think this is 
an important function of this Human Rights Commis- 
sion; therefore, the need for this will be a permanent 
thing. 

MR. ROMULO. When we speak of a continuing 
program of education and information, does the com- 
mittee envision that the commission itself would under- 
take it or the commission would recommend to the 
Ministry of Education, Culture and Sports to have 
certain courses? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think both. Madam President. 
The commission itself will undertake the educational 
campaign or in coordination with the ministries of the 
government. 

MR. ROMULO. And as reported here, does the 
sponsor feel that we need a commission to undertake 
this work? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. I con- 
ferred with the honorable Chief Justice Concepcion and 
retired Justice J.B.L. Reyes and they believe that there 
should be an independent Commission on Human 
Rights free from executive influence because many of 
the irregularities on human rights violations are commit- 
ted by members of the armed forces and members of 
the executive branch of the government. So as to 
insulate this body from political interference, there is a 
need to constitutionalize it. 

MR ROMULO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. I ask, Madam President, that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 


thf. but, presumably, as we improve 

tion r.f ^ system, because the response to the viola- 
nnt rights would improve, did the sponsor 

Rieht<! Perhaps a Commission on Human 

and necessary for a certain number of years 

othpr phased out depending on how the 

niachinery in our government is working 

Geiftknf^^wi^^^^’ ^ ^ 

some Doint iti f ^ foreclose the possibility that at 
will be nhnc H Commission on Human Rights 

creation of a Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. GARCIA. Could I just add to that? 

There is also a need for ongoing information on 
human nghts, both for the civilian population and the 
military and police forces, for them to enforce human 
rights and to understand the standards by which their 
behavior will be judged. So, I believe the better in- 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR REGALADO. Thank you, Madam President. 

May I just pose a few minor matters to the comrnit- 
tee. I do not know if we took this up this morning 
because I happen to be out attending to our printing 
problems for the Commission. 

On page 2, lines 5 and 6, I suppose the committee 
could possibly consider more of a style the deletion of 
the words “promulgated by the Supreme Court,” 
because the proper terminology here is “RULES OF 
COURT in the Philippines.” That is already understood. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I thank the Commissioner for 
that observation. 

MR. REGALADO. Also, lines 14 and 15 appear to be 
subparagraph 5 — “perform such other duties and func- 
tions as may be fixed by law.” In the Common Provi- 
sions, Article XII, Section 7, that is required and it is 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


729 


one of the functions of all the constitutional commis- 
sions. Perhaps, the sponsor may consider the deletion 
thereof at the proper time. 

MR SARMIENTO. Thank you for that observation, 
Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. One major concern of mine is the 
meaning of the phrase “human rights” because we are 
going to have a constitutional commission on human 
rights but along the same vein as those mentioned by 
those who spoke before me. We do not seem to have a 
very definite concept of what is human rights. 

The body will recall that during the proceedings on 
the Article on Accountability of Public Officers, as a 
fail-back provision in the event that this article is not 
approved by this Commission, I had proposed therein 
an addition to Section 12, paragraph 2, the last phrase 
there which says, “including any violation of civil, 
political or human rights,” which I had explained 
before. But it will also be noticed that I was quite care- 
ful in delineating and specifying “civil, political or 
human rights,” because if it is a civil right of which one 
is deprived, the procedure would be, of course, to go 
through a civil case. If it is a political right that is 
violated, it could either be a civil case or a criminal case; 
in which case, if it is a criminal case, it will be within the 
jurisdiction of the regular prosecutory services. If it is a 
civil case, then it will be within tlie individual initiative 
of the party complaining. 

The committee mentioned this morning that in 
connection with the term “human rights,” they are 
referring only to the civil and political rights embodied 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights but 
excluding the social and cultural rights mentioned 
therein. 

My problem with this amorphous term is, for instance, 
let me invite attention to this Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, particularly. Article XVI, paragraph 1 
which says: 

Men and women of full age, without any limitation due 
to race, nationality or religion, have the right to marry and 
to found a family. They are entitled to equal rights as to 
marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. 

If this right is violated, it is actually a violation of a civil 
right which, however, is now enshrined as one of the 
human rights under the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. In other words, we actually have here a civil 
right which is considered under the protection of a 
human right provision under the universal declaration. 
So, bringing it down now into this particular article, if 
there should be such a violation in the Philippines which 
only is with respect to the freedom to marry, the free- 
dom to found a family, since it is a human right, would 
that faU within the jurisdiction of the proposed 
Commission on Human Wghts? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, Commissioner 
Aquino would like to answer the question. She is a 
human rights’ advocate. 

MS. AQUINO. I do not claim any expertise on the 
subject matter, but. Madam President, may I be allowed 
to reply. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, Commissioner Aquino. 

MS. AQUINO. I shall attempt to reply to the query 
of Commissioner Regalado. I think the question is con- 
ceptual in the sense that it is essentially of what values 
other than those we have constitutionally provided for 
in the Bill of Rights, provide the reservoir of sources 
for decisional norms in human rights cases. 

In the United States there is a debate about inter- 
pretative and noninterpretative review of human rights 
cases. And the consensus pertaining for the moment is 
that the values that would serve as reservoir for deci- 
sional norms would be tradition and consensus. By 
tradition, we refer to principled traditions which would 
be determinate and helpful in projecting human rights 
cases. 

In the P hili ppines, we speak of the tradition of 
political oppression during the period of martial law. We 
speak of the tradition of racial bigotry. Minimally, we 
could speak of the tradition of religious intolerance in 
the South, for example. And on matters of consensus, 
the consensus is on the matter of history. 

This is where I would like to differ partly with the 
committee when it seems to focus on political cases 
only. It is askew; it is a bit off mark. When we speak of 
countries in the Third World, like the Philippines, we 
speak of human rights as something that is basic, some- 
thing that pertains to a right to hfe, shelter, food, 
decent education and decent standards of living. It is 
essentially the assertion of our clamor for dignity to 
human life. It is bom out of a collective stmggle of the 
Filipino people against a neo-colonial history. 

Compared to the countries of the First World, where- 
in capitalism gives full gear to individual initiative, we 
speak of human rights in the context of the Magna 
Charta of Rights as the end in itself - the freedom to 
assemble, speak and petition for redress of grievances. 

It would seem, therefore, that there is a focus on 
individual and collective rights. There is a vital differ- 
ence in the countries of the First World and the Third 
World on this matter. The emphasis, and rightly so, in 
the countries of the First World, is on individu^ rights, 
the Magna Charta; while in the countries of the Third 
World, the meaningful concept of human rights is seen 
in collectivism. It is a collective right of the people 
against inhumanity, oppression, starvation and igno- 
rance, such that we speak of human rights not as end in 
themselves, but rather as means to achieve greater ends. 

I think the focus should be more rightly directed in 
that trend. 


730 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Does that answer the Commis- 
sioner’s question? 


MR. REGALADO. Madam President, conceptualiza- 
tion, we admit, is proper and apt with its interstitial 
differences in the quiet pathways of the academe. But 
I am more concerned with the application of this 
particular article in the roaring boulevards of actual 
life. And it will not be a question merely of conceptual- 
ization, but of jurisdiction. We have other agencies: the 
ombudsman, the regular prosecutorial services, the 
courts of justice. 

We would like to find out now exactly what are those 
particular cases involving human rights which would 
^ within the jurisdiction of this particular constitu- 
tional conimission. And I remember this morning that 
the committee mentioned that it will be for the com- 
mission to determine what are the cases that would be 
within its jurisdiction and not be compounding an 
undue delegation of powers. 


On the other hand, I see no mention here about 
Congress providing for such cases as shall fall within the 
exclusive jurisdiction of this Human Rights Commission. 


Actually, when we go into the actual application of 
this article, divorced from its present ephemeral status, 
we will have that problem: When do we invoke the juris- 
iction of the Human Rights Commission? Unless there 
IS a specification as to the cases that fall within their 
juns iction and, even if not exclusion, but at least some- 
g which may either be within their primary or 
jurisdiction so that the party may know 
anH ° would the committee want it to be defined 
enumerated or determined by the commission itself 
Congress a chance to say what are those 

Hum should fall within the jurisdiction of the 

Human Rights Commission? 


lav^to I think it will be for the enabling 

that will K ^ ®^actly what are these specific offenses 
maZ the Commission on Humar 


nal^^sol^^i^^li^^' ^^‘^^use I recall that in the ori 

I am also a member'^ h ^ committee of whi 
the exneriPTi^<» more specific. I think it v 

violations of human Vihts^^'^ 

generally committed I "^^lonwide scale a 

article It k n ’ that is the thrust of t) 

as well as tL pouie anrJhe 

were rp^snonc^Kio f Paramihtary forces whi 

w^ the proSnL?’ And I think tl 

fution^ comSn ^ 


MR. SARMIENTO. Among other things. Madam 
President. 


MR. REGALADO. I remember that there were 
things about salvaging, hamletting. Does the committee 
think that at the proper stage, it could formulate a more 
specific area or parameters of the jurisdiction of this 
Human Rights Commission, so we would know whether 
there would be a necessity really for so constitutionaliz- 
ing the same? 

I also voice the concern of some of the other Com- 
missioners, whom I had the opportunity to exchange 
views with, that they feel that if we constitutionalize 
this commission, it is, in effect, an assumption on our 
part that the same situation that gave rise to the idea of 
having such a commission, the nationwide periodicity 
occurrence of human rights violations, will continue, so 
that we will have a constitutional Human Rights Com- 
mission indefinitely and, of course, coequally, there 
must also be the corresponding widespread violations 
of human rights. And some of them had mentioned to 
me that suppose after about a few years, with the 
proper enforcement of the laws, with the proper imple- 
mentation and the protection granted to the citizens, 
there will only be very isolated violations of human 
rights, which could very well be handled by the ordinary 
agencies of the government, and yet we have here a 
constitutional commission which may turn out to be no 
longer necessary or, if necessary at all, not to that 
extent. We cannot change it or we cannot remove it 
unless we amend the Constitution. And there were views 
expressed by some: why not just a constitutionally 
mandated commission? 

So, I am giving that as a feedback from some Com- 
missioners so that the committee may think of the 
possible advance defenses should there be onslaughts, as 
Commissioner Maambong had already mentioned, which 
could be in the form of a prejudicial question. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, let us go by 
parts. First, I would like to address my reply to the 
comment or inquiry as to whether or not these viola- 
tions are continuing. My answer to that is yes. Until 
now, we have reports of human rights violations being 
committed in almost every part of the country. Fact- 
finding missions are being conducted and they reported 
that there are massive human rights violations. 

For instance, in the Veritas issue of August 14 to 20, 
1986, the caption was “Violations Go On,” and they 
enumerated many human rights violations committed in 
the provinces. 

Then, in the issue of the Daily Inquirer of August 14, 
1986, the caption was: “Farmer’s Child’s Rights 

Abused.” And in this morning’s Ma/aya, we have reports 
of human rights violations being committed in the 
provinces by government forces. 

So, I believe that there is still a need for this Human 
Rights Commission. 

On the inquiry on whether there is a need for this to 
be constitutionalized, I would refer to a previous in- 
quiry that there is still a need for making this a consti- 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26,1986 


731 


tutional body free or insulated from interference. I 
conferred with former Chief Justice Concepcion and the 
acting chairman of the Presidential Committee on 
Human Rights, retired Justice J.B.L. Reyes, and they 
are one in saying that this body should be constitutional- 
ized so that it will be free from executive control or 
interferences, since many of the abuses are committed 
by the members of the military or the armed forces. 

MR. REGALADO. Will the sponsor admit that this 
commission and the thrust of its work is really mainly 
directed against human rights violations by public 
officers or military personnel or military authorities? 

MR. SARMIENTO. By the nature of the human 
rights violations, yes, Madam President. 

MR. REGALADO. Mentioned here in Section 2, para- 
graph 1 is the matter of violations of human rights by 
private parties. Does not the sponsor think that if 
human rights violations are committed by private 
parties, the regular prosecutorial services of the govern- 
ment could properly take care of them? So that in the 
definition of the jurisdiction of the Commission on 
Human Rights, we zeroed in on the acts committed by 
these public officers, the military officers and para- 
military units. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Actually, that was the original 
recommendation of the proponents of the resolution — 
that we limit it to offenses committed by public officers. 
But the committee recommended that we include 
private parties. 

MR REGALADO. In the same manner, like in the 
case of the ombudsman, it will be noticed that the 
thrust is with respect to official malfeasance, mis- 
feasance or nonfeasance. So, at least, there is that 
delineating area as to their jurisdiction. 

MR. SARMIENTO. At the proper time, the Gentle- 
man may recommend his amendment, just to clarify. 

MR. REGALADO. I think we can also include private 
parties or civilians, if they act in conspiracy with these 
public officers. So that, at least, we will know just 
exactly what is the area within which this commission 
should operate aside from the other agencies charged 
with the protection of human rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We will appreciate the Commis- 
sioner’s recommendation in this point. 

MR REGALADO. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. In connection with the discussion on the 
scope of human rights, I would Uke to state that in the 
past regime, everytime we invoke the violation of 
human rights, the Marcos regime came out with the 


defense that, as a matter of fact, they had defended the 
rights of people to decent living, food, decent housing 
and a life consistent with human dignity. 

So, I think we should really limit the definition of 
human rights to political rights. Is that the sense of the 
committee, so as not to confuse the issue? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to continue and respond 
also to repeated points raised by the previous speaker. 

There are actually six areas where this Commission 
on Human Rights could act effectively: 1) protection 
of rights of political detainees; 2) treatment of prisoners 
and the prevention of tortures; 3) fair and public trials; 

4) cases of disappearances; 5) salvagings and hamletting; 
and 6) other crimes committed against the religious. 

Regarding the other point on the necessity of a 
permanent commission, the experience of Amnesty 
International suggests that even countries in Europe or 
the United States of America need organizations on 
human rights like the Amnesty International where 
human rights education is critical to make people aware 
of their riglits. This is because the rights are normally 
protected and defended when the citizens are them- 
selves conscious that these rights are theirs and they 
exist. And, lastly, for those who are supposed to uphold 
the law, which I mentioned earlier, like the soldiers and 
policemen who are in-charge of jails, they should also 
be made conscious that there are rules that determine 
their behavior towards prisoners whom they are sup- 
posed to treat and deal with. 

MR. RAMA. Is it also the sense of the committee that 
higher levels of human rights are taken care of by the 
Article on Social Justice? 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly, there are other fora where 
these concerns will be dealt with. For example, on land 
reform, there will be the Ministry of Agrarian Reform; 
on labor, there will be the Ministry of Labor, and so on. 
There are other areas but we felt it is important to 
elevate this entire concern for human rights to a consti- 
tutional commission to make this a permanent and 
lasting concern that would be beyond the reach of 
political changes in government. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Aquino be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I will have to take 
exception to the position of Commissioner Garcia on 
this point because to limit the concept of human rights 
to political rights in matters of political oppression is 
very intellectually dishonest. In my previous discussion, 
the point that I was discussing is that human rights lie 


732 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


at the roots of social disequilibrium. For so long as there 
is structural imbalance, we would have cases of human 
rights. In fact, earlier when I said initially that when we 
speak of human rights in Third World countries, they 
are means not just the end in themselves, to attain 
dignity to human life. To this extent, I believe and I am 
in full agreement with the committee that the work of 
human rights is very noble. In fact, I think it is mission- 
ary, without sounding very patronizing about it. When- 
ever there is every opportunity, we should proselytize 
for human rights. But then, if the committee will agree 
with me, and this is my dilemma, human rights are basic 
and fundamental to the roots of social disequilibrium; it 
would, in effect, state likewise that when we create 
a constitutional commission, it is as if the objective 
attains to the level of a constitutional messiah that 
addresses structural problems of disequilibrium. We 
should resist that drift. I would like to disabuse the 
mind of Commissioner Rama about it. But for purposes 
of conceptual clarity, let us not just address the symp- 
toms of the violations of human rights. Deeply imbed- 
ded are the questions of social justice, economic justice, 
structural oppression and social disequilibrium. 


CrARCIA. The entire scope of human right 
precisely is more on the political, civil, economic anc 
social rights. I agree with Commissioner Aquino that th( 
sources of many of these violations of political rights ar( 
in themselves social and economic in nature — poverty 
Unger, lack of employment, lack of land, powerless 
ness, lack of participation in political power. We ai: 

ar<^ th ^ experience with the people. These 
e asic and root causes of many of their malaise. 

micci!? ^ P ^ advocating a human rights com- 

ArtipiJ^ ^ root causes. In fact, the 

structnrar Justice precisely tries to address the 

our sociptv^^n ^^®J°rical and political imbalances in 

posed arSie on the^r'^® 

that there is also^ ^(^mission on Human Rights is 
political detention of problems regarding 

vagings which we’ torture, disappearances, sal- 

which we never wantToh^^^^^®^^®^ ^ 

set of rights whiov. repeated. These are a certain 

even towh I I egree. They do nol 

problem. But neverth^^^^”^’,.®^ causes of the 

remain with us ana they are a problem that wil 

And one of the m many Third World countries 

defended is that reasons why they are often no 

nature of C ri^ . T 7"® ““ 

advances that we^can h’ therefore, one of the majo 
commission which wil^ot country is to have ; 

later on, but also to prevent thLeT 

ing consciences with a humL^ 

spedfio and limited in order to mtlc: ‘ 

efflctoe t^the"^ “ ‘ 

po mod imprisonment and torture. If it concerns itsel 
with the whoie gamut of human problems - economi 


injustice, social injustice and others — it could never 
be that effective. Therefore, we are far more modest in 
our efforts in this article which tries to remedy only 
one area, although there are other articles, other efforts 
and other vehicles and media where the other basic 
problems of society will have to be addressed. 

MS. AQUINO. I hope Commissioner Garcia appre- 
ciates my position. It is not just an abstract diversion. It 
creates actual pragmatic problems. For example, on 
matters of jurisdiction, as a human rights lawyer, I 
handle cases of squatters who are forcibly evicted. 
Squatting is a human rights problem; the oppression of 
workers is a human rights problem ; sexual discrimina- 
tion is a human rights problem. Would these jireas 
properly pertain to the jurisdiction of the Human 
Rights Commission? 

MR. GARCIA. Although they are part of the human 
rights problem, we are saying that this committee 
should have far more modest objectives. If they want to 
try to remedy only one area, that is all right; it is a 
clearer consciousness of what basic civil and political 
rights are. Then this is one area that the committee 
should try to defend and safeguard. What does one do 
when he is arrested? What does one do if there is 
pressure to make him sign a confession without counsel, 
without a lawyer? These are certain rights of individuals 
that make one far stronger when he confronts the police 
power of the State. 

In other words, I realize we are not solving the 
ultimate problem of land of the squatter here, of 
land of the farmer who is being evicted, but, never- 
theless, we are equipping him with political tools wit 
which to confront forces that are ranged against un. 
But I am saying that there are other avenues an ^ 
areas which can meet the more major and more 
problems of social justice and economic imbalance. 

MS. AQUINO. I was asking for this clarification 
because I wanted us to rid ourselves, and I am a ® 
it, of the odium of this messianic syndrome, and neitner 
do I want to raise false hopes about problems w ic 
are basic, societal and structural. That was on y my 
concern. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. 

I am happy to note that most of my questions have 
already been answered, but there are still concerns 
which I would like to indicate for the committee. There 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


733 


are three points on which I would like to ask the com- 
mittee. First, I would like to go back to the problems 
indicated by Commissioners Regalado, Tingson and the 
rest, regarding the parameters of power and functions 
of human rights. I was very much concerned earlier 
when Commissioner Garcia referred to the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights. As I understood him 
earlier, this is supposed to be the coverage of the juris- 
diction of the Commission on Human Rights, but later 
on this was corrected by Commissioner Sarmiento when 
he said that it actually covers only political and civil 
rights. And tlien here comes Commissioner Aquino 
talking about the collective rights of the people to 
decency of livelihood, and so on. 

So, it appears to me now that from the very start we 
have already been in a confused state as to what really is 
the coverage of this term “human rights.” Could the 
committee perhaps give us a definitive statement on 
what is really the coverage? 

Before that, I would like to emphasize that during the 
discussion on the Bill of Rights, I was very specific in 
asking Commissioner Bernas about the classification of 
rights, and we seem to have reached a point where we 
said that all these rights could be classified into indi- 
vidual rights, political rights, civil rights, economic, 
social and cultural. What is the coverage of these human 
rights we are talking about in this proposed article? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Gentleman just said that we 
are in a confused state; I humbly disagree, Madam Pres- 
ident, because we made it clear that the coverage of the 
Commission on Human Rights should be purely civil 
and political rights. The Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights covers so many rights — economic, social, cul- 
tural, civil, political — but as I said, we will limit our- 
selves to civil and political rights and to our Bill of 
Rights. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, is that an indi- 
cation that later on the committee will clarify these in 
any of the provisions or will the committee await 
amendments from the floor on those points? 

MR. SARMIENTO. We will gladly accommodate 
amendments. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

But I have to disagree with Commissioner Sarmiento 
when he said that the coverage of human rights would 
only be political and civil; I think that is too limiting. I 
have been reading some articles and some reports of 
Amnesty International adverted to by Commissioner 
Garcia, and I noticed that the violations investigated 
by Amnesty International — they came to the Philip- 
pines and I saw their report — seem to indicate that they 
were not only investigating violations of political rights 
but individual rights. When we talk of torture, we are 
not talking of violations of political rights, we are talk- 


ing of individual rights, and the deprivation of liberty or 
life. 

As a matter of fact, I recall that because of our 
interest in this matter, we have caused it to be inserted 
in Section 19 of the Bill of Rights. I have been trying to 
insert this and, finally, the body approved it. This refers 
to employment of physical, psychological or degrading 
punishment against prisoners or detainees. So, would 
the Commissioner reconsider his statement that the 
coverage of this Human Rights Commission would only 
be political and civil and say that the coverage should be 
more on individual rights violation? 

MR. GARCIA. But the persons who enjoy civil and 
political rights are the individuals. For example, Article 
5 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which 
prohibits torture or cruel or inhuman or degrading 
forms of treatment, is directed to protect the rights of 
individuals against torture. So, I do not see any contra- 
diction in saying that civil and political rights are 
individual rights. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Is the committee saying that 
when we say violation of political rights, we are actually 
covering individual rights violation? 

MR. GARCIA. Definitely. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Then I can get along with that. 

MR. SARMIENTO. As Commissioner Maambong 
said, the power or the coverage of the Commission on 
Human Rights is very limiting. It is. Madam President. 
As mentioned by Commissioner Garcia, it is a modest 
attempt to solve the human rights problems in our 
country. It is not an attempt to cover all forms of 
human rights violations. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I think we are 
going to have a difficulty again, as adverted to by Com- 
missioner Bernas, when we go into classifications. As far 
as my classification is concerned, individual rights are 
not covered by political rights. As a matter of fact. 
Article 2 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
enumerates political rights; for example, that everyone 
has the right to take part in the government. I think that 
is clearly a political right. Another is that everyone has 
the right to equal access to public service in his country; 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights went on 
further by saying that the will of the people shall be the 
basis of the authority of government. However, I take 
the word of the committee that when we say violation 
of individual rights, this is included in the term “poli- 
tical rights.” This way, we will not be bogged down in 
our own method of classification. 

The next point to consider is the creation of the 
Commission on Human Rights. I think the committee 
will agree that this commission can be created in three 


734 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


ways: It can be created as a constitutional body, just 
like the other constitutional commissions; we can have 
it mandated by the Constitution; or, even without the 
mandate of the Constitution, the Congress can create 
this body. Would Commissioner Sarmiento agree with 
me on that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Congress can create this 
body, but as I have said, if we leave it to Congress, this 
commission will be within the reach of politicians and 
of public officers and that to me is dangerous. We 
should insulate this body from political control and 
political interference because of the nature of its func- 
tions — to investigate all forms of human rights viola- 
tions which are principally committed by members of 
the military, by the Armed Forces of the Philippines. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes. As a matter of fact, even 
without the Constitution, even without the law, this 
Commission on Human Rights can still be created by 
executive fiat, whether we are in a revolutionary gov- 
ernment or a constitutional government. 

MR. SARMIENTO. As a matter of fact. President 
Aquino created the Presidential Committee on Human 
Rights. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Sufficient enough to make it 
independent, I think. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Would the Commissioner agree 
with me that this Commission on Human Rights is some 
sort of an oversight commission just like the ombuds- 
man in relation to the Tanodbayan? In the Ombudsman 
concept, as explained by Commissioner Colayco, the 
Ombudsman receives complaints from people because of 
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in government 
functions and then it passes them on to the Tanodba- 
yan. In this case, just like the Ombudsman, the Com- 
mission on Human Rights will also receive complaints, 
do some investigation but actually in the implementa- 
tion itself, it will have to pass them on to the regular 
investigative bodies of this government. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Not to the investigative bodies 
but to the prosecutory bodies of the government, 
because the commission will do the investigation. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, if the Commis- 
sioner will investigate, does it have to have a corps of 
investigators? 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, but we are in a revolutionary 
^vemment. I am thinking of a situation where, even 
^ ^ revolutionary government, the Office 

Th^ r still create this kind of commission, 

e Gentleman will agree with me on that? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

mission President, does this Com- 

the UnitPH *^ghts have some sort of a model in 

U S Coniit. the committee know if the 

'-institution contains the same provision? 

simUar Commis^J^n^' ^'tam President, I mentioned a 
This is part of th? ^nni^n Rights in New Zealand. 
Rights Commission^ Constitution. They call it Human 
Constitution of New 7 ”^ ^his is part of the unwritten 
of this commission . ®^tand. But the principal function 
we are expanding th ^^^cational in nature. In our case, 
Commission. ® functions of the Human Rights 

MR. MAAMBONG T m 

is created directlv hv Zealand, the commissior 

^ the Constitution. Is that right? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes 
MR MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

supposed to be at 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And in other words, it will not 
rely on the investigative facilities of the Philippic® 
Constabulary at the present setting or the NBI or any 
other investigative arm. It will have to have its own 
corps of investigators. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, it will hav®^its 
own corps of investigators and the body can 
upon the existing agencies of the government o 
in its investigative work. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I am a little bit worried about 
Section 2(1) which says: “Investigate all or 
human rights violations committed by public ot "j , 
and this includes civilian and military authonties. 
the Gentleman explain what he means by ci 
and military authorities”? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, “civilian and 
military authorities” refer to paramilitary forces. They 
could also refer to members of the PC-INP, members of 
the army, marine and navy. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just to clarify the points taken 
up earlier. Commissioner Garcia said that this is actually 
not only an investigative agency, but a recommendatory 
agency; it is also a preventive agency. Is that right. 
Commissioner Garcia? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


735 


MR. MAAMBONG. And it can conduct an infor- 
mation campaign and according to Commissioner 
Sarmiento, it may assist in the actual prosecution of 
offenses and will, in fact, cover different islands of the 
country, if that is at all possible. Finally, is it not a fact 
that when we talk of the Commission on Human Rights, 
we are more or less interested in the wholesale violation 
of rights, like atrocities, political persecutions? We do 
not really concern ourselves with the day-to-day crime 
that is committed in this country. Otherwise, the whole 
commission will be bogged down. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. We leave 
it to the proper law-enforcement agencies to take care 
of the day-to-day crimes being committed in our coun- 
try. 

MR. MAAMBONG. So, we are more or less concerned 
with these violations which affect, probably to coin the 
word, humanity itself and involve so many people, like 
the Escalante massacre and all these. 

MR. GARCIA. No, Madam President. It can also refer 
to one individual who is imprisoned. The violation of 
the rights of any one single person is a violation of 
human rights. When a man is not given fair trial or is 
tortured, this committee or this commission must inves- 
tigate the violation and try to prosecute with the help 
of the other agencies. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is really what I am worried 
about. Madam President. A person might perceive that 
his human right is violated, and human right is a very 
broad term. And then, he not only goes to the regular 
investigative authorities; he also goes to the Human 
Rights Commission. We now have two agencies working 
along the same line. How do we intend to solve this. 
Madam President? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Commissioner Maambong men- 
tioned day-to-day crimes. What I had in mind when I 
answered his question were ordinary crimes, such as 
robbery, homicide, murder. But when we speak of viola- 
tions against the right or the freedom against torture, 
against cruel and inhuman or degrading treatment or 
punishment or violation of the right to due process 
of law, freedom from arbitrary search and seizure, 
these are violations that can well be covered by the 
Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That, more or less, clarifies my 
question. I will just point out one thing that is happen- 
ing now in the Province of Cebu, but this is not to scare 
the Commissioners. 

If we will go over our newspapers in Cebu, the rate of 
killing of police officers and military officers is almost 
once every two days. Last Sunday, I attended the burial 
of one of our police patrolmen, Pat. Rolando Ruiz, a 
good friend of mine. Another student of mine, PC Major 


Pedy Noval was shot in the head. This has been going 
on since November 1984 up to the present; and the 
body count has been going on everyday. Cardinal Vidal 
has expressed his concern. A few days ago, in the town 
of Tuburan, which is adjoining my town of Asturias, 
the whole station command was overrun, and three 
policemen were executed by a group of 50 men wearing 
military uniforms. 

This may not be true throughout the country, but I 
am very much distressed because this has not happened 
before in Cebu. Will this be considered part of the job 
of the commission, for example, to investigate this 
wholesale killing of police officers and military person- 
nel going on not only in Cebu but all over the country? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Committed by whom? Do we 
have the suspects? 

MR. MAAMBONG. That is the queer thing about it. 

I looked over the statistics and found out that since 
1984, those killed, whether police officers, military 
officers, columnists or newspapermen, were shot in the 
head. Nobody has been arrested or charged in court; 
nobody has ever been convicted because these are 
crimes which are supposed to be committed by people 
whom we do not know anything about. They attribute 
this to the sparrow unit of the New People’s Army but 
even this is not clear. This is happening not only in the 
Province of Cebu but in other provinces. This is what I 
mean by wholesale killing of military personnel and 
police officers. And so, I ask if these should be inves- 
tigated by the Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. SARMIENTO. I agree with Commissioner Maam- 
bong. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, my 
colleagues: I am inclined to agree with Commissioner 
Aquino. Although I feel that the legal and political as- 
pects are important, I would like to see human rights in 
a broader context. I feel that the approach here is, to use 
the analogy in medicine, more curative than preventive. 
Perhaps such a commission, if it were elevated to a 
constitutional commission, should concern itself more 
with the environment, the historical, cultural, socio- 
economic conditions that have fomented this state of 
attitudinal and value orientation towards violence. I feel 
that if such is established, it should follow the form that 
the New Zealand Hurhan Rights Commission had taken 
— that it should be more of an educational commission. 
1 would submit that many human rights violations 


736 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


are, as aptly described, symptoms of the malady that is 
seen in terms of the inequities in our socioeconomic life, 
and the continuing barrage of messages from our media 
and other information channels as well as the educa- 
tional system, which continually feed us with violence 
and which portray deviant behavior as the norm. 

Therefore, if such is established, I hope it concen- 
trates more on policy research and action programs on 
areas such as nonviolence and peace strategies. It would 
emphasize unique Filipino values and nonviolent stra- 
tegies on social change. We will, therefore, be working 
on changing the environment rather than merely con- 
centrating on a limited area. If such is estabhshed, we 
could work more towards the restructuring of the mass 
communication system £ind the educational system. It 
would emphasize the values in family life and will work 
towards a more comprehensive coordination of all 

ormal and nonformal education as these are the very 
institutions that have contributed to the present human 
nghts violations. 


I also hope that we could include in the Human 
r f? u ^°^"^ission members not only from the legal 
tield but also educators. If we accept that human rights 
promotion is a problem of education, why should we 
t \ attending to the symptoms of the prob- 

s more in-depth analysis of the func- 
^Ki* u- ^°^™^slon is made and that we refocus it 
^ research institution that would be 
e o peace research, to nonviolent strategies. 


of the Com- 

to addre^^fh articles in the Constitution try 

Lnt^v T that we face in this 

there are Commissioner Rosario Braid that 

more deep-se^ted°^d^^^^^'ll^ problems that are far 
stand that in “’^P^rtant in character. I under- 

we try to adH ^ ^^^®rent articles of the constitution, 
in our societv these diverse problems that we face 
mentioned, the Commissioner already 

be discussine th ^^'^^.^ttee on Human Resources will 
and culture So Points on education, science, arts 

into this^commR^ilfn^®^®”^^ suggestion on incorporating 

be open to that «i professions, we will 

formulate that amend^^^?!? Commissioner can 

at amendment during the proper time. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID v<a 

just pronaeatino tha • ^ay I add that it is not 

Con Trr Z s 

are constant violators of hum mdividuals who 

rontiniiinp pdnr'!itir> i "^*^an nghts — providing them 
continumg educational programs. Some of thin are 

now in prison; some are in the 

^ aa ;^ 4 ^„ i> • r . military and some are 

drug addicts. Reorientation programs taUored to non 


violent strategies would help them realize that there are 
alternative ways of solving problems, rather than by 
violent means. 

In other countries, they have tried to address the 
problems of human rights by establishing peace insti- 
tutes. I know of several countries, like Finland and 
other developing countries, where although their long- 
term goals are directed to the prevention of human 
rights violation, their programs, however, focus on 
policy research and action programs. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, the suggestion 
of the Commissioner is covered by one of the functions 
of the Human Rights Commission, and that is to esta- 
blish a continuing program of education and informa- 
tion. This program of education could cover the non- 
violent strategies which she mentioned and possibly the 
creation of peace institutes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. But could we be more speci- 
fic? The way it reads now, it would appear that it is 
enough to package an informal education program 
that would teach children and adults the importance of 
human rights. But we know that we must create the 
appropriate institutions that would examine the causes 
and consequences of human rights violations and that 
subsequent information and educational programs 
should be based on poUcy research. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we are fo^ 
mulating a fundamental law, a constitution, and I thin ^ 
we need not specify these various educational ^ 
proaches. My submission is that these are covered V 
a continuing program of education. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes. 

MR. SARMIENTO. But for the record, the 
sioner can mention those things as part of the con 
program of education. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. But I would like to hope that 
the committee shall accept an amendment that f®^^ 
on peace research and applied programs for nonvio e 
strategies of social change, something to that effect. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Thank you very much. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Bacani be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I will ask two 
questions which I consider very important and they 
need only very direct answers. 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


737 


Does tlie committee consider such a commission 
necessary? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, otherwise we would not propose 
it. 

BISHOP BACANI. Does the committee consider it 
necessary that tlie body should be a constitutional 
commission? 

MR. GARCIA. Yes. In his sponsorship speech. 
Commissioner Sarmiento explained why he considers 
it important. For me, the most important reason is this: 
We are dealing here with politically-related violations; 
therefore, it is important that the body is beyond the 
reach of political changes in government; that the 
members be not simply presidential appointees but that 
they are beyond that; that the body is independent and, 
therefore, can even check those forces, like the military, 
the police who are supposed to implement or enforce, 
but sometimes repress the riglits of citizens. 

BISHOP BACANI. While I am in full sympathy with 
the idea that there should be such a commission, I am 
not convinced by the reasoning to opt for a constitu- 
tional commission. Let us take the case of our problem 
regarding deforestation which has roots and ramifica- 
tions that go into the executive and legislative branches 
of the government, and yet we do not ask, despite the 
seriousness of the need for reforestation and the need to 
arrest deforestation, for a constitutional commission on 
forest conservation. Let us also take the example of the 
situation on pollution — again, the causes go into the 
executive and legislative branches of government, and 
yet people do not petition for a constitutional com- 
mission on pollution control despite the urgency of the 
problem and the fact that it is so widespread and that it 
has roots and branches all over, and needs independent 
men. Yet when it comes to human rights violations, we 
say: “Well, because we need people who are independent 
because the problem is so widespread, we should have a 
constitutional commission.” 

MR. GARCIA. The critical factor here is political 
control, and normally, when a body is appointed by 
Presidents who may change, the commission must 
remain above these changes in political control. Second- 
ly, the other important factor to consider are the armed 
forces, the police forces which have tremendous power 
at their command and, therefore, we would need a com- 
mission composed of men who also are beyond the 
reach of these forces and the changes in political 
administration. 

bishop BACANI. But that is also very true regarding 
deforestation. The same elements — military, men in 
politics, people appointed by the President — are also 
involved and yet we do not really ask for such a consti- 


tutional commission even though we are told by the 
Ministry of Natural Resources, for example, that if our 
present rate of deforestation continues, by the year 
2000 we shall irreversibly enter into a process of 
“desertification” which we may have entered already, 
they say. But as I said, nobody has proposed to create 
such a commission for forest conservation. 

MR SARMIENTO. With respect to the creation of 
such a commission, our resolution advocated for the 
creation of a commission for environmental protection. 

BISHOP BACANI. But not in that resolution. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We had that proposed resolution, 
but it was disapproved by the committee. So, what re- 
mained was this Commission on Human Rights. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes. But let us consider this 
hypothesis also. I can understand that the three consti- 
tutional commissions: the Commission on Elections, the 
Civil Service Commission, the Commission on Audit, 
will always have something to do on a big scale. But let 
us say - and let me be very hopeful for a while - that 
President Aquino really succeeds and Minister Emile 
and General Ramos cooperate with her, which is not an 
impossibility, and the army becomes very disciplined 
during the term of President Aquino. What will this 
Human Rights Committee deal with? It cannot deal 
with human rights violations of the outlaws because 
they are beyond the reach of the arm of the law. They 
will likely not take education from the government. As 
for the army and the police, in my hypothesis, which is 
not impossible, they will be behaving very well. So, 
what will this Commission on Human Rights do now? 

MR GARCIA. There is a lot of tasks, Commissioner 
Bacani. The ongoing formation of consciousness of 
people regarding human rights is a very big task. Sec- 
ondly, it is not only the citizens, but also the men who 
are supposed to uphold the law - soldiers and police- 
men. Training and formation should also be considered 
here. And, thirdly, as I mentioned also earlier, just 
because we have resolved our problems momentarily 
does not mean that there are no other human rights 
problems around us. I think this should also be pari 
of our consciousness as a people, as a result of our 
solidarity with human rights victims all over the world. 

Finally, governments come and go, but if this com- 
mission stays, it will in a sense ensure that human rights 
will be protected no matter who is President. And that, 
I think, is a far more important safeguard for the future 
generations to come. 

BISHOP BACANI. Yes, but for that, we will not need 
a constitutional commission on human rights. I would 
admit that we need a commission, some kind of a body. 
As regards to education, I do not know whether the 


738 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


educative purpose will serve as a sufficient rationale for 
this. 

Let us consider Section 4 of the Human Resources 
committee report. There will be a big task of education 
involved here. The study of the Constitution and human 
rights shall be part of the curricula in aU schools. So, 
this area will be taken care of for a very large portion of 
our people, and then mass media education can also be 
done. 


MR MONSOD. Madam President, I was just wonder- 
ing whether we can think about the issue a little more in 
this sense, that we can see over the next few years, 
maybe in five or ten years, given the structural prob- 
lems of the economy — the poverty, and maldistribu- 
tion of income and so on — the structure of political 
power in the country, there will be problems of 
human rights in the foreseeable future. Personally, I 
would like to see this kind of commission expand its 
horizons beyond crimes involving political beliefs. 
Perhaps over time, this could take into consideration the 
wider view of human rights, social and economic rights, 
the educational aspects — the research into the deeper 
reasons for all kinds of human rights violations. In other 
words, the creation of a constitutional commission is a 
signal of the importance of human rights, but the more 
immediate problems are these crimes involving political 
beliefs. But this does not mean that this commission 
cannot be exp^ded in its scope later on. I do not see 
^y point in time where our country will not need a 
ommission on Human Rights, given the very wide 
spec rum of human rights that are really attainable or, 
eas , what we would like to attain over the years. 

? would like to see not a closed deflni- 
nnpn' ^ unctions of this commission, but a slight 
wf» solve the immediate problems, 

we can go mto these other problems. 


bishop BACANI. Yes. Thank you. 

manv 'rif f second the suggestion already given by 
fall iinHpr specifically name the violations that 

present at i ® ^®^P®l6nce of this commission, for the 
inclurieti example, we speak of murder as not 

would be lUsso"rt^r”®^*^ violation and yet salvaging 
tion. difficult to define the line of demarca- 


in due welcome the amendme 


BISHOP BACANI. Thank 


you. 


is tha't' weTan*]!?' Commissioner i 

IS that we can look at rt on several stages. Then « 

have more specific crimes in the first stage. 

MR. RAMA Madam President, Commis 
Guingona would like to be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Guingona is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. Madam President. 

I would like to start by saying that I agree with 
Commissioner Garcia that we should, in order to make 
the proposed commission more effective, delimit as 
much as possible, without prejudice to future expansion, 
the coverage or scope of the concept and jurisdictional 
area of the term “human rights.” I was actually dis- 
turbed this morning when reference was made without 
qualification to the rights embodied in the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, although later on, this 
was qualified to refer to civil and political rights con- 
tained therein. 

If I remember correctly. Madam President, Commis- 
sioner Garcia, after mentioning the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights of 1948, mentioned or linked the 
concept of human rights with other human rights speci- 
fied in other conventions. I think he mentioned one 
other convention which I do not remember. Am I 
correct? 

MR. GARCIA. Is Commissioner Guingona referring 
to the Declaration of Torture of 1985? 

MR. GUINGONA. I do not know, but the Commis- 
sioner mentioned another. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, the other one is the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights o 
which we are a signatory. 

MR. GUINGONA. I see. The only problem is that, 
although I have a copy of the Universal 
Human Rights here, I do not have a copy of the o 
covenant mentioned. It is quite possible that t 
rights specified in that other convention which 
be specified here. I was wondering whether it wou 
wise to link our concept of human rights to gen 
terms like “convention,” rather than specify t e ng 
contained in the convention. 

As far as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
is concerned, the committee, before the peno o 
amendments, could specify to us which of these artic es 
in the Declaration will fall within the concept o civ 
and political rights, not for the purpose of includmg 
these in the proposed constitutional article, but to give 
the sense of the Commission as to what human rights 
would be included, without prejudice to expansion 
later on, if the need arises. For example, there was 
no definite reply to the question of Commissioner 
Regalado as to whether the right to marry would be 
considered a civil or a social right. Is it not a civil right? 

MR GARCIA. Madam President, I have to repeat the 
various specific civil and political rights that we felt 
must be envisioned initially by this provision — freedom 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


739 


from political detention and arrest, prevention of 
torture, right to fair and public trials, as well as crimes 
involving disappearances, salvagings, hamlettings and 
collective violations. So, it is limited to politically 
related crimes, precisely to protect the civil and political 
riglits of a specific group of individuals, and, therefore, 
we are not opening it up to all of the definite areas. 

MR. GUINGONA. Correct. Therefore, just for the 
record, the Gentleman is no longer linking his concept 
or the concept of the Committee on Human Rights with 
the so-called civil or political rights as contained in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 

MR. GARCIA. When I mentioned earlier the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, I was referring to an 
international instrument. 

MR. GUINGONA. I know. 

MR. GARCIA. But it does not mean that we will 
refer to each and every specific article therein, but only 
to those that pertain to the civil and political rights 
that are politically related, as we understand it in this 
Commission on Human Rights. 

MR. GUINGONA. Madam President, I am not even 
clear as to the distinction between civil and social rights. 

MR GARCIA. There are two international cove- 
nants: the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, 
Social and Cultural Rights. The second covenant con- 
tains all the different rights — the rights of labor to 
organize, the right to education, housing, shelter, et 
cetera. 

MR. GUINGONA. So, we are just limiting at the 
moment the sense of the committee to those that the 
Gentleman has specified. 

MR. GARCIA. Yes, to civil and political rights. 

MR. GUINGONA. Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are only two 
more registered speakers but one of them is not around, 
so I ask that Commissioner Tan be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, from the standpoint of 
the victims of human rights, I cannot stress more on 
how much we need a Commission on Human Rights. 
First of all, we are completely wrong if we think that 
the Aquino government has brought about peace. There 
are more cases of salvaging now than there was even 
before. And just this week, we had two in our area— one 


was electrocuted in tlie Makati Police Unit because they 
wanted to exact a confession; and the other was tor- 
tured in the Manila Police Unit. So, we are under 
illusion if we think that even after 100 years, we will 
have no human rights problems. Another reason is, 
human rights lawyers are very, very scarce. Whenever we 
need them, we can only find Soc or Fely or Rene; 
they are very scarce. Even my own family of lawyers 
does not know anything about human rights law. 

Another reason is that human rights victims are 
usually penniless. They cannot pay and very few lawyers 
will accept clients who do not pay. And so, they are the 
ones more abused and oppressed. Another reason is, the 
cases involved are very delicate — torture, salvaging, 
picking up without any warrant of arrest, massacre — 
and the persons who are allegedly guilty are people in 
power like politicians, men in the military and big shots. 
Therefore, this Human Rights Commission must be 
independent. 

I would like very much to emphasize how much we 
need this commission, especially for the little Filipino, 
the little individual who needs this kind of help and 
cannot get it. And I think we should concentrate only 
on civil and political violations because if we open this 
to land, housing and health, we will have no place to go 
again and we will not receive any response. I think our 
human rights lawyers, especially those belonging to the 
MABINI and FLAG, are one of the heroes of martial 
law. 

Thank you. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, there are no more 
registered speakers, so, I ask that we close the period of 
sponsorship and debate so we can move on to the period 
of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. RAMA There is a request that we suspend the 
session for a few minutes. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 4:44 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 5:01 p.tn., the session was vesunted with the 
Honorable Francisco A. Rodrigo presiding. 

\ 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Die 
session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


740 


TUESDAY, AUGUST 26, 1986 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). The 
Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. On account of the impending typhoon, 
I move that we adjourn the session untU tomorrow at 
nine-thirty in the morning. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer, before the 
Chair rules on the motion, I would like to manifest my 
reservation to file a motion tomorrow, concerning the 
present article we are discussing which I intimated 
during the caucus. 1 will do it tomorrow or otherwise, it 


will be done by Commissioner Calderon. 

Thank you. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Rodrigo). Let that 
reservation be recorded. 

Is there any objection to the motion for adjourn- 
ment? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is 
adjourned until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 5:01 p.m. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


741 


R.C.C. NO. 67 

Wednesday, August 27, 1986 


OPENING OF SESSION 

At 9:58 a.m., the President, the Honorable Cecilia 
Munoz Palma, opened the session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tlie session is called to order. 


NATIONAL ANTHEM v 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please rise to smg 
the National Anthem. 

Everybody rose to sing the National Anthem. 

THE PRESIDENT. Everybody will please remain 
standing for the Prayer to be led by the Honorable 
Ricardo J. Romulo. 

Everybody remained standing for the Prayer. 

PRAYER 

MR. ROMULO. Dear God, in the words of St. Francis: 

Make us an instrument of Your peace, 

Where there is hatred, let us bring love. 

Where there is injury, pardon 

Where there is doubt, faith 

Where there is despair, hope 

Where there is darkness, light 

Where there is sadness, joy. 

Dispel, therefore, from our hearts those dark shadows 
of suspicion and fear which becloud our minds and our 
vision. 

In drafting this new Covenant for all our people, 
teach us to accept with serenity the things that cannot 
be changed. Give us courage to change the things that 
can and should be changed. And, above all else, ^ant us 
the wisdom to distinguish one from the other so that we 
can be spared further strife and dissension. 

This we ask in the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ. 
Amen. 

ROLL CALL 

THE PRESIDENT. The Secretary -General will call 
the roll. 


THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, reading: 


Abubakar . . . . 

. Present* 

Natividad . . . 

. . . Present 

Alonto ...... 

. Present 

Nieva 

. . . Present 

Aquino 

. Present* 

Nolledo . . . . 

. . . Present 

Azcuna 

. Present 

Ople 

. . . Present 

Bacani 

. Present 

Padilla .... 

. . . Present 

Bengzon 

. Present 

Quesada . . . 


Bennagen . . . . 

. Absent 

Rama 


Bernas 

. Present* 

Regalado . . . 


Rosario Braid . . 

. Present 

Reyes de los 

. . . Present 

Brocka 

. Absent 

Rigos 

. . . Present 

Calderon 

. Present 

Rodrigo . . . 

. . . Present 

Castro de . . . . 

. Present 

Romulo . . . 


Colayco 

. Present 

Rosales .... 


Concepcion . . . 

, . Present 

Sarmiento . . 


Davide 

. . Present 

Suarez .... 

. . . Absent 

Foz 

, . Present 

Sumulong . . 

. . . Present 

Garcia 

. . Present 

Tadeo 

. . . Absent 

Gascon 

. . Present 

Tan 


Guingona . . . 

. . Present 

Tingson . . . 

. . . Present 

Jamir 

. . Present 

Trenas .... 


Laurel 

. . Absent 

Uka 


Lerum 

. . Present 

Villacorta . . 

. . . Absent 

Maambong . . 

. . Present 

Villegas . . . . 


Monsod .... 

. . Present 




The President is present. 

The roll call shows 36 Members responded to the call. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Chair declares the presence of 
a quorum. 

MR RAMA Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA Madam President, I move that we dis- 
pense with the reading of the Journal of yesterday’s 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

APPROVAL OF JOURNAL 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I move that we 
approve the Journal of yesterday’s session. 


♦Appeared after the roll call 


742 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

MR. RAMA Madam President, I move that we pro- 
ceed to the Reference of Business. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the motion is approved. 

The Secretary-General will read the Reference of 
Business. 


REFERENCE OF BUSINESS 

The Secretary-General read the following Com- 
munication, the President making the corresponding 
reference: 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, yesterday I 
entered in the record a reservation to file a motion 
concerning the Article on the Commission on Human 
Rights. I am now prepared to present the motion. 

Madam President, I move that we create or establish 
the Commission on Human Rights, not as an indepen- 
dent constitutional commission but through Congress 
by mandate of the Constitution. 

Madam President, this motion is filed because of the 
feeling of some Commissioners that this Commission on 
Human Rights should only be constitutionally man- 
dated and not created as an independent constitutional 
commission, and I mentioned this in our caucus. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can that not be in the form of an 
amendment? 


COMMUNICATION 


MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 


Communication from Mr, Edgardo J. Angara, President, 
Umversity of the Philippines, Quezon City, transmitting 
a copy of the Executive Summary submitted by Atty. 
asiano O. Flores, Head of the Division of Continuing 
ega ducation of the UP Law Center who had been 
con ucting ^ a series of 2-day “constitutional mini- 
convenhons in the various regions of the country as 
pa o the UP Constitution Project to get the per- 
cep ions and reactions of various sectors in the delibera- 
/986 Constitutional Commission of 

~ Constitutional Commission 
To the Steering Committee. 

MR. RAMA Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 


CONSmERATION OF PROPOSED 
fArti.i ^^SOLUTION no. 539 

6 on the Constitutional Commissions- 
ommission on Human Rights) 
Continuation 

period of AMENDMENTS 
MR. Rama Wf» 

ments on th. Period of am< 

Rights. I move that we take u^ tSTaTdIrcir 

ThlcLY^SsTonl-thVm^^^^^^^^ objection? (Sile, 

me motion is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maamboni 
recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. So, to resolve the particular 
motion of the Floor Leader, we shall now continue the 
deliberations. We are now in the period of amendments. 
May we call the honorable Members of the Constitu- 
tional Commission who are involved in this particular 
matter. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. As a 
matter of fact, we feel that this is a prejudicial question 
which should be resolved, and if the motion is approved 
on that assumption, then another motion will be pre- 
sented before the committee to delete the whole Article 
on the Commission on Human Rights and substitute it 
with one section to be transposed to the Article on 
General Provisions which will be presented for approy 
This is, of course, on the assumption that our motion 
will be approved. 

THE PRESIDENT. We wiU give the members 
committee time because they have to be informe o 
this motion and be given a chance to confer among 
themselves as to the action they will take with respec 
to the Commissioner’s motion. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. As a 
matter of fact, I was informed by Commissioner Cal e- 
ron that he will speak in favor of my motion. 

I will now present a copy of this formulation to the 
committee. 


SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

THE PRESIDENT. In the meantime, the session is 
suspended. 

It was 10:07 a.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 10:26 a.m., the session was resumed. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


743 


THE PRESIDENT. Tlie session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Tlie Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR. RAMA. I would like to ask that Commissioner 
Maambong be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, may I be 
allowed to withdraw the motion which I presented 
earlier. Considering that we are now in the period of 
amendments on tliis Article on the Commission on 
Human Rights, I now formally move to delete the whole 
Article on the Commission on Human Rights and in its 
place substitute this provision which reads: “SECTION 

CONGRESS SHALL CREATE A COMMISSION TO 

INVESTIGATE VIOLATIONS OF INDIVIDUAL, 
CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS COMMITTED BY 
OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS, CIVILIANS, 
POLICE AND MILITARY AUTHORITIES OR 
PRIVATE PARTIES. IT SHALL HAVE SUCH 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED 
BY LAW.” 

This motion, an amendment by substitution, is 
presented by Commissioners Calderon, Jamir, Colayco, 
de Castro and this humble Member. However, I reserve 
the right of Commissioner Calderon to talk on the 
motion. In the meantime, I am asking the committee 
for its comment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the committee ready to react 
now? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. It is the committee’s position 
that this proposed special body, in order to function 
effectively, must be invested with an independence that 
is necessary not only for its credibility but also for the 
effectiveness of its work. However, we want to make a 
distinction in this Constitution. Maybe what happened 
was that it was referred to the wrong committee. In the 
opinion of the committee, this need not be a commis- 
sion that is similar to the three constitutional commis- 
sions like the COA, the COMELEC, and the Civil 
Service. It need not be in that article. 

As a matter of fact, if the Commissioner could recall, 
in the case of the Ombudsman, which is a body created 
by the Constitution, it is not considered one of the 
constitutional commissions. The intent here of the com- 
mittee is not that it will be the fourth constitutional 
commission within that article, but merely to establish 
it as an independent body. We need not call it a com- 
mission, an independent office that can function in the 
area of human rights. 


Our suggestion, therefore, is that we should approve 
tliis regardless of where we end up putting it in the 
Constitution. It need not be in the Article on Constitu- 
tional Commissions. We are asking this Commission to 
approve the creation of an independent body, indepen- 
dent in the sense that the process of nomination and 
appointment will be shielded from pohtics and our pro- 
posal is that it can be through the Judicial and Bar 
Council and fiscal autonomy. This way, we are sure that 
this special body will be independent. That is the reac- 
tion of the committee. If we can proceed to the con- 
sideration of the special body within those terms of 
reference, then maybe we can separate this from the 
issue of why we are adding an extra constitutional 
commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. May I clarify the thinking of the 
committee. Madam President? First, the committee is 
saying that the Commission on Human Rights must be 
an independent body but it is not in the category of the 
three constitutional commissions. Is that the thinking of 
the Committee? 

MR MONSOD. Yes. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Considering that it is not in the 
category of the three constitutional commissions, can 
the Commission on Human Rights, if created, be dis- 
solved by Congress? That is one concern also. 

MR. MONSOD. No. We would like it to be a consti- 
tutional creation because we could feel the problems of 
human rights particularly in the next few years. We 
foresee in the foreseeable future that we will have more 
problems of human rights, even in the narrow sense of 
the political and civil rights. But we also foresee that 
over time as we become more developed, as our institu- 
tions function normally, the scope of this commission, 
since it is a constitutional body, can be enlarged to 
include social and economic rights. It can include the 
concepts proposed by Commissioner Rosario Braid in 
looking into the causes of the violations of human 
rights, both in their narrow and broad senses. Therefore, 
it has a place in the Constitution because the horizon 
for its functions is well beyond the immediate problems. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, tlie Commis- 
sioner is saying that it will not become functus officio at 
all. It will be a continuing body, regardless of whether it 
has performed its function in the field of human rights, 
as far as the individual, political and civil rights are 
concerned. 

MR MONSOD. Yes, and it can expand its scope as 
the need and circumstances arise because human rights 


744 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1 986 


is a very broad concept. The only reason we are limiting 
this concept now and trying for very modest objectives 
at this time is because we do not like the committee to 
dilute its efforts at this time when there are very real 
and concrete problems that have to be addressed. 

MR MAAMBONG. The third point I would like to be 
clarified about is the officers or the functionaries of the 
Commission on Human Rights starting with the acting 
chairman or members thereof, whatever may be the 
composition. I am referring to top level officers. Are 
they impeachable? 

MR. MONSOD. We do not conceive the process of 
impeachment for them. We may leave it to Congress 
to provide the means for their removal. Let us take the 
case of the Sandiganbayan. The process and the causes 
for the removal of its officers are left to Congress be- 
cause even if this Sandiganbayan is a constitutional 
creation, there will still be a need for an act of Congress 
in order to put in the details of the implementation of 
this special body. 


MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, the officers 
thereof will be contradistinguished with the officers of 
t e Ombudsman because the Ombudsman officers are 
OTpeacAable officers. Here we are contemplating a situa- 
ion w ere they may be removed under the civil service 
law or by laws to be provided by Congress. 

Incidentally, the Commissioner mentioned Sandigan- 
impeachabdity of Sandiganbayan 
wp IS only found in law. In the last discussion that 
mittff. ’ an agreement with the Com- 

that °^atitutional Commissions and Agencies 

o leers are not supposed to be impeachable. 

Commis^^^^^’ virtue of the amendment of 

method of ^ ^®Salado wherein we are limiting the 

provided to 

sentiments^'^th?*^^' ■ understand the 

reflect for thp *^°rnmittee about this. But I must 

ponents of touSto ™ 

like Commissioners 

Castro. I would like^o v 

I am only the presenter ouS motor''"'"'''' 

Thank you, Madam President. 


MR JAMIR. Madam President. 


nizir Commissioner Jamir is 


MR. JAMIR. I agree fuUy with the sentiments ol 
Commissioner Maambong. ^ sentunents ol 


MR MONSOD. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR DE CASTRO. Thank you, Madam President. 

May I ask just one question of the committee? I 
heard the Commissioner state that this will be a section 
in the Constitution. Did I hear him right? 

MR. MONSOD. No. I mentioned that this need not 
be placed in the Article on Constitutional Commissions; 
it can be in other sections. It can even be in the Article 
on General Provisions. 

MR DE CASTRO. Where does the Commissioner 
intend to place this at this time? 

MR MONSOD. Frankly, we would like to be guided 
by this Commission regarding the appropriate place to 
put this provision in. 

MR DE CASTRO. Will the formation of Commis- 
sioner Maambong on this matter stOl be subject to 
certain amendments? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, but I believe he withdrew it 
when we explained our position. We are always open to 
amendments within the framework of our concept. 

MR DE CASTRO. Then, if we can be furnished a 
clean copy of this formulation, we can use it so that we 
can be guided formally on how to make our amend- 
ments. 

Thank you. 

MR MAAMBONG. To be clarified on this matter, we 
have presented before the committee our amendment 
by substitution and it is now on record. With the t m 
ing of the committee regarding the issues which we have 
raised and to save time, I am hoping that the committee 
could reformulate, on the basis of our proposed amend- 
ment by substitution, a definite provision which we 
could work on. 

However, I would like to ask the committee one 
question again. Assuming that the reformulation of our 
proposed amendment by the committee will be carried, 
would it be one section only? I ask because we have 
made reference to the Article on the Ombudsman, and 
it includes other sections which provide for its func- 
tions. We are thinking along the line that, perhaps, if the 
committee will agree, once the members reformulate 
the section, then it would only be one section and all 
the other provisions, like the functions of the office will 
have to be provided for by law. I really do not know 
the thinking of the committee; that is why I am asking. 

MR. RODRIGO. Madam President, parliamentary 
inquiry. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27. 1986 


745 


Did I hear it correctly that Commissioner Maambong 
had withdrawn his proposed amendment? 

MR MAAMBONG. No. 

THE PRESIDENT. Not yet. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is still on stream. 

MR. RODRIGO. Therefore, I would like to support 
that amendment, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. I believe that Commissioner 
Sarmiento was intending to react to the question pro- 
pounded by Commissioner Maambong. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may I ask that 
Commissioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

In order not to lose time, I suggest that no reformula- 
tion be undertaken by the committee. We could work 
on the framework as presented, but it is to be clearly 
understood that it will not be considered as a separate 
subdivision of the Article on Constitutional Commis- 
sions. 

Let us totally disregard the heading and subheading 
above Section 1 , and we begin to work from Section 1 . 
And since it might be included in the Article on General 
Provisions, Section 2 may be treated only as the second 
paragraph of one single section of this particular article. 
There is no need really for a reformulation of the entire 
proposed section. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Colayco first? He may have some ideas on this, and then 
we will call on Commissioner Villegas. 

MR. COLAYCO. Thank you, Madam President. 

When this matter was first proposed yesterday, 
I assured the committee that I would support the 
proposal as it was presented, although some of my 
colleagues had already declared their reservations about 
making it a part of the Article on the Constitutional 
Commissions. My thinking at that time was this, and I 
will be honest, that if the body did not approve the 
proposal as worded in Proposed Resolution No. 539, 
I was going to move that it be a mandated commission. 
After hearing the brief explanations of the committee, 
personally, I am wilUng to go along. In other words, the 


commission will stiU be a constitutional commission but 
not a separate constitutional commission. 

'MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Villegas is recog- 
nized. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Madam President, this is just to 
present an analogous situation. The Central Monetary 
Authority, which we approved in the Article on Nation- 
al Economy and Patrimony, is a mandated body which 
Congress cannot dissolve at will, and is independent of 
the President. That'is precisely why we wanted a Central 
Monetary Authority. So, more or less, that could be the 
analogous situation that would support the committee’s 
views. 

MR SARMIENTO. May we know if the manifesta- 
tion of Commissioner Davide satisfies Commissioner de 
Castro; that is, we start with this article or this draft as 
presented by the committee so as to save time? 

MR DE CASTRO. As we have stated, this indepen- 
dent body will have to be created by law to include its 
functions and the removal of the officers thereto, so, it 
will be quite difficult if we follow the formulation in 
Sections 1, 2 and 3 of the Proposed Resolution No. 539. 
So I would then support the motion of Commissioner 
Maambong that there be an independent body, like the 
Commission on Human Rights, to be created by law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR MAAMBONG. There is, in fact, an unresolved 
question which I presented to the committee. The 
question was: In the reformulation of the committee, 
would this provision be another section or would it 
cover also functions, duties and others, like the 
Ombudsman? On the assumption that that would be so, 

I suggest that the proposed section which we have 
presented before the committee be the lead section that 
will be amended without making reference to the 
present formulation because it would only confuse us. 
At any rate, this section that I am presenting can be 
amended anytime. We can add, deduct, and, for pur- 
poses of clarity, make reference to the sections which 
are now in the committee report. 

Would it be a one-section thing or would it be several 
sections? 

MR SARMIENTO. It will not be a one-section thing. 
If we will note the Article on Accountability of PubUc 
Officers, when we created the Sandiganbayan, we 
enumerated its powers and functions, but it was not a 
one-section thing. Maybe we can have two or three 


746 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


sections on this independent body known as the Com- 
mission on Human Rights. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong’s pro- 
posed amendment poses a very basic question. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Maambong is to the effect that it is 
Congress which shall create, whereas it is the sense of 
the committee that the creation of this body be already 
enshrined in the Constitution. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, I was about to go into that 
by suggesting to the committee that perhaps we should 
ask the commission itself to determine at first blush 
whether we should have this body created by the 
Constitution or whether it should be created by Con- 
gress. That is precisely why I want the first motion I 
presented earlier to be clarified. I do not know what is 
the thinking of the committee on this matter. 


MR. SARMIENTO. It will be created by the Consti- 
tution, not by Congress. Commissioner Monsod 
explained why it should be shielded from the executive 
power or from political interference. That was the mani- 
festation made by Commissioner Villegas. It should 
e similar to that independent body, the Central Monet- 
ary Authority. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I understand that. 


president. In other words, the committee 

mi«ion° proposed amendment of Com- 

missioner Maambong as formulated. 


Manila. Human rights violations occur all over the 
Philippines, Madam President. Who will investigate 
human rights violations in Mindanao, m tlie Visayas, 
Northern Luzon and in Bicol? There are only three 
Commissioners, so are we going to give them branch of- 
fices everywhere? This will be very expensive. So, they 
will have to depend on the present investigating agencies 
of the government which are under the President. But 
since this office is segregated from the President, it will 
have no power to compel police agencies or fiscals to 
investigate and to prosecute. So, it will just be a paper 
tiger. As I said of the Ombudsman, we will just again 
be raising the hopes of our people — false hopes — that 
here, at last, is an office and we will solve human rights 
violations. 

I do not know why we seem to have lost all our 
confidence in the President and also in the members of 
our Congress. We refer to them as politicians, and we 
say we cannot trust politicians. But remember that these 
politicians will be elected by the people. They are 
representatives of the people. We seem to have de- 
veloped a paranoia just because of one Marcos. That is 
my basic objection to this. So, I favor the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Maambong. Let Congress, 
composed of elective officials elected by the people, 
enact the law creating this office and let it be under the 
executive department. Otherwise we will be again creat- 
ing another office which is a paper tiger. We wiU 
spend the money of the people uselessly. Public funds 
will be appropriated for an office which is only in 
Manila. 

Furthermore, we will just be raising false hopes 
among our people. We do not want to disillusion them 
anymore. 

Thank you, Madam President. 


is quit® ®i®ar- That is 
to the hnd\r ^ wl^ether we should submit that issue 

*0 aO .he p.vi- 


the president. Commissioner Rodrigo 


nized. 


is recog- 


say a few wot^l^f President, I would like to 

Commissioner M^a^^bone^ ® proposed by 

Ombudsman wMch^ ^ 

paper tieer if x ^ f ^ opposed, this office will be a 

iZt iS ple,: of 'ho Poes- 

recommend. merely to mvestigate and to 

Let us visualize thk -c ■ 

Constitution. When thf”S ‘f-, , 

we will need an taplementinracl w” '’T ’ 

and fsnprialU/ on on act to Create this office, 

and especially an appropnaUon for this office. It will 

be an office se^egated from the President. The appro- 

pnation wiU be for three commissioners, tor personnel, 

office equipment and office rental. Th© office will be in 


MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. I think one of the basic questions that 
we should answer is whether or not the Commission on 
Human Rights is necessary and whether it shoul e 
placed in the Constitution. 

Let me call attention to the fact that all over the 
world, there is a very grave concern for people whose 
human rights have been violated. This crime has ^®®u 
considered an international crime. We will notice that 
there are now international organizations on human 
rights and that even the biggest and the most prestigious 
institutions and foundations have granted awards to 
those people who fought for human rights. Therefore, it 
is necessary that we should recognize the importance of 
human rights and the Commission on Human Rights or 
a body on human rights to be included in our Constitu- 
tion. That is the point precisely of the committee. We 
cannot just ignore this very important problem on 
human rights which is now the concern all over the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


747 


world because of the brutal violation of humanity by 
dictatorships and other agencies. Tlierefore, as far as 
that is concerned, we should recognize the importance 
of a body on human rights. 

There is no basic conflict, Madam President, because 
Commissioner Maambong, as well as the committee, has 
agreed that it need not be a constitutional commission 
with the rights and powers and the status of the other 
constitutional commissions, like the COA and the 
COMELEC, but definitely we should include it in the 
Constitution. 

That is the only basic problem and the committee has 
agreed to that. So, there is no basic conflict. It is a 
matter of definition of what are the powers. Therefore, 
I agree with Commissioner Davide that in the meantime 
that we have not formulated a policy on the status of 
that body, we may continue the amendments to the rest 
of the section, which merely defines the functions and 
the qualifications of the members of this commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Nolledo still 
here? 

Is Commissioner Rodrigo through? 

MR. RODRIGO. No, not yet, Madam President. 
There is no disagreement that we should have such an 
office, such a body. Call it an office. Call it a comrnis- 
sion. I also agree that we must have a provision in the 
Constitution. That is precisely the proposed amendment 
by Commissioner Maambong: that we enact a provision 
in the Constitution mandating Congress to create that 
body. So, there is no disagreement on that. The dis- 
agreement, as far as I am concerned, is in isolating this 
office or this commission from the President, but, at the 
same time, not giving this commission enough power to 
act on its own but merely to investigate violations all 
over the Philippines, without any personnel of its own. 
It will have to depend on the personnel in the executive 
department which is under the President but is segre- 
gated from the President. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am giving way to Commissioner 
Colay CO. I will just speak after Commissioner Colayco. 

MR. COLAYCO. Just one clariflcatory question for 
Commissioner Rodrigo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Colayco is recog- 
nized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Earlier the Commissioner gave me 
the impression that he was against the entire idea 


because he was talking about the “toothless tiger,” the 
way he also talked about the Ombudsman. But after- 
wards he said that he had no objection to the principles. 

MR. RODRIGO. No, as a matter of fact, I am in favor 
of the proposed amendment of Commissioner Maam- 
bong which proposes a provision in our Constitution to 
mandate Congress to create this body. My disagreement 
is in the status of the office. What is the status of this 
office? Will it be segregated from the President but, at 
the same time, not have powers to act on its own? My 
stand is that it should be an office within the executive 
department, so that it can get the cooperation of the 
whole executive department in investigating cases aU 
over the Philippines and in prosecuting or recommend- 
ing prosecutibh of those cases anywhere in the Philip- 
pines. We already have the offices and the personnel 
under the executive department all over the Philippines 
for this. 

MR. COLAYCO. The Commissioners’ main objection 
then is the mechanics suggested by the committee in 
effecting the protection intended for those who are 
victims of violations of human rights. 

MR. RODRIGO. It is not only the mechanics, but it 
is also the form. I said form because I do not know what 
this is. If we create an office it should be either under 
the judiciary or the executive or the legislative, but this 
one will be in limbo. It is not even a constitutional 
commission. 

MR. COLAYCO. Tie Commissioner’s earlier objec- 
tion was that the Office of the President is not involved 
in the project. How sure are we that the next President 
of the Philippines will be somebody we can trust? 
Remember, even now there is a growing concern about 
some of the bodies, agencies and commissions created 
by President Aquino. 

MR. RODRIGO. If that is the case, how sure are we 
that the members of the commission are people we can 
trust. At least the President is elected by the people. 

MR COLAYCO. Yes, but the President will be the 
one who will be handling the whole commission, and he 
can get away with anything he wants. 

MR. RODRIGO. Why can we not trust the President, 
elected by the people, and we seem to be putting more 
trust on a commission composed of three people, ap- 
pointed by the President? 

MR. COLAYCO. I will leave it to the body. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee desires to react 
now. 


748 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR. MONSOD. We see the merits of the arguments of 
Commissioner Rodrigo. If we explain to him our con- 
cept, he can advise us on how to reconcile his position 
with ours. The position of the committee is that we 
need a body that would be able to work and cooperate 
with the executive because the Commissioner is right. 
Many of the services needed by this commission would 
need not only the cooperation of the executive branch 
of the government but also of the judicial branch of 
government. This is going to be a permanent constitu- 
tional commission over time. We also want a commis- 
sion to function even under the worst circumstance 
when the executive may not be very cooperative. How- 
ever, the question in our mind is: Can it still function 
during that time? Hence, we are willing to accept 
suggestions from Commissioner Rodrigo on how to 
reconcile this. We realize the need for coordination 
and cooperation. We also would like to build in some 
safeguards that it will not be rendered useless by an 
uncooperative executive. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 


MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to speak for two o 
three minutes against the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner may proceed. 
MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

Commfsc ^ '''ith Commissioner Rodrigo that th( 

paper tiger. I hav. 

distributed ^ ^mendmen 

wanted tr. ^ Members of this Commission, 
Se 2 ^ f “measures” on line 7 

Commission the'*'^owV*'f ’*^6'’' 

measures which maxT appropriate lega 

suance of the writ of injunctive reUef and is 

arguments from Comm— corpus. I heard the sam 

against ate creation of tSXtaasman. 

are sufSig^frornTn! ’’'“I'®'’ record. He said that w 
and he wants to leave^o^r°^^ understandab) 

Why do we have 1 Congress the power to creat( 

date Congress to UTSe h “ """ 

Rights Commission now^L^n"'^'' 

we should not pass the hu.^1 ? 

miss that goldrX„rttm?v^~ 

important body based on the^ creatmg this vei 

during the MarL re^e We 

hictnrv Ri.t if ..rra • Icammg lessons froi 

history. But if we remam adamant by not adoptii 

remedies to avoid fte condemnable practices of ti 

past regime - I refer to the Marcos regime - thi 


history might repeat itself. We will, in tlie words of 
Commissioner Aquino, be judged harshly by the future 
generations. 

Madam President, for many years during the Marcos 
regime, human rights were abundantly violated. Even in 
the present regime, we still have these violations. Com- 
missioners Rodrigo, Rama and I were victims of the 
violations of human rights when, without previous 
charges, we were sent to jail. The concern for the pro- 
tection of human rights is worldwide as indicated by 
Commissioner Rama. The provisions on the constitu- 
tional authority known as the Human Rights Commis- 
sion underscore the need to strenghten a mechanism 
that will truly protect human rights and vindicate 
victims of violations thereof. 

I have filed a resolution to include in the Declaration 
of Principles a provision that the State will respect the 
dignity of the human personality and guarantee full 
respect for human rights. A nation which does not in- 
tensely value human rights does not deserve the respect 
of other freedom-loving nations. 

By setting up the Commission on Human Rights as 
a veritable watchdog and guardian of our people against 
violations of human rights, we manifest to the world 
our respect for human dignity and honor. I cannot 
understand the hesitation to set up the Commission on 
Human Rights just because we have other commissions 
already set up in the 1986 Constitution. The sufferings 
and the anguish of the victims of violations of human 
rights in the Philippines and everywhere in the world 
should find sympathy in the heart of everyone of us, 
including the heart of Commissioner Rodrigo who him- 
self suffered in jail by reason of the abundant violations 
of human rights during the repressive Marcos regime. 
Leaving to Congress the creation of the Commission on 
Human Rights is giving less importance to a truly 
fundamental need to set up a body that will effectively 
enforce the rules designed to uphold human rights. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Maambong proposed the substitution of this proposed 
Article on Commission on Human Rights to one Section, 
probably to be inserted in the General Provisions. Com- 
missioner Davide suggested that we continue the amend- 
ments of the committee draft. I believe that the 
Maambong recommendation for a substitute section 
is an a priori that deserves our prior consideration. 

In line with my interpellations yesterday, I am of 
the opinion that this draft of the committee is not 
necessary because, for the protection of human rights, 
we have the entire machinery of government, particular- 
ly the law enforcement agencies, the prosecuting arm 
and the administration of justice. But if there be need to 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


749 


insert a section in the Constitution, then we should 
consider the substitute amendment of Commissioner 
Maambong instead of the suggestion of Commissioner 
Davide, because if this Commission decides for one 
section in another portion of the Constitution, like in 
the General Provisions, rather than a separate article, 
that issue would be in the nature of a prejudicial 
question. 

To give, as Commissioner Nolledo claims, even 
injunctive relief and issuance of the writ of habeas 
corpus, then how can this function be given to this 
Commission on Human Rights when this is essentially 
judicial? Tliat human rights are very important, there is 
no question. That violations must be prevented, de- 
tected and punished, there is also no question. But what 
is the issue now? Shall we entertain the Maambong 
amendment by substitution? I believe we should, 
because if that should be accepted by the majority, then 
we can limit our amendments to the substitute section 
proposed by Commissioner Maambong. 

niank you. Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, may the committee 
respond? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Garcia is recog- 
nized. 

MR. GARCIA. Thank you very much. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

Before we address the procedural question which 
Commissioner Rodrigo requested, I would like to touch 
on a very important question' which I think is at the 
very heart of what we are trying to propose — the 
independence of this Commission on Human Rights. I 
would like to relate to the body a personal experience 
of mine which I think is important to understand why 
this commission should be independent from political 
pressure or control. 

When I was working as a researcher for Amnesty 
International, one of my areas of concern was Latin 
America. I headed a mission to Colombia in 1980. 1 
remember the conversation with President Julio Cesar 
Turbay Ayala and he told me that in Colombia, there 
were no political prisoners. This is a very common 
experience when one goes to governments to investigate 
human rights. From there, we proceeded to the Procura- 
duria General to the Attorney-General, to the Ministry 
of Justice, to the Ministry of Defense, and normally 
the answers that one will get are: “There are no political 
prisoners in our country”; “Torture is not committed 
in this country.” Very often, when international com- 
missions or organizations on human rights go to a coun- 
try, the most credible organizations are independent 
human rights bodies. Very often these are private 
organizations, many of which are prosecuted, such as 
those we find in many countries in Latin America. In 
fact, what we are proposing is an independent body on 


human rights, which would provide governments with 
credibility precisely because it is independent of the 
present administration. Whatever it says on the human 
rights situation will be credible because it is not subject 
to pressure or control from the present political leader- 
ship. 

Secondly, we all know how political fortunes come 
and go. Tliose who are in power yesterday are in oppo- 
sition today and those who are in power today may be 
in the opposition tomorrow. Therefore, if we have a 
Commission on Human Rights that would investigate 
and make sure that the rights of each one is protected, 
then we shall have a body that could stand up to any 
power, to defend the rights of individuals against arrest, 
unfair trial, and so on. Therefore, this commission plays 
a vital role. And, finally, as I repeatedly mentioned 
yesterday, there is no substitute for the formation of 
consciousness of a populace that is willing to stand up 
and defend and uphold its basic rights. This can only be 
inculcated throu^ a continuing educational program 
regarding human rights. 

And so we believe that this is necessary. I would also 
like to request those of us who have had more experi- 
ences on how to make this more effective to make 
suggestions. If it is true, as it stands, that it is not as 
effective as we would wish, then we would like to 
accept amendments which would precisely strengthen 
this office, make it a nationwide effort to ensure that 
human rights will be protected. 

Thank you very much. Madam President. 

the president. I think the issue is clear. 

Commissioner Maambong is recognized. 

MR MAAMBONG. Madam President, I was about to 
ask for the suspension of the consideration of my 
motion for substitution, and in its place, to put before 
the body the issue on whether or not the Commission on 
Human Rights be created as an independent body in the 
Constitution or created by Congress by mandate of the 
Constitution. But I am wondering if the committee 
could perhaps present some amendments to the amend- 
ment by substitution which would, just the same, 
resolve the basic issue. The other proponents believe 
that the basic issue should be resolved: whether this be 
constitutionally mandated to be created by Congress or 
directly created by the Constitution. 

But if the proposed reformulation of the committee 
will solve the issue, I think we can save time by using 
that kind of procedure. 

THE PRESIDENT. But there are observations that 
have been made here to the effect that some Com- 
missioners believe that this should be left only to 
Congress rather than for an office to be created in the 
Constitution itself. 


750 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


So, I suppose that is the issue that we should present 
now to the body. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. What we would like to suggest, as 
proposed by Commissioner Davide, is to put to a vote 
the first paragraph of the proposal of the committee. 
We just want to make some minor change on that, but 
what we want to put to a vote is this issue now. 

THE PRESIDENT. The proposed amendment of 
Commissioner Maambong is pending before the body. 


MR. MONSOD. Yes, this will be by way of an amend- 
ment by substitution of the Commissioner’s proposal, 
but it will deal with the same issue. 

What we would like to propose to a vote is the para- 
graph which reads as follows: “THERE SHALL BE AN 
INDEPENDENT OFFICE CALLED THE COMMIS- 
SION ON HUMAN RIGHTS COMPOSED OF A 
CHAIRMAN AND TWO COMMISSIONERS WHO 
SHALL BE NATURAL BORN CITIZENS OF THE 
members OF THE BAR, AND WITH 
^ QUALIFICATIONS AND DISQUALIFI- 

CATIONS AS MAY BE PROVIDED BY LAW.” 

That is the only paragraph that we would hike the 
body to vote on. 


this office will not be in tl 
tutionaf same category as the other consi 

the Civil S°e™r°“ “'^ELEC an 

DrerS'”''’ *°’'d “INDEPENDENT” does nc 
missioner^^i^^^^^^^ may be proposed by Cor 
earUer on^ht^'Sed* 

time tv.o+ +1, need for cooperation and at the san 
^ ’ ere is a need for some independence. 

wouM mfe to aS^ '^’^^erstanding behind this, but v 
granh which i body to vote on this first pai 


MS. NIEVA. May I be recognized, Madam President? 
May I ask for further clarification of the proposal as 
read by Commissioner Monsod? 

THE PRESIDENT. We will first request Commis- 
sioner Maambong to make a reply. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, as long as it 
will resolve once and for all the issue in the mind of the 
proponent, we accept; that is, whether this Commission 
on Human Rights will be directly created by the Consti- 
tution or by Congress through the mandate of the 
Constitution. 

In order to resolve the issue, we are willing to accept 
that amendment to the amendment. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, the issue will be 
resolved because if the body votes for this first para- 
graph, then it becomes a constitutional office, although 
it will still need an implementing act of Congress. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In other words, if the body will 
not vote in favor of that amendment to the amendment, 
it means that the body does not want the Commission 
on Human Rights to be created directly by the Constitu- 
tion but instead it would want it to be created by 
Congress through the mandate of the Constitution, is 
that it? 

MR. MONSOD. That is the implication. 

THE PRESIDENT. Why do we not pose this simpler 
question to the body? Does the body desire to have 
a Commission or a Committee on Human Rights created 
by Congress but mandated by the Constitution or for 
Congress to create such a body? 

MR. MAAMBONG. As a matter of fact. Madam 
President, that was our original formulation. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think that is simpler. Those who 
will vote yes would mean that they are in favor that this 
should be left to congressional action. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That would be more direct and 
we would favor that. Madam President. 


no saw does Commissioner Maam- 


bong say since he 


IS the proponent of this amendment? 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Nieva have 
any question so as to guide her in her vote? 


MR. MAAMBONG Th^ r . . . 

that we have proposed .n situation is 

before the committee u" 

committee is supposed to h ^ formulation of the 

amendment which we proposed “ 


MS. NIEVA. After we have voted on this, because my 
question is on the qualification of the membfers. 

THE PRESIDENT. Yes, we will take that up later. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 


Commissioner Maambong 
accept the amendment? ® 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY. AUGUST 27. 1986 


751 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Just one clarificatory question. If 
we vote on the proposal making it a constitutionally 
mandated office to be created by Congress, will we be 
able also to present amendments to strengthen that 
office? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Definitely, Madam President, we 
can still do that. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. So, it will not prevent us because 
we have the impression that it will just become a section 
in the General Provisions. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Tlie other members of the com- 
mission will not be precluded to do that. That would be 
up to the committee actually because that would consti- 
tute an amendment to my amendment which is only 
one section. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. We intend to present amendments 
to further strengthen tliat body. In that case, we are 
clarified. 

Tliank you. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, Madam President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I have a similar problem. I 
think the issue here is that if we vote for Commissioner 
Maambong’s amendment, we should ensure that we have 
an appropriate framework within which Congress can 
act rather than leaving it to the Congress to set that 
office. So that if we vote otherwise, it means that we 
can proceed to tightening and strengthening the frame- 
work within which an office can operate. I think this is 
also in support of the amendment of Commissioner 
Natividad, although I would like to propose subsequent 
sections that would define the functions and scope of 
this type of commission. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In that case. Madam President, I 
will answer the same way as I have answered Commis- 
sioner Natividad. The Commissioner is not precluded to 
propose a^dditional provisions but these will be subject 
again to the acceptance of the committee. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What is to be decided is which is 
better — to have this in the Constitution or will it just 
be a creation of Congress? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, just for a clarification. 
If we are going to mandate Congress to establish this 
office on human rights and provide a framework for 
such a body as to function, et cetera, we might as well 
provide right here in the Constitution for such a body. 
Under the limitations that we would like to put, as 
suggested by the committee, we might as well do it here 
so that we can provide for all the amendments that we 
have in mind, such as the ones being proposed by 
Commissioners Rosario Braid, Natividad and the others. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 
nized. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I suggest 
as a compromise that we briefly say something like this: 
“THERE SHALL BE A COMMISSION ON HUMAN 
RIGHTS WHOSE FUNCTIONS, LIMITATIONS WILL 

be determined by law.” 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable? 

BISHOP BACANI. With this amendment, we will be 
creating it and at the same time leave the details to 
Congress- hence, we will satisfy those who want that it 
be created and at the same time those who are not 
aeainst its creation but would like to leave the further 
details to the future legislature. So, I propose that 
amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is that acceptable to Commis- 
sioner Maambong? 

MR MAAMBONG. Madam President, in order to save 
time and in accordance with the suggestion of the Chair, 

I would rather that the issue as to whether this Com- 
mission should be directly created by the Constitution 
or should be created by Congress by mandate of the 
Constitution be resolved. And for that purpose, Madam 
President, to keep the parliamentary situation in order, 

I am now formally asking the committee to defer con- 
sideration of my amendment by substitution, and 
instead I am now presenting this motion before the 
body. I move that the creation of the Commission on 
Human Rights be by Congress through the mandate of 
the Constitution. 

MR RAMA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 


752 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


MR. RAMA. I would like to speak against that 
motion, Madam President. We have forgotten the basic 
concept of the Constitution. The basic concept and the 
most necessary provisions in a Constitution precisely is 
the structure of government and the BUI of Rights. The 
reason for this is that the BiU of Rights guarantees the 
rights of the citizens against the violations of a ruler. We 
have to provide certain guarantees to the citizens against 
the excess of the government. In the same manner, we 
have to have a Human Rights Commission which would 
guarantee certain rights of the citizens against the 
excesses of the government. That is the most basic 
concept in the Constitution. Therefore, as to the ques- 
tion set forth by the Chair as to whether we should 
include this in the Constitution, certainly we should 
because it is part of the basic and most fundamental 
pimciple of a constitution. I think Commissioner Bemas 
wUl a^ee. It is just proper and necessary because of our 
experience and the trend in the world today wherein 
human right is a concern of many international 
organizations. 

THE PRESIDENT. That has been the subject of all 
the observations that have been given here this morning. 
Is there anybody else? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, Madam President. 


MR. MAAMBONG. I move that the Commission on 
Human Rights be created by Congress by mandate of 
the Constitution and not to be created directly by the 
Constitution. And I would like to clarify this motion by 
saying that those who are in favor of this motion wUl 
actually be saying that they would like this Commission 
on Human Rights to be created by Congress upon 
mandate of the Constitution. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Concepcion is 
recognized. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President, I do not agree 
with the alternative. I think we should vote only on the 
question of whether or not the Commission on Human 
Wghts shall be created either as recommended by the 
committee or the amendment of Mr. Maambong. But 
the consequence of the voting is a different thing. A 
negative vote on this question does not mean that it is 
an affirmative vote on the other alternatives suggested. 
We vote on whatever the Commission wants to settle. We 
vote y^ or no.. If the vote is negative, we should discuss 
the other alternative. 

THE PRESIDENT. But what is before us now is the 
proposal or the motion of Commissioner Maambong to 
the effect, in brief, that it should be created by Congress. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 


. . May we request a vote at this time 

^ understanding that a vote of 3 ^ is a vote for 
e aam ong amendment and a vote of no is a vote for 
the committee’s position. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I will further clarify that. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please restate the motion. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, 
nize^^ president. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


tha*t wh°teVM inquiry. Does it 

presentation of sreqt'n^^reLT^tsr 
THE president. I think that is understood. 
MR. davide. Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. That has been clarified. 
MR. MAAMBONG. May I restate the motion? 


THE PRESIDENT. Please restate the motion now. 


MR. CONCEPCION. What I object to is that a vote 
which is adverse to the point voted on, will constitute 
an affirmative vote for some other point. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, 1 accept the 
amendment. And so the motion would be that the Com- 
mission on Human Rights should be created by Congress 
under the mandate of the Constitution. 

BISHOP BACANI. May I just ask Commissioner 
Maambong one question. 

Since there is no doubt in the Commissioner s mind 
that such a body should anyway be established, I just 
like to ask whether or not the Commissioner wants this 
Constitutional Commission to have the honor of esta- 
blishing that body, because there is no doubt whatso- 
ever in his mind that he wants it to be mandated by 
this Constitution, that such a body should be established 
by Congress. And so, would he not rather have the 
honor to do that here? That is why I proposed that 
amendment. We can leave the further determination of 
the membership, functions and limitations of this 
commission to the enabling law. 

MR. MAAMBONG. The Gentleman is correct m that 
1 am in favor of the creation of the Commission on 
Human Rights, but in this Constitutional Commission 
we have actually two options; either we create it direct- 
ly in the Constitution itself or we mandate Congress to 
create it for us. And that is precisely the point proposed 
by the Chair to which we agree. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


753 


THE PRESIDENT. Which is now before the body; 
that is clear. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I have an 
anterior amendment. 


BISHOP BACANI. Tliat is why I am asking the Com- 
missioner whether or not he wants the honor of having 
it actually established. 


VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong has 
already answered that in the negative. So, that is clear 
now in the minds of everybody. 

As many as are in favor of the motion of Commis- 
sioner Maambong, please raise their hand. (Few Mem- 
bers raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. 
( Several Members raised their hand.) 

Tlie results sliow 1 1 votes in favor and 22 votes 
against; the Maambong motion is lost. 

Let us go back to the committee report. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner 
Rosario Braid has registered aliead. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized.. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In view of the result of the 
voting, I am now formally withdrawing my motion for 
a substitution. 

Thank you. 


THE PRESIDENT. Thank you. 

Does Commissioner Rosario Braid have an amend- 
ment? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I 
suggest an amendment to Section 1 , between lines 9 and 
1 1. It should state this way: “There shall be an indepen- 
dent Commission on Human Rights composed of a 
Chairman and two Commissioners, who shall be natural- 
bom citizens of the Philippines. THE CHAIRMAN AND 
ONE MEMBER SHOULD BE MEMBERS OF THE BAR 
FOR AT LEAST TEN YEARS, THE THIRD MEMBER 
SHOULD REPRESENT ANOTHER SECTOR SUCH AS 
education or other DEVELOPMENT AREAS.” 

This is my substitute amendment which could be 
rephrased later,but this is the essence. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is 
recognized. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we 
request the proponents to approach the table so that we 
will consider all the amendments. So, we will ask for a 
suspension. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended for a few 
minutes. 

It was 11:32 a.m. 


RESUMPTION OF SESSION 
At 11:51 a.tn., the session was resumed. 
THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 


MR RAMA. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. The Floor Leader is recognized. 

MR RAMA. May I ask that Commissioner Sarmienjo 
be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Sarmiento is recog- 
nized. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we ask 
Commissioner Bemas to sit with us as we entertain the 
amendments from our colleagues. 

Thank you. 


MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR MONSOD. We would now like to propose that 
we eo by paragraph and the committee would like to 
t the body for the approval of the first paragraph 
which wUl only state the principle: “THERE SHALL 
an INDEPENDENT OFFICE CALLED THE COM- 
MISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.” And then after that, 
fhp nftxt Daraeraoh. 




the PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this par- 
ticular first paragraph which has been given by Com- 
missioner Monsod? 


MR RODRIGO. I just want to make of record my 
belief that an office such as this which is not granted 


754 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


sufficient powers of its own, if independent of the 
executive, will be a paper tiger. 

THE PRESIDENT. Please restate it so that we can 
take a vote. 

MR. MON SOD. The first paragraph will state; 
“THERE SHALL BE AN INDEPENDENT OFFICE 
CALLED THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

THE PRESIDENT, As many as are in favor of this 
particular sentence or paragraph, please raise their hand. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, may I introduce 
an amendment to that which will read: “THERE IS 
HEREBY CREATED AN OFFICE WHICH SHALL BE 
CALLED THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

MR. MONSOD. We accept, Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
particular sentence, as amended, please raise their hand. 
(Several Members raised their hand.) 

As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand. ) 

as are abstaining, please raise their hand, 
f Une Member raised his hand. ) 

TTte results show 33 votes in favor, no vote against 
an one abstention; the first paragraph is approved. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bernas is recog- 


flnH rM.oi f considering the composite 

would liv pf this commission, the committ 

the id pa % ?u ^*^^®^her the functions first. And I thii 
mum fiinpf ^ ^pnimittee is to put down some mi 
the functin^”^ opening for Congress to expa; 

would Se Jo 1:’“. 

Sectinn 0 K f consideration on the basis 

qualifications, composition a 


the PRESIDENT. How wUl i, ,ead? 

sione^W?l?°- Resident, I believe C 

sioner Ople has a proposal in that regard. 

MR. OPLE. May I be recognized? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Ople is rec« 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. Madam President. 


I would like to propose an amendment to subpara- 
graph 1 of Section 2, line 22, in the form of an addi- 
tional clause following the phrase “private parties.” 

May I read the whole paragraph, as proposed to be 
amended: “Investigate all forms of human rights viola- 
tions committed by pubUc officers, civihan and military 
authorities, or by private parties INCLUDING THOSE 
WHO MAY BE ENGAGED IN ACTS OF REBELLION 
OR INSURRECTION.” And if the committee will 
kindly allow me, I would like to state very briefly the 
reason for this amendment. 

The Armed Forces of the Philippines, through its 
Chief of Staff, General Fidel Ramos, has time and again 
expressed strong reservations concerning a human rights 
pohcy that shuts itself to violations committed by 
forces adversary or hostile to the State. They say there 
must be no area of violations that should be closed to 
human rights inquiry, including those atrocities that 
may be perpetrated by rebel or insurrectionary forces. 

The military, of course, is understandably the most 
exposed and the most vulnerable to human rights in- 
vestigations in the nature of the task they have to do. 
But where even the conceptual application of human 
rights standards to their adversary forces is denied from 
the start, as though this were a sacrosanct and impene- 
trable area of concern, the effect is highly demoralizing. 

There are already reports. Madam President, that the 
efficiency of the AFP might be impaired where they 
have to exist in fear of prosecution for human rights 
violations while their adversaries are exempt from such 
inquiry and immune to such risks. 

This amendment, therefore, enters the caution that 
the “private parties” designated here in this subpara- 
graph who may be liable will not mean that if violations 
are committed by forces adversary to the State, they are 
exempted from responsibility as “private parties.’ This 
will ease a great burden on the minds of soldiers defend- 
ing the Republic, that the human rights policy of the 
Constitution is discriminatory and unfair to them, while 
creating a zone of immunity for others, and will also put 
undisciplined forces outside the military on notice that 
the arm of the law in the Philippines with respect to 
human rights violations recognizes no barriers. 

So, I seek the committee’s kind consideration of this 
proposal. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Can we have the reaction of the 
committee on this? 

MR. GARCIA. Madam President, I would like to 
make a few comments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


755 


MR. DA VIDE. I am seeking to introduce an amend- 
ment to the Ople amendment, but I believe that the 
committee would still react. 

MR GARCIA. Would the Commissioner like to speak 
first? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is proposing 
an amendment; the Gentleman may proceed. 

MR. GARCIA. I would like to react to the proposed 
amendment of Commissioner Ople. 

This debate about the scope of the Human Rights 
Commission has been a long one. In fact, if one has 
followed the discussions between the armed forces and 
the present Committee on Human Rights, I think the 
conclusion of the committee is rather clear. In fact, our 
committee is also divided on this point. Perhaps, the 
body should resolve this. All crimes are violations of 
human rights in many ways. But the precise idea of the 
Committee on Human Rights is that we have to try to 
investigate those violations of political and civil rights 
where remedies are not feasible, where the victims do 
not have ready access to legal remedy. And so, if we in- 
clude in the scope of this committee, crimes committed 
by lawless elements, outlaws or insurgents, we will then 
be duplicating the functions of ordinary courts and 
fiscals because all crimes, for example, kidnapping and 
murder, are punishable by the courts and these can be 
prosecuted by fiscals. Secondly, even if we put this 
under the scope of the existing Human Rights Com- 
mittee, we will find it extremely difficult, if not 
impossible, to actually prosecute because they are not 
recognized as legitimate forces. For example, in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights or the Inter- 
national Covenant on CivU and Political Rights, the 
signatories are state signatories. In fact, the entity that 
is supposed to make sure that the rights of the citizens 
are respected is the State, and they have all the forces 
of law and the armed forces to make sure that these 
rights of all the citizens are respected. And if there are 
violations, they are precisely supposed to go after those 
who have committed the crimes. Therefore, we have 
an existing system of justice - ordinary courts and 
fiscals — to prosecute these crimes, but Human Rights 
Commission has a very precise purpose. Those who do 
not have ready access to justice nor ready access to legal 
remedy are supposed to be helped by this commission. 

MR OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. May I reply briefly to the points made by 
Commissioner Garcia. I think this Commission is right in 
creating an independent office to be known as the 
Commission on Human Rights, first of all, because this 
proclaims a national commitment not only to punish 
violations of human rights but also to deter the viola- 


tions of human rights no matter who committed them. 
It is true that when, let us say, rebel forces commit an 
atrocity, probably these crimes would correspond to 
certain violations of the Penal Code or the criminal law. 
But why do we hesitate to put upon such crimes — 
obviously, political crimes — the stigma and the moral 
deterrent of the designation of such crimes as also 
human rights violations? Secondly, we are not saying 
that the violator of human rights on the part of such 
forces wiU be immediately accessible. Members of the 
military wdl, of course, be more accessible but certainly 
the moral force of this commission can be applied so 
that there is this deterrent effect of acknowledging a 
stigma of human rights violations also on those atroci- 
ties perpetrated by what I call adversary forces or those 
hostile to the State. We are not saying that they will be 
immediately brought to the fiscals and the courts. The 
times may not yet be propitious for that but facts can 
be gathered; witnesses, if they dare to come forward, 
can be encouraged so that there is a record of this viola- 
tion of human rights in the Human Rights Commission. 
And the Human Rights Commission may then make the 
appropriate recommendations. 

Madam President, I also recognize that rebel forces 
are not signatories to the International Convention of 
Civil and Political Rights; neither are they signatories to 
any international treaty which has the force of law in 
our own country. But the Philippine State is not pro- 
hibited thereby from exercising its jurisdiction and en- 
forcing the law and a symmetry of justice that recog- 
nizes no barriers, whether these barriers are ideological 
or military in character at this time. And, therefore, I 
think, in the interest of constitutional symmetry, justice 
and security, I would like to submit that this is a very 
proper and necessary amendment. 

MR DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR DE CASTRO. May the proponent agree to an 
amendment to his amendment? 

MR. OPLE. May I respectfully listen to the proposed 
amendment. 

MR DE CASTRO. I wBl say: “INVESTIGATE ALL 
forms of HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS INVOLV- 
ING CIVIL AND POLITICAL RIGHTS.” We shall 
refrain from enumerating “public officers” and so on. 
This, I believe, will include everybody, even members of 
this commission. 

MR OPLE. So that we do not have to face this pain- 
ful choice. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Yes, because the more we 
enumerate, the more there will be exclusions of certain 


756 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


enumerations. With this amendment, there will be no 
exceptions, whether they be the military, police, civilian 
or whoever they are. As I said, it will include every 
member of this commission. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 


proceeded against independently as a violation of 
human rights that this Human Rights Commission can 
take cognizance of. 

FR. BERNAS. The problem I have is the language of 
the proposed amendment. 

MR. OPLE. I am willing to listen to an amendment to 
improve the language. 


FR. BERNAS. May I just make an observation on the 
amendment of Commissioner Ople before we decide on 
the amendment to the amendment? The observation I 
would make would be a technical one which, I think, in 
the context of existing jurisprudence in criminal law, 
might make this amendment of Commissioner Ople self- 
defeating. In the present jurisprudence in criminal law, 
when there is a charge of rebellion, all other offenses are 
swallowed in the charge of rebellion. So that if we con- 
nect violations of human rights with rebellion, under the 
present jurisprudence, we will have to ignore the specifi- 
cations. of violations of human rights and pay attention 
only to the single crime of rebellion because rebellion 
absorbs everything else. Whereas if we do not connect 
this with rebellion, then we can go after the human 
rights violations of the rebels without having to tag 
them as rebels. But if we connect human rights viola- 
tions with rebellion, then the defense would be; “I am 

charged with rebellion” and that absorbs everything 
else. 


FR. BERNAS. Because the language of the amend- 
ment says “INCLUDING THOSE WHO MAY BE 
ENGAGED IN ACTS OF REBELLION.” So, the 
Gentleman is, in fact, making the acts of rebellion as the 
context for this addition. If we just take that out, every- 
one else comes under “private parties.” So, even the 
rebels come under “private parties” and we do not have 
to take the act of “rebellion” as the context because the 
moment we do, the defense will come up with the 
argument that the act of “rebellion” is the context. 

MR. OPLE. Does the committee subscribe to this 
construction just made by Commissioner Bemas? 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I have a pro- 
posed amendment to the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is the proposed amendment of 
Commissioner de Castro accepted by Commissioner 
Ople? 


MR OPLE. Madam President, may I just call the 
attention of Commissioner Bemas to the fact that 
rebelhon is not a condition sine qua non for a rebel 
violation of human rights. We just raise 
evprv nth ^ responsibility and accountability of 

hu^n commit such violations of 

not even^It ^ necessary condition and it does 

violatioTK provide the essential context to the 

paragraph '^*^^ri rights contemplated in this sub- 


MR OPLE. Yes, Madam President. 

MR DE CASTRO. This will exclude enumeration 
of people and parties. 

MR OPLE. My answer will probably depend on the 
committee’s collective response to the question that I 
just put to them. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 


is problem I see. Madam President, 

those who m mentioned “including 

‘ acts of rebeUion.” we are 

“rebellion” tif' ^ context; and once we use 

e'mhtogei::."'* 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, because it affects the formu- 
lations made by the committee. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, Commissioner Aquino 
would like to be recognized. 


here T thinV r> name “rebellion” or “insurrectioi 
of hnman rio’ht^^ ^ ^ constitutional net so that violate 
of man nghts among these forces, let us say, engag 
m an amed insurrection may refer not to actual con 
tions of combat. There might be other rules govern! 
combat. An example is what the armed forces do 
times wherein perhaps because of misplaced orders 
loss of control and discipline; they massacre soi 
people who are innocent. Then that, I think, create 
violation of human rights which can be segregated a 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would just like to 
volunteer some observations on the proposal of Com- 
missioner Ople. I am apprehensive that the proposed 
amendment has a very myopic focus on the problem of 
human rights. In fact, I think the emphasis is a bit 
askew. When we speak of human rights, we speak of an 
improper balance of power between the masses and the 
State such that traditionally and historically, human 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


757 


rights are best appreciated in the context of state and 
institutional violence where the masses lay destitute and 
powerless. Even in the context of contemporary 
political theory, they are known to have surrendered a 
certain measure of their personal liberties in favor of the 
State if only to yield to the requirements of social order 
and regulation. 

When we speak of state violence, we think of the 
people who, sundered from the seats of power and 
gasping in forlorn fashion over futile ideologues, become 
reservoirs of hate and bitterness whenever they feel the 
institutionalized state violence being perpetrated by the 
powers-that-be. So, we speak of human rights in the 
context of the State which has the unchallenged 
monopoly of the legal use of force. This is the kind of 
imbalance that is souglit to be corrected by a human 
rights commission which is being proposed by the 
committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is Commissioner Ople insisting on 
his amendment after the explanation? 

MR. OPLE. I am waiting for the response of the com- 
mittee, but in the meantime, will the Chair allow me to 
reply briefly to Commissioner Aquino’s points? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, there is no question that when we 
speak of human rights, the main concern is that of an 
overpowering and, perhaps, overbearing State violating, 
through any of its instrumentalities, the political and 
civil rights of presumably helpless citizens. There is no 
question about that, and I would hke to say that the 
reason that I think providing for an independent office 
to be known as the Commission on Human Rights is an 
excellent decision is that this all-powerful and overbear- 
ing State must be countered and be put under reins 
through mainly the moral and legal force of a nation 
exemplified in the Commission on Human Rights. 

But I merely put it to the Commission to understand 
that the armed forces says that about 1 7 percent of all 
the villages in this country have now come under the 
influence, if not control, of insurrectionary forces, and 
whether we believe them or not, the reports are there 
showing that some of our brothers engaged in this 
armed struggle against the State are committing their 
own excesses. And recently, an NPA commander in 
Cagayan de Oro City and Misamis Oriental did publicly 
apologize and offer reparation to some civilians who lost 
their lives probably because of a failure of control in 
discipline. 

If we do not make an attempt to satisfy the sense of 
lopsided justice in terms of human rights, knowing the 
hurts suffered by some of our own soldiers now, then 
the result is demoralization and since the committee, in 
my previous consultations with them, candidly admits 
that private parties cover violations of human rights also 


by these inimical forces, what I wanted to find out was 
the reason for hesitating to make this explicit. 

I have listened to Commissioner Bemas and I think 
his point is valid, but I am waiting for the committee to 
respond. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR FOZ. The committee would like to say that it 
prefers the amendment presented by Commissioner de 
Castro because it gives much leeway; it is all-embracing, 
and Congress will really have the chance to specify what 
will be the scope of the jurisdiction of the power of the 
proposed Commission on Human Rights. 

MR DE CASTRO. Thank you. 

MR OPLE. Madam President, I was looking for a 
symmetry and Commissioner de Castro has now pro- 
posed a kind of symmetry by the deletion of the enume- 
ration of various parties, public or private, that will fall 
within the scope of the investigation of human rights 
violations. Nevertheless, by eliminating this enumera- 
tion of “public officers, ci\^an and military authorities 
or by private parties,” if it is understood that the 
purview of the Commission on Human Rights extends 
to all citizens whoever they may be and whatever pur- 
suits they may be engaged in, then I will be willing to 
yield to the amendment of Commissioner de Castro. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, those are not 
excluded, but, as Commissioner Foz said, we will leave 
it to Congress. 

MR REGALADO. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. But the principle of universal application 
of the human rights policy is not denied by the commit- 
tee. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

the president. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR DE LOS REYES. Madam President, I would just 
like to comment on the statement of Commissioner 
Bemas that when we speak of rebellion, other crimes are 
swallowed. Perhaps, what he meant was that all other 
crimes are absorbed. It is true that there is no such thing 
as a complex crime of rebellion with murder or rebellion 
with arson and, in that sense, other crimes are absorbed. 
But these crimes committed independently of rebellion 
amounting to torture, are certainly not absorbed by 


758 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


rebellion but axe independent crimes which can be 
prosecuted independently. 

And I think there should be a balance in the investiga- 
tion by the proposed Human Rights Commission. Doon 
po sa amin, ang mga NPA ay kinuha ang isang PC na 
nabalitaan lamang nilang nang-aabuso. At sa harap ng 
kanyang pamilya, pinahirapan at pinatay. lyan po ba ay 
bahagi pa ng rebellion? Sa palagay ko ay abuso na iyan. 
That is already a human rights violation. 

Isang pulis ang nagkagusto sa isang babae, subali’t 
nang hindi sila magkasundo, inihabla ng rape ng babae 
iyong pulis. lyong kapatid ng babae na sumama sa NPA 
ay kinuha ang pulis at pinutol iyong kanyang “organ.” 
Is that still part of rebellion that can be swallowed or 
absorbed by rebellion? That is human rights violation. 

^t the important thing is that when this Human 
lughts Commission investigate cases, it will publish all 
the abuses of the military , thereby presenting a very bad 
image of the mihtary. But if we place there the amend- 
rnent of Commissioner Ople, stating that this will in- 
^ people who are engaged in acts of 

rebelhon, then there will be a balanced investigation and 
reportmg and people will see not only the abuses of the 
mihtary but also the abuses of these people who seek to 
overthrow our government. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


mi^onp^ Madam President, may I ask that Cor 
missioner Concepcion be recognized. 


THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Regalado stiU 
want to say something? 

MR. REGALADO. I just want to support that state- 
ment of Commissioner de los Reyes that the use of the 
word “rebellion” here absorbs all other crimes that may 
have been committed by the rebels on the occasion 
thereof. That was the old case of People vs. Hernandez 
applying the doctrine of pro reo and which, as a matter 
of fact, was penned by Justice Concepcion. But sub- 
sequently in the cases of People vs. Geronimo and 
People vs. Tame, it was clearly stated that any other 
offenses committed by the rebels not in the furtherance 
of the rebellious movement are separate crimes. I think 
the purpose of Commissioner Ople hore is to emphasize 
the fact that most of these human rights violations 
committed by these adversary forces are on the occasion 
of acts of rebellion. Of course, I take issue here with the 
words used, “of rebellion or insurrection,” which after 
all mean the same. But if the purpose of Commissioner 
Ople is really to underscore this concern which has been 
articulated even by the Chief of Staff, General Ramos, 
in the matter of his comment on the Presidential Com- 
mittee on Human Rights which seeks to investigate 
soldiers but not the rebels, and if he will really insist on 
this and it is acceptable to the committee, then we can 
just state there “CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER,” 
which would involve rebellion, sedition, tumultuous 
disturbances and not only rebellion per se. 

MR. CONCEPCION. Madam President. 


Commissioner Concepcion 


recognized. 


IS 


MR. CONCEPCION. Thank you. Madam Presiden 

to the^STeildment to propose an amendm 

“PRIVATE PA RTTFqVttu^^ simply to add the wc 
will explain if ^ WITHOUT DISTJNCTION” ar 

is not in eSrge Commission on Human Rii 

should be more *’’^°^^^'^ting violations thereof 
why human rLhT?rf^- ? where 

measures to forestaU such violations. recommen. 

undertake ^stu^et ^^ig^ts w< 

regards violations comn^Uted 

civiHans, the prosecution If - "Military or 

ment is the function of the^^^ 

courts of justice. Put the and ordii 

more important pub^k servLeT^'^" 

wavs to orevent r>r r»- devising means 

To . he vSrsarL 
Thank you. 


MR REGALADO. Although all other crimes commit- 
ted in connection therewith or on the occasion thereof 
are always separately punishable, the doctrine of pro reo 
does not apply there. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us first hear Commissioner 
Concepcion who desires to explain. 

MR. CONCEPCION. I would simply make this 
observation. The more we specify the offenses that are 
included, the more we limit the function of the Com- 
mission on Human Rights under the theory that when a 
specification is made, all those not specified are ex- 
cluded. So it would be better not to mention what par- 
ticular crimes are intended or what we have in mind. We 
simply leave it to the commission because their func- 
tion is broad enough, particularly if we add the phrase 
“ALL PARTIES WITHOUT DISTINCTION” or a 
phrase of a similar nature. So we would broaden rather 
than limit the ambit of our intendment with the phrase 
“those committed in connection with” or as a means 
necessary for the commission of the crime of this or 
that. This would exclude all other crimes or offenses. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


759 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERN AS. That is precisely the reason why we 
would like to avoid any mention of any crime so that 
we do not have to go through any trouble of trying to 
determine whether or not the violation of human rights 
was done in furtherance of rebellion. So we would like 
the focus to be on the violations of human rights. It is 
for that reason that we think the proposal of Commis- 
sioner de Castro gives us that proper focus. The focus 
is not so much on any particular crime or crime in 
general but on the violations of human rights. 

THE PRESIDENT. I think that is acceptable to Com- 
missioner Ople. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, the response of the 
committee to my question as to the purview or the 
scope of human rights violations within the jurisdiction 
of the Commission on Human Rights has not been very 
satisfactory. I think there is a tendency to evade the issue 
of whether or not human rights violations committed by 
forces inimical to the State are encompassed within the 
purview of the Commission on Human Rights by the 
term “private parties.” 

FR. BERNAS. I think the committee is clear that 
that is covered by the term “private parties.” What we 
are trying to avoid precisely is any language that would 
tend to connect it to any specific crime especially if we 
connect it with rebellion because we may have to go 
through the trouble of determining whether it was done 
in furtherance of, or independently of, rebeUion. But, 
certainly, “private parties” would cover the rebels since 
they are not public officers; they are not civilian or 
military authorities. And, again, it is for that reason that 
I think the amendment of Commissioner de Castro is 
preferable because the focus is on the violation and not 
on the violator. 

MR. OPLE. May I hear the final official position of 
the committee through the chairman of the committee. 
Is this construction supported? 

the P RESIDENT. That is, whether the term “private 
parties” include rebels, insurgents . . . 

MR. OPLE. Yes, precisely the point just made by 
Commissioner Bemas. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, the committee 
is divided on this issue, so may we hear the side of 
Commissioner Garcia. 

MS. NIEVA. Can I just ask for a clarification. Madam 
President? 

^®sterday, I asked the question: What did “private 
parties include? And it was made clear to me that it 


included all sides — leftists, rightists, centrists, rebels, 
sects and any private groups. So, I am now a little bit 
perturbed because it is in the minutes, and that was 
clarified to me by Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. That was 
my reply to the query made by Comrhissioner Nieva, 
but Commissioner Garcia would like to make his ob- 
servations on this issue. 

MR GARCIA. Madam President, I would like to 
clarify. What Commissioner Nieva observed is correct. 
The committee report, in fact, says “all parties” which 
includes different groups. What I have tried to present 
this morning is precisely the long debate on the issue of 
human rights being followed by the existing Presidential 
Committee on Human Rights created by the present 
government. In other words, they have themselves 
discussed this issue and the conclusion is precisely that 
all crimes, in one way or another, are violations of 
human ri^ts, punishable by courts and prosecuted by 
fiscals. If we are going to suggest that crimes by all these 
groups are going to be committed, the committee will 
be constrained to pursue so many of these different 
crimes, rather than go to its essential task which is to go 
after crimes where victims do not have ready access to 
legal remedy. Following the philosophy enunciated by 
Commissioner Aqumo where the government, which has 
the monopoly of legitimate power, controls the legal 
system and is also armed to punish crimes, they can thus 
pursue cases through the ordinary courts of law. We are 
admitting that there are violations of human rights com- 
mitted by rebel forces, but what we are saying is that 
the commission we are creating is precisely to enable 
ordinary citizens to have access against all the forces of 
the State. So, I am stating the actual position of the 
committee. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President. 

MR. GARCIA. Secondly, to give the international 
context, when I headed the Commission of Amnesty 
International to Colombia, I remember the very first 
statement made by President Juho Cesar Turbay Ayala 
of Colombia on January 16, 1980. He said: 

Before you investigate the human rights violations of my 
government, because there are no political prisoners in my 
country, why don’t you go after the crimes committed by 
the guerillas? 

In other words, that is normally the answer of govern- 
ment. And, therefore. Amnesty International’s response 
was, because the state parties are signatories to the 
human rights covenants and instruments, they are the 
ones who must be responsible for human ri^ts to be 
respected in their countries. And unless they are willing 
to give legitimate recognition to the rebel forces, then 
the commission cannot go after them. What govern- 
ments should do is to make sure that these crimes are 
punished in the ordinary courts. 


760 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


MR RAMA, Madam President. 

MR. MONSOD. May, the committee respond? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR. MONSOD. With aU due respect to the opinion of 
Commissioner Garcia, who is not a member of the com- 
mittee, the position of this committee is what is stated 
in the report — that it would include offenses by gover- 
ment and military officials as weU as of private parties. 
Our acceptance of the proposal of Commissioner de 
Castro is merely to give flexibility to Congress and the 
commission to determine the priorities of their work; 
but in terms of the scope, the committee report is very 
clear. 


IN ACTS OF REBELLION OR INSURRECTION 
AGAINST THE STATE.” 

MR. OPLE. Thank you very much. 

MR FOZ. And this was precisely raised by Commis- 
sioner Nieva yesterday during the interpellations and it 
was very clear. 

MR OPLE. With that categorical reiteration of the 
definite intent of the committee, I now would like to 
accept the amendment to my amendment by Commis- 
sioner de Castro. 

THE PRESIDENT. So that what will be submitted to 
the body for a vote is the amendment of Commissioner 
de Castro. 


MR. OPLE. If that is the case and the sponsoring 
panel is not united on this point, I am considering to 
decUne the amendment of Commissioner de Castro and 
to ask the committee whether it is their pleasure to put 
my amendment to a vote. 

BISHOP BACANI. Madam President. 

• PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bacani is recog- 


BACANI. I think all the members of th 

mprnhp United; Commissioner Garcia is not 

member of the committee. 


Mad^ Sdent.^"^ speaking of the sponsoring pam 

th^^thly^wertalt^^e ^ ^ 

was to ask thp ^^^bers of the committee. My poi 
place to show hoTm^v 

sense of the committee ^ 

committee’s sense is reaUv thV" 
and Commissioner oJo- yesterd; 

member of the ’ therefore, even though he i 

the committee. Panel, is not in accord w 


MR. RAMA. The body is ready to vote. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, may I just have 
a word, please? I am very thankful to the committee 
and to Commissioner Ople for accepting my amendment 
to the amendment, but I would like to inform the body 
that since the creation of the Human Rights Commis- 
sion, the military has always felt that it is always 
directed to them. When I saw Justice J.B.L. Reyes and 
Madam Avancena and they talked to me about human 
rights, I told them that this is principally directed to- 
wards the military, and that my problem is how to 
create this Human Wghts Commission and remove from 
its function the word “military.” It really is demoraliz- 
ing to the military when we say that they are 
of investigation by the commission. I found is 
morning the appropriate wordings to use so 1 can 
eliminate the word “military” in the formulation of the 
provision on the investigation of human rights viola ion . 

Thank you. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR. FOZ. We have previously manifested that we 
have accepted the amendment proposed by Commis 
sioner de Castro. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

we^u^e ^thf tern ^‘^p'rivTtt ®fmmittee that when 

make it clear that Lide fro^I^..'^® I"" 

enumeration, all other parties mav”hT^^^f^^H^ 

violators of human rights and of course *■ 

^ Cl course, it is so general 

that It covers even die ^endment of Commissionei 
Ople when it says, “THOSE WHO MAY BE ENGAGEE 


THE PRESIDENT. Yes, as formulated, the proposed 
amendment reads this way: “Investigate aU ° 

human rights violations INVOLVING CIVIL AND 
POLITICAL RIGHTS.” Is that correct? 

MR FOZ. That is correct. Madam President. 

VOTING 

THE PRESIDENT. As many as are in favor of this 
proposed amendment, please raise their hand. (Several 
Members raised their hand.) 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


761 


As many as are against, please raise their hand. (No 
Member raised his hand.) 

As many as are abstaining, please raise their hand. 

( One Member raised his hand.) 

The results show 34 votes in favor, none against 
and 1 abstention; the proposed amendment is approved. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Nolledo be recognized for some information? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I have here in my 
possession a statement from our separated brethren. I 
would like to read the last two paragraphs with the 
kindest indulgence of the Members of this Commission: 

August 27, 1986 

We are repeatedly told that our action has generated 
broad and keen interest in the work of the Constitutional 
Commission. If rather unintended, we take this as a salutary 
consequence. We trust that the generated interest shall 
remain alive and supportive of our collective efforts at 
framing a Constitution. We enjoin the people to remain 
steadfast in their wholehearted participation in the writing 
of a vital chapter of our history. 

With this call, we are happy to announce that tomorrow, 
Thursday, we shall be returning to the Constitutional 
Commission to continue our work in seeking new pathways 
for a collective development fully aware that the needs and 
ideals of the people shall always remain paramount. 

(Sgd.) Minda Luz Quesada (Sgd.) Jaime Tadeo 
(Sgd.) Ponciano Bennagen (Sgd.) Wilfrido Villacorta 
Jose Suarez 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, another information 
from Commissioner Tingson before we suspend the 
session. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR TINGSON. Madam President, soon after the 
Constitutional Commission was convened. Commis- 
sioner Tan and I filed a resolution unanimously ap- 
proved by this body and implemented by the President 
of the Philippines to give the public franking privileges. 
Commissioner Davide amended the said resolution so 
that the franking privileges would last only until August 
15. But, Madam President, I am happy to inform our 
colleagues that I received information today that the 
post office will continue our franking privileges until 
our work here is over. This means the people can write 
to us without stamps and we also can do the same thing 
until our work is over. 

Thank you. Madam President. 


BISHOP BACANI. Madam President, I would like to 
correct Commissioner Tingson. We cannot exercise that 
franking privilege ourselves. 

THE PRESIDENT. We can. The executive order of 
the President grants us the same privilege. 

BISHOP BACANI. I am sorry. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR RAMA Madam President, I move that we sus- 
pend the session until two-thirty this afternoon. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 12:44 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 2:56 p.m., the session is resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, we are still in the 
period of amendments. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any pending amendment? 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, may I ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized on the Article on the 
Commission on Human Rights? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. 

The first amendment is on Section 2(1), page 1, line 
?n After the word “investigate,” add a comma (,) and 
the phrase “ON ITS OWN OR ON COMPLAINT BY 
ANY PARTY” followed by another comma (,). 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR. FOZ. May we ask the proponent to repeat the 

amendment? 

MR DAVIDE. On Section 2(1), line 20, after the 
word “investigate,” add a comma (,) and the phrase 
ITS OWN OR ON COMPLAINT BY ANY PARTY” 
followed by another comma (,). 

MR. FOZ. We accept the amendment. Madam Pres- 
ident. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Davide which 
has been accepted by the committee? (Silence) Tlie 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 


762 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


MR DAVIDE. On Section 2(2), page 2, delete the 
phrase “issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum” 
and substitute it with the following: “ADOPT ITS OWN 
RULES OF PROCEDURE, INCLUDING THE IS- 
SUANCE OF COMPULSORY PROCESSES,” so that 
the two lines will now read: “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES 
OF PROCEDURE, INCLUDING THE ISSUANCE OF 
COMPULSORY PROCESSES to compel the attend- 
ance of any party to its proceedings or the ...” 

MR. FOZ. What about the power to cite for con- 
tempt? 


MR DAVIDE. The amendment is only up to that 
part because we will retain the phrase on the power to 
cite for contempt. So, I would propose the following 
omnibus amendments: First, on line 1 , substitute “issue 

duces tecum” with the phrase 
RULES OF PROCEDURE, IN- 
ISSUANCE OF COMPULSORY PRO- 
CESSES ; on line 3, insert after the word “materials,” 
a comma (,) and the word “RECORDS”; on line 4, 
delete the phrase “in accordance with”; on lines 5 and 
6, delete all the words. The entire paragraph will read 
rpm RULES OF PRO- 

PnP^v ISSUANCE OF COM- 

1*1^9^®^^®^ 1° compel the attendance of 
1 Proceedings or the production of 

•. I^ECORDS and documents, with the power to 

cite for contempt for violations thereof.” 


amen^m^L^^^f^^^^' President, I thought th 

ttTe firS r ^°"^missioner Davide would cover oni 
mLt con^tf I have an anterior amend 

a neVSk>n^^^^^ President, is to ad( 

coauthored by CoLmL P^^® 1. This i 

account thf o^^^^^^^ioner Tmgson, and takes inh 

during his intem^fw^^^^*?^ Commissioner Bengzo: 

posed Section ?(2)^wTu ^ session. The prc 

SCOPE OF HTttw^xt as follows: “DEFINE TH] 

shall fIll violations whig 

into ACCOUhrr JURISDICTION TAKIN( 

universal^ec? A p rights and th 

I would J: ^^hARATlON OF HUMAN RIGHTS. 

former Chief Jus^kp^r® President, thi 

this morning’s sSsL tw ""^^e a statement i 
Rights may define the 

it should be the er.m of its jurisdiction. I thin 

power to de?me « 

gamut of civil and poUtS ri.hl 
field and it is the commf • ^ 

empowered to identify thr^c^se^^^^^^ should 1 
exercise jurisdiction '^hich it c. 


Is the Commissioner, in effect, granting some kind 
of legislative power to the Commission on Human 
Rights by giving it the power to define the scope of 
human rights violations which shall fall under its juris- 
diction? 

MR NOLLEDO. It is not exactly a legislative power 
because it is implementing Section 2(1) which provides 
that the commission has the function to investigate at 
its own instance or at the instance of any party all 
forms of human rights violations. The words “all forms 
of human rights violations” will constitute the basis for 
the commission to define the instance of violations of 
human rights over which it can assume jurisdiction. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bengzon is recog- 
nized. 

MR BENGZON. I was precisely going to stand up 
and talk about lines 20 to 2 1 , and with the permission 
of Commissioner NoUedo, I would be satisfied with the 
reading into the record what we really mean by human 
rights violations. The way things stand now, the mean- 
ing is so broad. I wanted to have a sharper focus on 
what these human rights violations are so that there will 
not be any confusion later on when a case arises and 
several agencies of the government might wish to have 
jurisdiction. For that reason, I would be satisfied with 
a question addressed to the committee and with an 
answer to the effect that these human rights violations 
consist of the rights as articulated by us m the Bill of 
Rights and in the Civil and Political Rights in the United 
Nations. 

If we enter those in the Journal, then, to me, it is 
more than sufficient focusing of what we mean by 
“human rights violation.” And, therefore, there is no 
need any longer for the proposed amendment of Com- 
missioner Nolledo. I hope that Commissioner Nolledo 
shares that view. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I do not share the 
view of Commissioner Bengzon — with due respect to 
him — because the Human Rights Commission is 
expected to promulgate its own rules of procedure, in- 
cluding rules that are directly connected with pro- 
cedure, and one of these is to set forth the instances over 
which the commission has jurisdiction. While it is true 
that entering in the records the instances over which the 
commission has jurisdiction would seem to suffice, I 
think there is no need of further research on the part of 
persons who would like to take advantage of the bene- 
fits afforded by the existence of this commission when 
the commission itself so promulgates the instances that 
shall fall under its jurisdiction. 


MR. FOZ. Madam President, 
ask of the proponent. 


we have a question to 


MR. BENGZON. But, Madam President, I think it 
goes without saying that this commission would have 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27. 1986 


763 


that right without our really specifying it. Assuming 
that the amendment is approved, I was wondering if 
Commissioner Nolledo would be willing to substitute 
the phrase “THE CONVENTION OF THE CIVIL AND 
POLITICAL RIGHTS IN THE UNITED NATIONS” 
instead of “UNIVERSAL DECLARATION OF HUMAN 
RIGHTS” which is so broad. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Monsod is recog- 
nized. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, what we had in 
mind was to enumerate some basic functions of the 
commission, with the last subsection providing that 
Congress shall define the initial functions of the com- 
mission as well as those functions granted to it over 
time. Our idea. Madam President, is for the commission 
to have more modest objectives during its initial years, 
as we had mentioned earlier, and then these can be 
expanded to go even beyond the civil and political rights 
as the level of our development increases and there will 
be changes in the types of human rights violations 
existing in the country. So, if it is all right with both 
Commissioners Nolledo and Bengzon, we can put 
this as a catchall phrase at the end of the enumeration 
and to give enough leeway for Congress to expand the 
functions of the Commission from the initial modest 
objectives. 

MR. BENGZON. Madam President, is the committee 
suggesting that the formulation of Commissioner 
Nolledo, as amended by me, would then be transposed 
to page 2, somewhere on the last line? 

MR. MONSOD. Yes, after we have gone through 
some basic functions of the commission, then we can 
have a last phrase and leave that up to Congress. We 
have taken that into account. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case, we can add to the last 
part of the section the phrase “UNTIL OTHERWISE 
PROVIDED BY CONGRESS.” So, we will give to the 
commission the initial duty to define its jurisdiction, 
taking into account the Bill of Rights and the conven- 
tion mentioned by Commissioner Bengzon, after which 
we add the phrase “UNTIL OTHERWISE PROVIDED 
BY CONGRESS.” Ultimately, it will be Congress that 
will determine the extent of the jurisdiction of the 
Commission on Human Rights. 

FR. BERNA.S. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Benias is recog- 
nized. 


FR. BERNAS. I am a little uncomfortable with the 
idea of allowing the commission to fix its jurisdiction. 
Fixing jurisdiction is a function either of the Constitu- 
tion itself or of the legislative body, not even courts 
fix their own jurisdictions. It is either the Constitution 
or the legislature that does this. So, it would seem to me 
that if we have to talk about jurisdiction at all, we 
should not leave it to the Human Rights Commission 
but we either do it ourselves or we leave it to Congress. 

MR. MONSOD. Madam President, just an additional 
comment. We were going to propose as a complemen- 
tary provision to this article a section in the Transitory 
Provisions to the effect that until the Human Rights 
Commission is established by Congress in accordance 
with this Constitution, the present Presidential Com- 
mittee on Human Rights will function as the commis- 
sion so that it will already have its own terms of refer- 
ence. Then Congress may expand, delineate or add to 
these functions. 

So, that would be the complementary approach to 
this section. Madam President. 

MR. BENGZON. I think we will agree to that as an 
addition to the interpretation I articulated a few 
minutes ago and which should be read into the record. 
Then we leave the definition of functions to Congress. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with Commissioner Bengzon, 
Madam President. 

MR MONSOD. Madam President, we will be glad to 
consider the subsequent wordings as we go further into 
this article. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

MR TINGSON. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tingson is recog- 
nized. 

MR. TINGSON. Madam President, since I am a 
cosignatory to the first part of the amendment by 
Commissioner Nolledo, may I be clarified on one 
point. The chairman of the committee or the committee 
itself provides on page 2, line 12 the establishment of a 
continuing program of education and information to 
propagate the primacy of human rights. I suppose we 
are referring to a continuing program of education that 
is based on the Bill of Rights, which is part of the 
Constitution. Is that right. Madam President? 

MR. GARCIA. With regard to human rights educa- 
tion, this would depend on the audience, of course. The 
program will be based on the Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, and then, of course, the Bill of Rights. 


764 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


Now, for the particular audiences among law enforce- 
ment agencies, such as the military, there are definite 
standard rules for the treatment of prisoners. There is 
also the Declaration Against Torture and other such 
treaties or international instruments which could help 
educate our people and form their consciousness regard- 
ing human rights protection. 

MR. TINGSON. Specifically, would that include 
materials like the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights issued by the United Nations? 

MR. GARCIA. Exactly. 

MR. TINGSON. Thank you very much. 

MR. Rama Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Davide be allowed to continue his presentation of 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


shall not be strictly followed. If the Gentleman does not 
mind, may I ask him to reconsider because giving the 
commission the power to adopt rules of procedure will 
not preclude my amendment. 

MR DAVIDE. May I suggest that the proposal be 
taken later because it could be incorporated, probably, 
as a separate sentence. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I would like to know what is tlie 
reaction of the committee to my amendment to the 
amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. We do not have the reaction yet 
of the committee to the Davide amendment. So, can we 
have that first? 

FR BERNAS. I think the committee is in favor of 
having a generaUzed statement of the power of the 
Human Rights Commission to issue rules and regulations 
necessary for its investigatory function. 


MR. DAVIDE. May we know what is the reaction of 
proposed amendment on Section 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, 
nize^^^ PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

sioneT°oitid^ amendment of Commis- 

Whatisthe lL ^ to his last word. 

word of the Commissioner, please? 

MR. DAVIDE 1. 

on line 4 stop at the word “thereof” 

MR. NOLLEnn r» 

page 2 of the commtee^re'Jjfrt?”'’''*'’ 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

the following^clSiq!^^^^ President, I propose to add 
“PROVIDED However ^ P^^tod (.) after it: 
evidence SHA?LN0?^P™^^^ ^HE RULES OF 
IN hearings FOLLOWED 

SION.” ^JNDUCTED before the commis- 

adopt its own r^les of procedure^ "" commission to 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, when we author- 
ize the commission to adopt its own rules of procedure. 
It does not necessarily mean that the rules of evidence 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. Is this separate from the present 
Section 2(2)? 

FR. BERNAS. It will be in lieu of, and will include 
the power to issue subpoena and subpoena duces tecum. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Davide read 
his proposal again for the guidance of the committee. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, Madam President. On 
substitute the words “Issue subpoena and ®^„P^yvN 
duces tecum" with the following: “ADOPT 
RULES OF PROCEDURES INCLUDING TH 
SUANCE OF COMPULSORY PROCESSES.” 

On line 3, insert between the words 
“and” the following: comma (,) jgiete 

line 4, delete the words “in' accordance wit , . 

the entire lines 5 and 6 ; so that the amended su s ^ 
will now simply read as follows: “ADOP'T „ 
RULES OF PROCEDURE INCLUDING THli 
SUANCE OF COMPULSORY PROCESSES to 
the attendance of any party to its proceedings or 
production of materials, RECORDS and docume , 
with the power to cite for contempt for vio a lo 
thereof.” 

FR. BERNAS. The language is a Uttle awkward. 
Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE. “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PRO- 
CEDURE WHICH SHALL INCLUDE RULES ON THE 
ISSUANCE OF COMPULSORY PROCESSES.” 

FR. BERNAS. But would that not be included 
already in the idea of empowering the commission to 
adopt its own rules. 


WEDNESDAY. AUGUST 27, 1986 


765 


MR. DAVIDE. Precisely. 

FR BERNAS. In other words, we are trying to 
shorten this as much as possible. 

MR. DAVIDE. My proposal is just to substitute the 
original with “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PRO- 
CEDURE.” 


MR. MONSOD. Is it all right with the proponent if 
we say, “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PROCEDURE 
AND EVIDENCE”? 

MR. DAVIDE. I do not think it is necessary because 
the idea is that this commission should not really be 
bound by the technical rules of evidence. It is investiga- 
tive in character. 

MR. MONSOD. We are amenable to just using the 
phrase “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PROCEDURE.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR NOLLEDO. In that case, I will be satisfied if the 
committee reiterates the statement of Commissioner 
Davide that in adopting the rules of procedure the com- 
mission will necessarily adopt rules on evidence; that the 
commission is not bound by the technical rules of 
evidence; and that the rules of evidence shall not be 
strictly followed in proceedings before it. 

FR. BERNAS. The rules of evidence that will be 
followed are the looser rules applicable to administrative 
agencies. 

MR. NOLLEDO. And, therefore, they are not strictly 
applied as technically understood in the presentation 
of evidence before judicial bodies. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case. Madam President, I 
withdraw my amendment. 

Thank you. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla seeks to be 
recognized. 

MR. PADILLA. With the insertion of the phrase 
“ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PROCEDURE,” and 
with the elimination of the last phrase “in accordance 
with the Rules of Court promulgated by the Supreme 
Court,” will this mean that the rules of procedure of 
this commission can depart from, or even violate, the 
Rules of Court? 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, may I respond to 
it? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. Under the Article on the Judiciary, 
rules of procedure of all quasi-judicial bodies and 
administrative bodies will be subject to review by the 
Supreme Court. And, therefore, the rules of procedure 
to be adopted by the proposed Commission on Human 
Rights will be subject to review by the Supreme Court.. 

MR. PADILLA. Yes. That does not answer the 
question. Whether it can be reviewed by the Supreme 
Court is something separate. My question is: Will the 
elimination of the phrase “in accordance with the 
Rules of Court” mean that the rules of procedure to be 
adopted by this commission can deviate from, and even 
contradict or violate, the Rules of Court? 

MR. DAVIDE. It will not follow because the 
Supreme Court will have the authority to review all 
rules of procedure and the Supreme Court will see to it 
that it would be within the framework of the Rules of 
Court. 

MR. PADILLA Why then eliminate the Rules of 
Court that have been promulgated by the Supreme 
Court? 

MR. DAVIDE. My first answer, Madam President, 
will be that in all the provisions on constitutional com- 
missions, or on the Ombudsman, for instance, we always 
allow these commissions to adopt their own rules of 
procedure, but subject to the review of the Supreme 
Court Since this is practically an independent commis- 
sion even at a lower level than the regular constitutional 
commissions, we should adopt the same procedure in 
the matter of vesting it with certain authonty and 

powers. 

MR PADILLA So, the words “SUBJECT TO RE 
VIEW” should be added. 

the PRESIDENT. Maybe, we could also add that the 
mention of the Rules of Court here was made in relation 
to the power to cite for contempt. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. May I comment on this? 

THE PRESIDENT. Please proceed. 


766 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


MR. REGALADO. Yesterday, there was a question as 
to whether the proposed Commission on Human Rights 
would be, in effect, a quasi-judicial body, and the com- 
mittee said that they envisioned a quasi-judicial body. 
Although later, on questioning by Commissioner 
Romulo, it seems that the position of the committee 
was that this is purely an administrative body, not a 
quasi-judicial body. I agree that it is not a quasi-judicial 
body because it has no adjudicatory functions subject to 
review by a higher tribunal. It is purely an administra- 
tive fact-finding body similar to the Agrava Board. It is 
not a “judicial body softened with a quasi” because it 
has no adjudicatory functions and there is no provision 
here for appellate review of its functions. 


Cornmissioner Davide has called attention to the 
provisions of the Article on the Judiciary that these 
mles will, after all, be subject to review by the Supreme 
ourt. I regret to differ with the Commissioner because 
under Section 7 of the Article on the Judiciary, the 
rules of procedure of special courts and quasi-judicial 
odies are the ones to be reviewed by the Supreme 
• proposed commission is not a quasi- 

in While the commission may, therefore, 

f own rules, these must not differ substantially 

trom the provisions of the Rules of Court. Of course, on 
matter of the rules of evidence, it is obvious that the 
^ or evidence here will not strictly be appUed 
ecause this is an administrative body. The Rules of 

annhv Provide that they will only have suppletory 
apphcation to nonjudicial proceedings. 

vio^ion^f of the power to cite for contempt for 

phrase “in "'^®rein properly appended is the 

favor of ” f of Court,” I am in 

Rules of accordance with the 

of contemnt ni- reason: there are two kinds 

PhUinpines^- followed in the 

Rules of Court ^ method which is under the 

power to cite f method under the legislative 

difference betweenThl^^t"^^^'',^^^ ^ of a 

of procedure becau<!e merely rules 

contempt is its be* Peculiarity of the rule on 

character. As a mat^^ ^ Procedural rule with a penal 
in the nature of a r^' ' ^ special civil action 

tempt, pursuant to In the case of con- 

there are specific Rules of Court, 

facie curiae and indirect direct contempt or in 

•uiiccr contempt. 

On the other hand th« 

contempt proceedings ’in th? mother kind of 

Let us take the case legislative, like Congress. 
Nazareno where the oowpr^ m^ance, of Arnault vs. 
contempt and to hold Arnault 

until he would reveal what wL ^ detention 

tion of the Tambobong ^ investiga- 

te the inherent powers orSnf " 
tempt, not m accordance wim th^Rules 
power of the Judiciary to punish for contempt. 


The peculiarity of the Commission on Human Rights 
is that, it is purely administrative, it is not quasi- 
judicial at all. If it were a quasi-judicial body, just like 
the fiscal’s office, if the subpoenas are not followed and 
while the fiscal does not have the power to cite for 
contempt, he can apply to the proper regional trial 
court for the contemner to be ordered to appear before 
the fiscal. But, again, this is not a quasi-judicial body. 
This is similar to the Agrava Board which was purely 
fact-finding that is why it was necessary to empower it 
with the power to cite for contempt and to punish for 
contempt in accordance with the Rules of Court, in 
order to distinguish it from the legislative process of 
holding persons in contempt wherein the penalty is 
subject only to the discretion of Congress, unlike those 
in the Rules of Court where there are specific penalties 
for direct or indirect contempt. 

For that reason and to avoid some confusion or 
doubts in the future, I am proposing an amendment to 
the amendment of Commissioner Davide, if he will 
consider it, that we maintain after the word “thereof” 
the phrase “in accordance with the Rules of Court IN 
THE PHILIPPINES” - the “Rules of Court in the 
Philippines” being the correct and complete official title 
of the rules — just so, this commission may not adopt 
rules of contempt similar to legislative bodies which is a 
little dangerous. 


MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. In the light of the disquisitions^made 
and it being now made to appear that the f.^T^g'^ecause 
Supreme Court of the rules will not be Human 

of the admission of the committee j 

Rights Commission is not a quasi-judicia ^oul'd read: 
propose a compromise amendment SUB- 

“ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF 
JECT TO REVIEW BY THE 

amendment will be equated with t _ under the 

of quasi-judicial bodies and special courts una 

Article on the Judiciary. 

FR. BERN AS. The “hderstanding Js ^ 

“s^/o SriUstaccordai.ee with the 
Rules of Court in the PhUipphies. 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de los Reyes is 
recognized. 

MR DE LOS REYES. May I ask some questions of 
the proponent? If we do not place in the Constitution 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


767 


the phrase “adopt rules of procedure,” is there anything 
that will prevent this Human Rights Commission from 
adopting its own rules of procedure even if the Consti- 
tution were silent on that? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, if the Constitution 
were silent on that, the commission might not have that 
power, and that is the reason why we made an enumera- 
tion of its powers and functions. Tlie issuance of sub- 
poenas duces tecum, as well as citing an individual for 
contempt for failure to appear m any of its proceedings, 
must be in accordance with the Rules of Court. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I think I have to disagree most 
respectfully. Whenever a commission is created, it 
carries with it the necessary power to make its own rules 
of procedure; and, therefore, it is my respectful sub- 
mission, Madam President, that the amendment which 
will empower the commission to make its own mles of 
procedure is superfluous and unnecessary. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. It would seem to me that this is not 
just a question of empowering the commission to pro- 
mulgate its own rules, but it is also a command to the 
commission to make sure that it promulgates its own 
rules because it is possible that the commission might 
not, and in fairness to the public under investigation, 
the public should know what tlie rules of the game are. 
So, it is more than just giving it the power, but rather 
giving it a command that it better issue rules. I would 
also tend to agree with Commissioner Regalado that if 
this is a purely administrative body, we would have to 
specify its power to cite for contempt, if it is going to 
have the power to cite for contempt because the power 
to cite for contempt is in connection with judicial 
and quasi-judicial powers. 

MR. DAVIDE. Can we have the committee formulate 
the proposed combined amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. May we have the amendment read 
again? 

FR. BERNAS. “ADOPT ITS OWN RULES OF PRO- 
CEDURES, CITE FOR CONTEMPT FOR VIOLA- 
TIONS THEREOF IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE 
rules of court PROMULGATED BY. . .” 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment which has been accepted by the 
committee? 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President. 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR REGALADO. Madam President, in connection 
with my statement yesterday to the committee, I pro- 
pose to delete the phrase “PROMULGATED BY THE 
SUPREME COURT,” and continue with the phrase: 
“IN THE PHILIPPINES” because that is the official 
title of the rules. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is this accepted by the commit- 
tee? 

MR SARMIENTO. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Regalado be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Regalado is recog- 
nized. 

MR. REGALADO. Madam President, I have already 
given the intended amendment, and I have to ingraft it 
to the Davide amendment. 

MR. RAMA. Madam President, I ask that Commis- 
sioner Rosario Braid be recognized on Section 2. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, I would 
like to propose an amendment to Section 2(4), lines 12 
to 13. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, with due respect 
to Commissioner Rosario Braid, I have an anterior 
amendment to Section 2(3). 

the PRESIDENT. Please proceed. Commissioner 
Nolledo. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, copies of this 
amendment have been distributed to the honorable 
Members of the Commission. After the word “measures” 
on line 7, page 2, I propose to add the following words 
so that Section 2(3) will now read as follows: “Provide 
appropriate legal measures WHICH MAY INCLUDE IN- 
JUNCTIVE RELIEF AND ISSUANCE OF THE WRIT 
OF HABEAS CORPUS for the protection of human 
rights of all persons within the Philippines, provisions 
for legal aid services for indigent persons whose human 
rights have been violated or need protection.” The 
words I propose to add are “WHICH MAY INCLUDE 
INJUNCTIVE RELIEF AND ISSUANCE OF THE 


768 


WEDNESDAY. AUGUST 27, 1986 


WRIT OF HABEAS CORPUS,” and these are intended 
to strengthen the powers and jurisdiction of the Com- 
mission. These words are recommended to be included 
therein, taking into account the interpellations of Com- 
missioner Natividad in yesterday’s session. And if the 
commission would have no power to issue injunctive 
relief, say, against harassments which may also involve 
violations of human rights, and there would be no 
power to issue the writ of habeas corpus which is a judi- 
cial power, but which this Constitutional Commission 
has jurisdiction to give to the Commission on Human 
Rights then the commission would have no reason to 
exist. 


I would like to cite an example. Madam President. 
Here comes a complainant. Her husband is detained and 
being tortured; she goes to the Human Rights Commis- 
sion for relief. Do we mean to say that the commission 
is powerless to order that the person of the husband be 
produced before it, before investigation proceeds, 
especially if there are charges of torture? The members 
o the Human Rights Commission would like to see if 
here are really physical injuries inflicted upon the 
detained person. 


I ask every Member of this Commission to think it 
®^2use I was also a victim of humiliation inside 
pnH p X together with Commissioners Calderon, Rama 
commission can investigate without 
® power to issue a writ of habeas corpus or a 
At^ii contemplated by Commissioner 

create this Human Rights Com- 
Comm^c is really a paper tiger as stated by 

Se^^n^ can investigate but then it 

the what is happening inside the jail of 

mission ^ being tortured, and yet the com- 

bodv powerless to order the production of the 

basis ol nor charges have sufficient legal 


sider^^seri!l? of the committee to please cc 

Sct^ th" power to iss 

the creation of th?^ habeas corpus to ma 

reation of the commission more meaningful. 


FR- BERNAS. Madam President. 


the president 

nized. 


Commissioner Bemas is recog- 


fK. 


missioner Noltsdo^'^wh^^^ meaning to contradict 
power of injunctive reSf'? ''''"'"'issic 

relief, and includLe 

corpus of a writ of ^ 

Sion, that is, are we maSle nature of the co 
a matter of fact? ® ^ qnasi-judicial be 


ably headed by Commissioner Ople, which had the 
power to issue subpoena duces tecum, subpoena testifi- 
candum and to hold in contempt witnesses before it. 
These are judicial powers. 

FR. BERNAS. They are correct. Madam President. I 
was just trying to clarify this in the light of what we just 
approved. So that if we accept the amendment of Com- 
missioner Nolledo our discussion with Commissioners 
Regalado and Davide would really have to be reversed 
because we have converted the Commission into a quasi- 
judicial body. And I am not saying that I am against 
converting this into a quasi-judicial body. 

^MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. In fact, that is the effect. 

MR. NOLLEDO. We are constituting. Madam Pres- 
ident, a body that is an exception to the rule. As 
contemplated by the Davide amendment, it must be in 
accordance with the pertinent provisions of the Rules 
of Court because we are strengthening the powers of 
the Commission. 

I recommend that we just drop the idea of creating 
an independent Commission on Human Rights if we do 
not give teeth to this body. 

FR. BERNAS. Let us suppose that we accept this. 
Everything we said in Section 2(2) would really be 
unnecessary because now, we have a body that is 
quasi-judicial and, therefore, subject to all the rules 
of a quasi-judicial body as found in our Rules in the 
judiciary. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree with that as a general stafo- 
ment. But we have to consider the functions o 
commission in considering my amendment. 

' FR. BERNAS. Madam President, I am not disagreeing 
with the substance of the proposal of the Gentleman, 
am just trying to clarify concepts. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Personally, I would leave the issuance 
of the writ of habeas corpus to the courts because t e 
very nature of the writ of habeas corpus is that it is an 
instantaneous remedy and the body itself can go to 
court and ask for the issuance of a writ of habeas 
corpus. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In the meantime, the husband is 
already dead. 


MR NOLLEDO. Madam President we can gr£ 
judical powers to quasi-judicial bodies. An exam^e 
the National Labor Relations Commission, forme 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I share this information. 
Madam President. Lately, the Supreme Court has been 
liberal with respect to the issuance of a writ of habeas 
corpus on the basis of mere telegrams. So, does the 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


769 


Gentleman not think that this would be unnecessary 
since courts are now very liberal? This was a vote 
adopted just recently by the Supreme Court. 

MR. NOLLEDO. 1 do not believe so, Madam Pres- 
ident. 

MR. SARMIENTO. And besides, courts are operative, 
they are really liberal. 

MR. NOLLEDO. When Ninoy Aquino filed a petition 
for a writ of habeas corpus, it took the Supreme Court 
several years to decide on the petition. Even with 
respect to the presently constituted Supreme Court, I 
have my doubts because circumstances change. If this is 
an instantaneous remedy as stated by Commissioner 
Bemas, I think the committee should adopt tliis amend- 
ment because the commission would really be useless if 
it cannot give instantaneous remedy as circumstances 
may demand. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Foz is recognized. 

MR FOZ. I think there is some kind of divergence 
of opinion in the committee because personally I would 
support the proposal of Commissioner Nolledo to vest 
the proposed commission with the power to issue in- 
junctive relief and also all other reliefs depending on the 
circumstances. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I am happy that the chairman 
supports me. Why do we not compromise? As chairman 
of the Committee on Local Governments, when I hear 
an amendment, I would try to reason out and suggest 
amendments, too. For example, in order to meet the 
objections of Commissioner Bemas, we have to subject 
the order of the Human Rights Commission to judicial 
review. I will agree with subjecting to review the order 
of the commission by the Supreme Court. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we hear Commissioner 
Aquino first before we enter into any compromise? 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I would only like to 
express my support for the position of Commissioner 
Nolledo, however, we might have to confront the 
problem of overhauling the very nature of the Human 
Rights Commission in the sense that, if we vest the 
commission with adjudicative functions, necessarily it 
will have to assume likewise the multifarious accoutre- 
ments which are needed for the enforceabiUty of its 
powers to issue the writ of habeas corpus. 

As an administrative agency, the commission cannot 
enforce its ruling against the military establishment, 
for example, unless we realign its powers and duties 
accordingly as an adjudicative boay. 


MR. NOLLEDO. And the Constitution, Madam 
President, can grant that power. Besides, there is a dis- 
tinction between adjudicative power and the power to 
issue a writ of habeas corpus. The power to issue a writ 
of habeas corpus does not necessarily mean that the 
quasi-judicial body is making an adjudication or is 
making a decision. It is only preparatory to further 
consideration of the case. When a man is being tortured 
and there is no power on the part of the commission to 
issue a writ of habeas corpus to order the production of 
his body in order to see whether tortures are being 
done, then please let us not create this Commission on 
Human Rights. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, I already agreed 
with Commissioner Nolledo, however, I cannot agree to 
his position that the issuance of the writ of habeas 
corpus as a remedy is not an adjudicative power; it is. 
Before the remedy is granted by the court, there is a 
level of appreciation of evidence needed to vest pre- 
cisely in the person seeking relief the right to be 
delivered to court and for an inquiry into the legality of 
his detention. 

MR. NOLLEDO. The appreciation of evidence is not 
done in the technical sense because affidavits are at- 
tached to the petition and then as long as the allegations 
show a prima facie case on the part of the complainant, 
the court or the administrative body must be able to 
grant immediate reUef. 

MS. AQUINO. I am not so much concerned with that 
as I am concerned with the power of the court to en- 
force the writ. I mean, as it is already constituted the 
way we have agreed in the initial sections, the commis- 
sion would not have that power. 

SUSPENSION OF SESSION 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, may we ask for 
a suspension. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is suspended. 

It was 3:43 p.m. 

RESUMPTION OF SESSION 

At 3:57 p.m., the session was resumed. 

THE PRESIDENT. The session is resumed, 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rigos is recog- 
nized. 

REV. RIGOS. We ask that Commissioner Nolledo be 
recognized. 


770 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, after exhaustive 
and deep consultation with the chairman and members 
of the committee, my amendment on line 7, page 2, wiU 
now read as follows: “Provide appropriate legal 

measures WHICH MAY INCLUDE PREVENTIVE RE- 
LIEF.” It is understood that the words “PREVENTIVE 
RELIEF” should cover an order from the commission 
to conserve the body of the detainee and to prevent the 
authorities from hiding it, or from torturing or transfer- 
ring the body until further orders of the court, without 
prejudice to the right of the aggrieved party to petition 
for the issuance of a writ of habeas corpus with the 
Supreme Court or appropriate court. 

FR. BERNAS. It is not only the party who can ask 
tor a writ but the commission itself can ask for it. 

provision is aligned 
'^} . ® provisions on preventive measures contem- 

plated m Article 24 of the Revised Penal Code. 

I would like to mention Commissioners Colayco, 

qumo, egalado, Natividad and Azcuna as coauthors. 

MR. DA VIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 


MS. AQUINO. Does this power include the power to 
order medical treatment for the detainee? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. But does this exclude the power to 
release or to inquire into the legality of the detention 
which essentially pertains to the writ of habeas corpus? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Yes. It will be the Supreme Court 
that will decide those cases. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President, in that connection, I do 
not see any legal bar for the Human Rights Commission 
to inquire into the legality of detention. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Without finally deciding on it. 

MR. FOZ. Yes. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I see. 

MR. FOZ. But the commission can really inquire 
as to when it can investigate and then it inquires into all 
the aspects of the detention. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I agree. That will be part of its 
investigative power, and will form also part of its rec- 
ommendation to the appropriate court or body or 
officer. 


nature ^ Propose an amendment in 

ment shouW^vf”^^^ amendment? The ame 

eluding ” sn X 9 after the word ‘ 

PREVENTIVE^EASURE^^XNn^^ 

aid services ” ^^"^^^RES AND provisions for le 




ulc cunenameni, 


CommisItne^David?? amendmer 

MR. Davide 

eluding PREVFmti\ 7^ amendment will now re 

af. P-isi 

MS. AOUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT ■ ■ 
nized. ’ ^mmissioner Aquino is 


record. Slh” 

visitation by counsel and relative? *° ' 


MR. NOLLEDO. Certainly. 


MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 

MR. PADILLA. I heard the phrase “PREVENTIVE 
MEASURES” and reference was made to Article 24 of 
the Revised Penal Code. These are preventive measures 
that are not considered penalties. They have no refer- 
ence whatever. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I used the word “alignment” upon 
suggestion of Commissioner Regalado. I did not say that 
I am applying the provisions of that article. They are 
only similar to each other. Madam President. 

MR. PADILLA. And we should not forget. Madam 
President, that a person who has been arrested or de- 
tained but is not judicially charged must be released 
within five working days. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. During the interpellations, I 
brought up the matter of this power to enjoin because 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


771 


I believe in the statement of my coproponent that this is 
necessary to implement the program of protection of 
human rights. Suppose there is a claim that the com- 
plainant is being harassed. Will this amendment we are 
proposing cover this situation where the commission, 
with the help of the local police, enjoin the parties from 
continuing the harassment of the complainant? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not being an adjudicative function, 

I say yes. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 

MS. AQUINO. Just one clarification. Will this power 
have to arise necessarily from an adversarial procedure? 

MR. NOLLEDO. No. 

MS. AQUINO. In which case, they will have to be 
bound by the rigid requirements of substantive and pro- 
cedural due process which, I submit, should not saddle 
the function and the power of this commission. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Not necessarily. Madam President. 
I would like to know the reaction of the committee. 

MR. FOZ. The committee accepts the amendment, 
Madam President. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, we accept the 
amendment including the answers of Commissioner 
Nolledo. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Sarmiento 
mean that Commissioner Nolledo’s answers will be in- 
cluded in the amendment? 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, as part of our 
record, to clarify. 

May we ask the proponent to read the amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Nolledo is recog- 
nized. 

MR. NOLLEDO. “Provide appropriate legal measures 
for the protection of human rights of all persons within 
the Philippines, including provisions for PREVENTIVE 
RELIEF AS WELL AS for legal aid services for indigent 
persons, et cetera.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

MR. NOLLEDO. May I ask Commissioner Davide, 
who amended my amendment, to please read my 
amendment as amended by him? 


MR. DAVIDE. On line 9, after the word “including,” 
insert the phrase “PREVENTIVE MEASURES AND” so 
that the entire line wiU read: “including PREVENTIVE 
MEASURES AND provisions for legal aid services for 
indigent.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Thank you. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment which has been accepted by the 
committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we are now ready to 
vote on paragraph (3) as amended. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. There are still amendments on page 2, 
paragraph (3), which we would like to introduce. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide will please 
proceed. 

MR. DAVIDE. On line 9, before “including,” insert 
the following: “AS WELL AS CITIZENS OF THE 
PHILIPPINES RESIDING ABROAD.” This was taken 
up yesterday especially in the light of the interpellation 
by Commissioner Rama. So this will then be jointly 
sponsored by both of us. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted. 

Is there any objection to this proposed amendment? 

Commissioner Colay co is recognized. 

MR. COLAYCO. Clarificatory question. Madam 
President. How do we expect the commission to give 
protection to people outside our country? 

MR. DAVIDE. The commission may avail of our 
diplomatic and consular offices to give immediate 
assistance to groups of Filipinos who are victims of 
violations of human rights and apply for the necessary 
remedy with the proper forum in said areas. 

MR. COLAYCO. I am not too enthusiastic about 
that particular section. 

MR. DAVIDE. There are many Filipinos, especially 
in the Middle East, who are victims of violations of 
human rights, but we are not providing any assistance. 
So perhaps the commission can expand its services even 
to FiUpinos residing abroad. 


772 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, I would like to support 
this proposal very much because we have reports of 
many Filipino maids and dancers and other Filipinos 
working abroad who need legal assistance. They have no 
place to go, and when they go to our embassy, they are 
not given assistance and they come back home, some 
mentally ill. 

MR. PADILLA. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Padilla is recog- 
nized. 


MR. PADILLA Why do we not just simplify Une 8 
to read; “human rights of ALL FILIPINO CITIZENS”? 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 


comes to persons within the 
nmppmes, we should not distinguish between Filipinos 
Md non-Filipinos, but when it comes to persons abroad, 
me mantle of protection must be only to Filipino 
citizens, and that is the reason why we have to adopt a 
separate concept - to those in the Philippines, all the 
people, outside the Philippines, only the FUipinos. 

objection to the 

has ^®ndnient of Commissioner Davide which 

Chair committee? (Silence) The 

s none, the amendment is approved. 

^ paragraph, lines 9 and 

“for indiBPtit^^^^^^^^’ ^ like to change the words 

PWVILErPn’”^^?”®” P^^se “TO THE UNDER- 

attention must ^ 

indigent npror^ should not just be to the 

afford the those who may be able to 

must be given^thT^ assistance of private lawyers. They 

the people of the Phmppi^eT^''^'^'' 

MR. FOZ. No, Madam President. 

MR. DAVIDE tv, • • 

proposal will be thp ° i ^ indigent poor under the 

aid. Madam President^^Tn^th^^c by i^e legal 

used the word “unde^ -f Article, we 

amendment to have 

concept of the Article on SocL^TstS. ^ 

MR. FOZ. I am not PYarfUr 
sioner-s amendment, but I just wom“ukVto\SrSal 
LXen™™"" legal aS to fht 


MR. DAVIDE. Yes, free legal aid, because there are 
many underprivileged who cannot afford to pay for 
legal aid services. 

MR. FOZ. But if the Commissioner would change 
“indigent persons” to “UNDERPRIVILEGED” it 
would cover a lot more ground- 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes, that is the intention. After all, we 
have the CLAO to take care of it. 

MR. FOZ. The committee accepts the amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. The committee has accepted the 
amendment. Is there any objection? 

MR. NOLLEDO. Madam President, I object to the 
amendment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner NoUedo is recog- 
nized. 

MR NOLLEDO. Madam President, as I understand it, 
“underprivileged” is broader than “indigent.” There are 
many underprivileged squatters who are engaged in 
profitable business and they can afford to pay the legal 
fees. So I think the committee should stick to the word 
“indigent” as used in the Laurel laws. When we say 
“indigent,” it is almost equivalent to paupers. They have 
no source of livelihood, or what they earn from their 
sources of income will just be sufficient to keep their 
body and soul together. I repeat, “underprivileged” is 
so broad so that the use of it would give advantage to 
those who can easily afford to pay the legal fees. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, line 9 does not say 
“free legal aid services.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. That was the understanding when 
the chairman was asked whether or not it is free legal 
aid services. The chairman answered in the affirmative. 
The word “underprivileged,” Madam President, is really 
broad. One may be underprivileged in the sense of 
political rights; underprivileged in the sense of civil 
rights; or underprivileged in the sense of social rights, et 
cetera. So, I believe that the word “indigent” is appro- 
priate in the provision. I refer to pauper litigants in the 
Rules of Court. When we talk of “underprivileged per- 
sons,” they may be underprivileged in many respects. So 
the word “indigent” should prevail. We submit it to the 
floor for a vote. 

MR. FOZ. Actually, without having a provision like 
this, I think the proposed Commission on Human Rights 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


773 


may provide free legal aid services to the poor. I think 
this provision would really emphasize that the com- 
mission shall be available for legal aid for those whose 
rights are being violated. So this applies, more or less, 
to victims of human rights violations. 

MR. NOLLEDO. Regardless of financial capacity. 
What does Commissioner Bemas say? If he is agreeable 
to the word “underprivileged,” I wiU withdraw my 
objection. 

FR. BERNAS. Legal aid is rather broad, Madam 
President. It does not have to be free. In the case of 
those who can afford, it could involve referrals to 
private practitioners. 

MR. NOLLEDO. So it may be free or not. 

FR. BERNAS. It wiU be free or not. I guess the 
understanding is that when the commission itself gives 
legal aid, it wUl be free. But in the case of people who 
can afford, the commission is also free to give their 
service by referrals. 

MR. NOLLEDO. In that case. Madam President, I 
withdraw my objection. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized, 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just a minor clarification which 
may lead to some amendments. Does the use of the 
words “legal measures” on line 7, page 2, mean that this 
commission wUl recommend to Congress, for example, 
the passage of certain laws? Or are we referring to legal 
measures to be adopted by the commission itself? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I think legal measures would 
include legal assistance and procedures and safeguards 
to ensure that the government would respect human 
rights which the commission would recommend to 
Congress. 

MR. MAAMBONG. That includes the proposal of 
measures to be passed by Congress. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Regarding the words “legal aid 
services,” does it mean that there would be some sort 
of assistance other than by the present Citizen’s Legal 
Assistance Office (CLAO) under the Ministry of Justice? 
Is this another form of assistance other than that given 
by the Ministry of Justice? 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. And that has nothing to do with 
the legal assistance services given by private organiza- 
tions, like CLAO, FLAG or MABINI. 

MR. SARMIENTO. Madam President, these legal aid 
services would cover “providing legal assistance.” And 
this commission would possibly seek the services of 
these human rights organizations for effective legal aid 
services. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Could we properly say that this is 
in addition to the agencies now existing under the Minis- 
try of Justice and in coordination with private legal 
assistance offices? 

MR. SARMIENTO. The Commissioner is correct. 
Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. In addition, the Integrated Bar of 
the Philippines has been giving its own legal aid. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Thank you. Madam President. I 
have no amendment. 

REV. RIGOS. I ask that Commissioner Natividad be 
recognized for an anterior amendment on page 2, 
paragraph (2). 

THE PRESIDENT. The same section — Section 2. 

Commissioner Natividad is recognized. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I would like to propose a separate 
paragraph (3) after paragraph (2) which reads: “EXER- 
CISE VISITORIAL POWERS OVER ANY JAIL, 
PRISON OR DETENTION FACILITY.” I would like to 
explain with the indulgence of the committee. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Natividad may 
proceed. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. I feel that motu proprio, or upon 
the complaint of a citizen or a person, the commission 
should have the power to visit these jails, prisons and 
any detention facility because I think most human 
rights violations happen in these facilities. It will be a 
ray of hope to those who are detained in these facilities, 
if they know that at any moment this commission may 
be coming for a visit and will witness the condition 
under which they are being detained. So even without a 
complaint, I would like to see that this commission can 
motu proprio visit these detention facilities and deter- 
mine for itself if there is any violation of human rights 
being committed. 

MR. SARMIENTO. The amendment which is a new 
paragraph is accepted, Madam President. 


774 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Natividad 
please restate the whole amendment so that we can put 
it to a vote? 

MR NATIVIDAD. The new paragraph (3) reads: 
“EXERCISE VISITORIAL POWERS OVER ANY 
JAIL, PRISON OR DETENTION FACILITY.” 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner de Castro is recog- 
nized. 

MR DE CASTRO. May I ask a few questions of the 
proponent? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Gladly, Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Suppose with the visitorial powers 
of the commission it found that the prisoners are living 
in substandard or subhuman conditions, what will the 
commission do? 

MR NATIVIDAD. The commission will be guided by 
its own rules, which will determine whether or not any 
situation constitutes a violation of human rights. And if 
the situation constitutes a violation of human rights, 
then the commission has to follow its own rules and 
regulations. 

MR. DE CASTRO. I mean, suppose the commission 
ound out that the jail facilities are in subhuman condi- 

^ referring to the rules; 

the thmg is what it will do. 

n^^ SARMIENTO. Madam President, I think that 
w e covered by the new paragraph (4) which provides 
or egal measures for the protection of human rights. 

Cv^TRO. Will the commission investigate 
the which handles the jail facilities, if 

facilities are in subhuman 


they are being kept in a solitary cell over an extended 
period of time. And to my own perception, these are 
the instances where they should be interested in. A sur- 
prise visit, for example, will help the commission find 
out that there are many people in solitary cells. We have 
reports that people who are kept in solitary cells over a 
long period of time, say months or years, lose then- 
power to speak. 

Madam President, these are the practices which I 
perceive will be unearthed if this commission has the 
visitorial powers over these detention facilities. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, I do not quest- 
ion those who are in solitary confinement and so on. 
W’hat I ask about is the subhuman conditions of the jail 
facilities. The Commissioner had been in the police 
service for some time. He had investigated and inspected 
all these jail facilities and had made urgent reports for 
their reform, construction or improvement. But until 
now, nothing has happened. So what are our reports 
for? 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, I agree with the Commis- 
sioner. We are always reporting these to higher authori- 
ties, but in this new Constitution, I remember in our 
discussion with Father Bemas that we had these provi- 
sions approved that in these instances where the condi- 
tions in jails are subhuman, these may constitute 
unusual and inhuman punishment, subject to abatement 
by the State. And the remedy is wide open now. We are, 
therefore, for educational measures or for representa- 
tions to Congress to give more appropriations for the 
detention facilities. Madam President. 

MR. DE CASTRO. Madam President, if this commis- 
sion will go to all the jails in Metro Manila, it will find 
out that these are all in subhuman conditions. The 
prisoners are sleeping on the cement floor without mat, 
without anything, and yet the jail authorities, and even 
the city authorities, could not do anything because they 
do not have the funds. 

Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. Yes, Madam President. 

“We^av^^ CASTRO. Suppose the police officer sa 

them th(» money so we can prov 

them the human conditions.” 


J^ATIVIDAD. That is their defense, and 
would be taken into consideration. 


MR DE CASTRO. It is not a defense, it is a reality. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. Yes, that is why it is a complete 
defense for lack of funds. But I think the commission 
will be more mterested in whether people in jail are 
being tortured ; whether there is a complainant; whether 


THE PRESIDENT. We now proceed to vote on the 
amendment that has been accepted by the committee, 
which reads: “EXERCISE VISITORIAL POWERS 

OVER JAIL, PRISON OR DETENTION FACILITY.” 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Rama be recognized. 

the PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rama is recog- 
nized. 

MR. RAMA. My amendment was already stated by 
Commissioner Davide. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


775 


REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, may I join 
Commissioner Davide in this amendment on overseas 
labor. I have this as one of my amendments, and the 
other one will be an amendment to line 12, paragraph 
(4) which now becomes paragraph (5). After the sen- 
tence “Establish a continuing program of education and 
information to propagate the primacy of human rights,” 
add the following: “UNDERTAKE RESEARCH ON 
PEACE, DEMILITARIZATION, NONVIOLENT STRA- 
TEGIES, AND RELATED PROBLEM AREAS.” May I 
give the reason for this amendment? 

THE PRESIDENT. The Commissioner will please 
proceed. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President, the 
present functions focus on investigative and recom- 
mendatory powers given to tire commission which 
would include situationers and statistics on human 
rights violations, which is a short-term strategy. The 
policy research aspect here would include the medium- 
to long-term program wliich will undertake research on 
means to attaining national and international peace, 
studying ways of working towards the goal of respect 
for all the rights of people without distinction to race, 
sex, language, religion or philosophical conviction, at- 
tending to factors which lead to violence, ethnic, racial 
or religious discrimination including colonialism and 
neocolonialism; and expanding programs on rehabiUta- 
tiofl of torture victims. This would, therefore, expand 
the tools of legal measures now employed to research 
and would lead to more continuing education and 
more use of media in achieving the ends of the commis- 
sion. 

FR. BERN AS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERN AS. The committee accepts the spirit of 
the amendment but would like to simplify matters by 
inserting between “of” and “education ” on line 12, the 
word RESEARCH, so lines 12 to 13 would read: 
“Establish a continuing program of RESEARCH 
education and information to propagate the primacy 
of human rights.” This is with the understanding that 
the research, education and information program covers 
the whole gamut of the things Commissioner Rosario 
Braid has enumerated. 

THE PRESIDENT. Does Commissioner Rosario 
Braid accept the amendment? 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I accept the amendment as 
long as I have it on record. 

I have another amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Let us have the amendment 
approved first. 

Is there any objection to the proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Rosario Braid which has been accepted 
by the committee? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment, as amended, is approved. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. May I read my other amend- 
ment: “THE CONGRESS MAY EXPAND THE SCOPE 
OF THE COMMISSION TO INCLUDE CONCERNS 
STATED IN THE BILL OF RIGHTS AND OTHER 
SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND CULTURAL RIGHTS, 
SHALL IDENTIFY CAUSES AND CONSEQUENCES 
OF VIOLATIONS OF THESE RIGHTS AND ESTA- 
BLISH APPROPRIATE MECHANISMS AND PRO- 
GRAMS THAT SHALL PROMOTE THESE RIGHTS.” 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. I think we would again accept the 
spirit of the amendment with the understanding that all 
those are covered by the present paragraph (5), which is 
now paragraph (6): “Perform such other duties and 
functions as may be fixed by law.” 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I accept. Madam President, 
as long as it is read into the record for the purpose of 
future legislation. 

Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, I thought I would like 
to support the main idea behind some of the previous 
remarks of Commissioner Rosario Braid with respect to 
the international treaty obligations of the Philippines in 
the field of human rights. Commissioner Garcia had 
earlier referred several times to our intemational treaty 
obligations under various United Nations covenants, the 
latest of which are the Intemational Covenant on Civil 
and Political Rights and the Intemational Covenant on 
Economic and Social Rights, and, of course, right now 
the Philippine government is a respondent in various 
forums on human rights within the United Nations 
system. 

Will the committee, in the spirit of the remarks earlier 
made by Commissioner Rosario Braid, therefore, con- 
sider just one more Junction for the Human Rights 
Commission? I propose that before paragraph (5), on 
line 14, we insert the following: “MONITOR FOR THE 
PHILIPPINE GOVERNMENT COMPLIANCE WITH 
INTERNATIONAL TREATY OBLIGATIONS ON 
HUMAN RIGHTS,” which means that the Human 


776 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


Rights Commission then becomes the focal point for the 
efforts of the Philippine government in seeing to it that 
Congress enacts the proper laws by way of implement- 
ing our treaty obligations, and in the exercise of this 
function it may actually call upon other agencies of the 
government, especially the diplomatic service, to render 
support to the commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Will Commissioner Ople please 
restate his proposed amendment? 


MR. OPLE. The amendment, which would now 
become Section 5, reads; “MONITOR FOR THE PHIl^ 
IPPINE GOVERNMENT COMPLIANCE WITH INTER- 
NATIONAL TREATY OBLIGATIONS ON HUMAN 
RIGHTS.” This is a monitoring function, but based on 
experience, we know how difficult it is to respond to 
these international obligations. Very often, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs relies mainly on the Ministry of 
National Defense to assemble the information that we 
submit to the various international fora. 


MR. GARCIA. The amendment can be accepted by 
the committee as long as it is understood that it is an 
independent monitoring of the compliance of the Philip- 
pine government to international standards which, in 
fact, if I understand it correctly, is being done right now 
by independent private organizations, like the Task 
Force Detainees and other such organizations. 


MR. OPLE. Yes. What I am saying is that this is ; 
more congenial focal point for the Philippine govern 
ment especially for private organizations that do coUa 
oi?k^ ^ putting together the information that w( 
? uitemationai fora including the human right; 
mmissions in Geneva and other bodies in specializec 

Committee of AppUcation oi 
whirVi^ ^1 International Labor Organization 

ic f *u ^ ^®U6va SO that this monitoring functior 

on Humi mandate of the Commissioi 


ac^maW^^^i^'i ^ accept. I think that would 
national cirdet w^ould%''^^‘^^H^^^’ ^ ^ 

ence^^^m^nJ*^^^ happens based on our exp 

Shts i^ th^PhT"''"^ concerning hur 

S sti^ of Nai^ generally referred to 

SHt takes a long t 

^derenlnt if we buUd 

R^h^rcommi function into the Hur 

tiof will be Zch bitto 


MR GARCIA. Yes, I think so. Madam President. 
THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 


MR SARMIENTO. The amendment is accepted. 
Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Ople which has 
been accepted by the committee? 

MR OPLE. Commissioner Rosario Braid and I are the 
sponsors of this amendment. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Tan is recognized. 

SR. TAN. Madam President, I just want to make an 
observation. 

If I understand it correctly, when Commissioner 
Sarmiento was explaining the spirit and the origin of 
this proposed commission, it was supposed to be a 
modest commission which should give immediate relief 
and action on cases of human rights violations especially 
for the “indigent” which was changed to “underprivi- 
leged.” But now we are becoming immodest. We have 
research, we have cultural rights, and now we have to 
take care of international treaties on human rights. I am 
just afraid that the commission will have no time to take 
care of the individual violations of human rights. 

MR. OPLE. I appreciate the point made by Commis- 
sioner Tan, which is a very good precaution about the 
Human Rights Commission getting overextended right 
from the start. But I think the research function already 
built into the commission is very compatible with this 
monitoring function, and I think this really means that 
three or four people combined into a modest section 
can take care of this monitoring function with highly 
disproportionate benefits to the country. Madam 
President. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Rosario Braid is 
recognized. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. If I may add to what Com- 
missioner Ople said, these functions could be linked or 
related to existing research institutions. A small unit 
within the commission can identify the problem areas 
and can link these areas as concerns of existing research 
institutions, like the UP. So it really will not mean con- 
siderable overhead costs. They will monitor and identify 
the problem areas and suggest them for research by 
other more established research bodies. 

Thank you. 

MS. AQUINO. Madam President, just one comment. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Aquino is recog- 
nized. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


777 


MS. AQUINO. After all the amendments have been 
approved and with the very liberal posture of the com- 
mittee in terms of the spiritual endowments of the 
article, do we still want to be confined to the definition 
of this commission as an administrative body? Surely, 
we must provide some kind of a conceptual cohesion 
between the powers and the nature of the commission. 

MR SARMIENTO. I think Commissioner Aquino is 
now asking us about the nature of the Commission on 
Human Rights because previously we said it was purely 
an administrative body. But because of its new func- 
tions, it has acquired a new feature, a new character, so 
it is now a quasi-judicial body. 

MS. AQUINO. So this would necessarily require a 
readjustment in the functions and the concepts of the 
commission. 

MR SARMIENTO. Madam President, considering the 
adjustments we made, the new powers we added, the 
commission will no longer be a purely administrative 
body; it will be a quasi-judicial body. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. Madam President. 

MR. OPLE. Madam President, a quasi-judicial body 
still belongs to the genus of administrative bodies. 

Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. We are now ready to vote on this 
Ople amendment which has been accepted by the com- 
mittee. 

Is there any objection? (Silence) The Chair hears 
none; the amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we ask that Commis- 
sioner Da vide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR DAVIDE. Thank you. Madam President. The 
first amendment is on the original Section 2 (5), line 
13, which is to substitute the word “propagate” with 
“ENHANCE.” 

THE PRESIDENT. What does the committee say? 

MR SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR. DAVIDE. Still on Section 2, but before para- 
graph (5), I propose to insert the following: “REC- 
OMMEND TO CONGRESS EFFECTIVE MEASURES 
TO PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOR COM- 


PENSATION TO VICTIMS, OR THEIR FAMILIES, OF 
VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

MR. NOLLEDO. Anterior amendment. Madam 
President. I think that should be the last section as 
recommended by Commissioner Monsod, if the Com- 
missioner would note a while ago. 

MR DAVIDE. No, this is not the last section; this is 
entirely different. The proposal of Commissioner 
Monsod was the possibility of extending the authority 
of the commission to include practically all kinds of 
violations of human rights, not just civil and political 
rights. But this is among the functions; “RECOM- 
MEND TO CONGRESS EFFECTIVE MEASURES TO 
PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOR COMPENSA- 
TION TO VICTIMS, OR THEIR FAMILIES, OF 
VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

FR. BERNAS. Could we have the amendment again? 

I think we have that in the Bill of Rights. 

MR. DAVIDE. There is, but the one in the Article on 
Bill of Rights is for victims of tortures and similar 
practices. This one now is broader. 

FR. BERNAS. Could we have the amendment again. 

MR. DAVIDE. It reads: “RECOMMEND TO CON- 
GRESS EFFECTIVE MEASURES TO PROMOTE 
HUMAN RIGHTS AND FOR COMPENSATION TO 
VICTIMS, OR THEIR FAMILIES, OF VIOLATIONS 
OF HUMiu^ RIGHTS.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. I thought, in my interpellation on 
the original Section 2 (3), the answer of Commissioner 
Sarmiento was that the words “provide appropriate legal 
measures” cover recommendations to Congress of such 
laws which may be promulgated. Why are we providing 
this now, if it is already covered by paragraph (3)? 

MR. SARMIENTO. I recall, in answer to Commis- 
sioner Maambong’s question yesterday, that I said legal 
measures would cover indemnification of victims of 
human rights violations. So, possibly, we can have a 
reformulation of these paragraphs to accommodate the 
amendment of Commissioner Davide for more clarity. 

FR. BERNAS. Would the Commissioner have any 
problem with this amendment? It makes clearer the 
functional recommendation. 


778 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


MR. MAAMBONG. I would not have, if it makes 
clearer the functional recommendation. I was thinking 
that probably the committee, as suggested by Com- 
missioner Sarmiento, could accommodate the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide right in the original 
paragraph (3), which is now paragraph (4), so that we 
do not have to put in a new paragraph. If it cannot be 
done, then I have no objection to this amendment. 

FR. BERNAS. The paragraph, perhaps, will get very 
long. I just have one question of Commissioner Davide 
regarding compensation. 

MR DAVIDE. It reads “FOR COMPENSATION TO 
VICTIMS,” which means that the commission will rec- 
ommend to Congress measures to compensate the 
victims. 

FR. BERNAS. But it will not fix the compensation. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, it will only recommend. So the 
authority of the commission would necessarily include 
some remedial measures by way of recommendation for 
necessary legislation to compensate victims of human 
nghts violations. 


MR. NATIVIDAD. Madam President. 
nize^^ president. Commissioner Natividad is recog 

toon^ queltion?^^^’ Commissioner Davide yieh 

MR. DAVIDE. Gladly, Madam President. 

Ar^r^ natividad. I have the impression that in th( 
a Rights we have already provided fo 

DPMcafirf ^ 1 Congress to provide for a victim com 
human^ghts^ victims of violations o 

on the Madam President. The provisio 

tortures and Rights is limited to victims c 

es and other simUar practices. 

rights, MldliypJ^^dent^ violations of huma 

MR. davide Ypc th 

but the proposal i<! hi ^^"^an rights violationi 

accompUshed while tortures there may b 

wniie a person is under detention. 

Prerident^b^iuletStend question, Madar 

Commissioner Davlde's propoK T * 

“TRP r'mvyfiv>fTccTr\xT that it would read 

rOVERSfFNT^q*^v^r?II^^^^ ADMINISTER TH 
ScaY ^ VICTIM COMPENSATION SYJ 

TEM, rather than for the commission to just recon 


mend now a law with regard to the compensation of 
victims of human rights violations. I propose that the 
commission be the one to administer the payment of 
victim compensation, because I already presuppose in 
my mind that a direction for Congress to provide for 
such a law is already in the Article on Bill of Rights. 
And, therefore, in this article it is much better to make 
one step farther by providing that the commission 
should be the one to administer the victim compensa- 
tion system to strengthen its function as the human 
rights enforcer of our country. But if it is the pleasure 
of the commission that we now recommend a new 
victim compensation system, I will not insist on this 
amendment. I thought that we are ready. 

Madam President, the better step would be to provide 
that any victim compensation system shall be adminis- 
tered by the commission so that it will reinforce its 
functions. It will deal directly with the victims of 
human rights violations and pay them in accordance 
with the availability of funds and with the rules that it 
might promulgate. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Bemas is recog- 
nized. 

FR. BERNAS. Since it is Congress which will provide 
for the compensation, together with the system of 
compensation, I think we would rather leave it to 
Congress to decide how this victim compensation 
system is to be administered. At any rate, if Congress 
decides that it should be administered by this commis- 
sion, it can be given to this commission. And Congress 
may think of some other more effective ways. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. My interest here is that presently, 
the Ministry of National Defense and the Philippine 
Constabulary pay the compensation for victims of 
human rights violations. There is this provision in the 
appropriations law, so I am worried by the fact that 
even with this provision in the article, if we do not make 
a clear message or signal to the incoming Congress, it 
might give this function to the Ministry of National 
Defense. And I do not see this schematic relationship. 
It should be to this commission because I do not want 
to leave the gap open, whereby we amass the responsi- 
bilities to deal with the problem of human rights viola- 
tions and then in the final act of helping them materially 
and financially. Congress might opt to give it to the 
Ministry of National Defense. So if the committee 
agrees, we should state clearly that this functional area 
should belong to the functions and responsibilities that 
we reserve for the Commission on Human Rights. 

MR DAVIDE. Madam President, may I say that the 
recommendation itself for such compensation may 
provide that the compensation to be appropriated by 
Congress shall be handled by the commission itself. I 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


779 


think that would be the most logical step for any such 
recommendation to be made by the commission. 

MR. NATIVIDAD. How would Commissioner Davide 
word it now. Madam President? 

MR. DAVIDE. It is built into the proposed power: 
“RECOMMEND TO CONGRESS EFFECTIVE 
MEASURES TO PROMOTE HUMAN RIGHTS AND 
FOR COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS, OR THEIR 
FAMILIES, OF VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS.” 
So the very recommendation may already contain how 
these funds are to be kept and who shall distribute the 
funds to the victims of human rights violations. 

MR- NATIVIDAD. It does not say so in that state- 
ment, Madam President. 

MR- DAVIDE. Tliat is why in the recommendation 
itself the commission may, otherwise we will also be 
broadening the power of the commission, include the 
function of a treasurer. I think it would be best that we 
leave or we grant greater flexibility to Congress as to 
how the compensation which may be legislated shall be 
distributed or allotted. I am sure that the recommenda- 
tion itself will contain, for instance, who are the bene- 
ficiaries, taking into account already the discovery of 
violations of human rights — the victims of violations of 
human rights. So the report, in the nature of a recom- 
mendation, will even enumerate how much funds 
should be allotted and to whom these funds shall be 
given. 

FR. BERNAS. It seems to me. Madam President, that 
it is an administrative detail which we need not put m 
here and which can be provided for by the law itself 
providing for compensation. 

MR- NATIVIDAD. I submit. I just wanted to make 
clear that it is best that the commission handle this 
function. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, before Commis- 
sioner Davide returns to his seat, may I be allowed to go 
back to his amendment on page 2, line 13, which states 
“information to enhance the primacy of human rights.” 
I propose to add after “enhance,” “RESPECT FOR.” 

MR- DAVIDE. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to that 
modification? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the 
amendment is approved. 

MR. JAMIR. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Jamir is recog- 
nized. 


MR. JAMIR. May I propose an amendment to the last 
amendment of Commissioner Davide. 

MR DAVIDE. That would not be the last; that 
would be the latest. 

MR. JAMIR. I mean, the current one. I propose to 
substitute the last three words “OF HUMAN RIGHTS” 
with the word “THEREOF,” because there are two 
“HUMAN RIGHTS” already: “TO PROMOTE HUMAN 
RIGHTS AND FOR COMPENSATION TO VICTIMS, 
AND THEIR FAMILIES, OF VIOLATIONS OF 
HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

MR. DAVIDE. No, Madam President, because 
“THEREOF” would refer to just “HUMAN RIGHTS,” 
not to compensation to victims of violations of human 
rights. These are compensations to victims of violations 
of human rights. If we delete that phrase and substitute 
it with “THEREOF,” it would have no sense because 
the first is promotion of human rights, and the latter 
is compensation to victims of violations of human 
rights. 

MR JAMIR. But what is being violated is human 
rights, so they are being compensated for that. 

MR. DAVIDE. The compensation would be given to 
the victims or the families. 

MR. JAMIR. Yes, but they will be compensated by 
reason of the violation. 

MR DAVIDE Yes, by reason of the violation. That 
is why we have to stick to “VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN 
RIGHTS” because at the start of the proposed para- 
graph we do not mention “of violations of human 
rights.” So we cannot substitute “THEREOF” with 
“OF HUMAN RIGHTS.” 

MR JAMIR. I am just suggesting that as an amend- 
ment. If the Commissioner does not accept, I will not 
press for it. 

MR. DAVIDE. Thank you. 

THE PRESIDENT. May we ha/e a vote now? 

Commissioner Monsod is recognized. 

MR MONSOD. May I just ask a question. Would the 
coverage of the human rights violations include viola- 
tions by private parties? 

MR. DAVIDE. All kinds of violations pursuant to 
paragraph (1 ) of this section. 

MR. MONSOD. Yes. So here we are saying that 
regardless of who perpetrated it, the victims would be 


780 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


entitled to a compensation under the Commissioner’s 
amendments. 

MR. DAVIDE. That would be subject to the recom- 
mendation of the Human Rights Commission. I think 
the Human Rights Commission will have to determine 
also the priority of what kind of violation should be 
subject to a recommendation of adequate compensation 
by Congress. 

FR. BERNAS. In other words, the compensation 
need not come from the government? 


MR. SARMIENTO. It is accepted, Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection? (Silence) 
The Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. There are other amendinents. Madam 
President, so we ask that Commissioner Gascon be 
recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Gascon is recog- 
nized. 


MR. DAVIDE. That is correct. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. But the law can require the guilty 
party to pay the compensation. 

MR DAVIDE. Yes. 


MR MONSOD. So this is not corresponding stricth 
to the section in the Article on Bill of Rights. 

provision on the Article on Bil 
officers. ^ offenses committed by public 


MR GASCON. I have some proposed additional 
paragraph to the powers of the Human Rights Commis- 
sion. The first is to read: “TO GRANT IMMUNITY 
FROM PROSECUTION TO ANY PERSON WHOSE 
TESTIMONY OR WHOSE POSSESSION OF DOCU- 
MENTS OR OTHER EVIDENCE IS NECESSARY OR 
CONVENIENT TO DETERMINE THE TRUTH IN 
ANY INVESTIGATION CONDUCTED BY IT OR 
UNDER ITS AUTHORITY.” 

MR SARMIENTO. One question. Madam President. 
That power is one of the powers of the existing Pres- 
idential Committee on Human Rights, am I correct? 


tha^^thw?^f ^ wanted to clari 

provisions ^ correspondence between the tv 


MR. GASCON. Yes, Madam President. In fact, it is a 
verbatim statement from the existing executive order 
creating the Presidential Committee on Human Rights. 


if^a^ovenfml 7^” “ 

public officers th^lT the for offenses 

from the pubhc officers theS™^^ can also coll. 

MR MONSOD. Yes. Thank you, Madam Preside] 

his amendn^nUo^hat''^^ Commissioner Davide rest, 
eut so that we can put it to a vote? 

paragraph ^"'cdiately preceding the origi 

OMMENd TO c^ 14, insert: “R1 

TO PROMOTE effective MEASUR 

pensa?ioS^^o"vr™ 

OF VIOLATTONq THEIR FAMILf 

semicolon (;). ^ HUMAN RIGHTS,” and 

THE PRESIDENT Th- 

committee. ’ accepted by 

none; the am“’dmemt‘appro^^^^ The Chair he 

wouW bf am>'thw p'mgra^h to fit 
just approved. It S 
AND EMPLOYEES IN ACCORDANCE 
and a semicolon (;). 


MR DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I request that the consideration 
of the Commissioner’s amendment be deferred because 
I have a proposal to the effect that until Congress shall 
provide otherwise, the Presidential Committee on 
Human Rights shall continue to exercise its functions in 
addition to the rights conferred in this new provision. 

FR. BERNAS. I think. Madam President, the purpose 
of this amendment is to enshrine the power in the 
Constitution. 

M R DAVIDE. To institutionalize this power? 

FR. BERNAS. That is right, so that even if the exist- 
ing executive order is repealed, the power will continue. 

MR. DAVIDE. There will be no conflict. 

MR GASCON. May I know what is the position of 
the committee. 

MR SARMIENTO. The amendment is accepted, 
Madam President. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


781 


THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this 
proposed amendment of Commissioner Gascon which 
has been accepted by the committee? (Silence) The 
Chair hears none; the amendment is approved. 

MR GASCON. Another proposed power which is 
also included at present in Executive Order No. 8, creat- 
ing the Presidential Committee on Human Rights, is: 
“TO CALL UPON ANY MINISTRY, BUREAU, OF- 
FICE OR AGENCY FOR ASSISTANCE WHICH 
SHALL FORTHWITH BE FURNISHED OR ACCOM- 
PLISHED BY SUCH GOVERNMENT UNIT.” 

MR SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

MR DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. May I introduce an amendment to add 
after “ASSISTANCE” the following: “IN THE EXER- 
CISE OF ITS FUNCTIONS.” 

MR SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. The amendment has been ac- 
cepted. 

Is there any objection to this proposed amendment 
by Commissioner Gascon as amended by Commissioner 
Davide? (Silence) The Chair hears none; the amend- 
ment, as amended, is approved. 

Commissioner Rodrigo is recognized. 

MR. RODRIGO. The President of the Philippines has 
control over all ministries, bureaus and offices. We are 
creating a commission which is an island in itself, 
separate from the President. This is an exception from 
that. And now we are derogating from this power of 
control of the President over ministries, bureaus and 
offices, and transferring part of that power to this 
commission. Am I correct. Madam President? 

MR. GASCON. No, that is not it. It is just in the 
exercise of its function. It may be necessary for the 
commission to seek assistance from other ministries or 
agencies or bureaus but it is not taking power from the 
President. 

MR. RODRIGO. Suppose the ministry or bureau does 
not comply with the request? 

MR. GASCON. From my point of view, in the exer- 
cise of the powers of the commission, it should comply 
so that the advocacy for and protection of human rights 
will be assured. 

MR. RODRIGO. But suppose the bureau director 
does not comply and says: “Well, we are under the 


President. Let the President order us.” What can the 
commission do? Can it compel? 

MR SARMIENTO. I think the Commissioner is 
correct. Madam President. 

FR. BERNAS. May I offer something else. We give 
power to the commission, but then the President has a 
right to refuse in case the bureau or ministry feels that 
it should not be doing it. And then, if the President says 
it should not do it, that is the end of it. 

MR RODRIGO. That is the end of it; the commis- 
sion cannot compel. 

FR. BERNAS. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. GASCON. As it is written now, my proposal is 
the power to call upon agencies, ministries, bureaus, et 
cetera^to assist. 

FR. BERNAS. On the understanding that this can be 
countermanded by the President. 

MR. GASCON. Yes, Madam President. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR MAAMBONG. Maybe this is a parallel provision 
in the Article on Commission on Elections, where it 
mentions “deputized, with the concurrence of the 
President,” and this would be more in line with the 
statement of Commissioner Rodrigo. So I should suggest 
to Commissioner Gascon that probably in order not to 
encounter constitutional roadblocks, we could adopt 
some form of a terminology as this one: “deputize, with 
the concurrence of the President or authorize, with the 
concurrence of the President.” 

MR. GASCON. The committee has already accepted 
my amendment, and I think the suggestion of the Com- 
missioner is within the jurisdiction of the committee 
now. 

MR. SARMIENTO. We are willing to accommodate 
the amendment of Commissioner Maambong for 
harmony. 

MR. MAAMBONG. It is not an amendment. It is just 
a suggestion so that we can align it with the provision in 
the Commission on Elections where there is concurrence 
by the President. 

MR. GASCON. So it shall read: “TO CALL UPON, 
WITH THE CONCURRENCE OF THE PRESIDENT, 
ANY MINISTRY, BUREAU . . .” 


782 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


FR. BERNAS. Would it not be more effective if we 
just say: “SUBJECT TO A COUNTERMAND ORDER 
OF THE PRESIDENT”? 

MR. MAAMBONG. It will amount to the same thing. 

FR. BERNAS. In other woras, no prior concurrence 
of the President is needed. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Yes, as long as there is presiden- 
tial involvement so that we can do away with the 
objection of Commissioner Rodrigo that the proposed 
power might be in derogation of the powers of the 
President. At least, the President should know one way 
or the other. 

MR. GASCON. May I ask the committee how it is 
reworded based on the comments of Commissioner 
Rodrigo. 


“PROVIDED THAT THE 
PRESIDENT MAY COUNTERMAND.” We want to 
prese^e the control of the President over all executive 
agencies. On the other hand, we also do not want to 
S r commission. So, if the President feels that 
wnat the commission is asking should not be done, then 

requ^ necessary order to countermand the 


UNIT, SUBJECT TO REFUSAL BY THE PRES- 
IDENT.” 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, it is a fact that right 
now we have such a law. So it could be adequately 
provided by law, but if there is a need to institutionalize 
this particular power, can we not just simply say: RE- 
QUEST THE ASSISTANCE OF ANY MINISTRY, 
OFFICE OR AGENCY IN THE EXERCISE OF ITS 
FUNCTIONS? It may be a request, but I am sure that 
no agency will reject or decline. 

M R GASCON. So we will delete the proposal “SUB- 
JECT TO.” 


MR. DAVIDE. We delete “REQUEST” and 
“AGENCY.” 

FR. BERNAS. Then the understanding is that that 
request can be declined. 

MR. GASCON. What is the position of the committee 
which has already accepted my amendment? 

FR. BERNAS. I think we can rely on the prestige of 
the commission, and also it would be politically costly 
for the President to decline the request of the commis- 
sion. 


concept, I have no difficul 

sTem ^ “COUNTERMAND” does n> 

ommend snm” committee please re 

ommend some other word? 

PERN AS. We would entertain something bette 

IDFNT’’<5 PTnut” “SUBJECT TO THE PRE 
IDENT S RIGHT OF REFUSAL.” 


Presidenf*^^^^^^' thinking, 

of it. The Committee on Style can take i 

h J™endmem“''^''“ Commissioner Gascon res 
ms amendment as modified. 

MR. GASCON. It would read: “TO CALI UF 
ANY MINISTRY, BUREAU, OFFICE OR AGEh 
FOR ASSISTANCE IN THE EXERCISE OF ITS FU 
TIONS WHICH SHALL FORTHWITH BE FURNISF 
OR ACCOMPLISHED BY SUCH GOVERNMI 


MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I think that 
would be a good compromise considering that, if the 
bureau or office requested will comply, we can presume 
regularity of the performance or the functions of its 
office, which means that it must have the clearance 
from the Office of the President. So I think it is a good 
compromise. 

MR. SARMIENTO. It is accepted. Madam President. 

THE PRESIDENT. Is there any objection to this pro- 
posed amendment, as amended? (Silence) The Chair 
hears none; the amendment, as amended, is approved. 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we ask that Com- 
missioner Davide be recognized. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Davide is recog- 
nized. 

MR. DAVIDE. Madam President, this wUl be a pro- 
posed Section 3, which will read as follows: “THE 
COMMISSION SHALL ENJOY FISCAL AUTONOMY 
AND ITS MEMBERS SHALL BE SUBJECT TO THE 
SAME DISQUALIFICATIONS AND DISABILITIES AS 
MEMBERS OF THE CONSTITUTIONAL COMMIS- 
SIONS.” 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I ask Commissioner Monsod 
to comment on that amendment. 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 27, 1986 


783 


MR. MON SOD. Madam President, we may be limiting 
the members of the commission too much by comparing 
them to members of other constitutional commissions, 
because it is possible that they could also be working 
part-time or they may be of a different discipline. 
Perhaps, we should leave the matter to Congress, just 
like the members of the Monetary Board. But the fiscal 
autonomy is one of the features that the committee 
wants to install. 

FR. BERNAS. Could we consider “FISCAL AU- 
TONOMY” separately? 

MR DAVIDE. I wm delete “FISCAL AUTONOMY.” 

FR. BERNAS. No, consider it separately. 

MR. DAVIDE. Yes. On the matter of the disqualifica- 
tions and disabilities of the members of the commission, 
we are not putting them on the same level with the 
members of the other commissions. It cannot be said 
that they would be serving part-time. We provide for a 
definite term. If we approve Section 1 on a specific 
term — one will serve for seven years, the second for five 
years and the third for three years — this would demand 
full-time work. And if it would not be full-time, we will 
dilute really the special place that we have allocated for 
them. It is a Commission on Human Rights. 

FR. BERNAS. Madam President, could we defer 
consideration of that amendment until after we consider 
Section 1? 

MR DAVIDE. I would be willing to defer because 
there might be some changes in the matter of the 
creation and the composition of the commission. 

THE PRESIDENT. Commissioner Maambong is 
recognized. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Madam President, I just want to 
inquire whether or not that proposed provision on fiscal 
autonomy has been accepted. 

FR. BERNAS. We are not so clear on the status of 
that. We have asked that it be separated from disqualifi- 
cations, and the proponent was agreeable to separating 
it. So it is neither dead nor alive now, 

MR. MAAMBONG. It appears to me that the amend- 
ment of Commissioner Davide is that the commission 
shall enjoy fiscal autonomy. I would just like to advance 
an amendment to that amendment by deleting that 


portion and just say: “THE APPROVED ANNUAL 
APPROPRIATION FOR THE COMMISSION SHALL 
BE AUTOMATICALLY AND REGULARLY. . .” This 
would be in line with the provision on the constitutional 
commissions. But I understand that will be taken up 
later. 

Thank you. 

FR. BERNAS. Perhaps, we can go to the composition 
of the office now, unless we have more to discuss on 
powers and functions. 

MR. NOLLEDO. I think my proposed amendment 
should also pertain to the powers of the commission. 
This should appear as Section 3, Madam President, as 
recommended by Commissioner Monsod when I was 
interpellated by him in connection with my amendment 
authorizing the Commission on Human Rights to fix the 
cases that should fall within its jurisdiction. It reads: 
“CONGRESS SHALL PROVIDE FOR THE CASES OF 
VIOLATIONS OF HUMAN RIGHTS THAT SHOULD 
FALL WITHIN THE EXCLUSIVE JURISDICTION OF 
THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS.” According 
to Commissioner Monsod, there should be some points 
of reference to guide Congress in fixing the jurisdiction 
of the Commission on Human Rights; namely, 1) the 
pertinent provisions of the Article on Bill of Rights, 
2) the pertinent provisions of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights and 3) the answers of the chairman 
and members of the Committee, especially Commis- 
sioners Sarmiento and Garcia, to the interpellations of 
Commissioner Bengzon. According to Commissioner 
Monsod, the other members of the committee apparent- 
ly concurred with the suggestion that there should be a 
provision in the Transitory Provisions that pending 
action on the part of Congress, the presently constituted 
Committee on Human Rights shall continue to 
function. So I would like to know the reaction of the 
committee. 

Thank you, Madam President. 

ADJOURNMENT OF SESSION 

REV. RIGOS. Madam President, we ask that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

the PRESIDENT. Is there any objection that we 
adjourn until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning? 
(Silence) The Chair hears none; the session is adjourned 
until tomorrow at nine-thirty in the morning. 

It was 5:13 p.m. 


I 





aijvojtvs/ . fir- • . a-. . .-,; ,.. j 

• '• S'" - -,0). ■ • ; -• '!‘IA 

_ ■; 1»|.TI ■ i,i;t>S< ■ VA ; - • .; I • • t ( r »/,. , . / »: ( 

* it ik^ i \\H :fi;' Mr . ^ 

V - ' tru. itsiA hr^ )i^' 

^ . Jt' H. ,-c - . • ■ 


,\i 


- tfi 


i»^vv 


J w* 


. ix^wc.,* . .• . 

V f ^ ' A'f M ^ i { 

‘ ^ ^ , * '* V. I 




* •f.ix ttf •!]>.’ |•KJi <S‘ I aU‘ • ‘ 

niri^h'M- / ‘w/irv>V ,’ f,;, .a-; .>‘f 

iHVfttl4 1 ^ l^fiw r|f*.‘« I'J** J,'f : *•' , fli I t r' /jot* If 

' »u,.-,.^ rr. 

'-’ ‘ ••■■ -'«' ' -/■ I.' ''■ -i ... 

Q^un\<^. 1 f Itr . >■}^,'>r\^. /.,>. -I; . 5 , , < , . 

Hi.1 [ja ;. f,.-'*; ■• wr 1 > \ '»' ■' 

. .' .-.^ -V, .; _., 


'.'4 


r» t < 


n 


./> • I . 


"if 






1; 

‘•A . 



»v’ 


>;v'. ; 

1 

'>•, 



. . 


'•• ■ 

* 1 •' 

t 



T ' •. n« '. . .'»■ 




• «s/ 


^ I'* 

Vm » ' . ,* . ». 

4.^1 'J' 


I 


M J u 
'r^J * 






APPENDICES 


1 


■r 



'*?r 






m 


m 






j'0 


■ftr 


m0^ 


fcsi^ 


,i*fr/l,., 

'^'' 4- 


w^r 






ilWif.y. «■ 


>• *'■ ! "tajK" • M't-- 

,»'i ^ ■'(*' S' A 'i^' 

M woo3f» ;V vio»|:4w«w»» *5f Asms- Mfio^an c^< 

110201^ " 




Tvf 

• ^ 

' .» !».)! lW»A.tl4 

••.'I rr»fr 

V M.4 M4I. MIiIA •>^4 ( ' i 

• tu. Hti^ ^ 

>1*, *'• 
fti ifjituA *u m»# ftwvflid ,?. 
j , fU : ■.toOy Mwlt^tWH 

c.« lb* V »’H{> }i^ 

. II *»iii •(u^^ -lol )Uf)Uiif'ft9aI>ni ,j 

'•Mi 

V*.* suKlXai VBfi 

'■ ••» ^ .ft. a« A m{| 3 mi'ir 

'* •• 'v»n j^-/' ^ 

'• 1'5'tli MR jnit 

•iM.b i:«t\yMtfiio3 :to(liWw4:i| 

«*!j/».f 4'hi )'.>mob 






yAi 


IMi 


SffJ 












ik« 

T»,'V 




w 




J*" I ' 

r^flUiViJUA 








w 










lt»bb*/«6w ii«i'’-<*»*5' #i4^4piw> ■ 

«<i iNrti* *A -(nH .0»14 ^ 

— „ , ^Mmtu *. 

;1R .;,.1 ■*. V* h*rt«»/tiH4lolr Jpftwtfrt fU» WtftiM «l Wlfclift 

•■— • A ^'TMil siM-arfa kjli;».t fcfw wrfat'* 

« i*V«^ »rt1 «* »>**•*• . 

i*-»«> 'Mnnriwii «Mtt /(g.tt<»wU‘ i»fl(lt*n«il« )dnKM«ir«tS »dJ «6» «yi^ 

^niil W ^ 4 *d 9*iftl »• 

«} k/^ rT^riJM^ -UW^A* «Kr »V MWW0«^,^m 

«.^ilb!^«lfl«>^* h*4»4*r^.«4j4 1««, IKM .,;. 

oT .«»^ vAo^v »ih» W*«»<r 
md/tMih H'tMrtrtirt ■,l»ww«t'i n nW*>»w*6 "<»^* 

»n<vj Mii Ji WJf. e*)it.'>*iH*i»ibi|i iCi«M5 /•lyfisifttmuift jull 

.• W.W II ,. .-to',, V . ,,«ii\iw*i»ii'*»'i** ^ ‘""■- '*'.t*’'tJ!"!’'C!l^ 

„...■ ,. . ,.(. ... .,>1 V««^w „„ ««,,4k, 1.4,' 


•ji'i ^ 

I- >UJ 4^w ,iSivir(*fi.Mi JtfvM - . 
i. n ♦*o'» tA%im ,'»in 'yi"0; Oa, 

i^Tl 

j ujt tail >)i"eTHfvolitn< tf|r<UHMift 
t^, t ■’ lu/ ffttni’H. blit 

,*i<» ji>v f \(itoHb4 (*rfJ W n<9jwi 
t 'u iflT |it<7nw . uiiit 

i.i f> a)U((a #a! i 
• «< itM*i (/!U( muiltf(>^ yx.'4 

■♦ ■ 

fKll bA/i 

urilHli ^tt ff 

.H ?»{<> »iiii>Ji> \> •lin'^fiorii 


' V n 


A. 


‘ I . r 1 ! y: '• MS mrVr.1^, vl V J 

‘ J da . M. . . Oa aid Aa W aI ^ ■ Kj 9 Af^. A -All kM 


r4 /U. 


-l.llki ^ f 

A oH !»>«> WuorJr <|»«»v| '» -'ll R 

I ’‘-V4S5; . V' 1k4ii*«'>4< 4^»Vm I. iH' 


M »4 f ♦ 


* .*i»a fi«»*t* {iA> 

«ti rv0tu <t.rM4>U 


\»/Nn <M Ji*i ' 




.^t' 


y*l 4flV» 

4(* M -'^«'’ 9jlT 

iH\ .iiH4*i rf/ << 

il«i»< itM* • Ji K»'»U V»’.»ri'tll - ' 

’9fc u/t •^ltt^ 


■ '■ ^ ^'■■‘it -'MVy 

'■ 

■ Vr ' 






'%• 




^ •%HL. ?.%, 

,.V. t<al 


-I 


ih -J!‘ 




784 


LAND REFORM - PILLAR OF THE NATION'S RECOVERY 
BY COMMISSIONER GREGORIO J. TINGSON 




Madam President: 

It is said that land is the eternal gift of Almighty God to all 
men. Man, therefore being temporal, may not really own the land 
except as steward thereof. 

The long and tortured history of our nation recounts an 
equally long and almost forlorn hope of the toiling masses to till 
the land as freemen and not as slaves chained in bondage to a 
feudalistic system of land ownership. 

The Constitutional Commission, tasked with the drafting of a 

new charter that should be truly reflective of the ideals and 

aspirations of the Filipino people, is not spared the specter of this 

problem. Hence, it has to face squarely and objectively this most 

basic agenda: genuine agrarian reform for our country. It cannot 

e denied that the government of President Corazon Aquino is 

trying its best to find solutions to the age-old agrarian problem. 

ver since the time of Magsaysay, most Presidents have tried 

varied approaches to the problem, but they only succeeded 

in o ering false hopes to our people. At most the solutions 

superficial, safeguarding therein almost unnotice- 

h, V vk"*^ ^he problem still 

lurks within the veiy framework of society. 

vinlpnT^ sectors of our society believe that real solutions lie in 
armed change. They believe that only a violent 

acQuire enable the toiling masses to ultimately 

They ass^ert tk1 the nation, 

only then can k genuine agrarian reform, 

the hilk anH conviction, many of our brothers took to 

would not resident Aquino’s appeal for reconciliation 

over land ownerL^k inequality 

societv will • ^ ^ removed, their existence as members of 

and Inslenificant. 

agrarian problem Tn"’"’ instituted pallative solutions to 
even aggravatino ik Proved to be ineffective to the extent of 
the countryside n '’^i'lespread unrest mushroomed in 

successfully broken ^th*^^ k*^-^ government’s claim that it has 
people in the rural ar^L ^enturies-long bondage, the 

suffer. Because of a d ’ Particularly the farmers, continued to 
the ultimate solution tha?tk volatde situation, repression was 
Instead of initiating structural Previous leadership had opted to. 
ousted President used “the m the program itself, the 

the problem lies elsewhere ^ faT^ 

was primarily caused by a gro2 ‘^e insurgency 

people. The result of his faiLp / ‘^‘^^ontented and aggrieved 

relegated to the past, but we must^T^ 

many lives wasted, so many famihes brXn^ reminded of so 

shattered, and so many futures dimmed ’ 


It is important to recall that as the Marcos regime grew fiercer, 
the resistance of the people grew equally stronger. The more 
the forces of the State harrassed and maligned the masses, the 
wider the conflict spread. The alarming moment when brothers 
became enemies and friends confronted each other as foes 
hovered above us during the early days of 1986. That was a 
moment when our young nation was on the verge of a bloody 
civil war! 

A very religious and democratic people, we are, however, 
indeed unique for despite the impending conflict, the people still 
trooped to the polls last February 7 elections, in the hope that 
democracy could still be restored through the sanctity of the 
ballot. This hope was again shattered for the election proved to 
be the greatest farce in Philippine politics. From the period of 
campaign to the voting and to the appreciation of votes, the 
same was attended with flagrant malpractice, fraud and terror- 
ism. But the awakened Filipinos had not wavered in their resolve 
to save their country from doom. In sheer number, they opted to 
claim their democratic birthright under the unwritten but 
enduring constitution of all free people - they opted to revolt! 

Novel, however, was the Filipinos’ way of revolt that people 
all over the world were startled at our collective action for 
change. The people’s revolution was not through violence, but 
through their common conviction and faith. They toppled a 
seemingly indomitable foe just the same with the least bloodshed 
and human suffering. Such was the phenomenon, power and 
impact of the February revolution that it is worth a deep reflec- 
tion among the Members of the Constitutional Commission 
drafting a new charter. We must be guided with the belief that 
social problems are not settled by force alone. We have already 
proven that a contrary mode — that of a peaceful one — is more 
effective, more receptive and more humane. 

And the peaceful solution that lies within the reach of the 
Commissioners is the enshrining in the new Constitution of the 
concepts of agrarian reform that will bring to an end the nation s 
primary problem. It should be a concept that is not only genuine 
but realistic, without outrightly disregarding the rights of the 
landholders but, at the same time, pursuing an ultimate goal of 
achieving nationwide land reform anchored on the primacy of the 
toiling masses to own the land they till. For it is my personal 
belief that justice and equality in this land will only prevail with 
the attainment of an equitable diffusion of ownership but such 
distribution must be equally based on the same breadth of 
fairness. 

Then and only then can we establish a structural reform that 
shall be the pillar of our national recovery. 


785 


EXPLANATION OF VOTE 
OF COMMISSIONER MONSOD 


Madam President, I would like to explain my vote on the 
Article on the Executive with particular reference to an amend- 
ment, of which I was a principal author, regarding the right of the 
President to declare martial law for a maximum period of 60 days 
which can be revoked by Congress at any time, subject to review 
by the judiciary at any time. 

There have been suggestions here that those who voted for 
that amendment are victims of subjugated consciousness or 
cannot learn from the past, or even suffer from a lack of aware- 
ness of the people’s sentiments. 

Madam President, to be free means having the confidence to 
fight a dictator. It also means the capacity to allow freedom to 
defend itself against actual invasion or rebellion. The delicate 
balance we seek is not clear-cut. Mr. Marcos relied on the Consti- 
tution to keep power. The premise of a dictator who is ready to 
disregard the Constitution would mean that no amount of safe- 


guards can prevent him to make a naked assumption of power 
outside the Constitution. If one reads the totality of the article 
we have approved, the color of constitutionality that Mr. Marcos 
used to his advantage is no longer there. That is the difference 
between the 1935 and the 1986 Constitutions. 

Any insinuation of subjugated consciousness, lack of patriot- 
ism, responsiveness of so-called people sentiment is an offensive 
generalization to those whose records show that they did not 
allow themselves to be cowed even at the height of Mr. Marcos’ 
power at the risk of their lives and livelihood. 

I find righteousness offensive, particularly from those who 
want to make sweeping conclusions on the basis of one issue and 
not on the totality of one’s conviction and one’s record. “Patriot- 
ism is not the sudden and frenzied outburst of emotion but the 
tranquil and steady dedication of a lifetime.” 

Thank you. Madam President. 


786 


POSITION PAPER ON HEALTH 
BY COMMISSIONER QUESADA 


SECTION ON HEALTH, ARTICLE ON SOCIAL JUSTICE 

SEC. 13. THE STATE SHALL PROTECT AND PROMOTE THE 
RIGHT TO HEALTH. TO THIS END, IT SHALL 
ADOPT AN INTEGRATED AND COMPREHENSIVE 
APPROACH TO HEALTH DEVELOPMENT WHICH 
SHALL MAKE ESSENTIAL GOODS, HEALTH AND 
OTHER SOCIAL SERVICES AVAILABLE TO ALL 
CITIZENS AT AFFORDABLE COST, WITH PRIOR- 
ITY FOR THE NEEDS OF THE UNDERPRIVILEGED, 
THE SICK, WOMEN AND CHILDREN, AGED AND 
DISABLED. 

1. The right to health. This is the first time that this right and 
other social rights will be enshrined in the Constitution 
although the Philippines is a signatory to the Universal De- 
claration of Human Rights and the Alma Ata Conference in 
1978 which recognize health as a fundamental human right. 

Health has been defined by the World Health Organization as 
the “state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing, 
and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.” The at- 
tainment of the highest possible level of health is a most 
important, worldwide social goal whose realization requires 
the action of many social and economic sectors in addition to 
the health sector. 

2. Health development . This refers to the overall improvement of 
the level of health of the people to a higher level where the 
people can lead economically productive and socially satisfy- 
ing lives. Health development is essential for social and eco- 
nomic development, and the means for attaining them are 
intimately linked. It is also recognized that only when people 
have an acceptable level of health can individuals, families and 
communities enjoy the other benefits of life. 

3. Integrated and comprehensive approach. These two principles 
or concepts in health development are precisely premised on 
the understanding that the level of health of the people and 
the country cannot be achieved without the corresponding 
improvements in many social, economic, political and cultural 
conditions. It means, among others, better food and housing, 
better education, increased purchasing power, more access to 
health services, higher allocation of resources to health, more 
people s active participation in health efforts, a reorientation 
of the health development strategies and the political will to 
act on policies and plans. 

More specifically on health, the concept of integration would 
imply the following: 

3.1 Unifying the country’s health delivery system with the 
primary health care approach in the attainment of the 
goal of Health for all (Filipinos) by Year 2000, the goal 


set by the Philippines as a signatory to the Alma Ata 
Conference of 1978 agreed upon by 134 member States 
of World Health Organization and the United Nations 
Children’s Fund. The country’s health services are pro- 
vided by government and the private sectors. The Minis- 
try of Health is the primary agency with the function of 
addressing the health needs of the citizens. But other 
ministries also provide health services to their consti- 
tuents, e.g. the Ministry of Education, Culture and 
Sports for the school population; the Ministry of Labor 
and Employment for the workforce; the Ministry of 
National Defense for the military, and the city govern- 
ments for residents. On the private sector, health services 
are provided in hospitals, clinics, health centers and 
community-based health programs particularly of non- 
governmental organizations (NGOs). 

The pillar principles in the primary health care approach 
are: community or people’s participation, appropriate 
health technology, multisectoral linkages and the pro- 
vision of support mechanisms. It is based on the need to 
make health not mainly a State responsibility but the 
duty of all the people. 

3.2 Integration is likewise envisioned to maximize existing 
health resources, both government and nongovernment 
or the private sector, in the spirit of cooperation and 
collaboration. The State however is tasked to take the 
initiative in strengthening intersectoral and intrasectoral 
efforts to meet the health needs of the country. Efforts 
of nongovernmental organizations in health development 
must be appreciated and harnessed by the State. On the 
other hand, the private or business sector’s interest in 
health must interface with public accountability, 
governed by ethical codes that ensure the welfare of the 
general public. 

3.3 Integration also envisions that the health care system 
would blend western medicine with traditional health 
care modalities, would be directed more to prevention 
rather than cure, health rather than illness, community- 
based rather than hospital-centered in the delivery of 
health care. 

On the concept of comprehensive approach , the main con- 
sideration is on the coverage of health development. This 

would mean the following: 

3.4 Health services provided should include health promo- 
tion (with emphasis on health education), disease pre- 
vention or specific protection (e.g. immunizations, use 
of protective wears), early diagnosis and treatment, as 
well as rehabilitation. 


787 


3.5 Health services should attempt to plan and implement/ 
evaluate programs that would address the most common 
health problems of the country such as communicable 
diseases (pneumonia, tuberculosis, gastroenteritis, bron- 
chitis), poor environmental sanitation (water supply, 
toilet facilities, garbage, drainage, pollution), malnutri- 
tion, maternal and child health problems, drug abuse, 
endemic diseases like malaria, schistosomiasis, filariasis, 
degenerative diseases like cancer or neoplasms, heart 
diseases, cardiovascular diseases and mental illness. 
Health services should likewise address the particular 
health problems of its population coverage, for example 
in industry — the occupational and safety needs of the 
workers; and in school, the special needs of school 
children. 

3.6 A truly comprehensive approach to healtli care also 
would stress of the educational component of health 
programs to enable people to be actively involved in 
organizing and mobilization. 

4. Making essential goods, health and other social services avail- 
able to citizens at affordable cost. T his phrase highlights the 
fact that health as a human right cannot be enjoyed by people 
unless these are made available and affordable to them, 
especially the underprivileged sectors of our society. In fact, 
there should be free medical care for the paupers. 

5. The underprivileged, the sick, women and children, aged and 
disabled. This phrase singles out these groups as the disad- 
vantaged in terms of access to adequate health services and 
resources which the State pays more attention to. 

SEC. 14. THE STATE SHALL MAINTAIN AN EFFECTIVE 
FOOD AND DRUG MONITORING SYSTEM AND 
UNDERTAKE APPROPRIATE HEALTH MANPOWER 
DEVELOPMENT AND RESEARCH RESPONSIVE TO 
THE COUNTRY’S HEALTH NEEDS AND PROBLEMS. 

EXPLANATORY NOTES: 

1 . Effective food and drug monitoring system. The objective here 
is to rationalize the food and drug policies of our country to 
ensure that people’s health is protected, from harmful, useless 
and exorbitantly costly food and drugs. Such monitoring 
system would address itself to the adoption of a national 


essential drugs list, the use of generic names, strengthening of 
the national food and drug regulatory mechanisms, provision 
of independent and objective information to health pro- 
fessionals and the general pubhc and a direction toward self- 
reliance in pharmaceutical needs. Rationalizing food and drug 
policies is a multisectoral task that must involve government, 
industry, nongovernmental health groups, the private sector, 
and the consumers. 

2. Undertake appropriate health manpower development and 
research responsive to the country’s health needs and pro- 
blems. This clause provides the mandate for the health care 
system to take a critical look at our health manpower develop- 
ment. This includes the training, education, distribution, util- 
ization and management of our health manpower resources. 
Such a rationalization would imply how best these human 
resources could contribute to the health development of our 
country and people. This would imply, among other things, 
a reorientation of the health professionals in their technical 
and value system so that they would be encouraged to fulfill 
their service goals to our people. Then there is also the man- 
date for the State to look into the salaries and other working 
conditions of health professionals so as to entice them to serve 
in our depressed areas and to say in our country where then- 
services are needed. 

Research in health implies that it should first of all be able to 
address the priority health needs and problems of the country. 

SEC. 15. THE STATE SHALL ESTABLISH A SPECIAL BODY 
FOR DISABLED PERSONS FOR THEIR REHABI- 
LITATION, SELF-DEVELOPMENT AND SELF- 
RELIANCE AND TOWARDS THEIR TOTAL IN- 
TEGRATION INTO THE MAINSTREAM OF SOCIETY. 

EXPLANATORY NOTES: 

This section addresses itself to the protection of the disabled 
in our country who are estimated to be 6.7 million. It provides 
that the State create a special body that shall coordinate or 
manage the existing government agencies concerned with the 
rehabilitation, self-development and self-reliance of the disabled. 
It is also aimed that the programs for the disabled be more 
concerned not only with the development of the disabled but also 
with their full and total integration into the mainstream of 
society. 


788 


POSITION PAPER NO. 2 

BY COMMISSIONER AHMAD DOMOCAO ALONTO 


Prefatory Note 

This is a paper prepared and read by Ahmad Domocao Alonto, 
Delegate-elect from Lanao del Sur to the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention, before the First National Conference on the Pro- 
blems of the Cultural Minorities, sponsored by the Commission 
on National Integration, the Mindanao State University and the 
University of the Philippines at Baguio, held in the City of Baguio 
on March 4 and 5 , 1971. 

Delegates to the conference included, among others, eminent 
scholars and scientists (both local and foreign) in various fields of 
specializations, aside from prominent leaders of thought among 
the cultural minorities, both in and outside the government 


the political problems 

OF THE CULTURAL MINORITIES 
Statement of the Prohlftm 

The problem of the cultural minorities in this country is n 
th<.V of a minority group problem. Paraphrasing one i 

sociologists of modern times, “The attainment i 

cultiirf^^-^*^^^ of mankind’s divergent races ar 

time ’’ R* urgent and pressing problems of oi 

writine thought, Mr. Cesar Aguil 

problem Muslim problem, stated that “the minoril 

dimension i ^ ^ tninority group problem. Its broad( 

dimension involves, hterally, Philippine unity.” 

probl^1sX°o?v government recognized that th 

ferent cultural failure to integrate the di 

by Congress t 

^finition ofTerm^ 

cultural m^orTty? ^For^*th minorities and who are tl 

start from the nrr>^ Pr^^Pose of this discussion, we c; 

ties are those particuir" cultural mino 

social, economic and culturTf Y “P“ipin°s” whose politic 

level to which majority of^tJ attained t 

several causes. To these^gro, reached, due 

and linguistic gr^s asL. T ^ 

untractable Aetas we can indT aborigines, t 

naos, the Ilocanos’, the Tirurays'^lL'n-^ 

Bagobos, the Manobos, tHdaganf reT\ ^ 

naos, the Bilaans, the Samals the t * agakaolos, the Ma 
u D *3rnals, the Tausogs, the Subanos, the Ki 

bogans, the Badjaos of the South; the Dumagats, the Manday 

the Mangyans, the Ifugaos, the Ilongots, the Kalingas, the II 

nags, the Gadangs of the North, among others. Distinct fr< 

these groups are what we could refer to as the “cultural majc 

ties” which are composed of the following ethnic and linguis 


groups: the Ilocanos, the Pangasinenses, the Pampangos, the 
Tagalogs, the Bicolanos, the Ilongos, the Cebuanos and the 
Warays. 

Difference in Cultural Aspects 

What then can be the distinctive differences in the cultures of 
those different ethnic and linguistic groups which have given rise 
to the necessity of integrating them into the body politic? 
Racially speaking, aside from the aborigines, all of these different 
ethnic and linguistic groups belong to what can generally be 
termed as the Indo-Malayan race having a common cultural 
matrix. Difference in language, while in a way influencing to a 
certain degree the direction towards which the different groups 
have been culturally developing, has not yet been a very strong 
factor in influencing the different elements of our society. 
Natural geographic barriers separating the different linguistic 
groups are, in some cases, strong factors that influence the 
different cultural directions towards which each has been develop- 
ing. The problem we face today is the factor of the historical 
events to which the inhabitants of the different islands have been 
exposed. 

In this regard, it might help to trace the different political 
epochs which these different islands of the archipelago have 
undergone. 

First Period 

This was the period during which our ancestors came by waves 
to occupy these verdant and beautiful islands. Although they had 
different loyalties, yet it is admitted that all belonged to a 
common cultural matrix. 

The American Colonial Era 

Almost at the close of the last century and at the beginning of 
the current period just when the Tagalogs, the Visayans, the Ilo- 
canos, the Pampangos, the Bicolanos — who now constitute the 
cultural majority — were at last inspired to rise up in arms and 
join the ranks of those who had been fighting the invaders who 
had enslaved them for centuries, the United States of America 
defeated the Spaniards who were on the verge of being driven 
away by the combined native forces. Spain surrendered to the 
United States and the whole archipelago was handed to the 
United States as a prize of that war. All armed resistance was 
suppressed either by force or by dubious means. The different 
tribal governments and ethnic groups fell one after the other. 
Then, willingly or unwillingly, they were herded into one 
administrative control under the sovereign rule of the United 
States of America. The different ethnic groups which had not 
been conquered by the Spaniards were completely conquered 
this time and, like the others that had earlier fallen victims to the 
Spaniards, they had to accept the political structure that was 


789 


rammed down their throats by the new master. All the different 
political systems to which they had been accustomed and which 
they had developed during all these centuries were completely 
wiped out and, in their places, America forced its system upon 
them. 

Manifestations of the Problem 

This problem had different manifestations during the various 
periods through which the people in this country passed. During 
the pre-Islamic era in this country, this kind of problem was never 
felt. 

After Islam came, there still was no record manifestation of 
the problem since Islam, as a cultural factor, was brought to this 
country through peaceful means and there has never been any 
attempt to forcibly make it a way of life against the will of those 
unwilling to accept it. After the Spanish conquest, this problem 
started to appear in different forms, one of which was the de- 
veloping and persistent opposition to the Spanish rulers, first, 
by those who fought off the Spaniards from the start and, later, 
even those who fell under their sway awoke and joined the ranks 
of those fighting them. This particular manifestation of the 
problem went beyond the Spanish rule in this country. The 
sporadic uprisings of different magnitudes, not only among the 
Muslims who constitute the biggest single group of the so-called 
cultural minorities but even in the Christian areas, like the 
Colorum uprisings, the Sakdal uprisings, the Alangkat movement, 
were manifestations of this problem. Even after the grant of 
independence, manifestations of this problem still appeared. The 
Hukbalahap uprising is just another manifestation, taking place in 
the midst of the so-called cultural majority. 

The present-day manifestations of the problem within our 
society need not be emphasized for we are all witnesses to these 
phenomena. What is happening today in almost every corner of 
our country, whether in areas occupied by those belonging to the 
cultural majority or otherwise, whether it takes the form of 
political disparity, economic disequilibrium, cultural imbalance, 
or between the different ethnic groups or with the government 
forces, is all the manifestations of the problem whether these 
happen in Luzon, in the Visayas, or in the hinterlands of 
Mindanao. 

Today we are witnessing several events which are but the 
outcrop of this problem. In Cotabato and elsewhere, unfortunate 
clashes between several ethnic groups within the area and reach- 
ing the stature of a genocide, are taking place. Compounded by 
political intrigues and machinations, the situation seems to be 
getting out of hand. These events in Cotabato and elsewhere are 
the persistent continuity of past phenomena of this category 
and symptomatic of a cancerous problem that seems to defy 
solution. 

Measures and Efforts for the Solution of the Problem 

There have been, in the course of our political history, dif- 
ferent' efforts to solve the problem. These efforts |were based on 
different motivations depending on what period the effort was 
made. Under the colonial rule, the motivation naturally was to 
consolidate I the colonies and so the use of arms |was the principal 
means of solving the problem. 


After independence when there was a change of objective and 
motivation, the government started to adopt different methods 
to solve the problem. More realistic approaches to the problem 
were attempted. Studies were made; attempts to redefine and 
crystalllize the real problem in the light of [present-day needs and 
circumstances were taken. 

Different administrations had adopted different measures, 
some of which were comparatively effective while the others were 
useless. All these measures were adopted within the confines and 
limits of the political structure prevalent in the country. Some 
interested quarters came to realize, to their dismay, that there 
were many effective measures that could be adopted, were these 
feasible enough to apply under the present constitutional limita- 
tion of the country. Take the case of under-representation of the 
cultural minorities in our government. In our Congress, there is a 
very glaring case of under-representation which could be serious 
for the cultural minorities, amounting almost to non-representa- 
tion. The same disparity exists in the executive and judicial 
branches of our government, in some instances more serious than 
in the legislative branch. 

The rate of progress of the cultural minorities, particularly the 
Muslims, in the political field is very slow, if at all, as the political 
structure they are supposed to develop is foreign to them because 
it is a product of an imposition. This is also true not only in the 
political field but also in the social, economic and cultural aspects 
of life in the country. Compounding this are the different policies 
of different administrations which, instead of enhancing the 
solution of the problem, magnify it. This seems to indicate that 
within the framework of our present political structure, no 
solution to this problem is possible. There is a creeping feeling 
that the longer we live under the present political structure, the 
farther we go away from solving this problem. 

But a solution must be arrived at - it is not only a need but a 
basic goal that must be achieved if we have to remain intact. 
Historical events have indicated that no formula of effective 
solution is possible under the present constitutional framework of 
our country. This is not only so because of the impossibility of 
eliminating the social, economic and political disparity existing 
among our people under the present Constitution but also 
because the very philosophy of the present one does not permit 
the natural development and healthy growth of the different 
basic ideals of our people, without which we can never achieve 
national identity nor unity. 

But then, amidst all these gloomy circumstances. Providence 
intervened making it possible for us to work out a solution for 
our disintegrating society. I refer to the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention whereby our people, through their chosen representa- 
tives were given an opportunity to reframe our fundamental 
laws.' I can surmise this early that the strongest single factor that 
prompted the call for this charter revision is the sense of urgency 
felt by the different sectors of our society to find a solution to 
the state of disintegration taking place in our midst. 

It is then a must that in reframing the same law, it should be 
the highest sense of patriotism for every member privileged to 
participate to analyze all the basic problems confronting our 
society, not the least important of which is the problem of 
Philippine unity. Together, let us reconstruct our political 
thoughts in order to reconstitute the same to conform to the 


790 


basic philosophy of all the different elements that make up our 
society. Let us not hesitate even to reconstitute our governmental 
structure if necessary, to make it conform to the basic ideals of 
the different groups composing our society. Let us abandon the 
“straight jacket” to which we were plunged by our erstwhile 
masters as a condition precedent to the grant of a poUtical free- 
dom and which became the basic cause of our failure to imbue 
the society with the desirable sense of oneness and a common 
destiny. For unless we can imbue our people with a sense of 
oneness and common destiny, there seems to be no possible 
avenue'iof containing the process of disintegration that is going jon 
in our very midst, involving not only the cultural minorities but 
the whole fabric of our society. 

1 dare say that if to achieve unity, it is necessary to divide the 
country into several autonomous states bound together by a 
common goal and sense of oneness, we should not hesitate to do 


so. If unity cannot be achieved in a strictly unitary system as 
experience has taught us, then by all means let us revert to the 
only option left open for us — unity in diversity. This seems to be 
the goal fixed for us by Divine Wisdom when our ancestors, be- 
longing to a common racial strain but speaking different tongues 
and guided by the same Divine Providence, ventured through 
uncharted seas to these different islands separated by natural 
barriers yet belonging to the same geographical region. For the 
sake of the hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of precious 
lives of our kith and kin who were sacrificed in the fields of 
battles to defend their newfound paradise for us, their progeny, 
let us forge that unity on the anvil of necessity. Perchance, God 
Almighty Whose Providence controls the destiny of man and 
nations, will grant that we can preserve these beautiful isles for 
the generations yet to come. 

Amen and peace be with you. 


791 


STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT 
BY REV. FRANCISCO ARANETA, S.J. 


Some delegates to the convention have made the proposal that 
the new Constitution should reestablish the Republic as a federa- 
tion. From the unitary form of government that we presently 
have, the proposal calls for a change to the federal. 

It does not seem that the move to federalism is gaining ground. 
It is a new idea and because it is proposed principally by Muslim 
delegates, it is probably suspected as separatist. 

Whatever we think of the proposals for a federal form of 
government, the important thing is tliat they raise a very impor- 
tant question, that of the structure of government, and this I 
believe, is a question more basic than the forms of government, 
e.g. whether ours should be a parliamentary or presidential govern- 
ment, or whether we should have one or two houses in Congress. 

Ours at present is a unitary government. In this form of 
government the central government is given all powers by the 
Constitution. No sphere of powers is assigned by the Constitution 
to the local government. The central government, however, 
through enactment of the legislature, may delegate powers to the 
local government be these cities, provinces, countries, municipali- 
ties, etc. Thus over a period of time by successive acts of 
Congress, a certain amount of decentralization has been achieved 
in the Philippines. We have also created quite a few cities with 
their own charters. We also notice how provinces have been 
subdivided and municipal boundaries rearranged. 

And so we ask ourselves the basic question: Do we want this, 
or do we want to set up in the Constitution certain geographical 
divisions and to grant to these divisions certain powers, so that 
neither divisions nor powers may be changed except by constitu- 
tional amendment? Or do we want the present arrangement to 
remain? 


THE FEDERAL STATE 

Now let us look at the nature of federal states. The essential 
element of a federal state is the constitutional division of powers 
between the national government and the constituent units 
(states, provinces, lands, cantons). 

Is it a cultural unit? In some cases it happens to be. Thus the 
Pampangos may be thought of as a cultural group. Pangasinan 
may represent another ethnic group. But there is no cultural 
reason for having separated Bulacan from Bataan, or La Union 
from Ilocos Sur. 

Is the province meant to be an economic unit? Hardly. Eco- 
nomically, there is no reason why Cotabato should have been 
split, why Isabela should be distinct from Cagayan. And so forth. 

So then what is the rationale for the provinces? 

In many cases the provinces are merely remnants of colonial 
administrative development. In more recent times, provinces were 
created a) to increase representation in Congress and b) to 


increase the number of elective seats available for competing 
politicians. And the net effect of it all has been an increase in 
governmental cost without the slightest increase in governmental 
efficiency. 


REGIONAL SUBDIVISIONS 

What, therefore, do we consider to be the nature of the largest 
geographic subdivision of our government? What should be its 
objectives? 

We submit that the largest geographical subdivision of our 
government should be either economic or cultural units, and 
whenever possible, both. Moreover, they should be large enough 
to allow for economies of administration, and yet small enough 
to enable the administration to focus attention on manageable 
problems. 

The best way to clarify the concept is to indicate the possible 
major subdivisions which we shall call “regions.” 

REGION I 

The Ilocos: Ilocos Norte, Abra, Ilocos Sur, La Union, Benguet, 
Ifugao. 

REGION II 

Cagayan: Cagayan, Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya, Apayao-Kalinga, 
Mt. Province. 

The Batanes Islands may choose to be part of Region I or 
Region II. 

REGION III 


Central Luzon: Nueva Ecija, Tarlac, Pampanga, Bulacan, 
Aurora, Zambales, Bataan. 

Pangasinan can choose to be part of either Region I or Region 
III. Culturally, it would be closer to Region I. Economically, it 
belongs to the Central Plains of Luzon. 

REGION IV 

Pasig: This would include the cities of Metropolitan Manila, 
Rizal and Laguna, perhaps also the Infanta area of Quezon 
province. 

REGION V 

Southern Luzon: Cavite, Batangas, Quezon, Mindoro, Marin- 
duque. 


REGION VI 
Bicol: The five Bicolano provinces. 


792 


REGION VII 

Western Visayas: Romblon, Antique, Aklan, Capiz, Iloilo, 
Negros Occidental. 

REGION VIII 

Central Visayas: Oriental Negros, Cebu, Bohol. 

REGION IX 

Eastern Visayas: The islands of Samar and Leyte. 

Masbate may choose to join the Bicol or the Eastern Visayas 
region. 

REGION X 

Palawan island group. 

REGION XI 

West Mindanao: Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur, 
Misamis Occidental, Basilan and Sulu. 


Region V — Southern Luzon, while not a well-integrated eco- 
nomic unit, does represent a certain type of terrain. It is rolling 
land mostly, and can be both the fruit and livestock center of 
Luzon. It is substantially a cultural unit. 

Region VI — This is an economic and cultural unit. This is 
Bicolandia, a rice and coconut land. 

The Visayan islands have been divided according to the three 
language groups that predominate in that area: Waray-^\aray, 
Cebuano and Ilonggo. The island groups as they are, are not very 
well-knit economic units, but they are clear-cut cultural divisions. 

Region XIII — North Central Mindanao is split culturally, but 
it achieves geographical unity. Lanao and Bukidnon are really one 
plateau. The Misamis Oriental provides the shore between the 
table land and trie sea. 

Palawan and the Zamboanga peninsula do not represent very 
close cultural integration, but at least they have a long history as 
distinct political units. 

So these would be the regional units of this country. 
REGIONAL POWERS 


REGION XII 

Northern and Southern Cotabato. 

It would be possible to join Region XI and Region XII. 

REGION XIII 

T Mindanao; Misamis Oriental, Lanao del Norte, 

Lanao del Sur, Bukidnon. 






East Mmdanao: The Agusan, Surigao and Davao provinces. 

sholiw boundaries of these fourteen regi 

should become part of the regional political unit. 


t^uUNALE OF REGIONS 

examine rationale of the regional divisions. I 

units some^ '^®Sions, we will find that some are distinct econ( 
umts, some are clear cultural units, some are both. 

II III main river valleys. These are Rej 

Cotabato VaUeys Sris?o"h1t^“^°"’ the Agusan-Davac 
vallev Tk • better economic unit than a 

transnorta^ supply power, irrigation, and a meai 

nr3r ?"■ *“"0“nding mountains can supply logs 
proinde pasture ands. The valley itself properly cared fo, 


Region IV is buUt around Laguna de Bay and the Pasig. This, 
too, IS a ^^tir economic unit. The Pasig-Laguna de Bay develop- 
ment could be a tremendous source of wealth. Besides this, it is 
the chief metropolitan center of the Philippines. It, too, is 
culturally united. 

Region I is also an economic unit, built around to tobacco 
industry. It is definitely a strong cultural unit. 


What powers shall be granted to them? 

The possibilities are many and they should be studied. What- 
ever powers are granted should allow for both greater local ini- 
tiative and adaptation to regional needs. Powers should never be 
granted to lessen national unity. In other Swords, we should work 
out a way of distributing powers between the central government 
and the regions so as to bring about unity in diversity. 

Let us examine the possible powers. 

The very first set of powers has to do with education. 

Why should, for example, the Tirurays of Cotabato and the 
Subanons of Zamboanga have the same kind of education as the 
urbanized teenager of Pasig? Should not schooling prepare a 
person for his own kind of life? His social environment? 

Are we trying to obliterate all cultural differences, and hope 
that someday there no longer may be Maguindanaos and Iloka- 
nos. Mangy ans and Tagalogs? Our cultural diversity is cultural 
wealth. And there is no reason why a Tiruray should not remain 
distinctively a Tiruray and yet be a very loyal Filipino. But if 
cultural diversity is to be maintained, then educational diversity 
is needed. 

The answer to the educational needs of the country then 
would lie in the establishment of uniform national standards with 
diversity of curriculum content, as well as a certain diversity in 
the use of the medium of instruction. 

In our present system, the national government takes responsi- 
bility for elementary education and the provincial government for 
high school education. The reverse should be the rule. It is the 
lower levels of education that should be in the hands of the 
local government. It is here that the greatest adaptation is called 
for. 

Tentatively, it might be suggested that the municipal govern- 
ment should be responsible for grade school and high school 
education. The region should be responsible for college and 


793 


university education, with each region establishing a university 
within its area. 

The national government would merely supervise to assure 
itself of minimum standards at all levels. It would also administer 
all board examinations. 

Economic development should be the prime value of the 
regional structures proposed. Each of the regional development 
authority would be in charge of public works, agricultural ex- 
tension, forest conservation, river development. 

Regional development authorities, however, would participate 
in national planning as part of a national development authority 
and would submit their plans for approval. 

Should part of the judiciary be under regional control? 

This is something to think about. In the end, a system of 
courts more adaptable to the needs of the people may bring 
about greater and faster justice. 

Definitely, there should be a regional police system. Although 
this should not preclude a national police system such as the 
N.B.I. Ultimate police authority must reside with the national 
government. 

What about the armed forces? Actually, if a war is fought in 
the Philippines, we would be fighting many local battles. We saw 
that in World War II. This leads itself to the concept of regional 
armies. However, it is imperative that there be one army, under 
on command, although there is no reason why the army should 
not be organized along regional and subregional lines, ready to 
fight a people’s war. 

FISCAL AUTHORITY 

The crucial point is, of course, taxation. Regional structuring 
is meaningless unless the regions have autonomous control over 
certain taxes or at least a certain percentage of taxes. 


There are two ways of handling the problem. One is to assign 
certain taxes that the region can levy, e.g. property taxes, exise 
taxes, etc. The other system is to have the national government 
and the region share in all taxes collected according to certain 
proportions. 

In order to maintain a unified tax system for the entire coun- 
try, it will be better to share all taxes in certain fixed propor- 
tions. The proportions will have to be studied. Following is a 
possible model. 

1) Forty percent of the taxes collected by the region are to be 
automatically retained. 

2) Of the sixty percent left over, twenty percent should be 
redistributed to the regions on a per capita basis. This is to 
help the poorer regions. 

In effect only forty percent is to be retained by the national 
government. 

How the region should share taxes with barrios and municipali- 
ties should also be studied. Automatic retention on the barrio and 
municipal level should also be built into the taxing system. 

Finally, what about representation in the legislature? 

Each region should be allowed at least two representatives, 
plus one additional representative for every half-miUion citizens 
in the region. Thus a region with three miUion people would have 
five representatives in Congress. 

These are some of the possibilities for a regional structuring of 
our country. 

It would be more efficient. 

It would be more democratic. 

It would be better adaptable to the varying needs of our 
people. 


I 


794 


THE NEED FOR A NATIONAL COMMUNITY* 
BY COMMISSIONER ALONTO 


INTRODUCTION 


Statement of the Problem 

The Philippines is a new nation. The people of the country is 
engaged in the different but exciting process of welding them- 
selves into a national community. 

Due to historical background — the geographical peculiarities 
of the national territory and the composition of the society - 
this basic process is considered the most difficult tadc confronting 
the body politic. The future of this nascent nation depends on 
our success to achieve this goal. 

During the recent past when we were fighting for our political 
freedom, the diverse elements that constitute the society, and 
who then were all equally tasting the bitterness of political bond- 
age, were united behind our leaders’ pretentions to present an 
image of unity. Even the few discordant notes from certain 
Mgments of the society were drowned by the overwhelming cry 
tor emancipation. 


Over three decades have passed since we achieved our political 
m epend^ce and, possibly benumbed by the exhilaration oc- 
casione y the same, we seemed to have forgotten that the 
society IS composed of diverse elements and have taken for 
pan e t at we had succeeded in welding these diverse elements 
mto a national community. We seemed to take for granted that a 

ic c ^ ^ grant of citizenship and other sociopolitical rights 
IS sufficient to create a national community. 


Definition of T^rmc 

loosely defined as a group of 

social wav of lif Possessing a distinctive cultural and 

and subie^ct to th interests, ideal and objective 

Dr Cesar Prominent historians and sociologists, 

believes University of the Philippines, rightly 


the absence of this, at least an agreement on how such an 
ideology is to be created or determined. 

Now, no national tradition is by definition possible with- 
out the possession of a common history. It is a history 
cherished and treasured as an account of the development 
of a people or peoples in the process of becoming a national 
community, x x x 

One of the strongest factors in welding a national community 
is nationalism, and nationalism is defined as: 

A state of mind, in which the supreme loyalty of the 
individual is felt to be due to the nation-state. Though at- 
tachment to the native soil, to parental traditions and to 
established territorial authorities has been known through- 
out history, it was only at the end of the 18th century that 
nationalism began to become a genrally recognized senti- 
ment molding public and private life and one of the great, 
if not the greatest, single determining factors of history. 
Thus, nationalism is a modern movement, but, in the short 
span of its existence as a dominant element of societal life 
and organization, it has shown such a dynamic vitality and 
such an all-pervading character that the mistake has fre- 
quently been made of regarding nationalism as a perma- 
nent, or at least very ancient factor of history. (Ency- 
clopedia Britannica) 

The Necessity of Developing 
a National Community 

The Philippines found itself in this difficult task of nation- 
building amidst a troubled world beset with violent conflict of 
ideals and ideology, giving rise to new forms of colonialism, 
imperialism and other “isms” all opposed to the healthy growth 
of nationalism — the one binding element in establishing a 
national community. Mind you, failure to achieve success in this 
line will make all these efforts of nation-building, including ours 
in this Convention, “an exercise in futility.” 

THE SYMPTOMS OF FAILURE 


comcious^ners°of"S^Th.r"'“"'^'' '' 

sidprpH c tu- consciousness cannot be con 

the result of developed overnight, as it is usuall] 

tion of P ! historical process, as well as a constella 
commn aspirations of a people. A nationa 

th t • ^ hi a process of becoming 

that IS. Its members are trying to become more and more o 

a natio.nal community. Consequently, a people in the proces 
o integrating themselves into a national community wil 
search for further elements of common identity. One sue] 
element is the possession of a national tradition. Another i 
the existence of a common set of aspirations and expect 
tions related to one another by a common ideology; or i 


That we failed in achieving a national community needs but a 
few arguments. All we have to cite are some of the contemporary 
events taking place in the national scene, to convince us that 
much is wanting in our effort to establish a national community. 

The Language Problem 

One of the basic factors that lead to the achievement of a 
national community would be the establishment of a national 
language common to all the diverse elements composing the 
society. It is a sad commentary, in this connection, that even 
after the lapse of over three decades after independence we had 
to use English, a foreign language, so we will be able to under- 
stand each other. 


♦Speech delivered by Delegate Ahmad D. Alonto (Lanao del Sur) during 
the Privilege Hour, Session of August 10, 1971 of the 1971 Constitutional 
Convention, Manila, Philippines 


795 


Even after our attempt to establish a national language based 
on Tagalog, one of the major languages in this country, we are 
still as violently divided on this particular issue as we used to be. 
I daresay that we are even more so today. Even some thinking in 
this Convention in relation to this particular issue demonstrate 
our failure to achieve agreement on this vital issue. 

The Rise of Radicalism and Violence 

Sporadic uprisings of different magnitudes taking place among 
the different groups constituting the society, like the Colorum 
uprising, the Sakdal protest, the Alangkat movement, the Kamlon 
incident, the Hukbalahap rebellion, the Lapiang Malaya massacre 
are symptomatic not only of a protest against the established 
society but more definitely of our failure to achieve the establish- 
ment of a national community. 

The rise of radicalism is confined not only to limited sectors 
of the society for it has spread througliout the whole length of 
the archipelago. The various secessionist movements, the dif- 
ferent groups committed to bringing down the present esta- 
blished order by force, like the New People’s Army and other 
extreme movements, leading to unfortunate bloodletting, coupled 
with suppression of civil and political rights and continuous out- 
cries of government corruption and near-collapse of governmental 
functions in many areas of the country, are symptomatic of our 
disregard for a sincere effort to search for a common acceptable 
formula necessary for achieving a national community. 

The Genocide Taking Place in Mindanao 

The most unfortunate manifestation of this failure to achieve a 
national community is the fratricidal conflict now going on in the 
“Promised Land” of Mindanao. There, people belonging to dif- 
ferent ethnic groups are today engaged in the tragic effort of 
eliminating each other: Christians killing Muslims; Muslims killing 
Christians, reaching to a proportion approximating genocide. 

At first, this unfortunate phenomenon taking place in our 
national scene was confined within the verdant valleys of Cota- 
bato. It has now spread to Lanao del Sur and Lanao del Norte. 
The problem is magnified by political complications, clash of 
economic interests, and aggravated by the callous attitude of the 
administration towards the problem. It is compounded by the 
injection, intended or not, of religious complications when places 
of worship were desecrated, burned and chosen to treacherously 
massacre and eliminate whole inhabitants of remote villages of 
the indigenous residents. It may not be the motive, I pray, but 
the events that transpired one after the other, spreading like wild 
fire to almost all the areas occupied by the Muslims, tend to indi- 
cate a systematic and well-planned scheme to uproot and dis- 
possess the native Muslims from what remained today of their 
ancestral holdings. There are cases not only of a village but a 
whole municipality where those native Muslims who were not 
massacred had to evacuate to safe places to escape annihilation. 
Is Biafra being reenacted here? 

CAUSES OF FAILURE TO ESTABLISH 
A NATIONAL COMMUNITY 

Geographical Composition of 
the National Territory 

The geographical composition of the national territory is one 
of the natural causes contributory to the delay in the establish- 


ment of a national community. Continuity or contiguousness of 
a national territory is an important element conducive to the 
creation of a national community. But in our particular case, our 
present national territory is composed of 7,000 islands separated 
by natural barriers which made intercommunication difficult, if 
not at times impossible. For even today, with the sophisticated 
means of communication, such intercourse among the diverse 
elements composing our society has not reached a desirable point. 
On the other hand, events taking place in our national scene point 
to other directions. 

Ethnic, Linguistic and Ideological 
Composition of the Society 

These 7,000 islands constituting the national territory were 
originally inhabited by waves of migrants of people who, while 
belonging to the Malayo-Polynesian racial stock, spoke different 
tongues and possessed different shades of culture. In the course 
of their sociopolitico- cultural development, they were period- 
ically exposed to variegated cultural influences, thus widening 
the gap of their cultural differences. 

The resultant outcome is such that today they are as diverse 
as they were yesterday. In short, these factors developed a plural 
society. A contemporary sociologist of note, Gustave E. Von 
Grunebaum, has defined pluralism in this wise: 

Pluralism is the coexistence within a political, religious 
or cultural unit if smaller bodies, whose recognized dif- 
ferences from the dominant group and/or from one another 
will not yet exclude them. Such pluralism is almost of 
necessity predominantly cultural in its visible manifesta- 
tions; it may be based on religious divergencies; but it is in 
the cultural life of the groups that the religious differentia- 
tion makes itself felt. When the self-consciousness of the 
sub-units results in their developing political aspirations, 
pluralism tends to yield to separatism. The road from casual 
political collaboration of people of various backgrounds 
through an increasing cultural self-consciousness, and a re- 
sulting transitional phase of pluralistic coexistence, to 
nationalistic separatism has been travelled a number of 
times within the last century - the disintegration of the 
Ottoman and Hapsburg Empires is perhaps the best known 
example. 

Historical Background of the 
Sociopolitical Development of the 
Diverse Elements of the Society 

This problem is further complicated by the historical back- 
ground of the sociopolitical and cultural development of the 
diverse elements of the society. 

Before the coming of the major ideological cultures to which 
they had been exposed, the different settlements in these islands 
were organized into different political entities called balangays, 
barangays, banwas, bawangens, kampongs, torogans and terms of 
similar import. Analysis of these different terms conveyed the 
idea of a primitive sense of sociopolitical evolution. 

The first m^or culture that came to the shores of the different 
islands was Islam. For proper understanding of the degree of its 
influence over the then developing and independent communities 
in the different islands, let us define what Islam is. In its technical 


796 


meaning, it is “complete submission to or acceptance of the will 
of Allah (the Islamic term for God)”. For a more neutral view of 
what is Islam, let us quote a non-Muslim, Dr. W. Montgomery 
Watt of the University of Edinburgh, in his book. What is 
Islam? : 


XXX The word Islam is properly a verbal noun meaning 
“the surrendering of oneself’ (sc. to God), and Carlyle ex- 
pands this in his own way. 

. . . and then also “Islam,” that we must submit to God. 
That our whole strength lies in resigned submission to Him, 
whatsoever He do to us. For this world, and for the other! 


He quotes a saying of Goethe, “If this is Islam, do we 
not all live in Islam? ” Then he further expands. 


It has even been held the highest wisdom for a man not 
merely to submit to Necessity - Necessity wUl make him 
submit, - but to know and believe well that the stern thing 
which Necessity had ordered was the wisest, the best, the 
thing wanted there. To cease his frantic pretension of scan- 
ning this great God’s world in his small fraction of a brain; 
to know that it had verily though deep beyond this sound- 
ing, a just law, that the soul of it was good ... A man is 
right and invincible, victorious and on the road towards 
sure conquest, precisely while he joins himself to the great 
deep Law of the World, in spite of all superficial laws, tem- 
porary appearances, profit- and-loss calculations; he is vic- 
torious while he cooperates with the central law, not vic- 
torious otherwise: — and surely his first chance of cooperat- 
ing with it, or getting into the course of it, is to know with 
is whole soul that it is: that it is good, and alone good! 
This IS the soul of Islam; x x x (What is Islam? pp. 5-6). 


Islam then is the name of a “religion ” but then the Islari 
concept of religion which in Arabic is called din, is quite diffen 
P ^ 3nd western concept of the meaning of religk 

s purpose, again we quote Dr. W. Montgomery Watt: 

Prejudice is only one of the difficulties to be met by the 
^uropean or American student of Islam. As soon as he 
Islam as “the religion of the Quran” or 
hP‘ ? ^ hundred million Muslims of today,’' 

w ^ ^^legory which does not fit, the category of 

dental^ A f ^^at does “religion’' now mean to the occi- 
soendino Ordinary man, it means a way of 

him <?nm Sundays in practices which give 

lems of strength in dealing with the prob* 

.ora,ds 1" him to be friendly 

sexual nm Persons and to maintain the standards ol 

merce or nothing to do with com 

At * economics or politics or industrial relationships 

prosperous indT-n^ attitude of complacency in the mon 
mav^ 1 breeds smugness. The Europeai 

ploite^'rof as an opiate developed by ex 

f.h l/t keep them ii 

Kri V different from the connotations to th 

Muslims of the verse 3.19/17 :“the true religion with Goi 
IS Islam. The word translated “religion” is din, which i 
Arabic commonly refers to a whole way of life. It is not 
private matter for individuals, touching only the per 
phery of their lives, but something which is both privat 


and public, something which permeates the whole fabric of 
society in a way of which men are conscious. It is — all in 
one — theological dogma, forms of worship, political 
theory, and a detailed code of conduct, including even 
matters which the European would classify as hygiene or 
etiquette. If this is how the Muslim sees the din of Islam, 
how is it to be described to the European? (What is 
Islam? p. 3) 

That Islam has influenced the formation and development of 
the different political entities developing in the different islands 
in the archipelago is quite well-known. Islam has given to the dif- 
ferent developing political entities in the islands an ideology and 
direction, replacing the primitive concept of society formed in 
the minds of the inhabitants of the different islands. Evidence 
of the influence of Islam in the development of the different 
sociopolitical societies in the archipelago is numerous. The glory 
of the Sultanate of the Sulu Sultans, the grandeur of the 
Sultanate of Dipertuan Qudarat of Maguindanao, the Code of 
Kalantiao, the patriotic valor of Datu Lapulapu, the ferocity of 
the nascent kingdom of Rajah Sulaiman, and even the legendary 
majesty of Princess Urduja of Pangasinan are some of the 
testimonials of the influence of Islam in the development of 
sociopolitical thoughts in the archipelago. 

Colonial Period 

The 16th century has witnessed another epochal event which 
had strongly influenced the direction to which the cultural 
development of the country had turned to. This could be 
properly referred to as the “colonial period” of this country — 
when Spain, motivated by territorial conquest and the imposition 
of the so-called European Christian Civilization, came to colonize 
the different islands. Imposing its will by means of force upon the 
different ethnic groups populating the different islands, it pressed 
upon these different groups its beliefs and imposed its political 
rule over the different principalities and sultanates that had fallen 
under its sway. Where they succeeded, they eliminated the 
political structure of the different groups which were then in dif- 
ferent stages of development, and in its stead rammed into the 
throats of these people the political structure of the Spanish 
Christian political system. Where they were not strong enougli to 
suppress the people who obstinately resisted, as in the case of the 
different ethnic groups populating a great portion of the island of 
Mindanao and the archipelago of Sulu as well as the hardy tribes 
of the hinterlands of northern Luzon, the same resulted into 
centuries of armed conflict where hundreds of thousands — even 
millions — of lives were lost from both contending parties. This, 
naturally, stagnated the cultural and political development of 
those involved in this strife, a price they paid to preserve their 
independence from the colonial rule of Spain. 

The American Imperialism 

Almost at the close of the last century and at the beginning of 
the current period just when the Tagalogs, the Visayans, the Ilo- 
canos, the Pampangos, the Bicolanos — who now constitute the 
cultural majority — were at last inspired to rise up in arms and 
join the ranks of those who had been fighting the invaders who 
enslaved them for centuries, the United States of America de- 
feated the Spaniards who were on the verge of being driven away 


797 


by the combined native forces. Spain surrendered to the United 
States and the whole archipelago was handed to the United States 
as a prize of that war. All anned resistance was suppressed either 
by force or by dubious means. The different tribal governments 
and ethnic groups fell one after the other. Then, willingly or 
unwillingly, they were herded into one administrative control 
under the sovereign rule of the United States of America. The dif- 
ferent ethnic groups which had not been conquered by the 
Spaniards were completely conquered this time and, like the 
others that had earlier fallen victims to the Spaniards, they had to 
accept the political structure that was rammed down their throats 
by the new master. All the different political systems to which 
they had been accustomed and which they had developed during 
all these centuries were completely wiped out and, in their places, 
America forced its system upon them. 

NARI or PAANO NGAYON? 

In the light of this revelation, we have to answer the question: 
“What are we to do? ” To me, the answer is this august body. 

I dare say that it is a must that in reframing our fundamental 
law it should be the highest sense of patriotism for all of us to 
analyze the basic problems that confront us, not tlie least of 
which is the problem of achieving a national community. Let us 
reconstruct our political thoughts in order to reconstitute the 
same to conform to the basic philosophy of all the diverse ele- 
ments that make up our society. Let us not hesitate even to 
reconstruct our governmental structure, if necessary, to make it 
conform to the basic ideals of the divergent groups comprising 
our society. Let us abandon the “strai^acket” to which we were 
plunged by our erstwhile masters as a condition sine qua non to 
the grant of a political freedom and which became the basic cause 
of our failure to imbue the society with a desirable sense of 
oneness and a common destiny. For unless we can bestow to our 
people a sense of oneness and common destiny, there seems to be 
no possible recourse to contain the process of disintegration goihg 
on in our very midst, involving not only a certain sector of our 
society but its whole entirety. Again, let us listen to the wisdom 
of a statement by Dr. Cesar Adib Majul relevant to this particular 
issue: 

The present day requirements of a developing society 
which is a universal phenomenon make it crucial to 
emphasize the positive contributions of divergent groups 
or sub-cultures within the wider community. The experi- 
ences of some of the most developed countries which are 
competing with one another to serve as models of what a 
modern society should aim at, demonstrate that it is infi- 
nitely wiser to maximize the efforts of every group in the 
body politic rather than to suppress one in favor of a 
majority. 

Les sons in His tory 

Let us, by all means, take lessons from history. The idea of 
federation of states as distinguished from a strictly unitary system 
of government is a direct result of mankind’s revolt against the 
unitary and centralized governments of the monarchies and 
oligarchies of the past. It is a part of the democratization of 
human society. 


In the history of almost all the nations of the world when 
diverse groups decide to form themselves into larger unities and 
execute “sociopolitical contracts” as the basis of their union, 
more often than not they come out with a federal government — 
“a government of a federal community characterized by a 
territorially diversified pattern of foci or attention . . .” (Encyclo- 
pedia Britannica). 

A federal system, above all other systems, provides the 
maximum opportunity for separate and diverse communities to 
organize themselves into larger unities as illustrated by the histo- 
ries of Switzerland, the United States, Canada, Australia, Ger- 
many and a host of more recent examples, like the Soviet Union, 
India, Malaysia, and many others. 

One of the most recent, India, evolved a diversified federal 
system of its own only after 1947 as a means of providing a 
“basis” for solving the problem of how to organize an effective 
democratic government for its richly differentiated people. It is 
the most complex system ever devised. Some would deny its 
true federal character because of the broad powers granted 
to the central government. But the weight of local traditions - 
linguistic, religious, cultural - is so great that the provinces tend 
to gain rather than lose in strength. The system is still evolving 
and the end is not in sight, but it is possible to argue that without 
the techniques of federalism, Indian constitutional government 
could not have been achieved. (Encyclopedia Britannica), 

On the other hand, we have examples of nations with a unitary 
system. Most of these are either composed of a homogenous 
society that has a long history of evolution under a traditional 
sovereign, like that of Japan and Great Britain or diverse com- 
munities that grouped together and achieved nationhood from a 
former colonial power, either by force of arms like Indonesia or 
by parliamentary struggle like the Philippines. In most of the 
latter samples, a great many of them are still to achieve a consti- 
tutional government, not to say a democratic constitutionalism, 
like Indonesia, Pakistan and many others. And even those that 
have achieved some degree of constitutionalism like the Philip- 
pines are showing signs of instability. Even traditional unitaty 
systems of government in Europe are beginning to show signs of 
instability. Let me quote a newspaper article by an Associated 
Press writer, Rodney Angove, published in The Manila Times 
issue of July 7, 1971, entitled: “Unrest in Europe, MINORITIES 
MOVE TO IMPOSE RIGHT”: 

PARIS (AP) - In a dozen West European countries, 
more than a score of minorities are trying to assert them- 
selves. 

They are nationalists, separatists, autonomists, regional- 
ists or those who are culturally obsessed. Few make head- 
lines abroad, except the Irish Republican Army in Northern 
Ireland. But motivations are much the same everywhere - 
race, culture, language and economic status. 

Some of these countries affected have a unitary system of 
government, like Britain, Spain, France and Italy. 

CONCLUSION 

Under this situation, I dare say that if to achieve unity we have 
to retrace our steps and divide the country into several autono- 
mous states bound together by a common goal and sense of 


798 


oneness, we should not hesitate to do so. If unity cannot be 
achieved in a strictly unitary system as experience has taught us, 
then by all means let us revert to the only option left open for us: 
UNITY IN DIVERSITY — which seems to be the goal fixed for us 
by Divine Wisdom when our ancestors, belonging to a common 
racial strain but speaking different tongues and guided by the same 
Divine Providence, ventured through uncharted seas to these 
beautiful islands separated by natural barriers yet belonging to 


the same geographical region. 

For the sake of the hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of 
precious lives of our kith and kin that were sacrificed in the fields 
of battle to defend their new-found paradise for us, their 
progeny, let us forge that unity on the anvil of necessity. Per- 
chance, God Almighty Whose Providence controls the destiny of 
man and nations, will grant that we can preserve these beautiful 
isles for the generations yet to come. 


799 


LETTER-PETITION TO PRESIDENT MARCOS RE AUTONOMY 
MINDANAO, SULU, PALAWAN, BASILAN AND TAWI-TAWI 


15 July 1975 

His Excellency 

President Ferdinand E. Marcos 
Malacanang, Manila 

Your Excellency: 

Anent the resolution brought up by the Second Zamboanga 
Conference of July 1, 1975, we the undersigned - Maranaos, 
Maguindanaos, Tausogs, Iranons, Yakans, Samals, Mindanao- 
Bisayans, Higaonons, Subanons, Manobos, Tirurays, Bilaans, 
Bagobos, Badjaos, Kulibogans, Tagalibis, Tagakaolos, and Kala- 
gans, Muslims and Christians alike — all indigenous inhabitants of 
the different provinces and cities of Mindanao, Sulu, Palawan, 
Basilan and Tawi-Tawi, most respectfully submit to Your 
Excellency this position paper. 

I - INTRODUCTION 

In 1970, certain non-native elements from other parts of the 
country, motivated by various interests and ulterior motives — 
economic, religious or political — organized para-military groups 
called Ilaga. The Ilaga started its rampage of indiscriminate killing 
of natives — men, women and children — burning their dwellings 
and places of worship, looting their properties, grabbing and 
occupying their lands, which exacted from the natives the loss of 
thousands of lives, while hundreds of thousands of them were 
driven from their homes, displaced and dispossessed of their 
ancestral lands aggregating to several million hectares; their losses 
amounting to billions of pesos. 

II - HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF RESPONSES AND 

REACTIONS 

The Ilaga depredation continuing unabated with no tangible 
relief or protection from their government, the Muslim and some 
of the members of the cultural communities, in desperation, took 
up arms against the Ilaga hordes but soon found themselves in 
confrontation with government forces. Intermittent battles flared 
up and developed into a large-scale war. 

The “Muslim world” felt increasing concern for the plight of 
the Philippine Muslims. The Islamic foreign ministers conferring 
in Benghazi, Libya, decided to send a fact-finding mission com- 
posed of the foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Libya, Somalia 
and Senegal. Thereafter, upon the conclusion of the Second 
Islamic Summit at Lahore, Pakistan, they again sent to the Philip- 
pines the late Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, H.E. Sayed Omar 
Al-Saqqaf, who conferred several times with Your Excellency. 
The report of these several missions to the Philippines was passed 
upon by the Islamic foreign ministers in their Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) Conference in June 1974, and expressed deep anxiety 
over the situation of the Philippine Muslims. In a resolution, it 


called upon the Philippine government to desist from all measures 
which resulted in the killing of Muslims and destruction of their 
properties and places of worship. Convinced that the socio- 
economic measures proposed to improve the condition of the 
Muslims would not by themselves solve the problem, it urged the 
Philippine government to find a political and peaceful settlement 
through negotiations with Muslim leaders and representatives, 
including the Moro National Liberation Front, in order to arrive 
at a just solution within the framework of the national sover- 
eignty and territorial integrity of the Philippines. In time, its 
Secretary-General, H.E. Syed Mohammad Hasan Al-Tohamy, on 
several trips, conferred with Your Excellency. This brought about 
the Jeddah Negotiations last January 1975, during which Your 
Excellency sent Executive Secretary Alejandro Melchor, Jr. and 
party to discuss the negotiations with the representatives of the 
Moro National Liberation Front. 

The Philippine government position was that, short of 
granting complete independence, it was willing to talk with the 
MNLF representatives. On the other hand, the MNLF lowered its 
demand - from that of complete independence or secession - to 
local autonomy with adequate safeguards to guarantee the 
preservation of the natives’ lives, honor, culture, property, eco- 
nomic development and religious and political freedom. This 
demand stemmed as the natural consequence of the Ilaga depre- 
dations which constrained the natives to polarize their objective- 
that the only recourse for the protection and preservation of their 
lives and property is the adoption of measures to guarantee their 
safety from the rest of the country and to be able to govern 
themselves in the way they want. 

Ill - OUR STAND 

The Muslim Conference on Government Policies and Programs 
for Muslim Mindanao called by the government at the Mindanao 
State University in June 1974, gave us opportunity to indorse 
Ansar el Islam Manifesto of May 31, 1974, fully convinced that 
the only just and workable and feasible political solution to the 
crisis, short of secession, is the granting to us of complete local 
autonomy with a defined and guaranteed territorial jurisdiction, 
and a legislative power to adopt laws. Unfortunately, however, no 
semblance of action was given this demand by those concerned. 

The opinions of leaders of the natives, such as Delegate Sergio 
F. Tocao of Cotabato, former Senator A.D. Alonto and former 
Senator Mamintal A. Tamano of Lanao - that of Delegate Tocao 
having been manifested in his speech at the Ansar el Islam Sym- 
posium at the Mindanao State University Campus in 1972; that 
of Senator Alonto, in his paper submitted at the Mindanao 
Executive Development Academy Conference at Cagayan de Oro 
City in February 1975 ; and that of Senator Tamano, in his letter 
to Your Excellency dated 22 February 1975, all agree on this 
principle of complete local autonomy. Many other leaders of the 


800 


Mindanao-Sulu-Palawan-Basilan-Tawi-Tawi region hold the same 
view. 

In the first Zamboanga Conference in April 1975, the Ansar el 
Islam reiterated the same demand — first, by sending a letter 
dated April 13, 1975, along with enclosures, to Your Excellency; 
and, secondly, by presenting copies of the same letter and enclo- 
sures to the conference for the guidance and action of all con- 
cerned. The enclosures consisted of a copy of the Ansar el Islam 
Manifesto of May 31, 1974; copy of Senator Taman o’s letter of 
22 February 1975 ; copy of the speech of Delegate Tocao of April 
29, 1972; and copy of the paper of Dr. Alonto at the NEDA 
Conference on 17-21 February 1975 at Cagayan de Oro City. 
There was also attached a copy of an office memorandum of the 
Office of Executive Secretary Alejandro Melchor, Jr. from the 
P.D. Secretariat, proposing “An Act Creating the Bangsa Moro 
Special Province,” harmonious with the Complete Local 
Autonomy Concept. Again, no action thereon was given. 

When the Second Zamboanga Conference was called by the 
government purposely to refer to the conferees the draft agenda 
^ mitted by the Committee of Four of the Islamic Foreign 
Ministers Conference, news accounts thereof were released - 
from which we learned about the proposals of the draft agenda, 
e ee very strongly that the proposals therein are in full con- 


formity with the desires of your petitioners herein along with the 
rest of the natives of these islands. In letter and spirit, the pro- 
posals do not impugn upon the integrity and sovereignty of the 
Philippine government, and that they are the just and proper 
bases upon which a continuation of the Jeddah Negotiations can 
be made. As a matter of fact, the ideas coming from both the 
government side and the different groups of the native populace 
of these islands fall within the concept of that proposed agenda. 

We, therefore, jointly petition Your Excellency to cause the 
resumption of the Jeddah Negotiations on the basis of the afore- 
said draft agenda submitted by the Committee of Four of the 
Islamic Ministers Conference. God may yet grant to save us from 
the fate to which our neighbors in Indochina have fallen. 

Respectfully submitted: 

(Printed Names & Signatures) (Addresses) 

(NOTE: The original of this letter-petition bears over 100,000 
signatures of bona fide natives of Mindanao, Sulu, Palawan, 
Basilan and Tawi-Tawi representing a cross section of Muslims, 
Christians and other religious denominations and of different 
social, economic and political persuasions.) 


801 


MANIFESTO OF THE AA/SA/? EL ISLAM 


The ANSAR EL ISLAM, a Movement of Muslim whose over 
half a million members are found in all Muslim communities in 
the Philippines, the sole objective of which is the complete 
establishment of Islam in all aspects of their way of life, on the 
occasion of the “Muslim Conference on Government Policies and 
Programs for Muslim Mindanao” called by President Ferdinand E. 
Marcos to be held on June 4-6, 1974, at the Mindanao State 
University, Marawi City, 

(1) AGREES to the holding of the Conference as it affords 
the Movement a chance to declare its stand, along with those of 
the other sectors of the Muslim communities; 

(2) STATES that since its founding five years ago, the Move- 
ment has been concerned with the search for a solution to the 
cancerous problems facing our country ; and 


(3) DECLARES that the only workable solution to the 
national crisis in relation with the Muslim communities, short of 
complete independence for them is the granting to them of a 
complete local autonomy the following basic features, among 
others, to be guaranteed: 

a. A defined and guaranteed territorial jurisdiction; and 

b. A legislative power to adopt local laws based on the Holy 
Qur’an and the Sunnah of the Holy Prophet (Peace be upon 
him). 

Lanao Islamic Center, Marawi City, Philippines, May 31, 1974. 

(Copy of the MANIFESTO presented by ANSAR EL ISLAM at the 
Opening Session of the “Muslim Conference on Government Policies and 
Programs for Muslim Mindanao,” held at the Mindanao State University, 
Marawi City, Philippines, on June 4-6, 1974. The original of this Manifesto 
contains 20,000 signatures.) 


802 


Republic of the Philippines 
1986 CONSTITUTIONAL COMMISSION 
Quezon City, Metro Manila 

CAUCUS 


Date ; August 15, 1986 

1:21 P.M. 


HON. WILFRIDO V. VILLACORTA 
HON. BERNARDO M. VILLEGAS 


Venue : South Caucus Room “A” & “B” 

Batasang Pambansa Complex 
Quezon City, Metro Manila 

Attendance : 

Present; 


HON. CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 
HON. YUSUP R. ABUBAKAR 
HON. FELICITAS S. AQUINO 
HON. ADOLFO S. AZCUNA 
HON. TEODOROC. BACANI 
HON. JOSE F.S. BENGZON, JR. 

HON. PONCIANO L. BENNAGEN 
HON. JOAQUIN G. BERNAS 

HAM fJ;°^GEL ROSARIO BRAID 
HON. LINO 0. BROCKA 

HON. JOSE D. CALDERON 

HON. CRISPINOM.de CASTRO 
HON. JOSE C.COLAYCO 
I;°^hilariog.davide,jr 

HON. VICENTE B. FOZ 

G. GARCIA 

HON martin C. GASCOh 

HON. JOSE B. LAUREL JR 

^ULOGlOR.fEkl^S' 

HON MAAMBONG 

HON monsod 

HON 

HON. BLAS F. OPLE 
HON. AMBROSIO B PADILT a 

HON.MmDALUZM QUEsa^^ 

HON. NAPOLEON G.'Sa 

HON, RUSTICO F, DE WS reyp^ n 
HON. cirjlo a. rigos ■ 

HON. FRANCISCO A. RODRIGO 

HON. RICARDO J.ROMULO 
HON. RENE V.SARMIENTO 

HON. JOSE E. SUAREZ 
HON. CHRISTINE TAN 
HON. GREGORIO J. TINGSON 
HON. EFRAIN B. TRENaS 
HON. LUGUM L. UK A 


CHAIRPERSON 


Secretariat 


Atty. Flerida Ruth P. Romero — Secretary -General 
Mr. Roberto P. Nazareno 


Mr. Albert Almendralejo 
Atty. Godofredo C. Nicdao 
Ms. Nanette Ramos 
Ms. Avelina S. Mallare 
Ms. Evangeline H. Santos 
Ms. Ophelia Miguel 
Ms. Annie Balagot 
Ms. Edna Carbonell 
Ms. Linda Pagayucan 
Ms. Wilhehnina Salvino 
Ms. Natividad C. Vergara 
Mr. Ariel Teoxon 
Mr. Jose Fatales 
Mr. Dando Roldan 


— OSEC 

— Committee Secretary 

— Committee Assistance Unit 

— OSEC 

— Debate Stenographer 


- 

— do — 

— 

— do — 

— 

— do — 

- 

— do — 

- 

— do ~ 

— 

— do — 

— 

- do - 

- Page 

- Page 


— Technician 


The meeting was called to order at 1:21 p.m. 

THE CHAIRPERSON (Hon. Cecilia Munoz Palma). 
The caucus is called to order. 

The committee can now deliberate on the proposed 
amendments. I think everybody has a clean copy of 
Section 1. Please go over it. This already includes all 
those that have been accepted. Plural ba itong “levels”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Raised the levels; standard of living, 
instead of “level.” 

MR. MONSOD. The phrase “standard of living” is 
much clearer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. I think “standard” is a better 
word for the layman to understand. 

MR. OPLE. I prefer the word “standard.” 

MR. COLAYCO. How about “quality of life”? 

MR. OPLE. I accepted the amendment of Bishop 
Bacani. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. So we go back to “standard.” 


803 


“To raise the quality of life.” 

MR. OPLE. Instead of “standard of living.” 

MR. MONSOD. Especially the underprivileged. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. For all, especially the under- 
privileged. 

MR. MONSOD. Mas maganda iyon. 

MR. OPLE. Maganda na ang Section 1. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Maganda na. Puro Filipino na 
ang nakikita ko rito at saka inalis na rin iyong salitang 
“both.” 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes, Commissioner Foz. 

MR. FOZ. May we suggest changes? 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Please proceed. 

MR. FOZ. In the first paragraph, the fifth line, “sus- 
tained increase in the amount of goods and services. . .” 
is somewhat the same as the line which begins with “and 
an expanding productivity. . .” 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, it is the effect of economic 
concepts. One is economic growtli. You can increase the 
amount of goods and services without increasing 
productivity by expanding hectarage and by employing 
more people, but the productivity per unit may be 
declining. 

MR. FOZ. How about the phrase “produced by the 
nation”? Can we do away with that? 

THE CHAIRPERSON. No. 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, because of the difference 
between the gross national product and gross domestic 
product. Sometimes our national product will include 
those that are being produced abroad. 

MR. FOZ. Those that are imported. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes. 

MR. FOZ. Then, perhaps it is not necessary to use the 
word “and.” Maybe it is a matter of style. And accord- 
ing to Commissioner Jamir, maybe we can do away with 
the word “the” on line 2, Section 1. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “Founded on effective control by 
Filipinos.” 


MR. FOZ. Yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Could we go back to the first sentence 
amendment because the phrase “founded on effective 
control of Filipinos” is a dangling apposition. It should 
be “that is effectively controlled by Filipinos.” 

MR. FOZ. Instead of “founded”? 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, because it is a dangling apposi- 
tion. 

MR. FOZ. It does seem dangling. 

MS. AQUINO. “That is effectively controlled by 
Filipinos.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. “The State shall develop a 
self-reliant and independent national economy that is 
effectively controlled ...” 

MR. OPLE. We can delete the words “That is.” 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, we can delete “That is.” 

MR. OPLE. Would Commissioner Aquino consider 
just a slight transposition here: “The State shall develop 
a self-reliant and independent national economy under 
the effective control of Filipinos,” or “under effective 
Filipino control.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. “Effectively controlled.” 

MS. AQUINO. Mas positive yata at saka active ang 
“effectively controlled by Filipinos.” Delete founded 
on the.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes. 

MR. COLAYCO. Madam President. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes, Commissioner Colayco. 

MR. COLAYCO. I have a proposal on the third line 
before the last one on the first paragraph. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Please read it. 

MR. COLAYCO. “Produced by the nation for the 
benefit of the Filipino people.” If it is produced by our 
country, it should be obvious that it will be for our 
benefit. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Not necessarily. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Not necessarily; these are mostly 
exported. 

MR. COLAYCO. But even if these are exported, they 
are for the benefit of the Filipino people. Because we 


804 


have been emphasizing “Filipino” here three times; it 
seems that we are not too sure that we are doing all 
these for us. 


MR. BENNAGEN. I think we need that for a sharp 
break, as it were. 

MR. COLAYCO. Right; I think we are overdoing this. 
THE CHAIRPERSON. All right. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think the concept of 
Justice Colayco is with priority to the basic needs of the 
Espino for an expanding productivity. This is, I think, 
his concept — that being export-oriented could benefit 
us — but if it were more explicit by saying “with more 
priority to the basic needs ...” 

VILLEGAS. That is included in the other 

section. 


MR BENNAGEN. I just wish that it becomes part of 
the understanding of the provision. 

MR VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. MONSOD. That can be read into the minutes. 

MR ABUBAKAR. I think this word “sustained” is a 
drive to impress upon the Filipino people that our 
economy should continue to increase, of course. 

MR. MONSOD. That is right. 

MR ABUBAKAR. And that sustaining strength is a 
compulsion on our people to produce more in terms of 
economic goods. 

MR BENNAGEN. But it has acquired a certain mean- 
ing in western society which has been technologically 
dominated even at the expense of natural resources. 


MS. ROSARIO BRAID. Yes, but that is, I think, the 
idea. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. Yes, but what is sustained there in 
their conception? 


MR MONSOD. Why not say “for the benefit of the 
people ? 


MR BENNAGEN. Sustained — in the sense of 
potential goods and services, sometimes at the expense 
of the natural resources. 


THE CHAIRPERSON. The word “Filipino” is 
deleted, yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is understood that it means the 
Fihpmo people. 


MR. VILLEGAS. I think the provision would 
guarantee the quality of life. 

MR BENNAGEN. Yes. I just wish that becomes part 
of the understanding of the committee. 


MR. BENNAGEN. If 
ourselves . . . 


we have become allergic to 


.p™® chairperson. There 
Fihpmos” here. 


are already too many 


MR OPLE. But let us put this in perspective. Goods 
and services here merely pertain to GNP, real GNP 
growth, although we like to say that GNP can be mis- 
leading because it can be maldistributed. 


MR BENNAGEN. Madam Chairman. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes, Commissioner Bennagen. 

pression of ^ because it gives the im- 

that is a consumerist society. I mean, 

whether that Principle here, and I do not know 

Sberatit committee during the 


MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR OPLE. It is also true that GNP growth rate in 
real terms correlates with a society, the fulfillment of 
a society’s need in the welfare of the citizenry especially 
in employment. Consider that our GNP fell by four 
percent in 1984, three-and-a-half, I think, in 1985, and 
at the end of this year, we hope that we can pose at 
least one percent. Is that correct. Commissioner 
Villegas? 


ten^.*^ VILLEGAS. No, I do not think that is the in- 

MR. bennagen. That is not the intent, but I would 
imagine that it could give that kind of an impression. 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think the intention was to make 
sure that it does not come down. 


MR VILLEGAS. Zero to one. 

MR. OPLE. Zero to one. And we know that all of 
these GNP decreases are correlated with higher unem- 
ployment, many plants shut down; until recently, and 
also with inflation, and so any fall in the increase of 
goods and services correlates with the level of socio- 
economic and human distress, especially for the most 
underprivileged. And so, I think, putting “sustained 


805 


increase in goods and services” here ought to be seen in 
that context that the fire will also keep growing. 

MR. BENNAGEN. All that I am trying to say is for us 
to obviate the understanding that it means potential 
growth of technology which will be covered by goods 
which I think is a lesson . . . 

MR. OPLE. Yes, let us have tliat qualification on tlie 
record. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Will the Gentleman allow me to 
interpellate? 

MR BENNAGEN. Yes. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. We are speaking of sustained 
growth in the production of services and goods, but we 
might correlate this also with our increasing population. 

MR. BENNAGEN. That is the idea, but sometimes 
there is this conflict between population ecology and 
growth and people get the impression that one is at the 
expense of the other. We are saying that there should be 
some kind of sustainability. I would even argue for the 
word “sustainable,” instead of the word “sustain” 
because it allows for continuing sustainability of both 
ecology, human resources and the idea of growth or 
progress. 

MR ABUBAKAR. For example, the idea of growth is 
three percent for 1984; then we have a growth that 
should be more than this. If they are going to sustain 
that and because the Philippine population of 55 million 
will increase to 60 million, we cannot carefully see it on 
the basis of that percentage. There will be a gradual 
increase also. We do not just sustain the growth on the 
basis of the growth that we had in 1 984, 

THE CHAIRPERSON. All right. Let us hear Com- 
missioner Rosario Braid. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I think what Commissioner 
Bennagen is concerned about are the possible conse- 
quences of rapid economic growth in terms of environ- 
ment and social degradation. If we repeated national 
economy twice here on line 3, I wonder if the commit- 
tee would, instead of repeating national economy twice. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Line 2? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. No, keep line 2 but with 
regard to “the goals of a balanced economy,” 
“balance” is a term which would insure that we are 
considering the other factors, too — the social, the 
ecological and that we do not insure that we produce — 
the concept of rising expectations and rising frustra- 
tions, because there is no balance effected by the 
consumption and the production. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. Is this not covered by the words 
and phrases that foUow what the lady Commissioner 
has just stated, which says: “The goal of the national 
economy are a more equitable distribution of oppor- 
tunities, income and wealth, a sustained increase in the 
amount of goods and services produced by the nation 
for the benefit of the Filipino people.” 

' MS. ROSARIO BRAID. My concept is a balance 
between production and consumption. 

MR ABUBAKAR. Is that not covered by the qualifi- 
cation that follows? 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I just wanted to suggest that 
since we have “national economy” twice here, we could 
have “balance” . . . 

MR OPLE. The problem of developing countries is 
that consumption is too low. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. As we have mentioned, that is 
the same section, the Goals of the National Economy. 

MR. VILLEGAS. It is needed. Commissioner Rosario 
Braid has to mention national economy again because 
we are talking about national economy, and we are 
saying, “The national economy has the following 
goals ...” So, even though it is repeated, it is not 
necessarily a repetition. 

MS. ROSARIO BRAID. I just wanted to introduce 
the concept of balance in case the Commissioner wants 
that. 

MR ABUBAKAR. Equitable distribution of oppor- 
tunities, income and wealth would be balanced because 
the product could go into all the elements of the Fili- 
pino population. 

THE CHARPERSON. So, is the first paragraph all 
right? 

MR ABUBAKAR. Yes. 

THE CHARPERSON. Could we proceed to the 
second paragraph of Section 1 ? 

MR. MAAMBONG. Just one question on the second 
paragraph, first sentence, line 4. Does the word “which” 
refer to industries? 

THE CHARPERSON. Is there a period (.) after 
“markets”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. We should have a comma (,) after 
“natural resources” — “through industries that make 
full and efficient use of both human and natural 
resources, . . .” 


806 


MR. MONSOD. Wala na ang salitang “both.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. The word “both” was elimi- 
nated. 

MR ABUBAKAR. Will the chairman read the whole 
paragraph? 

MR. VILLEGAS. “The State shall promote industrial- 
ization and full employment based on sound agricultural 
development and agrarian reform, through industries 
that make full and efficient use of human and natural 
resources, and which are competitive in both domestic 
and foreign markets. However, the State shall protect 
FUipino enterprises against unfair foreign competition.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. We missed the amendment of 
Commissioner Aquino. 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Is the third and last sentence 
necessary? 


ways which we did not enumerate here. Those are all for 
Congress to determine. 

MR SARMIENTO. How about the use of the word 
“unfair”? This is something limiting, because this pre- 
supposes there is a fair foreign competition. And then I 
understand that with the GATT, the word “unfair” has 
been used several times. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Simply state against foreign compe- 
tition because “against foreign competition” would give 
the State complete authority not to import anything 
which would prejudice Filipinos. 

MR. RAMA. The interpretation of the word “unfair” 
would be our interpretation. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. RAMA. Not the interpretation of other people. 


MR VILLEGAS. It is because there are legitimate 
situations where industries in the Philippines have to be 
protected. 

ABUBi^AR. Will that not detail the inflow, the 
commg of foreign capital and foreign investment? 


y^^LEGAS. It win not, if it is done precisely i 
110 ^’°”°”^ foreign compet 

^ concerned about ii 
resourrpJ' ^ sufficient to develop our natun 
emo^nvm ^ ^ industries that whl brin 

rate goods, we should not incorpc 

foreia!f? chapter any interpretation by whic: 
Sn apitalists will be discouraged. 

forei^ h^lestoenL ■ ^ discourag 


MR. VILLEGAS. Let us not listen to the interna- 
tional definition of “unfair,” if we think we are going to 
be prejudiced. But we should not close the PhUippines 
completely to imports because that would be the result 
if we just remove “unfair.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON. On this proposed amendment 
of Commissioner Aquino, that is, to eliminate the word 
“unfair,” can we get a consensus here of those present 
if the consensus is to support the committee, to main- 
tain the committee report on this particular sentence? 
Please raise your hand just to guide us. Can we raise our 
hand, just to get a consensus? 

MR DE LOS REYES. With the explanation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Who are in favor of removing 
the word “unfair”? In other words, who are against 
foreign competition? 


the'^wL suggestion to remove ABUBAKAR. Ut us show the foreigners that we 

e word unfair ? can compete with them. 


commit^e^^^^^^' ^ not accepted by 

committee because it would mean no import at all. 

coraprtiW'?'^^'^' “u' 


MR. MONSOD. Then the Commissioner should vote 
with the committee. 

MR. VILLEGAS. He did. He voted with the commit- 
tee. 


an^n^ijy/i^h^A^'i^^* dumping whenever we hai 
f” IS legitimately infant and will grow i 

ten to fifteen years. j 


THE CHAIRPERSON. No, he voted against. 
So shall we make this 1 9 now? 


MR. OPLE. Tariff or nontariff. 


MR. ABUBAKAR. I give that right to the Madam 
President. 


MR. VILLEGAS. Tariff, quantitative control, any 
way of protecting. Subsidies, for example. Those are 


THE CHAIRPERSON. There are 18 in favor and 7 
against. At least we have a consensus on that. 


807 


MR DAVIDE. Madam President. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes, Commissioner Davide. 

M R. DAVIDE. I would like to add something after 
“competition” - “OR COMBINATIONS IN RE- 
STRAINT OF PHILIPPINE TRADE.” It will read, 
“HOWEVER THE STATE SHALL PROTECT FILI- 
PINO ENTERPRISES AGAINST UNFAIR FOREIGN 
COMPETITION OR COMBINATIONS IN RESTRAINT 
OF PHILIPPINE TRADE.” 

MR. VILLEGAS. So the proponent would just repeat 
what is contained in another paragraph. 

MR. DAVIDE. This is now against foreign competi- 
tion. 

MR. VILLEGAS. But I think that is more in refer- 
ence to local trade. I think there is no harm in repeating 
it. 

MR. OPLE. Just a minute. When we speak of “com- 
binations in restraint of trade ...” 

MR DAVIDE. Philippine trade. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Cartels, for example. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the principal frame of reference is 
cartelization right here in the country. Is Commissioner 
Davide now putting this in a different focus so that 
Philippine enterprises may be protected from combina- 
tions in restraint of trade by foreigners? 

MR. DAVIDE. That is the thrust against foreigners 
because we have another provision here for domestic 
restraints or combinations in restraint of trade. 

MR VILLEGAS. That is right. 

MR. OPLE. Can Chairman Villegas offer a simple 
illustration of how combinations in restraint of trade 
against Filipino enterprises may be brought about? 

MR. VILLEGAS. For example, the most notorious 
case was the cartel of the oil industry, and, of course, 
we could not do very much about it but Aat was an 
international conspiracy of the oil producers. 

MR. MONSOD. Would that not be covered by the 
other section on combinations in restraint of trade? 

MR. VILLEGAS. No, I think that is taken more in 
local trade. 

MR. DAVIDE. No, that provision refers to domestic; 
this is foreign. 

MR. AZCUNA. Madam President. 


THE CHAIRPERSON. Commissioner Azcuna is 
recognized. 

MR. AZCUNA. Can we change that to “TRADE 
PRACTICES” so that it will just refer to “unfair foreign 
competition and TRADE PRACTICES”? 

MR OPLE. It is wider. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. All right, it is accepted by 
everybody. 

MR. VILLEGAS. “. . . against unfair foreign competi- 
tion and TRADE PRACTICES.” 

MR ABUBAKAR. “Unfair foreign competition,” I 
think that embraces unfair trade practices. 

MR VILLEGAS. Not really. 

MR FOZ. How do we state that again? 

MR. DAVIDE. “Unfair foreign competition and 
unfair TRADE PRACTICES.” 

MR. OPLE. Will this include, let us say, Japanese 
cartel in Japan playing one timber country against 
another? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, definitely, the Japanese have 
been doing it systematically. 

MR RAMA There are certain industries in the 
country which are foreign-owned or controlled and 
which have monopolized, in a sense, some basic needs 
of the country, like toothpaste, for instance. In other 
countries, they sell toothpaste or dental cream at very 
much cheaper prices. But I understand that here, it is 
controlled by certain Americans and that is why we are 
buying our toothpaste at a higher price. 

MR. VILLEGAS. That will be covered by the section. 

MR. RAMA. This will be covered by the section? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, on local practices of unfair 
competition and restraint of trade. 

MR. FOZ. Madam President. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Commissioner Foz is recog- 
nized. 

MR. FOZ. I have a little difficulty about the first 
sentence. Are sound agricultural development and 
agrarian reform the bases of full employment? 

MR. OPLE. Industrialization is not something that 
comes full-blown like Venus rising from her shell. It is 


808 ' 


something that is rooted in prior processes that provide 
a platform for meaningful industrialization, and we are 
saying that we cannot industrialize unless we attend to 
our priorities in agriculture, in social justice in agricul- 
ture through agrarian reform. It is through these that 
employment is maximized because land reform and 
sound agriculture, especially high productivity, create 
the mass purchasing power in the countryside that 
makes it possible for industries to sell their products in 
an increasingly widening market. This means we create 
effective demand. Without that demand in the country- 
side, no matter how many factories we establish in 
Manila, they will be shutting down in a short time. 

And so, that is the nexus. It is a very strategic nexus 
and I think what they suggest is that when we engage in 
agrarian reform, we are not only emancipating the 
tenant, changing the structure of the economy into a 
more equitable one, but we are also propelling our 
industrialization by creating mass purchasing power aU 
over the country. 


MR. MONSOD. It is always a question of allocation 
of resources. We are in a situation where capital is 
scarce. The question is: how do we raise employment? 
So if we want to increase employment with scarce 
capital, we first go into activities that are not capital- 
using and increase employment, because if we look at 
our history, the manufacturing output accounted for 1 2 
percent of our gross national product in the 1950s; our 
labor force increased from 7 to 21 million, but the pro- 
portion of manufacturing has not increased at 12 per- 
cent, even while our economy was becoming more 
capital-intensive. That means that the investments we 
have put in industry have not generated greater employ- 
ment proportionately. So, all these necessities, if we do 
not have that much resources or capital, should be 
directed first towards activities that do increase 
employment. 

MR. SARMIENTO. May I just briefly give my input 
on this? 


MR FOZ. In other words, we are saying here that we 
have to develop our agricultural sector first before we go 
to industrialization? 

MR VILLEGAS. Yes. 


MR. OPLE. Most economists consider this a necessity. 

MR. MONSOD. Because when we are in a labor-rich 
M scarce-economy situation, in order to increase 

in labor-intensive 

nrnrtiirifv f ^ agriculture first where the 

then we releases manpower also, and 

° employment; we go into light 

ore gomg into heavy industrialization. 


This was precisely the conflict between Alexander 
Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson. Jefferson was espous- 
ing agriculture before industrialization, but Hamilton 
was espousing industrialization before agriculture. Now, 
what Hamilton said prevailed. So, in the States, it was 
industrialization first before agricultural development. 

In Japan, it was the industries that gave push to its 
agriculture. 

MR. MONSOD. No, Madam President, if we take a 
look at the history of Taiwan, Korea and Japan, f^eir 
industrialization was precisely based on efficient agricul- 
ture. 

MR. BENNAGEN. Madam President. 


strict nrppAH ''^111 j^st have to say that there i« 
think that between agriculture and industry, 

should bp they are interacting. Th 

there are interact in such a manner tl 

becomes that what is good for o 

becomes good for the other and for the whole. 

readJldT^stagr Jhl 

trialization. ready for ind 

pr^ws ^d^a?h^ i meaHhe'^^^^^^^''^’ ^ 

It - -e. ^ 

1 Zl employment, then first we hi 

•fh J t+i ^y^ties that likewise increase employm< 
with a little capital if possible. 


THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes, Commissioner Bennagen. 

MR. BENNAGEN. I think the interaction between 
agricultural development and industrialization m ® 
Third World setting is much more complex tb^ ® 
classical model. What we are saying here is that there 
should be an appropriate interaction between these two 
processes. We cannot deal with agriculture as if it were a 
discrete entity, and industry as if it were a discrete 
entity — one jumping into the other in a qualitative 
manner. 

We are saying here that there could be possibilities for 
small-scale enterprises, intermediate technology and all 
that, before a critical mass becomes possible for us to 
make a qualitative leap into what we call an industrial 
society. So, it is not an either or; it is not a black or 
white relationship. 


MR SARMIENTO. Is Commissioner Monsod telling 
us that we give priority to agricultural development 
before industrialization? 


MR VILLEGAS. That is why the way it is phrased, 
there is Commissioner Brocka’s suggestion about 
sequencing. It is just the idea of a basis. 


809 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, with regard to the 
experience of the United States as stated by Commis- 
sioner Sarmiento, could we find out from Commissioner 
Villegas what propelled industrialization in the United 
States? 

MR. VILLEGAS. Actually, one thing which probably 
the nonspecialists do not pay attention to is that the 
United States is most recognized not for its industrial 
leadership in the world but for its agricultural prowess. 
There is no country in tlie whole world which is as 
strong as the United States in agriculture. 

MR. OPLE. Four percent of the American population 
are engaged in agriculture and they produce surpluses 
for the world. 

MR. VILLEGAS. For the Russians and formerly for 
the Chinese. 

MR. OPLE. Only four percent. 

MR. MAAMBONG. One question. Madam President. 

From my point of view, because I do not know much 
about economics, industrialization is different from 
agriculture. They are two different concepts — indus- 
trialization is one thing, agricultural development is 
another. 

MR. VILLEGAS. We cannot make tliat complete 
distinction. As Commissioner Bennagen was saying, they 
are in symbiotic relationship. 

MR. MAAMBONG. In the second paragraph, when 
we say, “The State shall promote industrialization 
through industries,” I could understand that. But when 
we say, “The State shall promote industrialization and 
full employment based on sound agricultural develop- 
ment,” we are mixing up both, if that is intended. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, of course, because it is a basis. 
Our industries will never be competitive if the raw 
materials that we are processing are produced ineffi- 
ciently. Tliat is exactly the problem with coconut indus- 
trialization. We may put all of the coco chemicals that 
we are now putting up, but still we grow the coconuts. 

MR. OPLE. One way of putting it is, when we put 
more value into our raw materials, then we are describ- 
ing a process of industrialization. 

MR. MAAMBONG. One more point. Do we intend to 
use the word “agrarian” rather than “land”? 

MR. VILLEGAS. I think so, yes, because it is more 
complete. 

MR. MAAMBONG. “Agrarian” is more complete? 


MR. VILLEGAS. Yes, than “land.” 

MR. ABUBAKAR. Madam President, we are more of 
economists. Why do we not go now into reality, actual 
situation? 

MR. VILLEGAS. So the economists are not involved 
with reality. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON. What is the problem of Com- 
missioner Abubakar? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. It is not my problem, it is the 
problem of the Filipino people. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Why? Is the Commissioner 
not a Filipino? What is the problem? 

MR. ABUBAKAR. We have embarked on an indus- 
trialization program however small it is. But in spite of 
this, there is a continuous outflow of our labor force 
into the Middle East and into Southeast Asia, so right 
now, we have about half a million Filipinos outside the 
Philippines who are employed in different regions. How 
do we account for this? If there is already an industriali- 
zation program going on why do we have this continued 
outflow of Filipino labor? I was in the Middle East, I 
visited many of these camps — there are about 1 50,000 
of them, especially in Kuwait in Saudi Arabia. How 
could we account for this? 

MR. OPLE. Of course, I helped establish the Overseas 
Employment Program of the Philippines, and why? I teU 
the Gentleman that we see this in a strategic perspective 
as merely a short- and medium-term approach. The ideal 
situation is one where, like Korea, Taiwan or Japan, we 
export not warm bodies abroad but value-added prod- 
ucts made by our own management and labor. That is 
the ideal situation which we hope we can attain. 

But in the meantime that the economy is not dyna- 
mic enough to accommodate all of these people, I think 
it is right that they take advantage of opportunities 
outside their own country and bring in the foreign ex- 
change earnings, without which our balance of pay- 
ments would be in total shambles. They help send many 
thousands of schoolchildren to high school and college; 
they make it possible to create small business enterprises 
all over the land. 

There are, of course, social costs that sometimes 
become prohibitive, especially from the standpoint of 
women. But since it is an interim policy, we hope that 
one day we will be able to export goods and services 
based on the products of our own labor at home rather 
than send the workers themselves. 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Not warm bodies. 

MR. OPLE. Not warm bodies. 


810 


MR. RAMA. Madam President, may we proceed? 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes. 

MR. VILLEGAS. Shall we go to Section 2? 

THE CHAIRPERSON. Yes. May I leave the Chair to 
the chairman of the committee who will then preside, 
with the permission of the Vice-President. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. May I just request clarification regard- 
ing Section 1 ? 

When we say, “through industries that make full use 
of the national endowment in both human and ...” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). “. . . full 
and efficient use ...” 

MS. AQUINO. Yes, “full and efficient use. . .” 

MR. OPLE. We eliminated “national endowment” on 
the recommendation of Commissioner Davide. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). There is a 
new version. 

MS. AQUINO. Of “human and natural resources”? 
Yes, in any case, does this mean that the basis will be 
to set up key industries that will allow a self-sustaining 
agro-industrial expansion? Ganoon ba ang ibig sabihin 
noon? 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Part of it, 
yes. 

MS. AQUINO. Essentially, it would allow for capital- 
goods industries and intermediate producer-goods indus- 
tries? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Defi- 
nitely. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. There is no limit to the diversifica- 
tion, 

MS. AQUINO. Not necessarily based on an agricul- 
tural economy? 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). No. 

MR. OPLE. No. 

MS. AQUINO. Thank you. 


MR. SARMIENTO. May I just make some minor 
amendments? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Sarmiento. 

MR SARMIENTO. Why is the word “full” used 
twice in paragraph two — “full employment” and “fuU 
and efficient use ” ? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). The repe- 
tition is necessary. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, because this will also include the 
development of high-level manpower. 

MR SARMIENTO. Another minor amendment, the 
deletion of the word “both.” 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. VUlegas). It has 
already been deleted. 

MR SARMIENTO. Thank you. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, just one 
clarification. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. VUlegas). Yes, 
Commissioner de los Reyes. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. I am made to understand that 
the reason we included the word “unfair,” although we 
have voted on it, is that, if we delete the word “unfair,” 
it wUl mean that we can no longer import. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Every 
competition can be decided non grata. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Yes, but I do not think it 
follows. We can import things that we do not have here 
But, for example, despite the locally-made shoes in 
Marikina, we stUl import Florsheim shoes. Is that fair or 
unfair? Florsheim shoes are of better quality but are 
more expensive. 

MR. MONSOD. They also come in at a higher price 

MR. DE LOS REYES. Suppose the price is as cheat) 
as ours? ^ 

MR. MONSOD. Then it is unfair competition. As long 
as they sell it here at a price lower than the domestic 
market price, then it becomes unfair. 

MR. DE LOS REYES. For a more expensive price? 

MR. MONSOD. Then it is up to the consumer to 
decide. 


811 


MR. DE LOS REYES. That is the point. If we have 
enough locally-made shoes here, why do we have to 
import shoes? That is why the word “unfair” should be 
removed. 

MR. MONSOD. Mr. Presiding Officer, that is the dif- 
ference between protecting an efficient producer and 
protecting the market. If we start protecting the market, 
then we do get into problems of allocation, licensing 
and permits because we are saying that this market is 
only for certain enterprises. Then we go back to the 
import-control period and to crony capitalism because 
who is going to have the right to be protected in that 
market? What we are saying here is, we will protect the 
efficient Filipino producer. If it is unfair competition to 
him, then he has every right to protection. 

MS. AQUINO. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Commis- 
sioner Aquino is recognized. 

MS. AQUINO. What would be the positive effect of 
protecting the manufacturing aspect if we do not 
protect the market as well? How can we generate 
gurplus accumulation for investment? 

MR. MONSOD. As a matter of fact, there are many 
ways to do that. We are not saying he should not be 
protected. We are saying there are combinations of non- 
tariff and tariff. But what we are saying is that any 
statement here that opens the door to a complete 
system where we close off the economy is bad for 
industry itself. 

MS. AQUINO. I think that is not the intention. 

MR. MONSOD. Then we should say “unfair” if that 
is not the intention. 

Mr. Presiding Officer, what I am saying is, in eco- 
nomics, if we put foreign competition alone without the 
.^ord “unfair,” then that is protectionism. Now whether 
that is the Commissioner’s perception or not, that is 
what it means in economics. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, prejudi- 
cial question. 

the PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Please 


MR. VILLACORTA. This is just a caucus and all the 
clarifications that the committee is making concerning 
controversial issues such as unfair foreign competition 
might not be properly recorded. 

the presiding officer (Mr. Villegas). It is 
recorded. 

MR. MONSOD. It is. 


MR. VILLACORTA. What I mean is, what is the 
weight of the discussions in this caucus in relation to the 
actual discussions on the floor in terms of the inter- 
pretation of the intent and contemplation of the provi- 
sions that we are discussing? 

MR. OPLE. The Commissioner has a very good point 
because this is not the only occasion when a wealth of 
interpretations coming from the committees and from 
individual members usually get articulated, and yet all 
these will not appear on the Record of the Constitu- 
tional Commission. I think this point can be met if 
someone moves to enter in the Record the deliberations 
of a given caucus of the Commission. 

MR. VILLACORTA. I so move, Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. ViUegas). On the 
floor. 

MR OPLE, Yes, on the floor. 

MR VILLACORTA. I thought I could do it here. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. But if it is approved, then it be- 
comes a procedure for us. 

MR VILLACORTA. So, I will make that motion 
when we discuss it on the floor this afternoon. 

MR. OPLE. Yes. 

MR. BROCK A. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Brocka is recognized. 

MR. BROCKA. May I ask Commissioner Monsod to 
elaborate some more on protecting the market or pro- 
tecting the entrepreneur or the industry? 

MR. MONSOD. Let me put it this way. The whole 
context of import controls in the 1950s and the Board 
of Investments measures capacity concept specify that 
the Philippine market must be protected for Filipino 
enterprises. What does protecting the market mean? 
That means that as long as a Filipino enterprise can 
supply a market regardless of his cost or the quality of 
his products, then he should be the one to produce to 
serve that market. It is possible that some Filipinos will 
have better quality products, but the principle is to put 
up walls to protect that market for certain people. 
Unfortunately when we do that, there are also multi- 
national companies who take advantage of these walls. 
And some of the companies now that have been here for 
20 or 25 years are multinational companies that have 
taken advantage of the wall because we are protecting 
the whole wall, regardless of who is inside. 


812 


What we are saying here is that we really should 
protect Filipino enterprises, the producer. It is the 
producer who is with a handicap because foreigners are 
dumping in the Philippines. It is the producer who has a 
handicap because he is just beginning his enterprise and 
he needs the support of the State as he goes through 
the infant stage. But he should not be an infant forever. 
As a matter of fact, there is one other way to do this, 
which is probably more pro-people. 

Whenever industries apply for protection which can 
be quantitative or tariff, what really should be done is 
to quantify the kind of protection he needs. For he has 
to sell steel at PI, 000 per ton. One can buy steel from 
abroad at P500 per ton, and if we put a 50-percent tariff 
on it, it will cost P750 per ton. Yet we say that during 
the first five years we will protect the Filipino corpora- 
tion. That means we are protecting him to the extent of 
P250 per ton. Our suggestion is this: If he is producing 
100,000 tons a year, tell him to sell at P750 and we will 
give him the money to make the difference. Then 
people will realize that we are subsidizing a specific 
industry , and therefore, they will tell us not to subsidize 
him for more than five years. But there is a hidden 
subsidy by the people when we go into protecting the 
market. When we protect an industry at a time he needs 
it, then it is very clear what kind of subsidy he is 
getting. 

MR. OPLE. Apropos of Commissioner Brocka’s 
concern again. With respect to newsprint, this is a raging 
issue. How much does the State or does the nation 
spend subsidizing PICOP? 

Pirrw monsod. I do not know at this point, but 
rlCOP is not competitive for a very simple reason. The 
conversion cost of wood in the case of PICOP is very 
high because during that time when they were using up 
me forest, they were not being charged enough taxes. 

happened? There are no more forests. Now 
they need tree plantations, and when we try to dupli- 
cate nature, it is more expensive. So right now, they are 
not competitive anymore. 

M R. OPLE. We are paying much more for low quality 
newsprint than if we were to allow some importation of 
newspimt. We have a publisher here in our midst — 
Commissioner Rosario Braid — and all the newspapers 
are agitating for some freedom to import newsprint 
which would be much better and would cost less. PICOP 
I think is now on its 25th year, and it is still regarded as 
an infant industry. Every newspaper reader suffers 
from this. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Maambong. 

M R MONSOD. May I take one more point. When we 
talk about liberalization, we are not saying that the 


industry is no longer protected. We are only saying that 
instead of putting barriers of quantitative restrictions, in 
other words, nontariff, we say that this cannot be im- 
ported or this can only be imported by a few who have 
the license to do it. Instead of saying that, we are saying 
that we will give them 50 percent or 30 percent or 40- 
percent tariff protection but anybody can import, but 
there is still tariff protection. 

What is the difference between a nontariff and a 
tariff protection? With a nontariff protection, we are 
protecting the market. In other words, I import, I get a 
license to import and now I am a monopoly seller. I can 
sell at any price I want because the domestic market 
can only have these products that I am allowed to 
import. That means that the monopoly profits go to the 
enterprises. That is why the vested interest in this 
country wants that because the profits are captured bv 
them. 

With a tariff protection, the tariff revenues go to the 
government and they still have to compete with any- 
body who wants to import. That is the difference. 

MR MAAMBONG. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Maambong. 

MR. MAAMBONG. Can we say in simple terms that 
in the last sentence of the second paragraph, we allow 
fair foreign competition and fair trade practices from 
foreign establishments? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Defi- 
nitely. It has been proved by 200 years of economic 
development that fair trade enhances the welfare of 
people all over the world. Trade is precisely that we can 
make progress. The most self-sufficient communities, 
for example, without casting aspersion on the indigenous 
communities, are the Mangy ans. If we want to go back; 
the Mangyans are very self-sufficient. (Laughter) So, if 
we try to be self-sufficient, that is the surest road to 
underdevelopment if we are not willing to be inter- 
dependent with other peoples. 

MR MONSOD. May I ask Commissioner Brocka if he 
has been sufficiently answered. 

MR. BROCKA. The problem is probably the absence 
of another economic expert who can discuss with us on 
the same level the things that are being discussed right 
now, one who would hold a different point of view or 
different school of thought. That is probably the pro^ 
blem. What is happening right now is that we are getting 
explanations from experts from one school of thought 
What we have here is a layman defending another school 
of thought talking about protectionism, talking about 
things that were given to us by lobbying groups. Frankly 
I thought I did not get myself involved in the dissension 


813 


on the Article on National Economy and Patrimony 
that was being discussed. It was only during the dis- 
cussions that I started realizing that it was important. 

That is why that afternoon when I got a copy of the 
proposals of those lobbying businessmen, the coalition 
now, and they started talking about industrialization, 
protectionism, and Filipinization of the economy, deep 
inside I was hoping that one of them would be a Com- 
missioner, like Mr. Lichauco, or one of those who are 
able to discuss on the same level because he is an eco- 
nomist with years of expertise. And what we have are 
purely full of sound and fury. We get only a little 
bit . . - This is why it is so hard to stand up and talk 
about this because the moment I interpellate, and am 
asked a question, I will never be able to answer. The 
only thing that I could say is that tlie economy is in 
such a state that Jimmy Tadeo was speaking about and I 
got the feeling that this is Juan dela Cmz talking. This is 
the “masa” knocking at the door saying: “You produce 
the raw materials, the raw materials are here; they are 
brought to the United States or foreign countries then 
come back here, and then we buy them.” 

I appreciated the directness of Commissioner Villegas 
because it became very clear when he said “no” to state 
capitalism. In other words, I was working on intuition. 
But I did not want to go into voting because although I 
can say that private enterprise can be the propelling 
energy, the start or the prime mover deep down inside 
is there must be some form of control, some legislation 
that would somehow control this because history has 
taught us that without that kind of control from state 
legislations, then what happens is that we are open to 
the vultures. We cannot fight against the encroachment 
and the intrusion, a matter which was brought up also 
by Commissioner Ople in the Social Justice Committee. 
This is a nagging fear. 

And so what I was carrying was all these fears, but at 
the same time also I am so stifled, I cannot come out 
and speak up because the moment I asked for clarifica- 
tion, it is almost futile. I cannot answer because my 
answers are purely based on the intuition of a Filipino 
as expressed by Jimmy Tadeo. I said it is Juan dela Cruz 
knocking because that sector is the most oppressed and 
has been the victim of oppression for decades. But as I 
looked around, it seems as though the matter did not 
mean anything. 

MR- MONSOD. That is why we are trying to clarify, 
because, for example, there are many ideas that are 
thrown around but have no basis in fact. 

MR. BROCK A. It is easy for the Gentleman to say 

that. 

MR. MONSOD. That is what I was trying to explain. 
We are trying to explain exactly what is nontaiiff and 
tariff protection. That is a matter of pure definition. I 
would just want to make sure that that is not misunder- 
stood. 


MR BROCK A. Yes. I appreciate that. But I am 
speaking from the point of view of the other Com- 
missioners who are not economists and who are not 
experts so that even if Commissioner Ople, for example, 
speaks about this, he is not an economist. I was hoping 
somehow that if there were an economist here who can 
repudiate what has been said, probably from the ex- 
changes of the debates we would understand things 
without even asking questions. As it is right now, after a 
long explanation about this, it is still cloudy and vague. 
The nagging question that is in my mind is: Will we get 
out now of that particular rut that we are in? Commis- 
sioner Villegas spoke about the government having 
failed miserably, not only here in the Philippines, but in 
other countries. There is always a comparison with the 
other countries. I felt like saying, “I do not care about 
the other countries.” But then, of course, it would not 
be prudent to say that. I accept the answer that the 
government has always failed miserably. But deep down 
inside what I was trying to say is that probably this 
is the time to give the government a chance. As I ex- 
plained yesterday, I was in a task force which recom- 
mended State regulation. Some people were wondering 
why somebody who fought in the parliament of the 
streets against State regulation is now recommending 
State regulation. The only answer that I can say is, let 
us give this government a chance. It has given us so far 
a democratic space where we can move. 

MR MONSOD. What we are saying is that this is a 
government program and so let us ^ve the government 
a chance. If we say, “Give the government program a 
chance,” then we have to give it a chance because this is 
what the government wants to do. 

MR VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). May I 
just add something about the fears of Commissioner 
Brocka over no control. 

MR BROCKA. My fear is that the economists who 
are in the committee have connections with some multi- 
national companies. I am sorry I have to say it. This is 
exactly what I fear, and I think what most Commis- 
sioners also fear. Probably, if we know for a fact that 
some of the Commissioners in the committee have 
nothing to do with any multinational company or not 
defending any multinational company, or not, in any 
way, connected with multinational companies, then I 
might be able to accept it completely. But as a Fili- 
pino — I am no longer talking as a Commissioner: I 
am talking as a private citizen - when somebody for- 
mulates policies and the one formulating it has con- 
nections with multinationals my tendency is to have 
suspicion. That cannot be taken away from me because, 
definitely, he will defend himself even though he will 
say, “this has nothing to do with our position or with 
our jobs.” 


814 


MR. MONSOD. Why did the Gentleman come to that 
conclusion? First of all, I hope he is not referring to me. 

MR BROCK A. No, I am not referring to the Com- 
missioner. 

MR MONSOD. I hope he is not because I have no 
connection whatsoever with any multinational. 

MR BROCK A. I am not referring to the Gentleman 
in particular, but what I am saying is that it is human 
nature. If, for example, a lawyer is under the employ of 
a multinational company, definitely he cannot bite the 
hand that feeds him. He cannot hit his employer with 
such conviction and, in all fairness and in aU honesty, 
say that this is the kind of economic policy that wDl be 
good for the Filipinos. There is only one thing that is in 
my mind. That is why I asked, “Is it for the protection 
of the Filipinos? Will it be for the Filipinos for whom 
we are drafting a Constitution”? How can we say that 
when, in the first place, we are in the employ of a multi- 
national company. We will definitely have to defend 
that. That is human nature. 

I could not bring this up for the simple reason that 
others will say I am sowing intrigues. But that is pre- 
cisely the point. I thought that if we have something to 
do with some multinationals, then it would be for 
delicadeza, probably, that we back out. I do not know 
how it can be done. That is the dilemma that I am in. 

MR MONSOD. Maybe we could put it this way. The 
program that is now being approved by the Cabinet and 
by the Cory government is a program that was for- 
mulated by Filipinos. There was not a single foreigner 
involved in that program, and I am willing to give you 
all the names of all the people who participated there. 

MR BROCKA. I am not talking about foreigners. 

MR MONSOD. But this is very important. 

MR BROCKA. I am not talking about foreigners 
being involved. The issue is the vested interest of pro- 
tecting certain interests of multinational companies. 
One CM be Filipino in name; natural-bom, but the thing 
about it is, one can be employed, one can receive favors 
from multinational companies. We cannot help that. 

MR. MONSOD. This was the issue yesterday on the 
question of motivations. If the Gentleman now says that 
there is a cloud over the motives of people, then we are 
back to the issue yesterday on the floor. The Gentle- 
man can have the list of the people and tell me whether 
these people can be considered pro-Filipino or not. But 
what I am saying is that we look at the merits of the 
program because there is a lot of talk saying this is IMF 
and World Bank. 

If we look at the way the program was formulated, he 
will know that many of the aspects of this program were 


objected to by the IMF and the World Bank because 
they did not like it. If there were some aspects of it that 
happened to coincide with what the IMF and the World 
Bank wanted, that does not make it an IMF/World 
Bank program. 

MR BRCKTKA. I just brought out the feelings that I 
have inside. It is not to create trouble or to create in- 
trigue. As I said, when I spoke the other day, I was very 
grateful for the directness of Commissioner Villegas. 
This was exactly what I wanted. I wanted a discussion 
on it before voting because we know very weU that 
there is a lot of lobbying. But the moment the voting 
came in, I knew that it was going to lose. That is not the 
whole point of the caucus. We want to clear up things 
for the simple reason that there are not enough experts 
on economy. 

I was very grateful to Commissioner Villegas for being 
very direct. I took down notes, and I was trying to 
understand what he said. I just brought this out for the 
simple reason that sometimes what happens is that we 
are too nice to each other or we are too polite but we 
are not being honest. I think my colleagues know what I 
am talking about. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Just for 
the record. If Commissioner Brocka is referring to me, I 
can assure him that I am not employed by any multi- 
national. If he is referring to friends of CRC, 80 out of 
these 800 friends are multinationals and, in fact, those 
who were in the galleries watching are friends of CRC. 
So, if the allusion was meant for me as an economist, I 
can assure . . . 

MR. BROCKA. I could not care less about those 
businessmen lobbying. All I am concerned about is what 
Jimmy Tadeo spoke about yesterday because that was 
the “masa” talking. That was Juan de la Cruz knocking 
at the doors of the Constitutional Commission. They 
have been so oppressed all these years, and these are the 
things which I think every Filipino understands. Nasa 
sarili mong bayan, nag-iimport ka, ang iniimport mo 
nanggaling sa atin. Nagbabayad tayo, binibili natin ang 
mga bagay na nanggaling dito. There must be some 
economic policy or industrial policy which would stop 
us from being put to such an insulting position. 

I will take the word of the Gentleman, if he says that 
this kind of policies that is addressed to right now 
would save us from that particular problem. There ’ 
nothing more insulting. One goes to New York and 
realizes that the clothes that he is buying are made 
the Philippines. Three or four years ago, there was n^ 
such thing. If one goes to New York or to Conway h° 
better watch out for aU those trademarks. Items used 
to be from Korea and India. Now they are all over- 
winter clothes and everything. One has to watch out 
because they all come from the Philippines. 

But I take the Gentleman’s word for it. Simple lang 
naman ang ipinaglalaban ng mga Pilipino. Ikaw ay nasa 


815 


saiill mong bay an ngunit ikaw ang nagugutom; ang 
yumayaman ay ang mga multinationals. The rich be- 
come richer, and the gap becomes wider and wider, and 
I think it is up to the Constitutional Commission to be 
able to bridge that gap. We spoke about this in relation 
to the Article on Social Justice. I wanted to stand up 
when there were questions about the process of law and 
the light to eminent domain. I just wanted to stand up 
and say I think social justice should be viewed from the 
point of view of Joel Nabong, the boy who was featured 
in Mr. and Ms. That is a picture of the PhUippines — 
that this malnourished eight-year-old boy died in a land 
of plenty, died in the midst of a supposed rich country. 
Why? One stops to think about it because it has been 
plundered not only by Mr. Marcos but also by foreigners 
with service contracts. These were things that I did not 
know. 

MR. MONSOD. May I just conclude by saying that 
the program now being approved by the government 
would be undermined by a provision in the Constitution 
that is contrary to the philosophy of the economic pro- 
gram of the government now and that is coming in 
through the back door, which we feel is unfair and 
which we should not constitutionalize. Those for the 
other side of the picture were duly listened to in all 
hearings in the making of this program. 

Secondly, I want to tell you that this morning 
Minister Jose Concepcion was quoted or has been 
mentioned in the ad. I talked to Minister Jose Concep- 
cion this morning, and he said he is against constitu- 
tionalizing permanent and absolute protectionism in the 
Constitution because that is bad for Philippine industry 
because he is in favor of the program. He just wants to 
give time for the industry to recover, which is what we 
are putting here when we say that they should be pro- 
tected from unfair competition. It would be unfair at 
this time if they are not given protection when they are 
recovering from the economic debacle. 

MS. AQUINO. May I say something, Mr. Presiding 
Officer? 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer, it is almost time to 
go back to the floor. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes. Can 
we move to Section 2? At least, let us be productive. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Mr. Presiding Officer, I have 
been asking to have the floor since 15 minutes ago, 
and I think I have earned my right to speak after having 
not spoken for sometime. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes. 

MR. VILLACORTA. This is just for clarification, not 
for adversarial reason. I would like to know if there are 
among the more developed countries — Japan, western 


Europe and the United States — protectionist policies 
against not unfair but fair foreign competition. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. ViUegas). There 
are, of course, protectionist policies. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Against fair, not unfair, compe- 
tition? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). They 
interpret it as unfair competition. We are not going to 
accept an international definition of “unfair.” So, that 
word “unfair” still gives a lot of latitude for us to define 
what we mean by it. 

MR VILLACORTA. In other words, there are pro- 
tectionist policies against foreign competition? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Unfair 
foreign competition. 

MR VILLACORTA. And which they interpret to 
be unfair. Mr. Presiding Officer, I am not an economist, 
but I have coauthored some works with an economist. 
Dr. Romeo Bautista, formerly of the NEDA and the UP 
School of Economics. These developed countries do 
have protectionist policies against foreign competition. 
They do not make any reservation. They do not qualify 
whether it is fair or unfair. It seems that if we go by the 
precedence of these developed countries, they do not 
even bother to qualify whether it is fair or unfair. They 
consider it their prerogative to protect their locd 
industries against foreign competition. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. VUlegas). No, I 
think that is not true. If we read all the Congressional 
hearings in the U.S. Congress about the infamous textile 
bill, we will see endless statements why it is unfair for 
the Korean workers to be paid so low, and the Filipino 
workers to be paid a pittance and here we are paying 
our salaries at high levels. They always have the pretext 
of saying that it is unfair. 

MR. VILLACORTA. Then how would they justify, 
for example, their limiting the influx of Philippine 
commodities into the Japanese and American markets? 

THE PRESIDING OFHCER (Mr. Villegas). They say 
it is unfair that our costs here are so low compared with 
their costs that they cannot compete. 


MR VILLACORTA. But the fundamental issue, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, is that it is the prerogative of any 
country — and I think the developed countries recognize 
this end — to give priority and to give protection to 
local industries, which protection some members of the 
committee seemed unwilling to give to the Philippines. 


816 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). We are, 
precisely. 

MR VILLACORTA. Then why do we have to use the _ 
qualification “unfair”? 


MR MONSOD. Because it means something very 
definite in economics and that is what we are saying. 
I cannot take away that word for it has a very clear 
meaning in economic policy. 


MR VILLACORTA. If I may interject, this is not an 
economics document that we are producing. This is a 
document that will reflect or that should reflect reality 
and will also influence reality. The reality of things is 
that most of the competition that we get from foreign- 
ers is unfair. Considering the low level of economic 
development that we have, how can we possibly com- 
pete with foreigners? I am sorry if we sound like a 
broken record. This has been belabored over and over 
this morning and also yesterday, but I would like to 
reinforce the appeal of some Members of this Commis- 
sion, ^though we are probably the minority, that we 
reconsider this majority opinion and that we have to 
apply hard-and-fast economic interpretation. As I said, 
this is not a document for an economics class or an 
economics textbook that we are producing here. It is a 
document that seeks to serve the interest of the Filipino 
people, lam not saying that those who are for retaining 
the word unfair” are anti-Filipino, but I am simply 

askmg tor a reconsideration because it will be criticized 
by postenty here. 


HE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Empiri- 
c y speaking, 55 million consumers are Filipinos and 
we are thinking of them. The moment we say we have 
to remove unfair,” we will perpetuate the situation 
where even industries that are producing highly priced 
mferior goods will adversely affect 55 million Filipinos. 

^ My last statement, Mr. Presiding 

Otticer, is that I do not want to belabor the point. I do 
not think that the consumers of these countries, these 
developed countries, were adversely affected in the same 
m^ner that we are describing 55 million consumers 
who will be suffering, whether in the short run or in the 
long run, from a protectionist poUcy. I think it is an 
imperative of economic development for a country, 
yven the economic stage that we are in, given the under- 
development that we are in, and given the exploitation 
that we have long suffered. I think it is an imperative, 
no less. 


firm. The 214 million consumers were constantly oppos- 
ing the textile bill, that is why it was defeated in 
Congress. So let us follow closely a similar situation. 

MR DE LOS REYES. Mr. Presiding Officer, would it 
make any difference if we just say: “HOWEVER, THE 
STATE SHALL PROTECT FILIPINO ENTER- 
PRISES”? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). That 
would be worse because these people are asking for 
protection for infant industries. 

MS. AQUINO. May I address this to Commissioner 
Villegas? 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Aquino. 

MS. AQUINO. I only wish to clear the air. When I 
proposed the deletion of “unfair,” I did not know that it 
would excite so much rancor and acrimonious debate 
on the floor. I was proceeding from a very basic and 
fundamental premise, as I have explained earlier, but 
I do not want to belabor the issue considering that we 
have decided upon it earlier. Commissioner Monsod is a 
friend and I would like to take exceptions to this 
insinuation about the backdoor maneuver. I was not 
playing agent to any lobby group when I took the floor. 
In fact, I discussed it with him before the plenary 
session was opened. I discussed the possibility of 
deleting the word “unfair” and he said that we do not 
have a viable chance. But then it was proceeding from a 
pure, honest, personal conviction that it was the impera- 
tive of the times and apparently the way the discussion 
here is going, at the instance of the proposal of Com- 
missioner de los Reyes, Commissioner Villegas would 
again say that this group may not like it. 

Apparently, we were going toward that kind of a 
fixation already, and so I would like to clear the air. 
When I moved for the deletion of “unfair,” I was not 
acting as agent to any of these groups. I am sorry that I 
had to clarify that. Commissioner Monsod. 


MR. MONSOD. I did not mean that. Unfortunately, 
there was a coincidence there of use, but I certainly can 
never ascribe to the lady being an agent of anybody. 

MS. AQUINO. I do not even know these people. 

MR. OPLE. Mr. Presiding Officer. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). I am 
afraid the Commissioner has not really watched very 
closely the debate on the textile bill in the U.S. There is 
a very strong statement by Americans that there are 214 
million Americans who have to clothe themselves daily 
and there are only five million employees of the textile 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Yes, 
Commissioner Ople. 

M R OPLE. Before the Floor Leader makes a motion 
to adjourn, I just want to make a point or two. Is it my 
understanding that Commissioner Villacorta will move 


817 


to have the record of this caucus read into the Record 
of the Constitutional Commission? 

MR. VILLACORTA. Yes, I expressed that. 

MR. OPLE. I am for that, and I think the record of 
the caucus can stand some balance which I hope to 
provide. 

We, of course, have learned to depend on Commis- 
sioner Brocka to utter the unutterable. (Laughter) He is 
a great source of honesty and candor, but at the same 
time there is something pretty hazardous about entering 
the realm of motives, when, in effect, out of goodwill, 
certainly not out -of any hostility, we find ourselves 
monitoring the consciences of colleagues. The reference 
to lawyers of multinationals, for example, might put 
some Members of the Commission in embarrassment 
unless this is somehow rectified. I think that we come 
here not from economic and political vacuums. 

We are, in the words of Karl Marx, bound by all the 
material integuments of society and although we may 
represent certain class interests, some political interests 
and other interests, I hope that there is a general pre- 
sumption of good faitli that we are able to act in 
complete independence of any external group. I wanted 
to point out, for example, that when I proposed the 
series of amendments in the committee — and the com- 
mittee members are the living witnesses — I did not anti- 
cipate that there would be a coalition of some groups 
pressing for industrialization in the draft article. These 
were framed and presented even before there were coali- 
tions of this type, and I am glad, however, that there 
seems to be a happy convergence of some fundamental 
thoughts on industrialization as a guiding principle of 
the Article on the National Economy and Patrimony. I 
think if there is a common presumption of good faith 
on our part and the ability to act, in complete inde- 
pendence of any outside forces no matter how close 
ideologically or personally we may be to them, then 
that establishes some standards of comfort for all the 
Members of the Commission. 

On the matter of the debate on Section No. 1 , 1 think 
that there has been a very exhaustive and fair debate in 
which all viewpoints have been taken into account. The 
complaint that perhaps there should be a greater 
equality of expertise on the part of advocates of op- 
posing sides may be too late to repair now. I personally 
would like to see Ding Uchauco or Larry Henares sit 
here as Members of the Commission if the body likes 
that. But, apparently, it is too late to change the compo- 
sition of the Commission. I want to encourage this 
attitude of candor on the part of the Commissioners, 
especially those who suffer from a lack of greater expo- 
sure to economic questions, who must now come to 
terms with themselves on fundamental issues of eco- 
nomic policy. And as Members of the Commission, no 
matter what the differences in our stages of knowledge 
concerning the economy are, I think we have all bravely 
tried to participate, and that is our duty. 


And on the part of the committee, I want to com- 
mend them for the high threshold of tolerance for 
different views that they have manifested. They have 
been under strain, especially this morning and yesterday 
morning. And I think that overall, we are aU holding up 
to the challenge of tolerance for other ideas. And I 
think it was Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes who put it 
most excellently when he said: 

The test of freedom is freedom for the thought that you 

hate and not freedom for the thought that you Uke. 

And I am glad that we are able to comply with our 
differences. 

MR. BROCKA. I move that the comments that I 
made be stricken off, particularly on some of the things 
that Commissioner Ople mentioned, especially on that 
aspect of motivation. When I said that, it was with such 
heaviness but, as I said, I cannot function and I cannot 
relate to the Commission if I just keep it. 

MR. OPLE. Yes, the Gentleman is responsible for 
offering the hidden agenda. (Laughter) 

MR. BROCKA. Right. I would not allow my being a 
Member of the Constitutional Commission kill that in 
me because I feel that I would rather know who my 
friends are and who my enemies are. I have been in- 
volved in playing politics in the movie industry and if 
there is one thing I hate, I hate dealing with people 
whom I do not know. I can work with Armida Siguion- 
Reyna, although I cannot stand her because I hate her 
guts. The records will bear that out, because she is 
straight and honest. 

I know whom I am dealing with. This is why I 
brought it out. It was with so much reservation and I 
did not mean to be malicious. I was just bringing out 
exactly what I felt. I felt that ang pagsasabi ng tapat ay 
pagsasama ngmaluwat.lt is as simple as that. This is why 
I kept saying I was grateful and I appreciated the direct- 
ness of Commissioner Villegas. The Gentleman was right 
yesterday. Why go on with all those words when what 
we exactly mean is this? This is why I was laughing at 
the joke of Commissioner Azcuna when he said at one 
time that as far as the bases are concerned, the govern- 
ment shall endeavor to remove the bases in accordance 
with law, something like that. It was a joke, but it some- 
how hit the point that we, as Commissioners, are trying 
to do in the language of parliament, m the spirit of 
parliamentarism and jurisprudence, et cetera. So I 
would ask that those remarks that I made, particularlv 
on that part, be deleted. ^ 

MR. UKA. Mr. Presiding Officer, may I have a few 
words. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. ViUegas). Commis- 
sioner Uka is recognized. 


818 


MR. UKA. With those words of our brother Commis- 
sioner Brocka — that rhymes with my name, Uka — I am 
very happy to learn about those things. And he is very 
frank about what he feels. And so, I would like to 
inform the body, although we are not all economists, to 
economize our time. It is now quarter to three, and I 
think we still have a plenary session. 

THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. ViUegas). Commis- 
sioner Bennagen has the last word. 

MR. BENNAGEN. May I beg the Chair’s indulgence. 
I would like to take the concept of foreign competition 
out of the context of being unfair and put it in the 
context of healthy competition in the sense that, in 
social life, whether political, economic or whatever, 
there must be an element of competition which provides 
the motive force for change. In relation to what Com- 
missioner Garcia mentioned the other day or yesterday 
and in relation to the development of productive forces 
of technology, of personnel and men, there must be an 
element of healthy competition. And if we put this 
provision in the context of that healthy competition, to 
aUow for the proper development of technical capabili- 
ties, technology, manpower skills, I think it would not 
be so threatening. Mention was made of the fact that 
there is no inherent fair competition in the relationship 


between small-scale domestic industries in relation to 
giant transnational corporations. I think if we have that 
kind of relationship, that would necessarily be unfair. 
And I think that the State is mandated to act in relation 
to this kind of relationship. But where healthy competi- 
tion is allowed, I think there should be some element of 
competition because only then can we have develop- 
ment of productive forces through market forces and 
not necessarily through the State, because too much 
state intervention makes for state paternalism, and 
demobilizes political exercises as well as economic 
exercises. 


THE PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Villegas). Thank 
you. 

The meeting is adjourned. We will go back to the 
session hall. 

The meeting was adjourned at 2:48 p.m. 

CERTIFIED TRUE AND CORRECT: 


(Sgd.) Avelina S. Mallare (Sgd.) Evangeline H. Santos 

(Sgd.) Annie H. Balagot (Sgd.) Wilhelmina B. Salvino 

(Sgd.) Ophelia C. Miguel (Sgd.) Edna C. Carbonell 

1 (Sgd.) Ermilinda A. Pagayucan (Sgd.) Natividad C. Vergara 
Debate Stenographers 
Committee Assistance Unit 


A MONOPOLY OF NATIONALISM AND MERIT? 
BY COMMISSIONER JOSE D. CALDERON 


Mr. Presiding Officer, I rise on a question of collective privilege. 

I stand up to articulate the sense of outrage and dismay, that I 
personally, and the majority in this Commission collectively, feel 
over the campaign of vilification and calumny that has been 
launched against us by certain Members in this Commission. 

In a joint statement released to the press by five Members of 
this Commission and reported out in yesterday’s newspapers, 
they claimed that, and I quote, “the democratic ideals and 
nationalist aspirations of the Filipino people no longer stand a 
chance in that deliberative body,” unquote. The deliberative 
body they meant is, of course, Mr. Presiding Officer, this 
Constitutional Commission. 

The worst of it, Mr. Presiding Officer, is that even certain 
sectors of the media seem to be falling into a propaganda trap. 
One newspaper yesterday was headlined “Nationalist’ Con-Com 
Men Resigning. ” While the word ‘Nationalist’ is enclosed in 
quotation marks, indicating it may not be the truth, how many of 
the ordinary newspaper readers will take note of the difference? 
Another newspaper was headlined in giant letters “10 Con-Coin 
Members to Resign .” Under it was a drophead in big bold letters 
“over anti-Filipino provisions.” This time, there are even no 
quotation marks indicating that the headline writer agrees that 
those provisions we passed here are indeed anti-Filipino, and he 
is passing on this bias to the public. The implication of all these, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, is that we in the majority who oppose then- 
stand are undemocratic and anti-nationalist. 

This is a scurrilous aspersion designed to deceive our people 
into thinking that the Members of this Commission who, because 
of the congruence of their votes have become the majority m this 
Chamber, are engaged in a conspiracy to sell the Filipmo people 
and our country down the river to the multinationals. Likewise, it 
is a distorted and mean propaganda gimmick designed to deceive 
our people into thinking that they who form the minority in this 
Chamber, they who failed to convince the greater number to vote 
with them, are nevertheless the true champions of democracy and 
nationalism. 

I stand here, Mr. Presiding Officer, to unmask this deception. 

They claim to be for democracy; and then they rail against 
what they call the tyranny of the majority. Is not democracy, 
Mr. Presiding Officer, the principle that the majority rules? Why 
then cannot these colleagues submit to the will of the majority 
of this Commission as expressed in the collective vote of the 
Members? Or is the democracy they claim, another kind of 
democracy, the kind of democracy that is meant when the word 
is appended to the names of countries that are socialistic or com- 
munistic such as The People’s Democratic Republic of this and 
that? 

They claim they are nationalistic. Do they have a monopoly of 
nationalism, of patriotism, of love of country? Are they the only 


ones who love the Philippines and the Filipinos? What about our 
President, former Supreme Court Justice Cecilia Munoz Palma? 

How about former Senators Ambrosio Padilla, Francisco “Soc” 
Rodrigo, Domocao Alonto, Decoroso Rosales and Lorenzo 
Sumulong? How about the religious leaders. Pastors Cirilo Rigos 
and Gregorio Tingson of the Protestants, and Bishop Teodoro 
Bacani of the Catholics? How about our Muslim brothers, former 
Senator Domocao Alonto, Commissioners Yusup Abubakar and 
Lugum Uka? How about former Speaker Jose Laurel, Jr.? How 
about, to name a few. Commissioners Jose Bengzon, Jr., Alberto 
Jamir, Christian Monsod, Ricardo Romulo, Bernardo Villegas, 
Crispino de Castro, Jose Colayco and Florenz Regalado? How 
about the political oppositionists. Commissioners Bias F. Ople, 
Teodulo Natividad, Rustico de los Reyes, and Regalado Maam- 
bong? How about former Chief Justice Roberto Concepcion and 
Floor Leader Nap Rama? Are these people, and the others whom 
I failed to name, any less nationalistic than these self-proclaimed 
patriots who do not have the grace to accept a parliamentary 
defeat? 

Some of our colleagues here, notably Floor Leader Nap Rama, 
Commissioner Rodrigo and myself, actually suffered incarcera- 
tion in jail in the hands of the dictator Marcos because of our _ 
fight for the restoration of democracy and nationalism. Where 
were these self-proclaimed fighters for democracy and national- 
ism during those dark days? And yet, Mr. Presiding Officer, we 
do not proclaim to the world that we have a monopoly of 
nationalism and love for democracy. As a matter of fact, we 
believe in the democratic principle that the market place of ideas - 
should be open even to those ideas that we oppose, open even to 
those ideas that we abhor. But ascribing base motives to the 
other side, just because we do not win the votes, is the most 
undemocratic practice in the world. 

These people claim that they are doing their best to cooperate 
but that it has become apparent that their proposals are not 
judged on their merits but on the basis of bloc politics. 

This is a most undemocratic and dangerous attitude, Mr. 
Presiding Officer. It implies that they believe that they alone 
possess what is meritorious, what is conect, and what is true. 
How about us who do not agree with them? Even in the Supreme 
Court, disagreements are resolved by a vote by which everybody 
afterwards abides. Can they not understand that this practice of 
democracy - finding the collective will by mqority vote - 
observed even in the Supreme Court, should also be foUowed in 
this parliamentary body and out there among our people through 
general elections? 

But they claim that they are the only ones who are ri^t. 
They claim they alone possess the key to the recovery of this 
nation. They claim when they are rejected in the voting that there 
is a conspiracy against the Filipino people. Who authorized them 
in the first place to speak for the people? By what right do they 


820 


arrogate unto themselves the title of nationalists, progressives, 
and lovers of democracy when they could not even abide with 
grace and politeness to the will of the mqority? 

They claim they are trying to cooperate. And yet they behave 
so brazenly when they are defeated in a vote. Does this mean that 
they will cooperate with us only for as long as we accept their 
proposals and that the minute we reject their proposals they will 
no longer cooperate? By their conduct, Mr. Presiding Officer, 
the answer to this question seems to be in the affirmative. 

In the future, Mr. Presiding Officer, it is possible that through 
the vote or through violence these people may capture the 
government of this country. By their conduct and the way in 
which they interpret democracy, heaven help us when that day 
comes! 

In the meantime, Mr. Presiding Officer, we are still living in a 


democracy under our definition, not theirs. I therefore wish to 
remind them of a portion of the prayer I said here sometime ago: 
quote “as crucial issues are submitted to the vote, fortify us. 
Almighty God, with humility in victory, with grace in defeat, and 
with the wisdom to understand that every vote in this Chamber 
is a vote of conscience intended to achieve the common weal and 
certainly not a partisan stand designed to defeat a foe. For in this 
Chamber, 0 Lord, there are no foes, only colleagues in the 
common endeavor to structure the foundation of this nation” 
unquote. 

In short, Mr. Presiding Officer, I appeal to them: Let us vote 
against each other, but let us not call each other names, nor claim 
a monopoly of nationalism and of merit. 

I thank you. 


RESOLUTION NO. 20 


RESOLUTION TO INCORPORATE IN THE NEW CONSTITU- 
TION AN ARTICLE ON THE EXECUTIVE 

Be it resolved as it is hereby resolved, by the Constitutional 
Commission in session assembled. To incorporate in the new 
Constitution the following provisions on the Executive Depart- 
ment. 

ARTICLE 

EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

SECTION 1 . The Executive power shall be vested in a Pres- 
ident of the Philippines. 

SEC. 2. No person may be elected President unless he is a 
natural-born citizen of the Philippines, a registered voter, able to 
read and write, at least forty years of age on the day of the elec- 
tion, and resident of the Philippines for at least ten years imme- 
diately preceding such election. 

SEC. 3. There shall be a Vice-President who shall have the 
same qualifications and term of office and be elected with and in 
the same manner as the President. He may be removed from 
office in the same manner as the President. 

The Vice-President may be appointed as a member of the 
cabinet. Such appointment requires no confirmation. 

SEC. 4. The President shall be elected by direct vote of the 
people for a term of six years which shall begin at noon on the 
thirtieth day of June next following the day of the election and 
shall end at noon of the same date six years thereafter. T e 
President shall not be eligible for any reelection. No Vice- 
President shall serve for more than two successive terms. Volunta- 
ry renunciation of the office for any length of time shall not be 
considered as an interruption in the continuity of the service for 
the full term for which he was elected. 

No person who has served as President for more than four 
years shall be qualified for election to the same office at any 
other time. 

The returns of every election for President and Vice-President 
duly certified by the board of canvassers of each province or city, 
shall be transmitted to the Congress, directed to the President o 
the Senate. Upon receipt of the certificates of canvass, t e 
President of the Senate shall, not later than thirty (30) days a er 
the day of the election, open all the certificates in the presence 
of the Senate and the House of Representatives in joint pu ic 
session, and upon determination of the authenticity and ue 
execution thereof in the manner provided by law, canvass t e 
votes. 

The person having the highest number of votes shall 
claimed elected, but in case two or more shall have an equa an 


highest number of votes, one of them shall forthwith be chosen 
by the vote of a majority of all the Members of both Houses of 
Congress voting separately. 

The Congress shall promulgate its rules for the canvassing of 
the certificates. 

The Supreme Court, sitting en banc, shall be the sole judge of 
all contests relating to the election, returns and qualifications of 
the President or Vice-President and may promulgate its rules for 
the purpose. 

SEC. 5. Before they enter on the execution of their office, the 
President, the Vice-President, or the Acting President shall take 
the following oath or affirmation: 

“I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and 
conscientiously fulfill my duties as President (or Vice- 
President or Acting President) of the Philippines, preserve 
and defend its Constitution, execute its laws, do justice to 
every man, and consecrate myself to the service of the 
Nation. So help me God.” (In case of affirmation, last 
sentence will be omitted) 

SEC. 6. The President shall have an official residence. The 
salaries of the President and Vice-President shall be determined 
by law and shall not be decreased. No increase in said compensa- 
tion shall take effect until after the expiration of the term of the 
incumbent during which such increase was approved. They shall 
not receive during their tenure any other emolument from the 
government or any other source. The Congress shall provide 
by law for the annual salaries of the President and the Vice- 

President. 

SEC. 7. The President-elect and the Vice-President-elect shall 
assume office at the beginning of their terms. 

If the President-elect fails to qualify, the Vice-President-elect 
shall act as President until the President-elect shall have qualified. 

If a President shall not have been chosen, the Vice-President- 
elect shall act as President until a President shall have been chosen 
and qualified. 

If at the beginning of the term of the President, the President- 
elect shall have died or shall have become permanently disabled, 
the Vice-President-elect shall become President. 

Where no President and Vice-President shall have been chosen 
or shall have qualified, or where both shall have died or become 
permanently disabled, the Senate President, or in case of his 
inability, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall act as 
President until a President or a Vice-President shall have been 
chosen and qualified. 

The Congress shall provide by law for the case of death, per- 
manent disability or inability of the officials mentioned in the 


822 


next preceding paragraph and the manner in which one who is to 
act as President shall be selected until a President or a Vice- 
President shall have qualified. 

SEC. 8. In case of permanent disability, death, removal from 
office or resignation of the President, the Vice-President shall 
become the President to serve the unexpired term. In case of 
permanent disability, death, removal from office or resignation of 
both the President and Vice-President, the Senate President or, in 
case of his inability, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 
shall then act as President until the President or Vice-President 
shall have been elected and qualified. 

The Congress shall by law provide for the case of death, per- 
manent disability or resignation of the Acting President at the 
time the vacancy in the Office of the President occurs or subse- 
quently thereafter, declaring who shall serve as President until 
the President or the Vice-President shall have been elected and 
qualified, subject to the same restrictions of powers and 
disqualifications as the Acting President. 

SEC. 9. Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice- 
President during the term for which he was elected, the President 
shall nominate a Vice-President from among the Members of the 
Senate and the House of Representatives who shall assume office 
upon confirmation by a mqority vote of aU the Members of both 
Houses of Congress voting separately. 

SEC. 10. The Congress shall, at ten o’clock in the morning of 
the third day after the vacancy in the offices of the President and 
Vice-President occurs, convene in accordance with its rules with- 
out need of a call and within seven days enact a law calling for a 
special election to elect a President and a Vice-President to be 
held not earlier than forty-five days nor later than sixty days 
rom the time of such call. The bill calling such special election 

shah be deemed certified under paragraph , Section 

Article VIII of this Constitution and shall become law upon its 
approval on third reading by the Congress. Appropriations for the 
special election shall be charged against any current appropria- 
tions and shall be exempt from the requirements of paragraph • 

Section Article VIII of this Constitution. The convening of 

the Congress cannot be suspended nor the special election post- 
poned. No special election shall be called if the vacancy occurs 
within eighteen months before the date of the next presidential 
election. 

SEC. 11. Whenever the President transmits to the President of 
the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his 
written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and 
duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written 
declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be 
discharged by the Vice-President as Acting President. 

Whenever a majority of all the members of the cabinet 
transmit to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives their written declaration that the Pres- 
ident is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, 
the Vice-President shall immediately assume the powers and 
duties of the office as Acting President. 

Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President 
of the Senate and to the Speaker of the House of Representa- 


tives his written declaration that no inability exists, he shall 
reassume the powers and duties of his office. Meanwhile, should a 
majority of all the members of the cabinet transmit within five 
days to the President of the Senate and to the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives their written declaration that the 
President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his 
office, the Congress shall decide the issue, convening, in ac- 
cordance with its rules without need of call, within forty-eight 
hours for that purpose, if it is not in session. If the Congress, 
within ten days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, 
if not in session, within twelve days after it is required to assem- 
ble, determines by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Congress, 
voting separately, that the President is unable to discharge the 
powers and duties of his office, the Vice-President shall assume 
the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall 
continue exercising the powers and duties of the office. 

SEC. 12. In case of serious illness of the President, the public 
shall be informed of the state of his health. The cabinet mem- 
bers in charge of national security and foreign relations and the 
Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines during such 
times shall not be denied access to the President as Commander- 
in-Chief. 

SEC. 13. The President, Vice-President, and members of the 
cabinet, and their deputies or assistants shall not, during then- 
tenure, hold any other office or employment, nor may they 
practice any other profession, participate directly or indirectly 
in any business, or be financially interested directly or indirectly 
in any contract with, or in any franchise or special privilege 
granted by the government or any subdivision, agency or instru- 
mentality thereof, including any government-owned or con- 
trolled corporation or their subsidiaries, and shall strictly avoid 
conflict of interest in the conduct of their office. 

^ The spouse and relatives by consanguinity or affinity within 
the fourth civil degree of the President shall not during his 
tenure be appointed as members of the constitutional commis- 
sions, or the Office of the Ombudsman, or as ministers, deputy 
ministers, chairmen or heads of bureaus or offices, including 
government-owned or controlled corporations and their subsi- 
diaries. 

SEC. 14. Appointments extended by an Acting President shall 
remain effective, unless revoked by the elected President within 
ninety days from his assumption or reassumption of office. 

SEC. 15. An incumbent or Acting President shall not make 
appointments within two (2) months preceding the date of the 
next presidential election and thereafter until the expiration of 
the term of the former or the tenure of the latter, except tempo- 
rary appointments to executive positions when continued 
vacancies would prqudice public service or endanger public 
safety. 

SEC. 16. The President shall nominate, and with the consent 
of a Commission on Appointments, shall appoint the heads of the 
executive departments, ambassadors, other public ministers and 
consuls, or officers of the armed forces from the rank of colonel 
or naval captain and other officers whose appointments are vested 
in him in this Constitution. He shall also appoint all other officers 




r ^ 



of the Government whose appointments are not otherwise 
provided for by law, and those whom he may be authorized by 
law to appoint. The Congress may by law vest the appointment of 
other officers lower in rank in the President alone, in the courts, 
or in the heads of departments, agencies, commissions or boards. 

The President shall have the power to make appointments 
during the recess of the Congress, whether voluntary or compul- 
sory but such appointments shall be effective only until dis- 
approval by the Commission on Appointments or until the next 
adjournment of the Congress. 

SEC. 17. The President shall have control of all the executive 
departments, bureaus, and offices and shall take care that the 
laws be faithfully executed. 

SEC. 18. The President shall be the Commander-in-Chief of all 
the armed forces of the Philippines and whenever it becomes 
necessary, he may call out such armed forces to prevent or 
suppress lawless violence, invasion or rebellion. In case of invasion 
or rebellion, when the public safety requires it, he may, for a 
period not exceeding sixty days, suspend the privilege of the writ 
of habeas corpus or place the Philippines or any part thereof 
under martial law. Within forty-eight hours of the proclamation 
of martial law or the suspension of the privilege of the writ of 
habeas corpus, the President shall submit a report in person or in 
writing to Congress. The Congress, voting jointly, by a vote of at 
least a majority of all its Members in regular or special session, 
may revoke such proclamation or suspension, which revocation 
shall not be set aside by the President. Upon the initiative of the 
President, Congress may in the same manner extend such pro- 
clamation or suspension for a period to be determined by 
Congress if the invasion or rebellion shall persist and public safety 
requires it. 

The Congress, if not in session, shall within twenty-four hours 
following such proclamation or suspension, convene in accord- 
ance with its rules without need of a call. 

The Supreme Court may review, in an appropriate proceeding 
filed by any citizen, the sufficiency of the factual basis of the 
proclamation of martial law or the suspension of the privilege of 
the writ or the extension thereof and must promulgate its 
decision on the same within thirty (30) days from its filing. 

A state of martial law does not suspend the operation of the 
Constitution, nor supplant the functioning of the civil courts or 
legislative assemblies, nor authorize the conferment of jurisdic- 
tion on military courts and agencies over civilians where civil 
courts are able to function, nor automatically suspend the 
privilege of the writ. 


The suspension of the privilege of the writ shall apply only 
to persons judicially charged for rebellion or offenses inherent in 
or directly coimected with invasion. 

During the suspension of the privilege of the writ, any person 
who has thus been arrested or detained shall be judicially charged 
within three days otherwise he shall be released. 

SEC. 19. Except in cases of impeachment, or as otherwise 
provided in this Constitution, the President may grant reprieves, 
commutations, and pardons, and remit fines and forfeitures, 
after conviction by final judgment. 

He shall also have the power to grant amnesty with the con- 
currence of a mqority of all the Members of the Congress. 

SEC. 20. The President may contract or guarantee foreign 
loans on behalf of the Republic of the Philippines with the prior 
concurrence of the Monetary Board, and subject to such limita- 
tions as may be provided by law. The Monetary Board shall, 
within thirty (30) days from the end of every quarter of the 
calendar year, submit to the Congress a complete report of its 
decisions on applications for loans to be contracted or guaran- 
teed by the government or government-owned and controlled 
corporations which would have the effect of increasing the 
foreign debt and containing other matters as may be provided 
by law. 

SEC. 21. No treaty or international agreement shall be valid 
and effective unless concurred in by at least two-thirds of all the 
Members of the Senate. 

SEC. 22. The President shall submit within thirty days of the 
opening of each regular session of the Congress a budget of 
receipts and expenditures, which shall be the basis of the general 
appropriations bill. 

SEC. 23. The President shall address the Congress at the 
opening of its regular session. He may also appear before it at any 
other time. 

Adopted, 

(Sgd.) CECILIA MUNOZ PALMA 
President 

This Resolution was adopted by the Constitutional Commis- 
sion of 1986 on August 26, 1986. 

(Sgd.) FLERIDA RUTH P. ROMERO 
Secretary-General 




) 


4 ' I 


. ' “■*^1 'j h 








