
PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



0 



nPHE career of Sergio Osmeria, President of the Philip- 
pines, has closely paralleled that of Manuel L. Quezon, 
the man he succeeded in office. They were born in the 
same year; they had much the same social and educa- 
tional background; they both studied at the University 
of Santo Tomas, where they were roommates and class- 
mates. They commenced their public careers at the same 
time in their native provinces. Both were provincial 
governors; both were elected to the first Philippine 
Assembly; both continuously held public office until the 
establishment of the Commonwealth Government in 1935. 
when they were elected to the highest offices in the 
land — Quezon as President and Osmena as Vice-Presi- 
dent. 

An apostle of Philippine-American collaboration — a 
role he has played since the early days of the American 
regime, as governor of Cebu, as speaker of the Philip- 
pine Assembly, and later as Vice-President of the Philip- 
pines — Sergio Osmena assumes the presidency of the 
Philippines at a very opportune time. 

Sergio Osmena was born September 9, 1878, in the 
island of Cebu, one of the central islands in the Philip- 
pine archipelago. He studied at the San Carlos Semi- 
nary in Cebu, and in 1894 entered Santo Tomas Univer- 
sity in Manila, where he studied for two years. 

BEGINS PUBLIC CAREER AS 
A JOURNALIST 

During the troubled period between 1896 and 1902, 
Osmena was first a newspaper writer and then publisher 
of a newspaper in Cebu. In 1903, he was admitted to 
the Bar in Manila and returned to Cebu to practice. In 
1904, he became provincial fiscal (prosecuting attorney) 
of Cebu, and in 1906, he was elected provincial governor. 

When Osmena took office, there was considerable dis- 
order in the province of Cebu. The effect of the disloca- 
tions and disturbances of the years of insurrection was 
still felt, and serious crop failures contributed to the 
unrest. However, Osmena was able to restore order — 
"a situation that has not before existed wnthin the mem- 
ory of living people," according to the report of the 
Philippine Commission. 

From the beginning, Osmena advocated the eventual 
independence of the Philippines. In 1902, he was a 
member of a group which petitioned Governor-General 
Taft for permission to form a political party advocating 
independence. At that time, the United States civil au- 
thorities opposed the formation of independence parties, 
and permission was refused. In 1906, when the first 
Convention of Provincial Governors was held in Manila, 
Osmena was one of the small group of five governors 
who openly urged eventually independence. Nevertheless, 
although he belonged to the minority group, he was 
elected President of the Convention. 



BECOMES SPEAKER OF THE 
ASSEMBLY 

When the restriction against pro-independence par- 
ties was lifted preceding the elections for the first Philip- 
pine Assembly in 1907, Osmeria and other leaders formed 
the Nacionalista Party, which elected an overwhelming 
majority of the members of the new body. Osmena was 
elected Speaker of the Assembly. 

Under Osmeiia's leadership, the Assembly avoided the 
two major pitfalls before it — too docilely following the 
cue of the American officials, or adopting purely obstruc- 
tionist tactics — and became a responsible and effective 
legislative body. It adopted almost entirely the parlia- 
mentary rules of the Fifty-ninth Congress of the United 
States; in two respects it actually anticipated important 
reforms in the rules of the American Congress. It pro- 
vided for one Appropriation Committee of twenty-five 
members, most of whom were chairmen of other com- 
mittees. The Congress of the United States did not adopt 
this procedure until fifteen years later, as part of the 
reforms made in establishing a budget system. The sec- 
ond important deviation was in relation to the composi- 
tion of the powerful committee on rules. While in the 
United States at that time, the Speaker was the chairman 
of the committee on rules, Speaker Osmena never made 
use of this great prerogative, the chairmanship of that 
committee having been held all the time by another 
member of the Assembly. This matter was also followed 
by the U. S. House of Representatives some time later. 

Osmena was Speaker of the Assembly during the nine 
years of its existence. In 1916, the Congress of the 
United States passed the Jones Act, which started spe- 
cifically the intention of the United States to give the 
islands eventual independence, gave the nation a greater 
measure of self-government, and provided for the elec- 
tion of a Senate composed of Filipinos. Osmena decided 
to remain in the lower house — renamed the House of Rep- 
resentatives — and was Speaker of that body until 1922. 

The influence which Osmena wielded in the govern- 
ment of the Philippines during the period of his speak- 
ership — 1907 to 1922 — was far greater than that of any 
American Speaker. In power and prestige, he was actu- 
ally second only to the Governor General w'ho was ap- 
pointed by the President of the United States; and he 
was able to obtain for the Filipinos an ever-increasing 
share in the conduct of the government of the Islands. 
Three factors contributed to this: first, his official posi- 
tion as Speaker of the low^er house; second, and more 
important, his position as the leader of the overwhelm- 
ingly dominant political party; and third, his own per- 
suasive personality. The American Governors-General 
respected him and the other leaders of his party, and 
consulted him not only concerning necessary legislation, 



but also the administration of the executive departments. 
In 1918, Governor General Francis B. Harrison formal- 
ized this arrangement between the American executive 
branch of the Government and the Filipino legislature 
by creating a Council of State, of which he w^as Chair- 
man and Osmena was Vice-Chairman. This Council 
actually performed the functions of a cabinet. 

SPLIT IN PARTY LEADERSHIP 

In 1922, Osmena and Quezon had a disagreement on 
the leadershi]) question. While Osmena maintained that 
for the effectiveness of the Filipino participation in the 
government a national leadership was a political neces- 
sity, Quezon, on the other hand, advocated collective 
leadership. This disagreement led to a split of the 
iSacionalista Party. However, Osmena and Quezon re- 
mained close personal friends. In the same elections, Os- 
mena did not run for reelection in the House and, in- 
stead, presented his candidacy for the Senate and was 
elected Senator from Cebu, a position which he held 
until he was elected Vice-President of the Philippine 
Commonwealth in 1935. 

The differences between Osmefia and Quezon did not 
long continue. Osmena and his followers supported 
Quezon in the legislature, and before the elections of 
1925, the two factions reunited to form the Partido Na- 
cionalista-Consolidado, of which Quezon was leader. Os- 
mena was by no means forced into political obscurity. 
He became President pro tempore of the Senate of which 
Quezon w^as President. In 1924, he was a member of 
the Third Philippine Mission to the United States; in 
1925. he was special envoy of the Philippine Legislature 
to the United States and delegate of the Philippine Group 
to the thirty-third Interparliamentary Conference held in 
Washington, D. C; in 1927, he was a member of a 
committee designated by the Philippine Legislature to 
confer w^ith the President of the United States. 

HEADS INDEPENDENCE 
MISSION 

In 1931, Osmena and Speaker Manuel Roxas were 
chosen to head the Ninth Independence Mission to the 
United States. This Mission remained in Washington 
for almost two years, and was able to secure the passage 
by the American Congress of the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act 
which is the forerunner of the Philippine Independence 
Act. 

The Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act provoked a violent po- 
litical upheaval in the Philippines. Senate President 
Quezon and many other leaders seriously objected to 
certain provisions of the act which the Mission secured. 
The act provided that it should not take effect unless 
approved by the Philippine Legislature or a convention 
of the Filipino people. Quezon immediately set about 
to defeat the acceptance of the act; Osmena and the 
other members of the Ninth Independence Mission sought 
to obtain its approval. All the old party lines were oblit- 
erated in the fight over the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Act. In 
the end Quezon and those opposed to the act won over- 



whelmingly, and on October 17, 1933, the Philippine 
Legislature rejected the act. 

The political schirm between Osmena and Quezon 
did not last long. When Quezon secured the passage 
of the Tydings-McDuffie Act in 1934, which also required 
the assent of the legislature before becoming effective. 
Osmena supported its acceptance. Neither Osmena nor 
Quezon were candidates for members of the Constitu- 
tional Convention. However, the great majority of the 
members of the Convention w^ere followers of one or 
the other. Nevertheless, the differences were not carried 
into the Constitutional Convention. 

QUEZON AND OSMENA 
TEAM UP 

The constitution w^as drafted and approved by the 
Filipino people and by the President of the United States 
and the country made ready to elect its first President 
and Vice-President under the Commonwealth Govern- 
ment. The nation was on its way to complete independ- 
ence in an unsettled and difficult world. The new gov- 
ernment needed all its wise and able leaders — it could 
spare none of them. So instead of engaging in a spec- 
tacular political battle, Osmefia and Quezon soberly con- 
sidered the best interests of their country and agreed to 
bury their temporary differences. They became candi- 
dates on a coalition ticket. This reconciliation was much 
more than a political truce dictated by expediency; it 
was an actual agreement betw^een the two great Filipino 
leaders to work together for the good of their country. 
About two years after the elections of 1935, they merged 
their parties, and in 1941, they were reelected on a single 
party ticket — the Partido Nacionalista. 

From the beginning, the Vice-Presidency of the Philip- 
pines has meant heavy responsibilities. Osmena was 
appointed Secretary of Public Instruction, a post which 
has always been ranked as one of the most important 
in the Philippine Cabinet. In 1939, President Quezon 
chose Vice-President Osmena to head a mission to Wash- 
ington which obtained important amendments to the Tyd- 
ings-McDuffie Act. 

OSMENA IN CORREGIDOR 

On December 24, 1941, President Quezon and Vice- 
President Osmena and the members of the War Cabinet 
were forced to leave Manila for Corregidor. The second 
inauguration of the President and the Vice-President 
took place there on December 30, 1941. On Corregidor, 
Vice-President Osmena was in charge of the destruction 
of the Philippine paper currency for the Philippine Gov- 
ernment, and superintended the loading of the Philippines 
gold reserve on the submarine which brought it to the 
United States. 

On February 20, the Vice-President left Corregidor 
with President Quezon, and shared in the hazardous jour- 
ney, first to Cebu, thence to Mindanao and Australia, and 
finally to the United States. 



OSMENA HnI WASHINGTON 

In Washington, the Vice-President carried a large 
share of the duties of the Philippine Government-in- 
exile. He attended the meetings of the Pacific War Coun- 
cil in the absence of the President; on September 15. 
he was appointed by the President Chairman of the Post- 
War Planning Board which has the vital task of plan- 
ning for the post-war economic rehabilitation and mili- 
tary security of the Philippines. On behalf of the Philip- 
pines he signed the agreement of the United Nations 
Relief and Rehabilitation Administration at the White 
House on November 9th. 

In the elections of November 11, 1941. it was gener- 
ally understood that when President Quezon's term of 
office expired on November 15, 1943, Vice-President Os- 
mefia would succeed him. The w^ar situation, however, 
raised the problem of whether it would be wise to change 
leadership. Osmena, instead of asserting his undoubted 
right under the Constitution, agreed to the consideration 
of the matter, not only on purely legal grounds but also 
on political grounds arising from the necessities of the 



war. Consequently, upon Osmena's initiative, the Com- 
monwealth Government submitted the matter to Congress 
for consideration and action. Congress passed a joint 
resolution continuing President Quezon in office for the 
duration of the war and Osmena readily accepted this 
decision and made an appeal to his countrymen in these 
words: 

"Congress, after thorough consideration, passed 
the joint resolution providing for the continuance in 
office of President Quezon for the duration of the 
war. This resolution expresses the considered judg- 
ment of the American people. I accept it without 
reserve and I urge every Filipino, whether in the 
homeland, in continental United Stales, in Hawaii 
or anywhere else, to accept this congressional action 
which is intended to safeguard the best interests of 
the two peoples." 

On August 1, 1944, the same day Manuel L. Quezon 
died in Saranac Lake, New York, Sergio Osniefia took 
his oath of office in Washington, D. C, as President of 
the Philippines. 







Sergio Osmena taking his oath of oflfice as President of the Philippines before Associate Justice Robert H. Jackson 

of the U. S. Supreme Court 



