
y 






‘ { 







^\ir. 












Its Uccord 



■Tj«#^ 



'■‘:s 



The PTesident arrives at Pototan^ Iloiloy 
December 8, 1946 



A BRIEF RECORD OF THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS 
OF PRESIDENT ROXAS FROM THE TIME 
HE TOOK OFFICE ON MAY 28, 1946 
TO OCTOBER 4, 1947 

The interest and welfare of the masses, the uplift 
and advancement of Philippine veterans and of their 
widows and orphans, a clean stable government, strict 
economy, the development of Philippine industries to 
enable the Republic to become totally self-sufficient — 
these are the salient and outstanding motives behind 
all the proclamations, orders, statements, and other 
official acts of President Manuel Roxas during these — 
the first critical years of the Republic. This is the 
record — so far. . 

1. Proposed and approved Missing Pex'sons BUI for Filipino 

> veterans. 

2. Announced opposition to strikes against the Government. 

3. Created provincial and municipal committees to take 

charge of sale of foodstuffs outside ManUa. 

4. Created Board of Deportation for undesirable aliens. 

5. Recreated Council of State. 

6. Ordered regulation of house rentals and the curbing of 

abuses of house owners. 

7. Negotiated for the purchase of 3,500,000 yai'ds of cloth, 

750 tons of rice, and 500 tons of refined sugar to speed 
up rehabilitation. 

8. Authorized free distribution of 48,000 cases of milk to 

childi’en in slums and schools. 

9. Recommended that government sell away surplus prop- 
^ erty that it does not need so that the proceeds could 

be used in the rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
the country and for purchase of big estates for sub- 
division and sale to tenants. 

’P440 



1 




2 



10. Arranged loan of P4, 000, 000 from Reconstruction Finance 

Corporation for the rehabilitation of the hemp indus- 
try, NAFCO. 

11. Urged more strict supervision over private educational 

institutions. 

12. Authorized additional appropriation of P16,715,000 for 

organization and maintenance of additional elementary 
classes. 

13. Acquired broadcasting radio station of the USIS to be 

placed'under Department of Instruction for dissemina- 
tion of cultural and educational information to the 
public. 

14. Allocated specific lump sums out of $120,000,000 provided 

for public works in the War Damage Act. 

15. Authorized appropriation of P10,000,000 from available 

funds to be apportioned among cities and px*ovinces 
for public works. 

16. Proclaimed the granting of amnesty to all persons who 

committed acts of violence against persons or property 
in furtherance of resistance to the enemy. 

17. Created six-man Commission to study budgetary and 

financial needs of the counti-y and to consider not only 
$75,000,000 loan to P. I. but also the budgetary and 
financial needs for the next five years. 

18. Established Rehabilitation Finance Corporation. 

lo! Extended financial assistance to disabled veterans in 
army hospitals. 

20. Appointed delegation of five members to work jointly 

with SCAP in Tokyo. 

21. Created Surplus Property Commission. 

22 . Ordered mechanization of farming under National De- 

velopment Company with 100,000 hectares to be util- 
ized to meet shortage of rice supply* 

23. Created Council of National Defense. 

24. Decreed that henceforth all provincial jails be placed 

under Military Police Command to prevent recurrence 
of jailbreaks in the provinces. 

25 Ordered the subdivision of all Japanese holdings in Da- 
vao now under the custody of NAFCO for distribution 
to tenants. 



26. Authorized school teachers to collect fees for services 

rendered in connection with the filing of war damage 
claims. 

27. Created public school health service board to administei 

the healtli and dental fmids of the Department of In- 
struction, raised through voluntary contributions. 

28. Authorized appointment of a trade representative from 

the Department of Labor to Guam to take care of the 
interests of some 4,000 Filipino laborers already there 
and an estimated 2,000 more expected to be recruited 
and shipped there. 

29. Authorized creation of a Real Property Board of three- 

members to gather data for all public lands and gov- 
ernment-owned lands and to ascertain market values 
and other factors for proper appraisement of lots for 
expropriation or sale. 

30. Ordered the suspension of two chief agents and twc. 

assistant agents from the Bureau of Internal Revenue 
■ because of irregularities in the collection of taxes. 

31. Approved the granting of renewal of Meralco franchise. 

32. President approved 21 bills passed by Congress among 

which were: 

a. Civil Aviation Bill granting licenses for airmen 

to nationals of any coimtry under cei'tain con- 
ditions. 

b. An Act creating the Patent Office. 

c. An Act amending Section 47 and subsection (b) 

of Section 184 of the Insurance Act, to make 
life insurance policies incontestable even on 
the ground of fraud after they have been in 
force for two years. 

d. An Act authorizing agricultural and vocational 

schools to charge tuition fees, and creating spe- 
cial trust funds. 

e. An Act to create a National Commission on Edu- 

cational, Scientific and Cultural Matters. 

/. An Act to create the Bureau of Fisheries. 



4 



g. Joint Resolution No. 5 authorizing the President 
to appoint a commission to make a study of the 
problems relating to the exploration of oil re- 
sources of the Philippines and to authorize 
the President, upon recommendation of said 
commission, to take action as may be necessary 
for the proper exploration, development and 
exploitation of said resources. 

33. Contract with Westinghouse Electric International Com- 

pany to cooperate in executing a long range power 
development program in the country was signed. 

34. Treaty of Friendship with the French Republic signed. 

35. In commemoration of the 1st anniversary of the Phil- 

ippine Republic, 63,000 cases of evaporated and con- 
densed milk, contributed by the UNRRA, were dis- 
tributed to indigent children throughout the country, 
at the instance of Mrs. Roxas. 

36. Tlie Floridablanca Air Base was turned over by United 

States Army to the Philippine Army. The procure- 
ment cost of the property is P10,300,000. 

37. Eighty-four United States Navy ships were turned over 

to the Philippine Government. 

38. Administrative Order No. 38 creating a real property 

board to attend to problems involving real estate in 
connection with the planning of the City of Manila 
was issued. 

39. The arrival of 900 disc plows as part of the P5,000,000 

worth of farm machinery allocated by. the UNRRA to 
the Philippine Islands is announced so that rice and 
com growers using tractor power may secure their 
plows at once through the PRRA on General Solano 
or at AMEC on Tanduay. 

40. President Roxas received from James Mclnnes Hender- 

son two valuable lots with buildings — one lot situated 
on P. Paredes valued at P228,000, and the other on 
Arlegui, valued P100,000, at the token price of one 
peso each. 

41. Issued at Executive Order No. 75 designating the Cebu 

Landing Field as National Airport. 



5 



42. Promulgated Proclamation No. 32 reserving for lumber 

production pui’poses a parcel of the public domain 
located in the municipality of Nasipit, Agusan, 

43. Announcement of the inauguration of the ‘‘University 

of the Air” over KZFM to take place on September 
1 was made. The facilities of KZFM will thus be 
employed for cultural and educational purposes as 
prescribed in the executive order creating the Radio- 
Broadcasting Board. 

44. The reorganization of the Philippine Army, with three 

major commands coordinated under the control of the 
Chief of Staff of the Philippine Defense Forces was 
decided in a meeting of the Cabinet with the Re- 
organization Committee. 

45. Plan for the creation of telecommunication bureau or 

office to be called Civil Aeronautics Administration 
under the Department of Commerce and Industry. 
The Cabinet also studied plans for the case of veterans 
and guerrillas who will be released from the Victoriano 
Luna General Hospital. 

46. President Roxas extended grant of living bonus to mu- 

nicipal, provincial, and city employees up to June 30, 
1948. 

47. Release of the Office of the President of a total of 

P5J.00,000 school funds to accommodate 210,000 school 
children next semester, — to have minimum pay of 
teachers increased to P80 plus living bonus of P35. 

48. Issued Executive orders reorganizing the Government of 

the Philippines. A saving of P6, 000, 000 has been rea- 
lized from the P226,000,000 general appropriations 
authorized for the fiscal year as a result of the re- 
organization of the Government whereby nearly 2,000 
positions have been abolished without prejudice to 
efficiency. Many functions have been coordinated, 
and yet no employee will lose his job as a result of 
the abolition of some offices. 



• 0410 



ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF THE ROXAS ADMINIS- 
TRATION FROM MAY 28. 1946 TO 
OCTOBER 4. 1947 

OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 

The Office of the President is the nerve center of the 
government. It is located at Malacanan Palace, the tra- 
ditional seat of the government of the Philippines. 
Sixteen offices function under the President and are 
directly responsible to him. The following accomplish- 
ments have been recorded: 

1. The Bui’eau of Civil Service: 

(a) Gave various civil service examinations to 13,865 
competitors, and conducted board examinations in wliich 
2,107 candidates participated. 

(b) From May 28, 1946 to May 26, 1947 acted upon 
161,767 appointments, retired 487 officers and employ- 
ees of the government imder the provisions of Act 
2589, as amended. 

(c) Retmed and gave retirement gratuities to 21 
Americans under Act 4151. 

2. The Budget Commission: 

(a) Received for comment and recommendation, 
from the Office of the President, 45 bills and proposed 
bills. Among those recommended for approval, 15 
have become laws, and the rest are now pending action 
by the President. 

(b) Prepared two National Budgets for the fiscal 
years 1947 and 1948. 

' (c) Received during the period under review, 546 
special budgets involving expenditures aggregating 

7 



8 



P207, 267, 794.88, including the creation and/or recrea- 
tion of 44,042 positions. Of this sum, the amount of 
P199,557,980.95 was recommended for approval, there- 
by affecting savings of P7,709,813.93. 

(d) Received 28,339 appointments from the different 
departments, bureaus and offices, including government- 
owned or controlled corporations and enterprises, in- ^ 

volving salaries amounting to F26,652,250. Of the said 
amount, a saving of P279,611 was realized as a result ^ 

of recommendations made by the Budget Office. 

3. Philippine General Hospital: 

(a) Served patients whose number had increased 
from 30 per cent to 45 per cent, in spite of many handi- 
caps such as shortage of personnel and accommodation 
for patients, equipment, instruments, food, drugs, linen, 
and the like. 

(b) Increased bed capacity from only 450 on July 
16, 1945, to 502 on May 12, 1947; admitted 13,927 pa- 
tients and discharged 13,507 patients. 

(c) Treated in the Dispensary Division a total of 
58,952 patients, an average of 452 patients daily. 

(d) Performed in the Receiving and Emergency Di- 

vision, 6,546 operations and 8,449 laboratory examina- 
tions. ^ 

4. The Bureau of Census and Statistics prepared: 

(a) Statistical Yearbook of Philippine Statistics for ^ 

1946. 

(b) Economic Survey of 1946. 

(c) Foreign Trade Statistics. 

(d) Labor Statistics. 

(e) Demographic Statistics. 

(/) Business Statistics. 



9 



(g) Wage Earner’s Cost of Living-indexes issued 
weekly for use of business fii’ms and the Court of Indus- 
trial Relations. 

(h) Special studies on Balance of International Pay- 
ments. 

(i) Special studies on the National Income of the 
Philippines. 

(j) Preparatory work for the Census. 

(fc War Damage Survey. 

(1) Survey to determine damage to civil registry 
records. 

5. In cooperation with other offices, the following 
were accomplished by the Biu’eau of Census and Sta- 
tistics: 

(a) A long questionnaire of the UNO calling for com- 
plete analysis of actual financial and economic condi- 
tions in the Philippines; data on war mortality and 
damages; and many other statistical data — tbr migb the 
request of the Department of Foreign Affairs. 

(b) Miscellaneous data on American investments 
and expenditures in the Philippines — ^Department of 
Instruction. 

(c) Statistical data on crops and industries, trades, 
wages, prices, cost of living, national income of the Phil- 
ippines, and international balance of payments at the 
request of the Joint Philippine-American Finance Com- 
mission. 

(d) Data on industrial disputes, wage claims, indus- 
trial accidents and workmen’s compensation, cost of 
living, etc. 

(e) Data on war mortality and damages for Ambas- 
sador Ehzalde. 



10 



(/) Data on economic levels in the Philippines, war 
mortality and damages, and miscellaneous information 
on local economics for Ambassador Romulo. 

6. The Press Relations Office accomplished the fol- 
lowing: 

(a) Issued the Official Gazette monthly. 

(b) Operated Station KZFM for the dissemination ' 

of government information. ' , 

(c) Supervised press conferences given by the Pres- ^ 

ident to Manila reporters and foreign correspondents. 

(d) Issued a revised edition of the official directory. 

(e) Recorded in picture all events of national im- 
portance. '' ' 

(f) Issued the Blue Book, embodying the significant 
accomplishments of the Republic of the Philippines in 
its first year of life. 

7. The Institute of National Language: 

(a) Examined and corrected from the point of view 
of linguistic forms 18 books in Tagalog, 10 bulletins, 
and three magazines. 

(b) Undertook linguistic researches and studies. 

(c) Conducted a literary contest in the national lan- 
guage. 

(d) Translated messages, speeches, and letters of ’ 

oational importance. 

8. The National Urban Planning Commission accom- ^ 

plished the following: 

(a) Gathered and' analyzed planning information for 
urban areas such as Manila, Cebu, Iloilo, Baguio, Ba- 
tangas, Tarlac, and other cities. 

(b) Drew plans for the downtown areas of Manila, 
southern part of Tondo, San Nicolas, Ermita, Malate, 



11 



Quiapo, Paco, and part of San Miguel, Sta. Cruz and 
Binondo. 

(c) Completed plans for Cebu City, Tarlac, and 
municipalities like Dagami, Dulag, Tanjay, and Guihul- 
ngan. 

9. The Agrarian Commission: 

(a) Recommended the 70-30 apportionment of the 
rice harvest. 

(b) Made studies regarding the fixing of the price 
of rice, resulting in the approval of the President of the 
fixed price of palay at no less than fl2 nor more than 
P15 a cavan for the last harvest. 

(c) Studied 26 cases regarding landed estates, three 
of which contained areas approximately 100 to 18,000 
hectares, with a view to government purchase and re- 
sale to legitimate tenants. 

(d) Received and studied numerous grievances of 
tenants against landlords, and rendered proper recom- 
mendations. 

10. The Law Division handled 264 pardons, 101 
orders, 26 proclamations, 18 deportation cases, 92 visa 
cases, and 95 miscellaneous matters during the year 
under review. 

11. The Division of General Affairs: 

(a) Maintained liaison services with the general 
public on miscellaneous subjects. 

(b) Attended to the needs of government offices for 
properties administered by the Philippine Alien Prop- 
erty Administration. 

(c) Attended to all matters pertaining to real estate 
owned by the national, provincial, and municipal gov- 
ernments. 

9140 3 



12 



12. Protocol Officer; 

(a) Prepared all invitations and notices of state func 
tions at Malacanan. 

(b) Brought up to date the Malacanan Social Reg- 
ister. 

13. The Records Division: 

(a) Received 63,576 articles of correspondence and ^ 

released 75,663 articles. 

(b) Sent 795 local telegrams, 768 foreign radiograms 

filed 80,557 articles of correspondence, complied with # 

375 requests for certified copies of records, and compiled 
records in 616 volumes. 

14. The Superintendent of Buildings and Grounds; 

(a) Made extensive repahs on the Palace and Exe- 
cutive Buildings. 

(b) Restored to pre-war condition the Malacanan 
concrete annex, the garage, the boat house, and the 
servants’ quarters, gymnasium, the swimming pool, and 
the Malacanan stables. 

(c) Made improvements on the lawns of the Palace 
and Executive Buildings, planted new trees, and re- 
paired the street lights and water connections. 

(d) Undertook a poultry raising special project. 

15. The Legislative Secretary’s Office: 

(a) Drafted 10 bills and redrafted 76 out of 130 bills 

received from different branches of the government, ^ 

(b) Drafted two concurrent resolutions. 

department of foreign affairs 

The Department of Foreign Affairs took over the 
administrative functions regarding the country’s inter- 
national relations on July 4, 1946. It has for its Sec- 
retary the Honorable Elpidio Quirino, Vice President 



. 14 



of the Republic who serves with concurrent jurisdic- 
tion; and for undersecretary, Dr. Bemabe Africa. 

The accomplishment of the Department of Foreign 
Affairs are as follows: 

1. It has succeeded in obtaining the tmanimous ap- 
proval of the Far East Cotmcil of the UNRRA for ad- 
ditional financial greints to the Philippines for the 
purchase of farm tools, work animals and livestock for 
distribution in the devastated rural areas. 

2. It has concluded the following treaties, agree- 
ments, and conventions: 

(a) Treaty of General Relations with the United 
States of America, signed on July 4, 1946 and ratified 
by the Senate by Resolution No. 11, dated August 5, 

1946. 

(b) Executive Agreement with the United States 
of America, signed on July 4, 1946 and proclaimed 
by the President of the Philippines on January 1, 

1947. 

(c) Philippine Abaca Fiber Agreement with the 
United States executed on August 8, 1946 and ter- 
minated on December 3, 1946. 

(d) Philippine Copra and Coconut OU Agreement 
with the United States executed on August 8, 1946 
and terminated on December 6, 1946. 

(e) Treaty of Conciliation with the United States 
signed on November 16, 1946, not ratified by the 
Senate. 

0) Air Transport Agreement with the United 
signed on November 16, 1946, ratified by the 

lltte on April 23, 1947. 

(g) Agreement with the United States concerning 
Fishery Rehabilitation and Development program and 



15 



a Fishery Training program, signed on March 14, 
1947. 

(h) Treaty on Consular* Convention, signed on 
March 14, 1947, and ratified by the Senate on April 

11, 1947. 

(i) Agi*eement with the United States concerning 
Military Bases, signed on March 14, 1947, ratified by the 
Senate on March 26, 1947. 

(j) Military Assistance Agreement with the United 
States, signed on March 20, 1947. 

(fc) Agreement with the United States concerning 
Meteorological Facilities and Training Program, signed 
May 12, 1947. 

(l) Agreement with the United States concerning 
Air Navigation and Training Program, signed May 

12, 1947. 

(m) Agreement with the United States concernmg 
Coast and Geodetic Sxu’vey and Work and Traming 
Program, signed May 12, 1947. 

(n) Treaty of Amity with China, signed on April 
18, 1947, ratified by the Senate on May 15, 1947. 

(o) Treaty of Friendship with France, signed on 
June 26, 1947. 

(p) Treaty of Friendship and General Relations 
with Italy, signed on July 9, 1947. 

(q) Treaty of Amity with Spain signed on Septem- 
ber 27, 1947. 

3. It has concluded arrangements for reciprocal 
landing rights with the United States, and temporary 
landing privileges for Philippine airline companies with 
China. Hongkong, Spain, Batavia, Siam, India, and 
Australia. 



16 



4. It has sent Bernardo Abrera and Eduardo Qui- 
sumbing to Japan to take care of Japanese reparations 
to the Philippines and to help recover looted Phil- 
ippine property. 

5. Under an arrangement with the United States, the 
Department has sent and will continue to send periodi- 
cally Filipino trainees to the United States Depart-, 
ment of States Foreign Service Officers’ Training 
School. 

6. With the UNESCO it is cooperatmg in the col- 
lection of data regarding Philippine culture, Philippine 
newspapers, moving pictime companies, and radio 
broadcastmg facilities. 

7. It has conducted preliminary negotiations with 
the British Government for the acquisition of the 
Turtle and Mangsee Islands. A committee headed 
by Atty. Diosdado Macapagal was sent over to the 
said islands to make a study as to whether the ac- 
quisition of the islands will redoxmd to the benefit 
of the Republic. 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

Jose C. Zulueta, Secretary of the Interior, has con- 
tributed greatly to the amelioration of peace and order 
of the coxmtry during the first year of the Republic. 
The following are the accomplishments of his de- 
partment: 

1. Established a policy of attraction towards dis- 
sident elements. 

2. Secured the surrender of about 200,000 unlicensed 
firearms together with 3,000,000 rounds of ammu- 
nition, valued approximately at F6, 000, 000. 



17 



3. Routed through the military police command dis- 
sident elements all over Luzon. 

4. Has extended great protection to barrios and 
fowns especially those near wide plantations. 

5. Has reduced criminality in the Philippines which 
reached its peak in August, 1946. 

6. Has extended 36 scholarships to deseiwing non- 
Christians for the purpose of furthering the agricul- 
tural, industrial and social development of the non- 
Christian inhabitants of the coimtry 

DEPARTaiENT OF FINANCE 

Secretary Miguel Cuaderno, since taking over the 
Department of Finance, intensified the collection of 
unpaid taxes and exerted all efforts toward balancing 
the budget within the next three years, if possible. 

During the convention of provincial and city treas- 
urers which was called by the Secretary of Finance 
in December, 1946, the attention of th^e officials 
was directed particularly to the need of intensif 3 dng 
the collection of taxes. These officials were also en- 
joined to undertake without loss of time a reassess- 
ment of real estate properties in order not only to 
effect an upward revision of assessments where such 
action was found to be justified, but also in order 
that land taxes could be collected in those cases where 
the assessment records had been destroyed diunng 
the war. 

Realizing the need of an independent Philippines 
for more revenues owing to the increasing expendi- 
tures of the Government for vital and urgent public 
requirements, to encourage the development of in- 
dustries, to promote the foreign trade, to achieve essen- 



18 



tial social objectives, and to rehabilitate, reconstruct 
and develop the national economy, it was deemed 
necessary in the first year of the Republic to effect 
a revision of the tax system of the Philippines. 

This was brought about by: 

1. The creation of a Tax Commission by the Pres- 
ident under Administrative Order No. 36. 

2. Taking drastic steps to weed out dishonest, inef- 
ficient and xmdesirable employees in the various gov- 
ernment biu-eaus and offices, insofar as it could be 
done under the civil service law and regulations. A 
general reorganization in the Bureaus of Internal Rev- 
enue and Customs is being undertaken, with the end 
in view of making them effective agencies for raising 
the revenues which the Government needs. 

3. Selection and coordination of reliable men in 
the Bureau of Customs in controlling the gem smug- 
gling racket of a group which has been using the 
airlines as a fruitful means of conducting their illegal 
business between Siam and the Philippines. 

Illegal entry of dutiable goods is also being pre- 
vented through the efficiency of the customs personnel 
in the outports. 

4. Getting key men of the Department busy on the 
work of the joint Philippine-American Finance Com- 
mission which has under study the financial position 
of the Republic of the Philippines. 

5. Redemption of treasury warrants issued before 
January 2, 1942. 

6. Creation of the Committee on Claims, under Ad- 
ministrative Order No. 6 of the President, which has 
the function of determining and recommending ways 
and means to settle financial claims against the Na- 



tional Government, its branches, subdivisions, agencies 
and instrumentalities, outstanding and unpaid prior 
to the liberation of the Phihppines from enemy oc- 
cupation. 

7. As head of the Philippine delegation to the Eco- 
nomic Commission for Asia and the Far East, Secretary 
Miguel Cuadex’no reported that the Philippine delega- 
tion urged in the Shanghai meeting the speeding up 
of the tempo of rehabilitation in this part of the world 
by increasing native membership in the Commission 
from among the countries affected. 

8. The assistant secretary general for economic af- 
fairs of the United Nations who is in charge of ECAFE 
conferences, has approved the selection of Baguio as 
the seat of the November meeting of the ECAFE. 

9. Secretary Cuaderno left with Secretary Abello 
for the United States on September 4 to head the 
four-man delegates to the general assembly of the 
United Nations Organization. 

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 

Headed by Secretary of Justice Roman Ozaeta who 
, rose from judge of first instance to Solicitor General 
to Associate Justice of the Supreme Court this de- 
partment strengthened the courts by the employment 
of capable prosecutors and judges. 

During the year the Department of Justice through 
the Bureau of Prisons accommodated and housed 
thousands of men charged with political collaboration. 
These men had been turned over to the Bureau of 
Prisons by the CIC of the United States Army. 

The Anti-Usury Board conducted anti-usury cam- 
paings and issued educational propaganda against 
usurers. Out of 205 complaints, 67 were disposed of. 



20 



The Public Service Commission disposed of 12,929 
applications for certificates of public convenience. It 
cancelled 446 certificates for failure of the parties 
concerned to pay the supervision and regulation fees, 
rts net income for the year was F358, 343.31. 

The Bxu-eau of Justice besides prosecuting govern- 
ment cases undertook the investigation of numerous 
deportation cases. During the year the Bin-eau dis- 
posed of 614 criminal, 303 land registration, 179 cadas- 
tral, 41 civil, 22 citizenship, and 37 habeas corpus 
cases. Out of 1,391 writs of execution, 1,041 cases 
were acted upon. 

The Tenancy Law Enforcement Division extended 
the rice tenancy act throughout the country. This 
Division handled 934 cases up to December, 1946. It 
disposed of 502 cases. From January to May, 1947, it 
received 808 cases filed at the central office. 

The Secm-ities and Exchange Commission has reg- 
istered 589 stock corporations whose total subscrip- 
tion amoimt to F37,377,934.50, of which P20,338,259.82 
has been paid; 291 cooperative associations with an 
aggregate subscription of Fl,470,110 of which 
F565,554.43 has been paid; and 408 partnerships with 
a total capitalization of F20,889,131.34, aside from 56 
partnerships with a total capital of Fl,354,074.78 reg- 
istered in the provinces. 

The Commission has prevented the issuance and cir- 
culation of no less than Fl,129,101.79 worth of watered 
stocks. It blocked the incorpox’ation of 11 companies 
with stocks aggregating F175,988 for failure to produce 
proofs of the amounts paid. It registered 11 corpora- 
tions with seciurities aggregating F25,697,000, and 





21 



exempted 115 corporations with seciirities amounthig 
to P6, 068, 969 from the requirements of registration 
and/or license under the Securities Act. 

The Coixrt of Industrial Relations has satisfactorily 
solved all strikes brought within its jiu'isdiction 
Since its reorganization after the war, not one of its 
orders, awards of decisions has been reversed by the 
Supreme Coimt. And the majority of its decided cases 
have not been taken by any of the parties involved 
to the Supreme Comi; for review. During the fiscal 
yeai' in review (1946-1947), there have been received 
55 industrial cases, four reconstruction cases, 43 in- 
cidental cases, 48 tenancy cases, and 18 contempt 
cases. Out of this total of 178 cases, 68 have been 
decided, thus leaving 110 cases pending hearing or 
decision. 

From July 11, 1945 to April 30, 1947, 1120 cases 
of prisoners for parole were received for investigation. 
Of this number, 839 were finally acted upon, of which 
86 were granted pax’ole by the President, 320 granted 
parole by the Board of Indeterminate Sentence, 247 
denied parole, and 86 were dropped. 

There were 926 petitions for conditional pardon re- 
ceived during the same period. Of this number, 615 
were finally acted upon, of which 353 were recom- 
mended to the President for approval, and 262 for 
denial. There were 22 cases of violation of condi- 
tional pardon. The violators were recommitted to 
prison to serve the remitted portion of their sentences. 

During the same period, there were 27 cases of 
prisoners whose respective sentences were either 
reduced or commuted upon the recommendation of 
the Parole Office. 



I 



22 



Of the 281 petitions for absolute pardon received, 
209 were acted upon, of which 119 were recommended 
for approval and 90 for denial. 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND COMMERCE 

Under the leadership of Secretary Maricmo Garchi- 
torena the Department of Agricultiu’e and Commerce 
has been able to accomplish the folio whig: 

1. Laimched a national food campaign making pos- 
sible the establishment of 103,681 home projects, 558 
commercial, and 604 semi-commercial projects on 
chickens and ducks. Increased production of food 
crops in all the provinces. The price of foodstuffs 
has been reduced considerably. 

2. Operated 18 experimental stations covering 3,295 
hectares, 1,705 of which are under cultivation. It dis- 
tributed seeds and plants valued at P54,854. 

3. Conducted plant investigations for the production 
of hybrid fruits and vegetables. It controlled the in- 
festation of farms by locusts and rats in twelve prov- 
inces, effected quarantine work to prevent the en- 
trance into the country of the fruit fly, coffee-berry 
borer and other pests. It conducted successful ex- 
periments on the utilization of milk soy as a sub- 
stitute for imported wheat. Soil conservation projects 
and agricultural extension service were carried on b\- 
the department. 

4. Through the Bureau of Animal Industry, five 
stock farms, 14 breeding stations, and fom’ breeding 
centers were stocked with 124 head of carabao, 171 
head of cattle, 39 horses, 18 buffaloes. 247 pigs, 49 
goats, seven sheep, 309 chickens and 29 pigeons; 
100,000 white leghorn and New Hampshire chicks. 



23 



5. Gave great impetus to the fishing industry. The 
sum total of the fishery investments in the Philip- 
pines is now F9, 109, 500. 

6. Helped in the development of the lumber m- 
dustry and increased the production of Imnber, reduc- 
ing the unit price of liunber in the local market. 
Reforestation, cinchona plantation, forest research, 
memorial tree planting, land classification, land reg- 
istration, game and wild life projects have been 
undertaken. 

7. Conducted industrial research, settled claims and 
disputes concerning dummy landholdings in Davao, 
and undertook cadastral smweys. 

8. Intensified the nationalization of retail trade, 
fiber inspection, and development of mining projects, 
rendered geological services and canvassed for new 
materials. The successful operation of PlOO worth 
of meteorological and r&dio technical equipment was 
undertaken. 

9. Established a national history museum with speci- 

mens from various parts of the Philippines. Inten- 
sified the dissemination of agricultural information and 
instruction through official bulletins and through the 
press and inaugurated the holding of regional con- 
ferences of farmers and field men in five strategic 
points. ^ 

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND COMMUNICATIONS 

Soft-spoken, hard-hitting, diligent Ricardo Nepomu- 
ceno has borne the brunt of the reconstruction work 
undertaken by the Philippines dm’ing its first year as a 
Republic. As Secretary of Public Works and Commu- 
nications he has contributed greatly to the consumma- 



24 

tion of the repair and reconstruction projects of the 
Government. 

During the period under consideration, the Depan- 
inent registered 17,708 motor vehicles, issued 43,124 
drivers’ licenses, 4,805 student permits, and received 
1,829 cases of violations of motor vehicle law. Of these, 
1,829 cases, 322 were settled amicably, 58 dropped for 
lack of merit, 78 taken to court, and 497 licenses re- 
voked. * 

The Metropolitan Transportation Service (METRAN) 
provided Manila and neighboring provinces with much 
cheaper land and water transportation than might be 
expected from private companies. It provided a means 
of livelihood to hvmdreds of people, 

1. The Department completed the construction of 
bridges in Manila, Marinduque, Morong, and Batangas. 

2. Two million pesos was distributed for the rehabi- 
litation of hospitals, dispensaries, and maternity build- 
ings in all the provinces totalling 22 structures now 
under process of construction. 

3. Sixteen buildings for use by public officials had 
been repaired in various parts of the country. 

4. National buildings were either constructed, main- 
tained, or altered in the City of Manila. 

5. Construction and repairs were carried out on 
ports and harbors in the City of Manila. 

6. Irrigation systems were repaired and new ones 
have been started, especially in the provinces of Rizal, 
Nueva Ecija, and Bulacan. 

7. River control projects were undertaken. 

8. Artesian wells were constructed or repaired and 
improved. 

9. One thousand and forty-two (1,042) post offices 
have been reopened throughout the country. 



10. Forty-five radio stations and 133 telegraph offices 
were reestablished. 

11. More than 425,897 paid telegrams and more than 
23,078 incoming and outgoing telegrams and radiograms 
were handled by the Bureau of Posts. 

12. Twenty-two thousand five hundred and sixty- 
four postal savings bank accounts with a total balance 
of P3,620,607.46 have been reconstructed. 

13. Thirty-seven thousand five hundred twenty-six 
deposits totalling F7, 211,410.99 and 25,791 withdrawals 
totalling P5,193,544.28 were registered. 

14. The main portions of the water and sewer systems 
in the City of Manila have been restored and surround- 
ing towns like Las Pinas,^ Guadalupe, and Antipolo have 
been furnished water service. 

15. Three thousand two hundred and eighty new 
water services were installed; 779 water service con- 
nections were reopened; 522 services were legalized 
Two hundred eighty-two sanitary sewer connections 
were installed, 36,230 lineal meters of sanitary sewer 
connections have been cleaned, and 59 stoppages re- 
moved. Four hundred eighty-three fire hydrants were 
reactivated and 4,022 water meters repaired. One 
hundred thirty-three projects with an estimated cost 
of P4,464,958 have been started. 

16. Through the USPRA two super highways have 
been constructed in Manila, the Sta. Mesa highway and 
the Espana double lane concrete road, which is nearing 
completion. The USPRA also plans to turn Taft Ave- 
nue into a concrete highway and to reconstruct the Jones 
bridge and the Quezon bridge. Before these two bridges 
are closed to traffic, the United States Army offers to 
construct two temporary bridges, one to connect Juan 



26 



Lime Street with Magallanes Drive and the other, 
somewhere between Quezon and Ayala bridges. 

DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION 

Secretary Manuel V. GaUego faced the problem of 
reconstructing the school buildings destroyed by the 
war and reestablishing classes which had been- dis- 
rupted by the Japanese occupation with resource- 
fulness and fortitude. 

Six hundred private schools and colleges of all levels 
in Manila and the provinces were reopened. At the 
close of the school year 1945-46 private schools reached 
57 per cent of their pre-war enrolment. Private sec- 
ondary school enrolment increased from 63,589 before 
the war to 63,750 in 1945-46. All indications tend to 
show that pre-war enrolment in all levels of instruction 
in private schools will be exceeded in 1947-48. A par- 
tial total enrolment of private schools and colleges in 
Manila and the provinces show that 257,926 are in at- 
tendance. 

The adult education progi’am has been stepped up and 
improved so that it now includes not only the teaching 
of adults on how to read and write but the instruction 
in civic education to save them from being used as tools 
by unscrupulous persons for subversive propaganda. 
Adults were given the opportunity to attend adult edu- 
cation assemblies and public forums. They were given 
information on how to improve their living conditions 
and increase their efficiency in their occupation. 

Adult students numbering 32,376 are now in attend- 
ance in 915 schools. About 90,716 adults attended 
adult education community assemblies. 

The National Library reopened the Baguio branch 
and the San Antonio, Zambales Library Deposit Station. 



27 



The National Library recovered practically all major 
manuscripts of Dr. Jose Rizal lost during the war of 
liberation. It completed a library development and 
rehabilitation program involving the following: 

1. Establishment in five years of municipal reading 
rooms in all towns and cities; 

2. Operation of a library on wheels to reach the bar- 
rios and towns that do not possess library facilities; 

3. Establishment of regular branches in all provincial 
capitals and principal towns; 

4. Establishment of libraries in big factories. 

The President allocated P16,000,000 for the rehabili- 
tation of the University of the Philippines. 

The President also ordered that there be closer super- 
^ vision of private instruction throughout the islands. 

During the year P16,750,000 was appropriated by 
Congress for additional elementary classes. This sum 
was to be added to the original appropriation of 
P31,373,460. The total appropriation for schools is 
more than P48,000,000 or 19.4 per cent of the total 
expenditures for the operation of the Republic. 

The additional appropriation enabled the Bureau of 
Education to open 8,380 additional elementary schools. 

Equipment and tools were acquired for use in the 
trade schools with the release of PIOO.OOO by President 
Roxas in November, 1946. 

The total enrolment in elementaiy, secondary, normal 
and technical schools in October, 1946, was 3,085,245. 

Since liberation 102 high schools have been opened in 
large municipalities. 

Instruction has been concentrated in both elementary 
and secondary schools upon the teaching of social studies 
including character and citizenship. 



28 



The Bureau of Education now operates three national 
schools of arts and trade, two vocational high schools, 
and 22 provincial trade schools. In July, 1946, 23 agri- 
cultm*al and rural high schools were opened. 

DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE 

During the last year, the Department of National 
Defense had weeded out undesirable elements from the 
rank and file of the Army of the Philippines. It has 
reviewed the loyalty cases of approximately 1,634 of- 
ficers and men. Court-martial cases were also passed 
upon by the Department. 

Forty-six trans-oceanic fixed point-to-point licensed 
commercial radio stations have been under its direct 
supei-vision and control. Among the radio companies 
falling under government supervision are the RCA 
Communications, Inc., McKay Radio and Telegi-aph Co., 
Lie., Globe Wireless, Limited, and the Philippine Press 
Wireless, Inc. 

Besides the point-to-point stations there are three 
coastal, eleven ship, and four aeronautical, thirty-eight 
craft and sixty-two amateur radio stations. The licens- 
ing and inspection of these radio stations have oc- 
cupied the attention of the Department. 

The Philippine Nautical School which in pre-war 
days had tux'ned out some of the best-trained yoimg 
Filipino naval cadets has been partly rehabilitated and 
is now housed in two old and dilapidated buildings. 
There are at present 75 first-year students at the 
School. 

The Philippine Army, renamed Ai’my of the P hil - 
ippines, is the largest entity imder the direction and 
supervision of the Department. 



29 



Up to June 30, 1946 the Aimy was under the ad- 
ministrational control of the United States Army 
through the Commanduig General, AFWESPAC. Its 
strength up to January 31, 1947 was 159,000 officers 
and men. But the process of demobilization was 
started and kept imtil the strength was pruned down to 
^ 35,743 officers and men. 

During the year the Philippnre Aimy has: 

^ 1. Reestablished the Philippine Military Academy; 

' 2. Re&tablished the Reserve Officers Service School; 

3. Prepared plans for cadre training; 

4. Surveyed and mapped out Army camps and sites; 

5. Established central depots and supply points all 
over the Philippines; 

6. Prepared a 5-year plan for research work; 

7. Continued organization of the ten military dis- 
tricts, the first chemical mortar ti’aining company, 1st 
and 2nd mfantry training regiments; 

8. Performed logging operations at Lanao forest and 
Bataan; 

9. Completed 19 wire projects; 

10. Gave care and treatment to 2,000 disabled vet- 
erans. ' 

■ The MPC, Military Police Command, although an ad- 

junct of the Philippine Army, has been placed under 
, the opei'ational control of the Depax'tment of the In- 

terior. Thus the Provost Marshal General is directly 
I'esponsible to two different departments. 

The Department supervises the 23 Army cemeteries 
in O’Donnell, Bataan and other places. 

The Coast and Geodetic Sui’vey has been actively 
searching for triangulation data of Northern Luzon and 
has been conducting a Motor Vehicle Operator’s 
Course. It has made a reconnaissance survey of the 



30 



mouth of Agusan River, a survey of Bataan, a resurvey 
of Manila Bay, and a reconnaissance survey of Pasig 
River. 

The Bureau of Aeronautics supervises and controls 
for civil aviation in the Philippines 62 landing fields 
(which include 16 military airfields). Commercial 
airlines have been registered and licensed, t 

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR I 

The Secretary of Labor is the Honorable Pedro Mag- ^ 

salin. As head of the Department, the Secretary has 
been responsible for various projects seeking to ame- 
liorate labor and capital relations. Under his guidance 
the Department of Labor has accomplished the 
following: 

1. It has intervened in 48 strikes and 21 other labor 
disputes involving a total of approximately 23,203 la- 
borers. Of the 48 strikes, 22 were amicably settled, 

16 were certified to the Court of Industrial Relations, 
three were brought by the parties concerned them- 
selves to the said court, and seven are still pending 
action and settlement. All the 21 labor disputes were 
amicably settled. 

2. Two hundred twenty-five labor organizations all ^ 

over the Philippines were registered. From these la- 
bor organizations, a total sum of Pl,125 was collected ( 

as registration fees. 

3. The 8-hour Labor Law and the Woman and Child 
Labor Law were enforced rigidly through special sec- 
tions of the Department. 

4. Of the 1,213 cases filed for Workmen’s Compen- 
sation, 441 were closed. For death cases, a total sum 
of P57,850.36 was collected, including P2,990.75 for 



31 



burial expenses. The total collection during the period 
was P105, 169.27. 

5. Five hundred and ninety-eight claims for unpaid 
salaries and wages uivolving 2,655 claimants were filed. 
Of this number of claims, 182 were amicably settled. 
One hundred and fifty-eight claims were closed, 61 were 
withdrawn, and 46 were abandoned by the claimants. 
Seventeen were dismissed for lack of merit, 18 for lack 
of jurisdiction, 13 for lack of information. 

6. Through the Safety Inspection Division, the De- 
partment investigated conditions in industrial and com- 
mercial establishments for* the purpose of determining 
and correcting hazards to life and limb. 

7. Industrial hygiene activities were undertaken by 
agents of the Department to insure enforcement of 
health and sanitation rules. 

8. Unemployment relief was given by the Depart- 
ment to deserving unemployed persons. Out of 5,718 
registered applicants for work, 2,736 were employed 
hi private firms. 

9. Through the Bureau of Immigration, the Depart- 
ment has apprehended, investigated, deported, or re- 
patriated aliens who have entered the country illegally. 
During the period under consideration, 293 Chinese en- 
tered the country illegally, 37 aliens of different na- 
tionalities were repatriated, and 26 aliens were ex- 
cluded. 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND PUBLIC WELFARE 

Dr. Antonio Villarama is the Secretary of Health 
and Public Welfare. The Department has a long list 
of accomplishments to its credit. To wit: 



32 



1. Improvement of general sanitation and immuni- 
zation which resulted in the prevention of major epi- 
demics; 

2. Increase of charity clinics and revival of dental 
services; 

3. Improvement of hospital service and increase of 
the per capita expense for patients; 

4. Wider campaign against tuberculosis, malaria, 
leprosy, and venereal diseases; 

5. Special studies on typhoid, dysenterjj, and other 
gastro-intestinal diseases; 

6. Successful prevention of dangerous communicable 
diseases from abroad, such as cholera, plague, and 
smallpox; 

7. Execution of joint program with the United 
States Public Health Service on leprosy, malaria, tuber- 
culosis, venereal diseases, sanitation, nutrition, mater- 
nal and child welfare, training grants, and training 
centers. 

8. Extension of relief and welfare program; 

9. Operation of the War Relief Office for war widows 
and orphans, the guerrillas, -and other indigent war 
victims; 

10. Creation and operation of the National Advisory 
Health Covmcil. 

11. Inspection, through the Bureau of Quarantine 
of 873 vessels and 485 aircraft, detained 24 vessels 
for quarantine, and fumigated 22 vessels. 

12. Supervision, through the Bureau of Health of the 
operation of seven national hospitals, 14 hospitals in 
special provinces, 34 provincial hospitals, nine leprosa- 
ria and leper treatment stations, 18 private hospitals in 



33 

Manila and a considerable number of hospitals in 
various provinces. 

13. In order to accomplish the most equitable dis- 
tribution of the 1,350 grams of streptomycin, it has 
been decided that hospitals and other similar institu- 
tions each be allocated a share of the dxug, with their 
respective medical authorities determining who among 
the patients under their care are suffeiing from the 
types of tuberculosis for which streptomycin is in- 
dicated. 

OFFICE OF rilE COMMISSIONER OF THE BUDGET 

From the Budget Commission spring the arteries 
carrying the lifeblood of the Government to the var- 
ious ramifications of the Republic. Its functions 
naturally are multifarious and delicate. The Re- 
public of the Philippines has coimted on the services 
of a mm whose experience and training fit him emi- 
nently for the service as Budget Commissioner. This 
man is Pio Pedrosa. 

During the year under review, special investigations 
were conducted by the office regarding requests for 
extra compensation for overtime service from various 
bureaus and offices of the Government. 

One htmdred and sixty-nine applications for retire- 
ment were recommended for approval imder Act 
No. 2589 as amended by Act No. 4151. 

Sixty-five positions were reallocated. 

Several positions were recreated. 

Great economies were effected through the efforts 
of the Budget Office. 

The expenditures of various departments, bm’eaus 
and offices of the National Government were rigidly 



investigated and proposals were embodied in a sjjecial 
budget. The budget office proposed drafts of the^ fol- 
lowing bills: ^ 

1. An Act empowering the President to effect 
changes in the reorganization of the National Gov- 
ernment; 

2. An Act appropriating fimds for operation of the 
Commonwealth Government and the Republic begin- 
ning July 1, 1946 vmtil the General Appropriation 
Act for the fiscal year 1947 is enacted; 

3. An Act to organize the Philippine Naval Patrol 
Command. 

NATIONAL POWER CORPORATION 

During the year under review, the National Power 
Corporation accomplished the following: 

1. Continued the preliminary surveys and investiga- 
tions of: 

(a) Agno River Project, Mountain Province; 

(b) Agus River Project, Lake Lanao, Mindanao; 

(c) Agus River Project, Infanta, Quezon; 

(d) Lumot River Project, Caliraya, Lumban, La- 
guna; 

(e) Penaranda River Project, Nueva Ecija; 

(/) Talavera River Project, Nueva Ecija; 

2. Operated Unit No. 1 of the power plant at Cali- 
raya; 

3. Completed rehabilitation of Unit No. 3 at Cali- 
raya; 

4. Rehabilitation Makati substation and transmission 
line from Caliraya to Makati substation; 

5. Completed sand and gravel backing of east and 
west dykes up to an elevation of 289 meters; 



35 



« 6. Completed one row of concrete paving at dam 

% up t^an elevation of 289.75 meters; 

7. Reestablished gauging and weather observations 
at Agus River, Infanta, Quezon; 

8. Reestablished rain gauges and water measuring 
devices at Caliraya; 

9. Rehabilitation living quarters of employees at 
Caliraya; and 

10. Constructed and repaired NPC roads at dam site, 
Caliraya. 

GENERAL AUDITING OFFICE 

From July 4, 1946, to July 4, 1947 the General 
Auditing OflEice continued performing the accounting 
and auditing functions which were fused in July, 1938. 

Numerous irregularities were discovered and brought 
to the attention of the office for investigation. 

To coordinate the investigation of all irregularities, 
two sets of investigating committees were created. 

More than 8,000 claims filed by* war widows and 
heirs of deceased regular officers and enlisted men of 
the Philippine Army and the former Philippine Con- 
stabulary have been processed. 

The audit of the transactions of the following en- 
tities was undertaken; 

1. Philippine Tuberculosis Society 

2. Asociacion de Damas Filipinas 

3. Charity Horse Races 

4. Accounts of Disbursing Officers of the Quezon 
Institute. 

5. Franchise corporations like the RCA Communica- 
tions, Pan American Airways, Philippine Long Dis- 
tance Telephone Co., and others. 









36 

The pecuniary savings effected out of the aiifait of 
the Philippine Tuberculosis Society and Quezon ^sti- f 
tute and the Asociacion de Damas Pilipinas totalled 
PIO, 656.54. 

The provincial audit department discovered a total 
of 112 irregularities and shortages amounting to 
P126, 203.85. From its audit of the accoimts questioned, 
pecxiniary savings amounting to P623, 669.87 were 
effected. 

O 
























y •• 










