NU COPS 3rd PLACE 
IN PHARMACY TESTS 




12 Out of 13 Candi- 
dates Pass; 92% Suc- 
cessful 

With a general average of &6'/c, 
Mrs. Rebecca L. Galeos, who gra- 
duated summa cum laude from the 
NU College of Pharmacy last sum- 
mer, obtained the third place in 
the board tests for pharmacists 
held last July by the board of 
pharmaceutical examiners, it war, 
learned from official reports of 
the Bureau of Civil Service. 

Eleven other candidates from 



Mrs. REBECCA L. GALEOS 

Urge Control Of 
Private Schools 

(hie Year Pre-Collegiate 
Course Proposed 

The absolute supervision and 
control by the state of all private 
schools and the establishment of 
a one-year pre-collegiate course to 
broaden the foundation of tech- 
nical and professional education 
were proposed before the joint 
educational committee in its re- 
cent meeting. TKe*>committee is 
' jUlflt 1 y ' hea^ed^by-Ste^ator Geroni- 
mtf -Tr Pet's on and Rep. Juan V. 
Borra. 

Dr. Antonio Isidro, consultant on 
higher education and member of 
the committee, proposed a national 
collegiate entrance examination for 
all secondary schools. He also 
asked that a one-year pre-col- 
legiate course be established next 
year to bolster the country's cul- 
tural foundation. 

Dr. Isidro decried weaknesses in 
pre-coliege i oundaUcm work which 
\xe ascribed to the foreign medium 
of instruction, limited cultural 
background, and lack of pre-ele- 
mentary education. 

He also revealed that the 10- 
year period of schooling here for 
elementary and secondary educa- 
tion is too short, compared with 
12 years in France, Italy, and 
the United States and 13 years in 
Germany and Japan. 

The joint committee, to which 
has been invited leading educators 
in the country, met to thresh out 
problems and adopt measures 
whereby the present educational 
system may possibly be improved. 



Radio School Faculty 
Bolstered Two 

Former U.P. Prof. 
Joins E.E. Faculty 

Following the need for more ins- 
tructors to cope with the big num- 
ber of students who are taking the 
Radio Course in the NU Vocation- 
al School, the services of two 
veteran radio men in the city have 
been secured, it was reported by 
Prof. Eligio J. Tavanlar, head of 
the department of electrical and 
mechanical engineering, who is 
concurrently head of the School. 

The new instructors are Messrs. 
Felipe S. Manalang and Jesus C. 
(Continued on page 4) 




Official Organ of the Student Body of the National University 
Entered as Second Class Mail Matter at the Manila Post Office on Oct. 18, 1930. 



Vol. XVI 



the University successfully passed 
the examinations. 

As a student Mrs. Galeos, who is 
presently connected with the fa- 
culty of the College of Pharmacy, 
not only excelled in her academic 
subjects but also took active part 
in extra-curricular activities. She 
was president of the Junior-Senior . 
Apotheker's, Pharmacal Advance, 
and the Zeta Chapter of the Phil- 
ippine Pharmaceutical Association. 
She was college editor of the 1948 
Nationalian. 

Acting Dean Maria V. Gutierrez, 
when seen by The National, ex- 
pressed the belief that with the 
showing of her initial crop of 
graduates in the board examina- 
tions, the enrolment in the college 
next semester may be considerably 
increased. 

Meanwhile steps are being taken 
by Acting Dean Gutierrez in se- 
curing more facilities for the use 
of the students in pharmacy. More 
books have been bought and the 
services of trained and experienced 
men in the field of pharmacy have 
been secured, it w T as learned from 
her. 



Manila, Philippines, October 14, 1948 



No. 6 



UNIVERSITY CELEBRATES 
FOUNDER'S DAY TODAY 



The Founder 






IN MEMORIAM-- 



Don Mariano F. Jhoeson 

==^=i^==s=^=^= wenceslao g. laureta == 



Library Bldg. To Wear "Bold Look" 



Not even a building*, a two- 
story affair at that, can well be 
termed as "commodious" for a 
library. The University Library, 
which has moved from its one- 
room quarters in the Main 
Building to the former Home Eco- 
nomics Buliding for the reason 
that there was not enough space to 
hold the students who had, of late, 
become library-conscious, still has 
to undergo a radical "never-look" 
change in the lay-out of rooms, it 
was learned from Miss Iluminada 
Lopez, chief librarian. 

The stock room, which occupies 
a greater portion of the first floor, 
wili be moved over to a corner to 
allow more room for the students 
who could not just afford to lose 
time making the good flight of 
stairs leading to the second floor. 
It is surprising to note that only 
a few students know that there is 
still another reading room. 

It was also learned that ventila- 
tors will soon be installed in the 
reading rooms, in line with the 
policy of the Administration to 
provide the students not only with 
a complete stock of books, spacious 
rooms, but also health rt stimul- 
ants", such as ventilators, which 



are vital in promoting "peace and 
order" in a library. 

With the start of the next se- 
mester, it was hinted, the students 
will find a Library building 
dressed in gala affair for the 
X'mas season. A bolder look, it 
will have. 



250 Students To 
Graduate In Nov. 

The University will turn out 
250 graduates from the different 
colleges and departments this 
semester, it was learned from the 
Office of the Registrar. 

The Normal College leads in the 
number of graduates, while the 
College of Education ranks a close 
second. The Colleges of Engine- 
ering, Commerce, Liberal Arts, and 
Dentistry trail behind in number. 

It was further learned from the 
registrar's office that although 
there will be no commencement 
exercises for the students who are 
graduating this semester, they will 
be allowed to participate in the 
April commencement exercises. 



The criterion of a man's success in life is not measured 
in terms of wealth. Neither is it based on what is peren- 
nially considered social and political prominence which our 
youth today look upon with confused admiration. 

Rather, success is gauged by the individual's ability to 
meet life squarely and surmount innumerable difficulties 
that so often discourage the young and faint of heart. 
Poverty, for one thing, has, time and again, inspired men 
to greater heights; but at the same time, been the unfor- 
tunate cause of discouragement to others. 

To Don Mariano F. Jhoeson, late founder of the National 
University, poverty meant nothing. He was born of 
poor parentage on October 14, 1877 in the district of Sta. 
Cruz, Manila. His father, Crispulo Jhoeson, a well-known 
sculptor, and mother, Marcela Alegrado, had taught the 
young man at an early age the value of work and industry. 
Naturally, when the young Mariano grew up, he consistent- 
ly struggled hard to overcome poverty, always hitching 
his wagon to the star of hope. 

There were other stumbling blocks to hurdle, but never 
for once did young Mariano waver. During his time, the at- 
tainment of education was not easy. In fact, few people 
had the opportunity to obtain higher learning. He, 
himself, did not have the benefit of college education that 
we know today, and which is available to everyone. 

There were few schools in those days. He attended 
the Ateneo Municipal de Manila where he obtained his ele- 
mentary and secondary schooling. Later, he finished at the 
same institution the degree of Litra Bachiller (Bookkeeping) 
and a course in Perito Mercantil. It was this very lack of 
schools that he determined, later in his life, to remedy. 
What opportunity he missed, he wanted others to have. He 
believed, as did Rizal, that the only salvation of the country 
lay in the education of the youth. To this end, he devoted his 
life and attained more than modest suuecess. 

(Continued on page 6) 



Rep. F. Serrano Guest 
Speaker At Convoca- 
tion 

The annual celebration and 
observance of the birthday of the 
late Don Mariano F. Jhoeson, 
founder and First Comptroller of 
the National University, will be 
held today, October 14. This day, 
which is declared holiday by the 
Administration, marks the 71st 
birthday anniversary of the illus- 
trious founder. 

A requiem mass will be said in 
the founder's honor early this 
morning at the University gymna- 
sium, with members of the family, 
Administration, Faculty, and the 
Student Body attending. 

At nine o'clock there will be a 
convocation and program which is 
(Continued on page 4) 

UNESCO Sponsors 
Essay And Poster Tilt 

Students Invited To 
Participate 

In a communication sent to 
heads of private schools, colleges, 
and universities, the Bureau of 
Private Schools announced that an 
essay and poster contest sponsored 
by the UNESCO will be held and 
opened to students in both public 
and private schools. 

The theme in both competitions 
is "Together We Build A New 
World" on UNESCO'S Work. The 
essay competition will be open to 
students between 15 and 18 years 
of age, while the second, to those 
between 12 and 15 years of age. 

Entries may be submitted in 
each competition in either of two 
forms: (a) An essay of between 
1,000 and 2,000 words; (b) a 
poster, as large as possible, but 
not exceeding 48 x 66 cms. or 
18 x 25 inches on which the word 
"UNESCO" must appear. Black 
and white or colors may be used. 
The design should be on simple 
lines that will reproduce easily. 
(Continued on page 4) 



Final Exams M For 
Oct. 28 -Nov. 3 

The final examinations ending 
the first semester of the current 
school year will be held from Oc- 
tober 28 to November 3, inclusive, 
according to reports released from 
the Office of the Registrar. 

To avoid the rush for examina- 
tion permits, students are advised 
to settle their obligations with the 
Bursar a few days ahead of tho 
d&te for the examinations. 

Schedule for the final examina- 
tions will be posted on bulletin 
boards or in other conspicuous 
places where the students could 
have an easy access. 



Page 2 



T h 



e i 



A T I O N A L 



October 14, 194* 



/♦The -QueZ'Qnian Philosophy 
" • Of Social J ustice 

* By Dr. Jose A. De Jesus 

Formerly Private Secretary to the late Pres. Quezon 



My Dear Professor 

By Manuel M. Anonuevo 



6. C. T* C t 



Sponsors' Merry-Go-Round 

By Z). V. Amano 



Manuel L. Quezon, son of school 
teacher Lucio Quezon and Dolo- 
res Molina, of Baler, Tayabas, was 
born a relatively poor boy. Trials 
and tribulations incident to a de- 
termined and unrelenting search 
for education characterized his 
early boyhood. He himself felt 
and experienced the travails and 
hardships of poverty and want. He 
saw and observed how other less 
fortunate people, young and old, 
had suffered injustices and depri- 
vations. These experiences haunt- 
ed him and influenced his life as 
he grew older. His sympathy for 
the poor and the underprivileged 
increased in fervor as the years 
rolled on. Their relief and de- 
liverance from this deplorable so- 
cial state became a passion and 
well-nigh a religion in his ma- 
turer years. 

Thus was nurtured in young 
Quezon a philosophy which he re- 
ligiously followed and observed in 
life: to help improve the lot of 
the poor, the humble, and the low- 
ly. It became an obsession and a 
part of his being until his death 
at Saranac Lake, New York, on 
August i, 1944. 

The first concrete expression of 
his love for the underprivileged 
and the less fortunate dated way 
back during his law practice in Ta- 
yabas when as a young lawyer he 
voluntarily offered his sendees 
gratis et amore to those detained 
in prison for alleged banditry. 
His success in law practice was 
unique. He never lost a case. 
When he became a provincial fis- 
cal, he prosecuted only those who 
really violated the law, without 
fear or favor. His high sense of 
justice highlighted all his actua- 
tions as a practitioner, fiscal, and 
provincial governor of Tayabas. 
Little wonder, therefore, that he 
became a champion of the masses 
who were often victims of oppres- 



sion and abuses of the rich and 
the powerful. 

His record as a student reveals 
his excellence and superiority in 
metaphysics. As a logician he 
was second to none; his knowledge 
of mass psychology finds no pa- 
rallel in our history. That is why 
he was invincible in debate and in 
the art of persuasion. This is the 
reason, too, why he succeeded, as 
no one had succeeded before, in 
championing the cause of the 
masses who constitute the greater 
bulk of our citizenry. His deep 
and unremitting concern for the 
common man has won for him the 
^undying affection and gartitude 
of the Filipino people. 

Because of his ardent love for 
justice and righteousness, social 
justice came natural to him. He 
urged the inclusion of social jus- 
tice in the Constitution of the 
Philippines. Even during his re- 
sident commissionership and his 
incumbency as President of the 
Senate, he had espoused measures 
in behalf of the factory workers, 
farm hands and other laborers. 
When he became President of the 
Philippines on November 15, 1935, 
his concern for his people grew 
deeper and more intense. He 
worked for social justice to pro- 
mote domestic well-being; to give 
the laborer a living and saving 
wage, and the farm hand his 
just participation; to treat the 
poor with the same respect as the 
rich; to teach our youth, besides 
their rights and duties of citizen- 
ship, the use of modem weapons 
for national defense. To Pre- 
sident Quezon, civilized society can 
only endure if justice is accorded 
equally to the rich and to the 
poor; that a man is more entitled 
to the fruits of his labor than the 
proprietor to the rent of his pro 
perty; that property owners 
(Continued on page 5) 



ROTC Sponsors On Parade 



Miss Sonny Cabagnot 
Reigning over the campus as Corps 
Sponsor this year is the ever-smil- 
ing coed from the College of Edu- 
cation. You all know Sonny. 
Engineers call her the tangent 
of every look from both men and 
wolves. Dentistry freshies were 
overheard to call her the "Perfect 
Dentine". Even a struggling 
freshman of the College of Law, 
who probably knows no law but 
has much imagination, remarked: 
"Sonny has a legal form." Not 
to be outdone, the Alpha Omegans 
recently voted her the most 
streamlined piece of architectural 
design on legs and proved it by 
electing her sweetheart of the 
fraternity. That is how popular 
Sonny is. And we, at the ROTC 
Dept, have at least one reason for 
raising our wee, wee, voice be- 
cause Sonny is with us. The 
corps may have its faults, but 
surely the selection of Miss Ca- 
bagnot as its Queen is not one of 
them. 

Mm Josefa C. Cedilla 

T^he 1st Bn has added another 
one of those "firsts" by beating 
.-wry one else to the draw in selec- 
ting alluring Miss Cedilla as their 
sponsor' "Chop" as ber !rfends 
call her is a Freshie in the College 
ot Pharmacy. Bom in the city, 
her shy and unassuming mid- 
Victorian man no i s are in deep 
contrast to the gandy proprnsilirs 
of her generation. She is one of 
those rare personalities with whom 
you can be well at ease at the first 
impact of conversation, gradually 



smothering you with • measured 
intimacy. 

She is a leader by her own 
right, being the Prexy of the 
Freshman Class Organization of 
the College of Pharmacy. 

Asked what her ideal man would 
be, she turned on one of those 
slow smiles you see in Gene Tier- 
ney and said that she has no ideas 
as yet and added: 

"There is one sure thing, 
though. He won't be found in test 
tubes nor in the thick textbooks 
on pharmacy. 
Miss Ester Dorotheo 

The "Southern Belle" is another 
popular campus personality. She 
is graduating from the College of 
Commerce this semester and all 
that is needed here is a review 
of her fruitful stay in the uni- 
versity. She reigned as Miss Com- 
merce during the school year 
L946-1947. She has participated 
in the activities of various clubs 
and organizations and is still ac- 
tive with most of them. She is 
presently the Prexy of the Rho 
Alpha, the exclusive fraternity of 
Commerce upper-classmen of the 
National University. She is a 
member of the English Club, the 
NU Ladies Club, and the NU Wo- 
men's Athletic Club. 

On the literary side, she has 
contributed several articles to 
the "National" and edited the 
Col I "go of Commerce ^National- 
Lah" for 1947-1948. 

That, in short, is Miss Ester 
Horotheo, a rare combination of 
beauty and brains, Sponsor of the 
2nd Bn. 



Our learned readers must have 
heard or read the pathetic story 
of the man who entered an eleva- 
tor from the top floor of a build- 
ing and hit the bottom in 3 se- 
conds flat. Because the elevator 
was not there. But this is another 
story. Just before the last pe- 
riodical examinations, we decided 
to go up to the N. U. Library atop 
the Main Building, to review our 
lessons. And Professor, the Love- 
rah-rhee too, was not there! 

Oh, yes, the library. Which re- 
mind us of the coming Finals. 
Right now, we could imagine, 
many a poor bird (of our feather 
at that) in the University asking: 
WILL I MAKE THE GRADE? 
(Meaning, passing grade, of 
course). We said "many", because, 
the only possible exceptions, we 
could think of at the moment, are 
those birds who have enough fea- 
thers in their caps, to be worrying 
about such trivial matters as aca- 
demic failure. They are the profes- 
sionals, the meritisimuses, and the 
scholars, whose chance of flunk- 
ing, are as remote as our topping 
the next C.P.A. Exams, or our be- 
ing honored with a bonfire. By the 
"many", we mean the poor work- 
ing birds (like ousel ves) which 
constitute the main bulk of the 
student body. These poor birds 
are greatly handicapped in their 
studies. They don't have even the 
time to steal a kiss, or sing the 
first line of the WODDY WOOD- 
PECKER SONG. But they are a 
strictly honorable lot, too. For 
which reason, we feel proud to be 
one of them. And justily so. And 
now, the Ed permitting, we should 
like to dedicate to them, this last 
portion of our column. Sort of 
bolstering their morale, and 
strengthening their 'spirit de guer- 
re', for the coming crucial battle — 
the Final Exams! 

For their inspiration, we take 
tja€ pleasure of quoting hereunder 
A FEW DROPS OF OIL" by 
Webb B. Garrison, which we have 
meticulously and painstakingly 
picked out, thread by thread, from 
the Cobwebs of Time. QUOTE: 
Once there was a barn door that 
was very hard to move. It was 
one of those old-fashioned doors 
that slid along on an overhead 
track. Sometimes it was very 
difficult to open it. At last it 
stuck fast, and no one could move 
it. So they sent for a carpenter. 
He took it off, put a few drops of 
oil on the track, and it moved so 
easily that it could be moved with 
one finger. 

;< There are many situations in 
life that are like that barn door. 
They are difficult. They are ex- 
asperating. We need something to 
make them go, and that something 
is neither more nor less, than a 
few drops of oil. 

"When someone provokes you al- 
most beyond endurance, try a few 
drops of sympathy. Visualize his 
problems and heartaches, and in 
doing that you will forget your 
own anger. If you want to succeed 
in the world, be liberal with the 
oil of courtesy, and there is noth- 
ing like a drop or two of forgive- 
ness if you'd like lots of friends. 

"In almost any case, where the 
going is hard, try a few drops of 
oil." Unquote. 

Yes, there are- many situations 
in life that are like that barn door. 
The final exams will certainly be 
one (we could immagine). The 
questions will be difficult indeed, 
and exasperating (because we 
made it so). But all we need is 
OIL. Oil to burn these coming 
nights, Oil to lubricate our rustied 
brains, and Oil (what do you 
know?) to apply to our Professors 
(to win back lost sympahy, or 
to erase their poor impressions of 
us). Yes, sirrreee! We certainly 
need OIL — and plenty! 



If I were Erie Standley Gardner 
and this is a detective yam, I 
would not have hesitated on the 
title: "The Case of the Confusing 
Coed". This is no thriller, but for 
once I wish to God that I were pos- 
sessed of the analytical genius of 
the %reat creator of Perry Mason. 
For we need the Fighting D. A. 
himself, not in pulp, but in flesh 
to unravel a consuming mystery 
which is baffling the best dicks of 
our local ROTC Unit. 

What is the nature of the mys- 
tery? It is very simple in its 
outward manifestations — so sim- 
ple indeed that its simplicity de- 
fies solution! It is the unfortunate 
fact that a goodly portion of our 
local coeds abhor the idea of be- 
coming cadet sponsors just as "na- 
ture vacuum abhorret." The dis- 
like is not feigned or faked but 
real and genuine, novel and pecu- 
liar. This confusing attitude is 
novel in its aspects considering the 
fact that being a cadet sponsor 
carries with it the inefaceable 
stamp of campus popularity, dis- 
tinction and honor. It is peculiar, 
in the sense that this attitude is 
native to our university campus 
only. The average coed of other 
schools would willingly miss any 
lunch, any time, if assured that 
her name will grace the Roll of 
Sponsors. 

In our modem world of compe- 
tition, the general trend is for 
women to hold on to glamour just 
as Uncle Sam is holding on to 
atomic secrets. But our coeds with 
their polite refusal offer a firm 
and shakable exception to the gen- 
eral rule. And upon that excep- 
tion hinges the unexplainable — 
the abstract. There must be some 
reasons behind such a strange 
twist of feminine logic. Whether 
they are justifiable or not is not 
for me to say. 

First reason is about the busi- 
ness of uniforms. All told, a spon- 
sor's uniform costs as much as 
P25.00, and twenty-five bucks tell 
on anybody's pocketbook, including 
ladies' handbags. That much 
money can buy three "New r Look" 
dresses for ordinary wear which 
any girl, including the poorest 
economist, will naturally prefer to 
the single uniform which may be 
used only during parades. This 
line of reasoning is very solid, and 
a coed with a glib tongue may 
force you into a blank wall. How- 
ever, a casual suggestion to g-o 
easy on the Vans, Johnson and 
Heiflin during off-hours and a 
little cut on Bireley's and Tootsie 
Rolls may do the trick. 



Second line of defense currently 
employed is the "mother-does-not- 
like-the-idea" barricade. The coed 
who throws this artificial barrier 
against your tactics of infiltration 
usually accompanies it with a sly 
smile. But don't mistake that for 
a "come on" signal, because when 
she passes on the line about Pet's 
say on the matter, the chances are 
that she is not referring to her 
aunt Petra but to Petronilo, the boy 
friend. This defense is tough for 
a deliberate break-through, and 
matters are made no easier when, 
by coincidence, Petronilo happens 
to be an assistant squad leader in 
your own platoon. 

Then there's the peppery remark 
about the individual cadet officer 
himself. "I don't like him. He is 
a perfect wolf". This is the hard- 
est reason to combat and the only 
truly undebatable issue. If a ca- 
det officer cannot act the role of 
the gentleman, then he has no 
business with ladies, much less 
with sponsors. 

The reasons mentioned have 
been cited in an effort to analyze 
the circumstances which form the 
bottle-neck in the strife for a 
more pi'oficient cadet corps. They 
are individual and isolated cases 
capable of wholesale improvement. 
Yet, discomfitures have popped up, 
because they have been ignored. 
The Office of the Commandant has 
for example, postponed the parade 
and review in honor of the spon- 
sors due to the lamentable fact 
that uniforms were not ready. A 
little cooperation would have been 
enough to save the Commandant's 
time-table. 

In fairness to sponsors, prospec- 
tive and actual, much maybe said 
in order to validate this unfor- 
tunate twist of events. There are 
no incentives towards which spon- 
sors may center their eiiorts and 
interest. Save for the paltry sa- 
tisfaction of occasional publicity, 
there is practically nothing attrac- 
tive in being a cadet sponsor. 

A cadet goes through all these 
troubles because of statutory prov- 
isions in the National Defense Act, 
while a sponsor has no ties binding 
her stronger than those of com- 
promise which she may or may not 
fulfill. There ought to be some- 
thing tangible by way of academic 
ratings or other satisfying rewards 
for sponsors at the end of every 
semester. Until such arrangement 
can be had, cadet-sponsorship will 
be nothing but a mere haze of 
high glamour, gold-coated with 
partial write-ups, but basically a 
lump of empty interest — unat- 
tractive and tasteless. 



ROTC BRASS GO SOCIAL 



The NU Cross-Saber Fraternity 
turned on the heat last Saturday 
night (9 Oct) by throwing an ac- 
quaintance party at the NU gym. 
Cadet Officers and their respec- 
tive sponsors as well as invited 
guests were treated with four solid 
hours of dance music furnished by 
the NU Orchestra under the able 



direction of Mr. Avelino Yumul. 

Among those present were: 
Capt Pedro M. Flores, Command- 
ant, NU ROTC Unit; 2nd Lt. Ra- 
fael F. Dumlao; 2nd Lt. Juan B. 
Panopio; 2nd Lt. and Mrs. Satur- 
nino F. Memita, and the office 
staff of the Office of the Com- 
mandant. 



FOUNDER'S DAY PRC3RAM 

(October 14, 1948) 

Master of Ceremonies JAMES BELTRAN 

L Floral Offering By the different colleges, depart- 

ments, fraternities, and sorori- 
ties. 

EL Overture National University Band 

Mr. Avelino Y. Yumul, Con- 
ducting 

III. Opening Remarks James Beltran 

President, NUSSC 

IV. Vocal Solo Miss Gloria Mien 

V. Introduction of the Guest 

Speaker Mr. Domingo L. Jhocson 

President, National University 

VI. Address Hon. Felixberto Serrano 

Representative from the 2nd 
District of Batangas 

VII. Recessional National University Band. 

Mr. Avelino Y. Yumul, Con- 
ducting 



October 14, 1948 



The .JUNIOR NATIONAL 



Page 3 



The JUNIOR NATIONAL 

Official organ of the student body of the NU High 
School Department 

Primitivo T. Acebuche — editor; Alma Tavanlar — associate; 

Zenaida Nisperos — society. 
Reportorial Staff: David Mengote — night department; Eleu- 
terio Lansang — day department; Prudencio Nisperos — after- 
noon department. 

Eduardo Klinefelter — typist. 
Prof. Santiago Alcantara — Adviser 
Miss Virginia Ongkiko — Asst. Adviser 



from the 

CLASSROOM 

Alma U. Tavanlar 



Rev. Fr. Manguiat HS S+udes Get 
Grateful For Set For This 

Cooperation Years Annual 



EDITORIAL 
Don Mariano-Our Inspiration 

It is fitting and proper that we celebrate our founder's day with 
singular solemnity and great demonstration of love and ' *PP™f™ 
for him, who, in life has dedicated his efforts for the uplift of the 
youth of the land. His vision in building this institution is commend- 
able, for this University, conceived through his liberal ideas, stands 
as the oldest non-sectarian institution of learning in our country. 

Don Mariano will go down in the educational history of our 
country, for through his inspired ambition, the National University 
came into existence. He was one among the many poor students 
who tried their best to obtain an education. It is said that the great- 
est enemy of the poor student is poverty, but Don Mariano's success 
is a proof that strong determination and self-sacrifice can conquer 
it. He did not consider poverty as a barrier across Jus path to suc- 
cess, and he came out victorious over all the hardships which would 
have overwhelmed a less determined young man. The National Uni- 
versity is a lasting and towering testimony to the vision and persev- 
erance that was his. 

He is dead, but his memory will always live with us. As long 
as the National University and liberal education exist in this country, 
the name of Don Mariano will always find a special place in the 
hearts of the National University students. 

Let us not forget this great man, whose life is to us an inspiration 
and benediction. 



HIGH SCHOOL FACULTY-STUDENT FOUNDER'S DAY 

PROGRAM 

Guest of Honor— Mrs. Miguela M. Vda. de Jhocson 
Part— I 

1. Holy mass, to be officiated by the Reverend Fr. Mariano M. 
Montero, Superior, V. 0. T. Church— 7:30 A.M. N.U. Gym 
(Elementary-High School Choir, directed by Rerevend Fr. 
Roberto Manguiat of the V. O. T., accompanied by the Na- 
tional University Band.) 

2. Flower offering — Faculty-student delegation to the cemetery 
and quadrangle of the Main Building, National University 

Part— II 
(4:30 P.M.) 

1. Overture — N.U. Band — Directed by Mr. Avelino Yumul 

2. A short biography of Don Mariano Jhocson — by Ramon 

Mediana 

3 . Duet— "Tres Caballeros"— by Patria Salva, and Rebecca Fer- 

nandez at the piano — Alicia Doria 

4. Dance— "La Jota"— by Luz Ora, Alicia Doria, Iluminada 

Lleses, Aurora Hernandez, Cipriano Roque, Ramon Me- 
diana, Luciano Llamoso and Leonardo Cantes. 

5. Harmonica— "Fighting Marine" — Jesus Bugtong 

6. Dance — "Tiniken" (Dutch Dance) — by Araceli Castro, Le- 

ticia Paanyong-ayong, Veneranda Alcantara, Clotilde Vil- 
lanueva, Rebecca Fernandez, Patria Salva, Alicia Aqui- 
no, Leonin Leonides, Concorcia de la Pena and Floren- 
cia Fadriguela. 

7. Declamation— "Psalm of Life" — Conchita Hernandez 

8. Guitar Solo — by Estanislao Caranzo 

9. Dance — "Tinikling"— -by Amparo Depusoy, James Lauser, 

Bamboo players — Ester Cruz-Onofre Benavidez 

10. Skits— "Don't Shoot"— III-B A.M. 

11. Solo— "Santa Lucia"— Teofila Leano 

12. Dance — Pandango sa Haw — Norma Ferrer, Benjamin Fo- 

ronda 

13. Closing remarks— by the guest of honor, Mrs. Miguela M. 

Vda. de Jhocson 

14. Recessional— National University Band 

Part— III 
Faculty-Student "Salo-Salo" 
Master of Ceremonies: Miss Estrella Pe Benito 



Time passes more easily than 
what is factually expected. As if 
July was only yesterday! And to- 
day has brought us so many 
things, making us feel as if we 
were living in a dream. 

A few days ago we were at the 
gym. There was a lot of fun. 
It was time we limbered up our 
sleeping muscles while others 
went atop their voices. 

Now let's see. Summing up the 
common round-about town gossips, 
we are proud to tell you types not 
from the common way of art-writ- 
ing or the popularly known ches- 
mis-try but something that arouses 
your desire for the "behind-the- 
scenes" glimpses of celebrities. We 
knew the IV-G P.M. romped away 
with the trophy in a well-earned 
victory. But they weren't excited 
about it. Why? Trailing behind 
the harmonious tunes, we noticed 
a group out of pitch. Not from a 
totally disgusted loser but voices 
definitely with spirit in the air. 
Contented in losing, but mind 
you — eh- shall it happen again? — 
or _yes,— omp— "No!!!" "Till the 
end of time, let's see," was the out 
of tune voice of the IV-G A.M. 

And did you also hear that there 
is such a convertible classroom 
around? Of course not the for- 
mer library which is a classroom 
now. Sometime last week — I heard 
of the Honorable Judge reading a 
verdict before the jury. Extraor- 
dinary event — isn't it? Well, it's 
from the IV-Binians of the after- 
noon session who made use of the 
Bill of Rights. Shy-looking class 
prexy To] en tin o was the Judge, 
while representative Bondok han- 
dled the defense. Making-believe 
they were real lawyers, the boys 
formulated the final verdict them- 
selves. Isn't that again worth 
imitating, friends? Applying our 
constitution in a simple way? We 
are living in a democracy, and why 
not make the best of it? Our 
country calls for more reformers. 
Start out now and develop your 
latent abilities. Someday you'll 
get entangled or may be (who 
knows) you'll be a real barrister 
handling cases or the like, so be- 
gin now, it's hightime for you. 

And, touching the opposite side 
of that democratic sphere — some- 
thing sounds as if there were 
Jews in the campus. (Jews — a 
nation without a definite territo- 
(Continued on page 4) 



According to the Reverend Fa- 
ther MacDevit, director of reli- 
gious instruction in the Philip- 
pines, and Reverend Father Ro- 
berto Manguiat, director of reli- 
gious instruction in the National 
University, the University is at 
present first among the non-secta- 
rian universities in the city where 
religious instruction is successful- 
ly carried on due to the coopera- 
tion of the students who are most- 
ly Catholics. 

Father Manguiat, who is con- 
ducting religious instruction per- 
sonally in the elementary depart- 
ment, said that the parents of the 
elementary pupils show great inte- 
rest for the spiritual education of 
their children. Through "The Ju- 
nior National," Fr. Manguiat ex- 
tends his thanks to the parents 



In preparation for the High 
School Senior Annual, all sections 
had their picture taken last Sept- 
ember 27 with their teachers and 
advisers. All the girls were in 
school uniform and the boys all in 
white and necktie. The copies of 
the picture which are now on dis- 
play in the two bulletin boards on 
the second floor present a very 
striking characteristic feature of 
the discipline and order for which 
the High School Department is 
known. 

Credit goes to our beloved prin- 
cipal, Mr. Jesus M. Jhocson, who 
has a knack for organization and 
administration. 

concerned and to the administra- 
tion for their unselfish cooperation 
extended to him. 



Senior Class "Social Hour" On Oct. 24 



The Social Hour of the Senior 
Class Organization is definitely 
set on Oct. 24, from 2:00 in the 
afternoon to 7:00 in the evening 
and is "scheduled" to surpass all 
previous affairs of the High School 
Department including those of last 
year. According to Ramon Me- 
diana, President of the Senior 
Class, this attempt of a Social 
Hour will be a model for all fu- 



ture social hours in the univer- 
sity. 

The members of the Senior 
Class are all agog and enthusias- 
tic of what is in store for them 
for that afternoon. Different sec- 
tions are preparing their skits and 
short plays to be presented for 
that occasion. The following com- 
mittees were created with their 
respective advisers: 



FINANCE COMMITTEE 

Chairman, Alma U. Tavanlar; Members, All Section Sec-Trea- 
surers; Adviser, Mrs. Beatriz Santiago. 

ENTERTAINMENT COMMITTEE 

Chairman, Ramon U. Mediana; Members, All Section Presidents; 
Adviser, Mr. Vicente J. Trinidad. 

REFRESHMENT COMMITTEE 

Chairman, Juanita U. Comelio; Members, IV-G-1 A.M.; IV-G-1 
P.M.; Adviser, Mr. Adolf o Castro. 

DECORATION COMMITTEE 

Chairman, Felix Golea; Members, IV-B-1 A.M.; IV-B-2 A.M.; 
IV-B-1 P.M.; Adviser, Cas Trin. 

COMMITTEE ON ATTENDANCE 

Chairman, Cipriano H. Roque; Members, All Section Beadles; Ad 
viser, Mr. Ismael Gali. 

COMMITTEE ON PRIZES 

Chairman, Marciliano S. Tolentino; Members, Luz Ora, Asuncion 
Manuel, Maria Paz Nelly, Estrella Pe Benito, Rosalia Augusto; Ad- 
viser, Miss Virginia Ongkiko. 

COMMITTEE ON ALUMNI PARTICIPATION 
In-Charge, Adoracion Nisperos, Rafael Caballero. 



ONWARD TO VICTORY— HURRAY! 




High school girls, donned in their shorts, shown parading in Lipa Street at t)ie opening of tfie intra- 
mural games late last month. The University band, which furnished the music, may be seen on fore- 
ground. 



Page 4 



The JUNIOR NATIONAL 



October 14, 1948 



Legal Atmosphere . . . 

(Continued from page 6) 
in Criminal Law in a local univer- 
sity, approached him for help in 
making a brief for the summary 
judgment for a defendant in a 
civil case. The poor ex-judge, off- 
hand, said he believed that the 
defendant could not move for a 
summary judgment in his favor as 
a remedy in a civil case. Our own 
law student cited Sec. 2 of Rule 
36 of the Rules of Court in show- 
ing the ex-judge's mistake and the 
latter was left dumbfounded. He 
realized he was stressing a wrong 
law! I believe that is one point 
for Dean Ylagan's excellent teach- 
ing of the law and the mastery 
by his Faculty of the subjects en- 
trusted to their care. 

Radio School . . . 

(Continued from page 1) 

Monroy, both graduates in elec- 
trical engineering. 

Mr. Manalang graduated from 
the Philippine School of Arts and 
Trades in 1928 and a year later 
obtained his license as a Commer- 
cial First Class Radio Operator. 
He joined the faculty of the trade 
school and later joined the staff 
of the Compania Maritima and 
served as Shipboard Radio Opera- 
tor until 1932. 

In 1938, while teaching at the 
Far Eastern Automotive Engineer- 
ing Institute he obtained his de- 
gree in electrical engineering at 
the Mapua Institute of Technology. 
After graduation, he served with 
the RCA Communications as Shift 
Engineer, until the outbreak of 
the war. 

He worked with the United 
States Army after liberation, and 
later rejoined the RCA Communi- 
cations as Senior Transmitter 
Technician. At the same time he 
taught at the National Radio 
School. 

Mr. Monroy, who is an electrical 
engineering graduate from the 
state university, worked for three 
years in the Reliance Radio Ser- 
vice, and is at present vice-pres- 
ident of the Eelctrical Engineers 
Corporation. 

Meanwhile, Prof. Eduardo C. 
Chanco, president and general man- 
ager of the Elencor, has been en- 
gaged to teach subjects in the 
fourth year in the department of 
electric engineering. Prof. Chanco 
has been with the faculty of the 
electrical engineering department 
of the University of the Philip- 
pines. , 

From the . . . 

(Continued from page 3) 
ry.) Why they were called so, is 
quite strange. But listen. It hap- 
pened one day — the 'now showing* 
was so inviting and our enthusias- 
tic brothers lost their minds, per- 
haps thinking the day was a holi- 
day — so off they went enjoying. 
Back to class the next day, they 
were badly "sabonized" (pardon 
my English) then went the "no 
one cares" because of so and so 
on. (Do you get me?) Disowned 
by a father, our IV-1 A.M. was 
compared to the Jews. But hating 
the cognomen which was really in- 
appropriate, they asked the Unit- 
ed Nations to settle them up and 
now we are done away with Jews. 
Let's forget it and say "Let there 
be peace among our ownselves." 

But are we not also bothered 
with storms? Socially speaking, 
however, the storms I mentioned 
may be balls, parties — and plenty 
of the sort. Right now the class 
treasurers carry big bags. At 
home everyone is busy pulling 
mamma's shirt for a peso or two. 
Everyone tries to get set-up for 
the grand — day or date? Day in 
and day out — eyes have been eye- 
ing other's eyes. They seem to 
speak of something — yes, they 
really are. "May I," "Yes" or 
"No" are commonly heard. Steps 
are swaying to the tunes, and no 
wonder the inordinately inspired 
soles (not souls) are preparing 
for the slides, wiggles and slow 
drags. We hope we could do full 



History Club Formed 

Students majoring in History 
from a number of colleges in the 
University recently formed the 
History Club, with the purpose of 
gaining a wider knowledge of his- 
torical events and activities which 
are relative to the study of the 
subject. 

For their initial activity, the 
members of the club visited the 
ruins of Fort Santiago and other 
historical sites in the Walled City. 
Other places in and out of the city, 
are scheduled for the next visit of 



WHY DO WE HAVE TO WORK 
AND SIGH? 

By 



Sports 



Salustiano E. Pimentel 
IV-B-2 A.M. 



"Why do we have to work and 
sigh, 

While the birds go fitting thru 

the sky? 
Why are we doomed to weave 

and knit, 



The formidable IV-G P.M. 
volleyball team subdued the fast- 
stepping and highly-tooted IV-G 
A.M. lassies in the championship 
game of the volleyball mtramur- 



that they have to till the soil in 

order to live, and this was the al * of the Hi ^ h Sch ° o1 De P art ~ 

beginning of man's eternal destiny, Hient last Oct. 2. 

"to work and sigh." Luz Ora and Felicidad Inofe- 

At the dawn of history, men's lio starred for the winning team 

life was simple and its simplicity with their excellent teamwork 

While the birds do naught but conveyed to us the belief that they and superior playing, while Alma 

flit- flit- flit?" lived more contentedly than we do Tavanlar did well for the losing 

Of all creatures on earth, man at present. During those days team. The score was 21-17; 21- 

the dub, m . r COnnec ^7^^ is the luckiest being endowed by they just hunted and fished in or- 8; 21-11. 

God with several advantages that <*er to have something to eat. The Immediately after the game, 

make him superior to all living trees and caves were enough to the pr i nc ip a l, Mr. Jesus M. Jhoc- 

things. His physical and mental shelter them, if they wanted to rest. son , prese nted the cup donated 

abilities enable him to adjust him- But nowadays, to hunt and fish by Mr. Richard Bond Jr. to Luz 

self to his enviroment and to con- is not sufficient to maintain a Qra, captain of the winning team 

trol its forces. This is a proof of decent living. A tree or a cave Tavanlar was awarded a prize as 

shelter 6 ^' * C ° mf0rtable the most valuable player and Luz 



of the club with the various sites 
and buildings which have been 
marked with plaques by the Phil- 
ippine Historical Committee. 

Officers of the club are: Pres- 
ident—Albert R. Sanedrin; Vice- 
President-Emilio Songco; Secre- ™? < ' 
tary-Treasurer — Miss Felisa Ve- 
dar. Adviser is Prof. Emiliano L. 
Laus. 



O'Romy Is Back 



Why do we work? As human 
beings progress, man's neces- 
sities increase. The truth that any 
individual can't live alone is the 



Ora received another as the best 
player of the intramural meet. 

The IV-G A.M. cheering squad 
led by Zenaida Nisperos, Araceli 



prime factor that demands these ^tro, and Mil Flores was ^ed 

the best and the most spirited 



aust work twelve f ° up durin ^ the 
ball season. 



entire volley- 



that he is lucky, 
because his abilities offer him a 
greater opportunity to survive and 
to be happy. 

Why then do we have to work 
and sigh? 

It is regretful that as man's 
After an absence of one and a half knowledge advances, his life grows necessities, 
years, Romeo (o'Romy) Goyene- more complicated and this com- Certainly we m 
chea, formerly associate editor of plexity denies him his contentment hours and sometimes twenty-four 
THE NATIONAL and until his which is his happiness. Let us hours a day in order to cope with 
departure to the States as a look far back to the first man and the demands of life. Therefore, In connection with the Social 
scholar was a fourth year student woman—Adam and Eve. When it is clear that we work, because Hour of the Senior Class a bas- 
in civil engineering in the Univer- they were still innocent, when we want to survive. ketball game between the Senior 
sity, arrived late last month. they did not know yet the differ- But why do we sigh ? We must class an <* a pick team of the un- 
Goyenechea was one of those in ence Detween good and evil, theirs admit that our knowledge of want der graduates including the regu- 
the first batch of pensionados sent was a lj ^ e of ease anc * J°y m the is a menace to our contentment lar members of the High School 
by the Philippine Republic to the blessed garden. They lived as the and happiness, because the more team is scheduled for Sunday 
United States to take up meteoro- birds do now * But a ^ter they we know, the more we become morning, Oct. 24. The object of 
logy. He was assigned to study have realized the good and evil slaves of want. Once we long for this game is to blaze the way for 
at the New York University in and that they would surely die, something and can't possess it, we the selection of our basketball 
New York City. the y became ashamed. They found grieve for it. Let me frankly sla ndard bearer for next school 
Following the completion of his jt necessary to look for something state that we sigh, because we are year< Mr yicente J Trinidad is in 
studies in meteorology, Goyene- to cover themselves. They came greedy; we are restless; we are charge of the Senior team while 



chea will serve with the govern- 
ment for a specified length of 
time. He is presently working as 
international flight forecaster 
with stations at Nichols Field. 



to know, as God has told them, discontented. 



UNESCO Sponsors . . • 

(Continued from page 1) 
International awards offered by 



ON BEING A NEW STUDENT 

By Jaime de Jesus, 1V-B2 A.M. 



Mr. Rasay will take charge of the 
team of the undergraduates. 

It is also contemplated that our 
girls volleyball team be given 
their debut on that same schedu/e 
by p\aymg against one of the 
teams of the M.I.A.A. Miss Se- 
She simply ignored me. villa is busy drilling her cohorts 



I come from the South — the lance, 
the UNESCO are as follows^First South where the majestic and peer- I could still picture that scared for that maiden bow. 

Competition: 1st prize for essay— ?ess Mt ' Mayon P roudl y stands. I, attitude of hers almost bordering 

P500; 2nd prize for essay— P400; a Blcolano > am steeped of its at- on the "God help me" look. Of- 
lst prize for 
prize for poster- 

ditional prizes for PI 00 each. Sec- s P lendour of ner beauty in the just loose from the wilderness, on 
ond Competition: 1st prize for ear] y m °mings when large mas- that first day I came. Or, per- 
essay— P300; 2nd prize for essay— ses of wnite clouds engulf her like haps, there was still much in me 
P200; 1st prize for poster— P300; a man tle— the serene dignity of that "provinciano" look with a 
2nd prize for poster— P200; and 8 her bearin S a s the roving gaze of wrong approach. 

students feast upon her — all these 



2 for essay— F400; ~ ' -~ M — *™ ^ w " iKJKJ ~- v - /x ~ 

poster P5Q0- 2nd mos Phere, for I come from a school tentimes I wonder whether I did p * a -p ^ • 

r— P400; and 8 al- that humbl y lies a t its base. The really look like a "lone wolf" i./Vl: I . (NeWS 



by Ricardo Aguilar 
P.R.O. 



additional prizes for P100 each. 

These prizes will be awarded in 1 have Ieft behind, 

the form of a grant to enable the 1 wanted a taste of the City 

winners either: to travel abroad; where educational opportunities 

to attend a conference on world a re yours for the asking. So I 

affairs; to acquire further educa- came, only to find myself drowned 

tion (if possible in another coun- in a sea of faces unfamiliar to 

try; or, to purchase books and m e. I had to turn my head right 

other educational material, in ac- a ^d left to catch what was being 

cordance with individual choice. talked about to the dismay of my 

Entries to these * competitions understanding. A dull ache of 

should be submitted not later than loneliness invaded me. There was 

April 30, 1919, to the Bureau of not a familiar face in sight to 

Private Schools for transmittal to whom I could utter the usual "hel- 

the Department of Education be- lo" that was a part of my daily 

fore the deadline on May 1, 1949. vocabulary. 

The best five in each medium of Enrolling wasn't an easy thing, 
each competition will then be Approaching a non-too obliging la- 
selected and submitted to the dy for information put me off ba- 
UNESCO. 



But then I found someone — nice 
and approachable. With her help 
I accomplished the form in such 
a short time. Again I didn't know 
where the Principal's office was, 



An informal election among the 
cadet officers was held 1st Sun- 
day October 3, after the drill 
hours in Luneta. "Cross Sword 
Fraternity" was selected to be the 
name of the organization of the 



who the registrar was, and where cadet officers. The following of- 

Fd find him. I haven't heard the ficers were elected: President — 

word "Bursar" in my eleven years Cdt. Major Gonzalo Simon; Vice- 

of imbibing the "wisdom of the President — Cdt. Capt. Celso Es- 

ages". So its like this— in the cobar; Sec-Treasurer— Ctd. Capt. 

city. I thought— so many people Ramon Mediana; Adviser — LL 

— so many words I haven't met Memita. 

before. * It was agreed upon that all 

I am a new student — I am be- non-commissioned officers would 

ginning to like my new Alma Ma- be included as members of the 

ter. But, I would like it more, if fraternity. 

relationships are not so impersonal 

and formal. 



Society 



Limit- 



Last Saturday Oct. 9, Pat Salva 
treated a group of friends with a 
dinner and dance in their resi- 



University Celebrates . . . The Excluded Middle . . . 

(Continued from page 1) (Continued from page 2) 

sponsored by the NU Supreme T , ± . , , , „. . . 

Student Council, at the university If the memhers °f the govern- under certain conditions. 

gymn. A short parade, to start meni f ollow the constitution, not mg the discussion to governments (ience . It was a whole dav affair 
from the Annex building, will be onl % to the letter > but also ™ the with democratic constitutions, if and among those presen t were: 
held around the campus, ending at «jwft> then that government is the members of the government p r i nc i P al Jhocson, CasTrin, the 
the foot of the monument of the based upon the constitution. If are imbued with the ideal demo- jy.Q ^.M. girls and their brother 
founder where a floral offering no outside force in one way or cracy, and consistently guard section the IV-B A.M and others 

ceremony will take place. The mother intervenes in the affairs against attempts of infringement " 

University band will head the pa- of the government it is based upon upon the constitution, and if other Recipient of many filici+ations 
rade which will be joined by the that constitution. Thus, under conditions are favorable, then the f rom fc er c j ose f r | en ^ s anc j a dmir- 
students and Faculty. ceriain conditions, the question presence of a constitution (demo- ers was Romana Bugtong of 

Guest speaker at the program, may oe answereo i { n th e affirma- cratic) means that the government IV G P M Wb« M iA, Q t fl j 
which will be held immediately , • { democratic w *Ta , J? celeDratea ner 

after the floral offering ceremony, tW€ ' * demMlc ' birthday last Oct. 6 with an ice 

is Rep. Felixberto Serrano, of the To the second question, "A We deeply regret that the sim- cream party held at the Varsity 
2nd district of Batangas. He will democratic government is a go- P le workings of this layman's Inn. Among the well wishers 
be introduced by President Jhoc- xernment by constitution, but mind does not make sense to one were: Nita Comelio, Bith Tavan- 
son. does the presence of a constitution steeped in the legal atmospliere. lar, Pat Salva, Becky Fernandez, 

justice to all of them. Best of mean that the government is de- Or perhaps the legal atmosphere Cloty Villanueva and Lita Dima- 
luck to all, and full speed ahead!! mocratic?", the answer is "yes" is too dense for our colleague. yuga. 



October 14, 1948 



The NATIONAL 



Page 5 



Section Castellana 



Coplas Que No Lo Son 



The Itolndcil Middle 

V. LAVA, JR. 



Literary 



For The Best 

By FAUSTINO DIAZ 



En conmcmoracion al aniveraario del cumpleanos del fundador y ^ ^ ^ ^ Cora de Jesus 

director de esta tastitucidn Sr. Dn. Mariano F. Jhocson, placenos el y RoJ>erto Qbordo have done 

honor de rcproducir a continuacion las "Coplas torresquianas"* escn- ^ ^ ^ exQ/ms 

tas por su hermano el Prof. Sr Kcmigio S. ^onypn^^ J dentists, there seems to be no 

la revista "Academy Courier" de esta miHma mstitucion, el 14 ae > • 

octubre de 1917 y declamadas por el joven Lopez alumno interne, rw«m to doubt that the N.U 

!^; lr^ l"« LuU ItnvJte* del mowmi de la velada que se College of Dentistry ranks not 

lower than number two in the 



como una de las partes interesantes del programa de 
celebro en su honor y que divertio tanto al auditorio. 



I. 

Hay dos cosas en la vida 
que no me hacen donnir^ 
la sombra de mi novia 
y un "balutan" de mani. 

II. 

Si me fijo en el escote 
de una dalaga de por aqui, 
el Director, que esta alii, 
me dice. . . .halo, arriba camote!! 

III. 

Es costumbre del Director 
dondequiera que nos vea, 
nos grita sin ton ni son 
jagarra el libro, a estudiar! 

IV. 

Les contrare un caso, 
que un dia me sucedid; 
le encontre en su auto 
en la Escolta, de paso. 
Plies, del susto que me did, 
palpaba cualquier libro 
y en vez de libro lo que cogi 
fue la bocina de un auto. 

V. 

Los verdaderos ciudadanos 
se alistan para ser milicianos 

desde el esposo de Dna Maria 

hasta el ultimo cochero del tranvia. 

VI. 

Si pasas por la plaza de Sta. Cruz 
a la hora que van los chicos a sus closes, 
tu vcrds uniformes de todas closes 
hasta uniforme de "Sotang bastus!" 

VII. 

Me cuenta la Srta. Paulina 
que al pasor por nuestra esquina, 
le sigue un hermoso perro 
y no era perro, sino un t( paliquero. Jf 

VIII. 

Las bellas "girls" de lo "High" 
no desean novio ni noviazgo, 
de eso tienen asco, 
por que gust an del "calamay". 

IX. 

No hay principle sin fin 
ni fin sin principio, 
y como yo he empezado, 



country. 

Well, I, for one, can see good 
reasons why we have come up to 
second place. Students like the* 
topnotchers have obviously done 
their bit. Then there is the facul- 
ty, zvhich is capable. 

t 

And we should not forget the 
clinic's general improvement in ap- 
pearance, which lias no doubt bol- 
stered the morale of the students 
to a considerable extent. 

The fact is that National Univ- 
ersity has a good dental college. 

Impressed by the results of 
the board exams, by the spic and 
span look of the clinic, I decided 
one day last iveek to take advan- 
tage of the offer of free dental 
prophylaxis 

What is tliat song about fools 
^rushing in where wise men fear 
to go? 

But it really %vasrtt so bad, be- 
cause my gums have just about 
stopped bleeding. 

But, since then, I have taken 
to brushing my teeth four times a 
day so as to postpone the next 
dental treatment for about twenty 
years. 

* * * 
Incidentally, ive should like to 
take the following opportunity to 
emphatically deny the follpiving 
story which is making the rounds, 
as having no basis in fact. 

It seems (so the story goes) 
that one of our veteran students 
rushed into the clinic one day 
and asked for a phrophylaxis. The 
student clinician, glad to be of 
service, showed him to a chair and 
proceeded to remove the tartar and 
cigarette stains, etc. The veteran 
seemed to be on the point of pro- 
testing, but decided to hold his 
peace. 

When it ivas all over, the vet- 



The man looked at the woman begotten of a life which is ruled 

and felt a tightening in his chest, by no condition, governed by no 

With an effort, he swallowed rights, dedicated to no purpose, 

hard, bit his lips, and heaved a wayward and worthless, 

sigh. He shook his head. Such had he been, and that he 

No, no, he seemed to say. Not sha » once aga !" b , e if ' • • 

she - she is too youn.g, too inno- ™ at night he lay awake and 

cent, too trusting and delicate. endeavored hard to keep awake. 

What is the matter? asked the Awake to thmk and thlnk ' to P lan 

woman who noticed the restless- and reason . clearly unhampered 

ness in his haggard face. Is there ? nd J diS ?t S !, 1 ° 1 l at J e ' ^ * _ U f_T 1"^ 
anything wrong? Is there some- 



thin!/ hurting you? Tell me, darr. 
Can I be of any help? 

He remained silent and stolid, 
and looked afar, gazing towards 
the distant horizon. He was think- 
ing, reminiscing of himself and of 
the woman. He was thinking of 
their past, of what they are now 
and what they shall be. 

Retracing the blazed, beaten 
path of life—his life — he recalled 
that once he had renounced, once 



hands, he dipped the pen into the 
bottle of ink and wrote , . . 

Nora, only heaven can tell how 
much you mean to me. But in 
spite of all, you know not who I 
am and what I have been. AH 
of our love, your dreams and 
mine, shall have to end. I can't 
tell you why. Maybe, later when 
I am gone you'll come to know. 
And, for your own good. You 
are not for me. You were ne- 
ver meant for me. 
He knitted his brows. The con- 



and for all, any further amorous fined passion pressed hard against 

dealing with her. Had he not his breast, and he swallowed hard, 

drunk from the cup of love the His lips narrowed to slits of paling 

elixir of unbounded joy and was re d. 



it not that it was from the very 
same cup that he had quaffed the 
bitter dregs of disappointment and 
a broken future? 

He gambled everything then — 
his fortune and studies. They sim- 
ply disintegrated to nothingness, 
and in the created void of his 
heart was sucked, like liquid fire. 



Nora, think it over. Weigh it 
and view it from every angle. 
You'll find and see that what 
I did was truly for your own 
good. May God bless you abun- 
dantly. 

He felt a little relieved. He 
breathed full and hard the scented 
breeze that silently blew from the 



the engulfing madness of a fan- soaked earth. 

tastic love. He lived then within In the morning, he was gone, 
a blanketing mist of wordliness. Gone with his sawed-off shot-gun. 

0O0 



Kalikasan 



luego, voy a dor punto final. 
(*Torresquiana se deriva de Torresky, un espaiiol cuplista y trans- 
formista que vino a Manila a principios del ano de 1916 para dar re- 
presentation es en los diferentes teatros de Manila y provincias con eran { s reported to Iiave thanked 
mn resultado exitoso.) v the student profusely, and to have 

gone away muttering to himself, 

The Quezonian . . • \"Boy, science sure has advanced 



(Continued from page 2) 



I was in the ArmyJ!" 



two 



only hope to keep their .posses- among others, for the welfare and 

sions indefinitely, if they share protection of factory and indus- In the last issue of The 
part of their profits with those trial workers and farm hands, tional, this column raised 
who work for them. To carry out Verily, social justice was one of questions, both general in nature, 
his social justice program sue- the primordial objectives of the and invited anszvers to thenu 
cessfully, he labored for the es- Quezon administration. Elsewhere in this issue, attempts 

tablishment of peace and order. Thus, we may say that President were vuu ie to ansiver them t but 
That is why there was little or Quezon's unflinching love and de- s> -^ co tfiey are not anS wered to the 
no unrest and discontent among votion to fair play, equal oppor- satisfaction of one who takes an 
the masses during his adminis- tunities for all, a high sense of 
tration. justice, and an abiding passion 

For the implementation of his for the welfare, happiness and se- 
social justice program, the follow- curity of the poor, the humble and 
ing laws were passed: the eight- the lowly, constitute the basic phi- 
hour labor law, the Woman and losophy behind his program of so- 
Child Labor law, the creation of cial justice. For this accomplish- 
the Office of Public Defenders, ment alone, if for no other, Pre- 

the Court of Industrial Relations, sident Quezon deserves a perma- pMf that we are governed by that 

titution?" can be answered 
"yes" only under certain 
' conditions. 

(Please turn to page 4) 



interest , this column shall attempt 
to answer them. 

To the layman's mind, un- 
adorned with the intricate ver- 
biage of the legal atmosphere, the 
question "Does the fact that we 
have a constitution necessarily im- 



the Department of Labor, and the nent and distinct place in the Hall com 
Tenancy Law Enforcement Office, of the Immortals of our country, mth a 



Sa buong paligid 
ating mamamasid; 
yaong kalikasang hindi magagawa 
ng sino mang taong sa tao'y nagmula. . . . 
Balantok na bahaghari'y 'sang mabuting halimbawa; 

sa mga pangitain na puspos mandm ng "hiwaga 

Ito'y katunayang may isang dakila 

na sadyang lumalang ng lan git at lupa 

(Kanyang pinarikit 
itong sandaigdig.) 
II 

Pinalamutian 
ng mga halamang 
iba't ibang kulay ang mga bulaklak; 
at may sari-saring samyo't halimuyak. . . 
Ang bukid na kalawaka'y tila niluntiang dagat, 
sa pagaspas ng amiha'y umaalon nang banayad .... 
Mga punongkahoy na makapipitas 
ng bungang sagana, sa gutom panligtas .... 
(Sangang malalabay 
panlilim sa araw. ) 
Ill 

Sa libis ng bundok 
masukal na pook; 
ang mabining daloy ng kristal na tubig 
ay tila kundiman na galing sa bati.s, 
walang humpay, walang sawa, liku-likong gumuguhit; 

Kagubata'y nililibot, puno't dulo'y di-malirip 

Malalayang ibong dito'y nagtatalik; 
nagsasalimbayan at nagsisiawit. . . . 
(Masasayang lubos 
sa biyaya ng D'yos.) 
IV 

Yaong papawirin 
pagsapit ng dilim 
ay kawili-wili ang iwing kariktan, 
bituin at tala'y nagtitimpalakan 

ng kani-kanilang ningning sa rurok ng kalangitan 

Sa naglalayag na ulap, buwa'y lumubog, sumungaw!. . . 
Hang saglit pa't pagbubukang liwayway 
ninikat ang araw sa dakong silangan .... 
(Pambuhay sa atin 
liwanag na kimkim.) 

Evangeline Garcia 




RHO ALPHA 
INITIATION RITES 

Right : Neophyte Pantaleon Ejer- 
cito gets a nice licking, as he si- 
mulates a gallivanting, coquettish 
"she-man". 



Left: Diminutive Felipe Juare 
seems to enjoy being "played" with 
by the frat sisters* 




Page 6 



The NATIONAL 



October 14, 1948 




NATIONAL 



Official Organ of the Student Body of the National University 

Member, College Editor's Guild of the Philippines 
Editorial and Business Offices: 385 Lipa, Samp. Manila 

(Published forthnightly) 

Uomulo D. Coloina, editor, Vicente Lava, Jr., news; Gil Man- 
zano, literary; Felicita G. Jacoba, society; Diosdado Samonte. 
iagalog; Rafael S. Caballero, Jr., sports; Fernando V. Lavador, 
Oscar Contreras — Contributing. Departmental Editors: 
/^--Esmeralda T. Dangzalan; Engineering— Francisco Pas- 
cal, Jr.; Commerce- Jesus L. Escasa; Dentistry— Mariano Pe- 
rez; Pliarmxtcy— Antonio Mercado; Education— Gloria Micu; 
Liberal Arts-Jose Cortez; NorwaZ-Lucinda Fernandez; 
ROTC— Dominador V. Amano. 



Prof. SANTIAGO ALCANTARA 
Faculty Adviser 



Mr. VIC. 
Asst. 



L. ESCASA 
Adviser 




The LEGAL 
ATMOSPHERE 

E. T. DANGZALAN 



Don Mariano ... 

(Continued from page 1) 

Considered one of the earliest and most striking educa- 
tional organizers of our times, Don Mariano F. Jhocson now 
occupies a secure niche in the country's hall of fame. 



ALPHA OMEGANS "ONE AND ONLY" 

GET PINS FROM PROGRAM HELD 

SWEETHEART ™ PHILOSOPHERS 

What must be the most unique 
Members of the Alpha Omega, and singular type of program ever 
exclusive fraternity of upperclass- held in the University is the lite- 
men in the Department of Arch- rary-musical program held by the 
itecture, did a / ay with their draw- students of the Philosophy and 
ing boards, T-squares, and other Political Science Classes (night de- 
drawing paraphernalia and went partment) of the Colleges of Lib- 
merry with an inaugural and in- eral Arts and Education last Sun- 
duction party held at the Liwa- day afternoon, October 10, at the 
nag's Fashion Academy on Que- university gym. 
zon Blvd. last Sunday evening, Musical selections, vocal rendi- 
October 10. tions, poems and many other num- 

bers were sandwiched in between 
Highlight of the affair was the t h e dancing. The program was 
presentation of the fraternity pin rendered in two parts, with re- 
to the fraternity sweetheart, Miss freshments served after each part, 
Sonny Cabagnot. The pinning thus allowing no lose of pep, vigor, 
ceremony and candle ceremony anf j stamina among the partici- 
were other interesting numbers. pants an d the guests who had the 

„ . best times of their lives at the 

Officers of the fraternity who af £ air 



managed the affair are: Jose D. 
Hinlo, most exalted omegan; Ma- 
rio B. Capule, vice exalted ome- 



It surely was a different pro- 
gram, an unusual approach to a 



from dance 
floors. 

Responsible for the sucees of the 
affair are the committees which 



practical elimination of the zany 

No other institution in the Philippines today has had gan ; Santiago R Baut.sta, brother dance „ cha „ 

the same humbleness of beginning as the National Umvei- scribe; Vic del Rosano brother 

3tv Don Mariano it is said, started the school with a cap- keeper of the fleece; Fehx Salva- 

taTof SnlyTlT ShStI after the establishment of the cion, Jr., brother crier; Mario 

civil government in the Philippines, following the downfall Gatmaitan brother keeper of pins; gerved ag executiye and workbg 

of Spanish power, he organized, in Sta. Cruz, what was Agusto M. Catuncan. brother bodies of the dasg Adviser fa 

known as the Colegio Filipino, with only very few pupils keeper of loyal orders; Ruperto Dr Joge de Jesus 

Known d& tiic ^ui^^xvy L '„^A*wT omiTcoc Thi« was S. Felipe, brother olympus; Ray- 

enrolled in the elementary and secondary courses. This was mundo p £ iwanag bro y th * r jester . 

in 1898. an d Carlos B. Gaon, fraternity ar- 

Five years later, the name of the school was changed tist , 
into Colegio Mercantil in view of the modification of the . 
school curriculum. Added to the elementary and secondary Members are Luperto Gaite, 

then offered were: commerce, bookkeeping and ac- Amando Salonga, Pedro Roan, Mi- 



CESSC HOLD 
ACQUAINTANCE SOIREE 

What may be rightfully termed 
as a successful affair was the ac- 



courses then ^^^^^SSZ guel Pascua^ Jaime Veron, Ben ^intance soiree held by the stu- 

counting, afl of which ^e^ the system ^ pe]ix £ Na . dents of the College of Education 

Spanish instruction obtaining at the time. ^ p ^ Romeo L Cag 

During this period, already a rebirth was growing in Phil- taneda, Crispin Toledo, and Leo 
ippine sociaf life. Human rights which had been held in nar do Quiampang. 
bondage for long centuries of Castilian tyranny began to be 
free The era of liberalism as envisioned by the democra- 
. tic way of American life was in sight. A liberal movement 
of thought among Filipinos was mounting which necessit- 
ated sweeping changes in the curricula and discipline of the 
college, 



at the NU gym last October 3. 

Professors, students, and guests 
spared no moment to rest with the 
lively and hot pieces tempting 
Advisers are Profs. Carlos da them to bum their soles until mid- 



Silva and Arthur Lindsay. 



LAW STUDES 



So, in 1913, the medium of instruction, which was still TO HAVE OUTING 
in Spanish, was completely discarded, and in its stead was 

placed the English language. For once, students of 



the Col- 
lege of Law will take time 

on 



night. Of course, there was enough 
time for refreshment which w r as 
served "to your gusto." 

Credit for the success of the af- 
fair goes to the officers of the 
College of Education Supreme 
Student Council: Vicente F. Ma- 
nese, president; Ricarte Pen a, 
out vice-president; Idmila Calceta, 
secretary; Gloria Micu, assistant 



Sunday, October 17, in Happy Josefina de Vera, treas- 

urer; Felicita G. Jacoba, assistant 



>vhole-day affair. 
Managing the affair are the 



ness manager; Lucio Cabarloc, 
Amor Bala, assistant business 
managers; Gil Manzano, press re- 
lations officer; Eufracio Garcia, 

press 



cil: Jose Soller, President; Romu- relation officers< 

lo Quimbo, Vice-President; and Advisers of the council are 

Pedro Trinidad, Secretary- Trea- p ro f. Domingo Serion and Dr. Ni- 

surer. co i as Q u ilon. 



a THORN among the ROSES 



A more progressive evolution in the method of instruc 
tion had to be effected with the view of affording students J* *> social on an outing 
nothing but the best in education. The services of more Sunday, October 17, m H 

qualified teachers were secured, more suitable buildings and valley. Swimming sightseeing, treasurer . Roger Palattao busi _ 

equipment acquired. 

As the years went by, the imperative need for opening 
up night classes was greatly felt. In answer to this demand, 

Don Mariano, in conjunction with the Lacson brothers, open- officers of the Law Student Coun- Zosimo Trinidad assistant 
ed up the Philippine Law School. The school which was re- - 
cognized by the government in June, 1915, became the offi- 
cial law school of the University in 1921. 

On August 1, 1916, the Board of Trustees changed the 
title Colegio Mercantil to National Academy. Later, on Jan- 
uary 17, 1921, the name was again changed into what the 
institution is known today— National University. It has the 
fortunate distinction of being the first non-sectarian insti- 
tution in the Philippines authorized to confer diplomas to 
its graduates. 

Don Mariano devoted his life to the .university He T^nt, X£ 

spared no effort to make it grow steadily in order that its of the e ; f ^ 

very foundation will become as solid as rock, capable of try We feel ca] , ed ^ &c 

withstanding the storm and fury of changing times. He saw centuate this point; for the pk _ 

to it that the needs and demands of modern educational ture is rather a poor likeness and 

standards were met. He wanted this university to continue does not do Miss Tablante justice. 

with its noble objectives in the enlightenment of the youth But even if it were a good picture, 

even long after he was gone. would it be possible for a photo- 

Don Mariano died on March 17. 1928. He left 10 chil- f»j* to record such fine points 

drcn, one of whom is deceased. They are: Domingo, who ZZ^^^t^l' °* 

Is President of the University at present; Ramon (deceas- ^ T { TeZeSTJL 7JS o°n 

ed) Florencia, Kecaredo, Remedios. Leticia, Teodoro, Jesus, her j. ? 

Mariano, Jr., and Pacita. 

Pictures are often superficial. 

His success in making the institution grow during his An added word is often necessary 
lifetime is a sufficient tribute to his memory. It is not a to evaluate the subject. The pic- 
success which brought him much wealth, nor much social ture does not tell us that she is 
or political prestige. And today, if the National University quiet, albeit merry, 
has attained its rightful place as one of the leading educa- Yet this seeming paradox is 
tional institutions of the land, it only reflects to the vision borne out by the fact that she does 

and foresight, industry and perseverance, of the man who not indulge in vigorous activities beauty- is best described by her 
founded it. He left his legacy to US, to the younger genera- such as swimming, or sports in own description which she gave 
tion, and to posterity, and the Filipino people will always re- general. Besides being a more with an impish smile and a lumi- 
member him for his contribution towards the attainment of than a regular church-goer, she nous twinkle in her eyes: You 
a more enlightened Philippine citizenry. likes to browse through romantic can call me a 'pious lady.' 




CONSUELO TABLANTE 

books, probably giving free rein 
to a vivid imagination. 

This 96-pound, 21-year-old 



Currently, there is so much fuss 
about the Cabinet revamp, about 
the graft and scandals supposed 
to have been committed by front- 
rankers in our officialdom to say 
nothing of the far-flung wholesale 
irregularities during elections. 
There are so many games being 
played and battles fought for and 
against our bleeding government. 
Right now, no one can figure out 
w r ho will be rightly hailed winner, 
unless we decide to agree that 
newspaper reporters are the win- 
ners. 

To this end, we have already one 
result: Free Press top staff- 
writer and the Philippines' "va- 
luable person", alumnus and pre- 
war professor of the University, 
Leon O. Ty, was pulled down to 
earth (by the neck?) in a libel 
suit by NACOCO's "Big-shot" Ka- 
law when the former hit the latter 
(on the head?) in a supposed 
"libelous" article. It was just 
one of Ty's attempts in his fearless 
"crusade against official graft 
and corruption" (with proper apo- 
logies to a justice of the Supreme 
Court.) Are we to understand 
that newspapermen are no moie 
entitled to a say or a hand in 
threshing out the present ills in 
our government? 

Our own Excluded Middle, in the 
last issue of The National, be- 
gan complaining about the right 
of freedom from search, without 
a search warrant, being impaired 
by a certain act of one of Manila's 
Finest. The tale told is, in its 
face value, a case of constitutional 
violation. The patrolman has no 
right to search the passenger's bag 
without search warrant That is 
quite settled. 

Yet, as one may be aware of 
the check points found inside the 
city and suburbs for preventing 
probable infiltration of Huk ope- 
rations into the city, it may be 
reasoned out on good grounds that, 
for carrying out the end and pur- 
poses of these checkpoints and by 
virtue of police power, suspicious 
elements > may be reasonably 
searched by those clothed with 
proper rights. 

To the questions of the said 
column, namely, "Does the fact 
that we have a constitution neces- 
sarily imply that we are governed 
by that constitution?" and, "A de- 
mocratic government is a govern- 
ments is a government by the 
constitution, but does the pre- 
sence of a constitution mean that 
the government is democratic?" 1 
wish to give these answers: 

The government established a 
constitution which does not only 
"necessarily imply" that we are 
governed by that constitution, but 
£hat it is above the government 
and above anything else. It must 
be upheld and respected by every 
person, be he the humblest man or 
the most powerful official. The 
second question is neither hard nor 
simple. It is a commitment which 
needs a great deal of explanation 
from the questioner in order to 
straighten the question sensibly, 
otherwise I will have to quote 
Dean Ylagan by saying, "That 
does not mean anything!" Mean- 
time, 1 will have to leave that as 
is. 

0O0- 

No wonder, so much is to be 
complained of decisions penned 
down by judges of inferior courts, 
much to the disappointment of 
those who know the law better 
than they do. One of our third 
year law students was relating to 
me the other day how he could 
laugh at the thought that an ex- 
judge, and, presently, a professor 
(Continued on page 4) 



