REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 




COMMISSION ON ELECTIONS 

MANILA 

PRIMER 

ON THE 

PLEBISCITE 

OF THE PROPOSED 

CONSTITUTIONAL 
AMENDMENTS 

TO BE HELD ON 

APRIL 7, 1981 



are holding a plebiscite to ratify or refect proposed 
amendments to the Constitution, adopted by the Interim 
Batasang Pambansa, sitting as a Constituent Assembly. Under 
the Constitution, any amendment to, or revision of, the Consti- 
tution shall be valid when ratified by a majority of the votes 
cast in a plebiscite which shall be held not later than three 
months after the approval of such amendment or revision. 

Batas Pambansa Bilangl22, fixed April 7, 1981, as the date 
of the plebiscite when the proposed amendments shall be sub- 
mitted to the electorate for their consideration. 



Q. What are the proposed amendments to 
the Constitution? 

A. The proposed amendments to the Philip- 
pine Constitution adopted by the Ba- 
tasang Pambansa sitting as a Consti- 
tuent Assembly, divided into three 
categories, are the following: 

1. Amendments to Articles VII, VIII 
and IX thru Resolution No. 2 with 
a final vote of 147 Yeas, 5 Nays 
and 1 abstention; 

2. Amendments to certain Sections of 

Article XII thru Resolution No. 3 
with a final vote of 148 Yeas, 2 
Nays and 1 abstention; 

3. Amendment by inserting a new sec- 

tion between Sections 14 and 15 of 
Article XIV permitting a natural 
born citizen of the Philippines who 
has lost his Philippine citizenship to 
be a transferee of private land for 
his residence as the National Assem- 
bly may provide, thru Resolution 
No. 1 with a final vote of 122 Yeas 
and 5 Nays. 

Q. When will the plebiscite be held? 
A. The plebiscite will be held on April 7, 
1981. 

Q. How many questions will be submitted 

to the voters? 
A. There will be three plebiscite questions. 



Q. How will these questions be answered? 
A. The voter may answer in any of the fol- 
lowing manner: 

1. To vote for the approval of each of 

the questions covering the amend- 
ments proposed, write the word 
"Yes" or its equivalent in the blank 
space provided for the purpose. 

2. To vote for the rejection thereof, 
write the word "No" or its equi- 
valent. 

Q. What is Question No. 1 ? 

A. As presented under Batas Pambansa 

Big. 122, the following is question No. 

1: 

Do you vote for the approval of an 
amendment to the Constitution and to 
Amendment No. 2, as proposed by the 
Batasang Pambansa in Resolution No. 
2, which, in substance, calls for the es- 
tablishment of a modified parliamen- 
tary system, amending for this purpose 
Articles VII, VIII and IX of the Consti- 
tution, with the following principal fea- 
tures: 

(1) The President is the head of state 
and Chief Executive of the Re- 
public of the Philippines, elected by 
direct vote of the people for a term 
of six years. He has control of the 
Ministries. He formulates the guide- 
lines of national policy. He nomi- 



2 



nates the Prime Minister and the 
Deputy Prime Minister to be eject- 
ed by the Batasang Pambansa. 
Upon the advice of the Prime Minis- 
ter in writing, whenever the need 
arises for a vote of confidence on a 
fundamental issue, the President 
may dissolve the Batasang Pam- 
bansa and call for an election on a 
date set by him. However, the Bata- 
sang Pambansa may not be dis- 
solved: 1) within eighteen (18) 
months preceding a regular election 
of the Batasang Pambansa; 2) with- 
in eighteen (18) months immediate- 
ly following such elections; 3) 
during the pendency of impeach- 
ment proceedings against the Pres- 
ident; or 4) when the Executive 
Committee or the Speaker, in ap- 
propriate cases, exercises the 
powers or discharges the duties of 
the President. The President shall 
be immune from suit during his 
tenure. Thereafter, no suit what- 
soever shall lie for official acts done 
by him or by others pursuant to his 
specific orders during his tenure. 
This immunity shall apply to the 
incumbent President referred to in 
Article XVII of this Constitution. 

(2) The legislative power is vested in 
the Batasang Pambansa to be com- 
posed of not more than 200 mem- 
bers unless otherwise provided by 
law, including regional and sectoral 
representatives, and members of the 
Cabinet chosen by the President. 
The regional and sectoral represen- 
tatives shall have a term of six 
years. The regular election for the 
members of the Batasang Pambansa 
shall be held on the second Monday 
of May, 1984, and every six years 
thereafter. The Batasang Pambansa 
elects the Prime Minister upon 
nomination by the President. It 
may withdraw its confidence from 



the Prime Minister, in which case, 
the President may within ten days 
from advice of the adoption of the 
motion of non-confidence, submit 
to the Batasang Pambansa a no- 
minee for Prime Minister. It calls 
for the election of President in case 
of permanent disability, death, re- 
moval from office or resignation of 
the President. In addition to the 
existing disqualifications, its Mem- 
bers may not appear as counsel in 
any criminal case wherein a govern- 
ment officer or employee is accused 
of an offense committed in relation 
to his office. 

(3) The Executive Committee is com- 
posed of not more than 14 mem- 
bers designated by the President, at 
least half of whom shall be mem- 
bers of the Batasang Pambansa, It is 
headed by the Prime Minister. The 
Executive Committee assists the 
President in the exercise of his 
powers and functions and in the 
performance of his duties as he may 
prescribe. The Executive Commit- 
tee shall exercise the powers and 
discharge the duties of the Pres- 
ident until a President is elected 
and qualified in the following cases: 
(a) if the President-elect dies; or (b) 
fails to qualify before the beginning 
of his term; or (c) if the President 
has not been chosen before the 
start of his term. In case of perma- 
nent disability, death, removal from 
office or resignation of the Pres- 
ident, the Executive Committee 
headed by the Prime Minister as 
hereinafter provided shall exercise 
the powers of the President until a 
President shall have been elected 
and qualified. If the permanent dis- 
ability, death, removal from office 
or resignation of the President 
occurs earlier than eighteen (18) 
months before the expiration of his 



3 



term, the Batasang Pambansa shall, 
within thirty days from the time 
the vacancy occurs, call a special 
election to be held not earlier than 
forty-five days nor later than sixty 
days from the time of such call, to 
elect a President to serve the un- 
expired term. In the absence of the 
Executive Committee, the Speaker 
of the Batasang Pambansa shall act 
as President until a President shall 
have been elected and qualified. 

(4) The Cabinet, headed by the Prime 
Minister, shall be composed of 
Ministers with or without portfolio 
appointed by the President. At least 
a majority of the Cabinet who are 
heads of ministries shall come from 
the Regional Representatives of the 
Batasang Pambansa. 

(5) The Prime Minister is the head of 
the Cabinet and of the Executive 
Committee. He is elected by the 
Batasang Pambansa upon nomina- 
tion by the President from among 
the members. The Prime Minister 
and the Cabinet shall be responsible 
to the Batasang Pambansa for the 
program of government approved 
by ther President. 

The Deputy Piime Minister, 
elected by the Batasang Pambansa, 
upon nomination by the President 
from among the Members thereof, 
performs functions assigned to him 
by the Prime Minister. 
Q. What is Question No. 2? 
A. As presented under Batas Pambansa 
Big. 122, the following is question No. 

Do you vote for the approval of an 
amendment to the Constitution of the 
Philippines, as proposed by the Bata- 
sang Pambansa in Resolution No. 3, 
which, in substance, institutes electoral 
reforms, namely: 

(1) Except as member of the Executive 
Committee no elective official shall 
be eligible for appointment to 



, any office or position during his 
tenure, unless otherwise provided 
by law, amending for this purpose 
paragraph (1), Sec. 4, Art. XII-B; 

(2) Accreditation of political parties 
whose candidates for President ob- 
tained the first and second highest 
number of votes in the last preced- 
ing presidential election under this 
Constitution if each has obtained at 
least ten percent (10%) of the total 
number of votes cast, amending tor 
this purpose Sec. 8, Art. XII-C; 

(3) Grant to accredited political parties 
the right to be represented in the 
registration board, board of elec- 
tion inspectors, Loard of canvassers, 
or similar bodies; as well as grant to 
accredited political parties of other 
rights or privileges as may be pro- 
vided by law: amending for this 
purpose paragraph (2), Section 9, 
Article XII-C; 

(4) Change of political party affiliation 
by an elective public officer during 
his term of office, or by a candidate 
for an elective office within six 
months immediately preceding or 
following an election shall be pro- 
hibited, unless otherwise provided 
by law, amending for this purpose 
Sec. 10, Art. XII-C. 

Q. What is Question No. 3? 

A. As presented under Batas Pambansa 
Big. 122, the following is question No. 
3: 

Do you vote for the approval of an 
amendment to the Constitution of the 
Philippines, as proposed by the Bata- 
sang Pambansa in Resolution No. 1, 
which, in substance, provides that a 
natural-born citizen of the Philippines 
who has lost his Philippine citizenship 
may be a transferee of private land, for 
use by him as his residence, as the Bata- 
sang Pambansa shall provide, amending 



for this purpose Section 14 of Article 
XJV of the Constitution? 

Proposed Amendments on the Presidency 
(Article VII, The President) 

Q. What are the salient features of the pro- 
posed amendments to Article VII of 
the Constitution? 
A. The following are the salient features of 
the proposed amendments: 

1. The President shall be the Head of 
State and Chief Executive of the 
Republic with concommittant po- 
wers. 

2. He shall be elected by a direct vote 
of the people for a term of six years 
to begin on June 30 following elec- 
tion day. 

3. An Executive Committee shall be 
created. This committee shall be 
headed by the Prime Minister. It 
shall exercise the powers and dis- 
charge the duties of the President 
upon the occurrence of the follow- 
ing situations: 

(a) A President has not been 
chosen on the date fixed for the 
beginning of his term, (b) The 
President-elect dies before the 
beginning of his term, (c) The Pre- 
sident-elect fails to qualify, (d) The 
President dies during his term, (e) 
The President is removed from 
office, (f) The President resigns 
from office, (g) The President 
suffers a permanent disability. 
The Executive Committee will con- 
tinue to function as such until a Pres- 
ident has been elected in a special elec- 
tion, and has qualified. 
Q. What is the Executive Committee? 
A. See discussion on proposed amendments 

to Article IX. 
Q. Enumerate briefly the new elements to 
be introduced into Article VII (The 
President) through these amendments: 
A. 1 . The President shall be elected by 
direct vote of the people for a 
term of six years. 



2. His term of office shall begin at 
noon on June 30 following elec- 
tion day. It shall end on the same 
day six years thereafter. 

3. The returns of every election for 
President shall be transmitted to 
the Speaker at the Batasang Pam- 
bansa where the votes for Pres- 
ident shall be counted. In case 
two or more candidates for Pres- 
ident obtain an equal and highest 
number of votes one of them 
shall be chosen immediatelv bv a 
majority vote of all the members 
of the Batasang Pambansa. 

4. The Executive Committee pro- 
posed to be created shall dis- 
charge the function of the Pres- 
ident upon the occurrence of a 
permanent vacancy in the office 
of the President. In the absence 
of the Executive Committee the 
Speaker of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa shall act as President until 
a President has been elected and 
has qualified. 

5. A special election shall be called 
by the Batasang Pambansa within 
30 days from the occurrence of a 
permanent vacancy in the office 
of the President when such va- 
cancy occurs earlier than 18 

v. months before the expiration of 
his term. Such election shall be 
held not earlier than 45 days nor 
later than 60 days from the time 
of such call. 

6. The President shall have control 
of the ministries. 

7. The President shall be comman- 
der-in-chief of all the Armed 
Forces of the Philippines. 

8. The President shall appoint offi- 
cials of the government. 

9. The President may grant amnesty 
with the concurrence of the Ba- 
tasang Pambansa. 



10. The President may contract fo- 
reign and domestic loans for the 
Republic. 

11. The President shall formulate the 
guidelines of national policy. 

12. The President shall address the 
Batasang Pambansa at the open- 
ing of its regular session and may 
appear before it at any other 
time. 

13. No suit shall lie for official acts 
done by the President or by 
others pursuant to his order. The 
immunity shall apply to the in- 
cumbent President referred to in 
the Transitory Provisions of the 
Constitution. 

14. All powers vested in the Pres- 
ident under the 1935 Constitu- 
tion and under other laws of the 
land which are not vested upon 
any official, shall be vested in the 
President. 

Q. What are the features of Article VII 
which will be retained under the pro- 
posed amendment? 

A. 1. The qualifications of the President. 

2. The President's official residence 
and compensation. 

3. The prohibitions and disqualifi- 
cations of the President. 

4. The President's immunity from suit 
during his tenure. 

Q. What features will be deleted from Arti- 
cles VII of the Constitution (The Pres- 
ident) with the introduction of this 
proposed amendment? 

A. 1. The President shall be the symbolic 
head of state. 

2. The President shall be elected from 
among the members of the National 
Assembly. 

3. The term of office of the President 
shall begin on the date he takes his 
oath of office which shall not be 



later than 3 days after his proclama- 
tion by the National Assembly nor 
in any case earlier than the expira- 
tion of the term of his predecessor. 

4. The ceremonial powers of the Pres- 
ident under Sec. 6, paragraphs (1) 
- (7), Article VII, except the duty 
to address the legislative body at 
the opening of its regular session. 

Q. Compare briefly the existing provisions 
of the Constitution and the proposed 
amendments to Article VII of the Cons- 
titution (The President). 

A. 1. On the manner of election 

The existing provision of the Cons- 
titution provides that the President 
shall be elected from among the Mem- 
bers of the National Assembly by a 
majority vote of all its members. 

The proposed amendments provide 
for a direct vote by the people. 

2. On the term of office 

The present provisions of the Cons- 
titution prbvide a term of six years 
from the date of oath-taking which 
shall not be later than three days after 
his proclamation by the National As- 
sembly. 

The proposal is also for a term of six 
years, but the same shall begin at noon 
on June 30 following election day and 
shall end at noon on the same day six 
years thereafter, 

3. On temporary succession in case of 
a permanent vacancy in the office 
of President 

The Constitution provides that the 
Speaker shall act as President until a 
successor has been elected and has qua- 
lified. 

The proposed amendments create 
an Executive Committee to be headed 
by the Prime Minister to perform the 
duties of President until a new one has 
been elected and has qualified. 



6 



Proposed Amendments on the 
Legislative Body 
(Article VIII, The National Assembly) 

The name of the legislative body is pro- 
posed to be changed from National As- 
sembly to Batasang Pambansa. 

Q. What is the composition of the Batasang 
Pambansa under the proposed amend- 
ments? 

A. The Batasang Pambansa shall be com- 
posed of not more than 200 members 
which shall include: (1) representatives 
elected from the different regions of 
the Philippines; (2) those elected or 
selected from various sectors as may be 
provided by law; and (3) those chosen 
by the President from the members of 
the Cabinet (Sec. 2, Art. VIII, Res. No. 
2). 

Q. What is the term of office of the mem- 
bers of the Batasang Pambansa? 

A. The members of the Batasang Pambansa 
shall have a term of six (6) years which 
shall begin, unless otherwise provided 
by law, at noon on the 30th day of 
June following their election. (Sec. 3, 
Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

The first regular election for mem- 
bers of the Batasang Pambansa will be 
on the 2nd Monday of May, 1984. 
Thereafter, their election shall be held 
every six years. (Sec. 5, Par. (1), Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. What are the qualifications of a regional 
representative of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa? 

He must be (1) a natural-born citizen of 
the Philippines, (2) at least 25 years of 
age on election day, (3) able to read 
and write, (4) a registered voter in the 
region in which he shall be elected, (5) 
a resident of the region for a period of 
not less than one year immediately 
preceding the election. (Sec. 4, Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. What are the qualifications of a sectoral 



representative of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa? 

A. He must be (1) a natural-born citizen, 
(2) able to read and write, (3) have 
such other qualifications as may be 
provided by law. (Sec. 4, Art. VIII, 
Res. No. 2) 

Q. How is the Speaker of the Batasang 
Pambansa chosen? 

A. The Speaker shall be elected by a major- 
ity vote of all the members of the Bata- 
sang Pambansa from among the mem- 
bers thereof, (Sec. 7, Par. (1), Art. VIII, 
Res. No. 2) 

Q. How is the Prime Minister chosen? 

A. The Prime Minister shall be elected by a 
majority of all the Members of the 
Batasang Pambansa upon nomination 
of the President from among the 
members thereof. (Sec. 1, Art. IX, Res. 
No. 2) 

Q. // the Batasang Pambansa loses its confi- 
dence on the Prime Minsiter, what is 
the procedure for the withdrawal of 
such confidence? 

A. The Batasang Pambansa may withdraw 
its confidence from the Prime Minister 
by a majority vote of all its members 
on a motion for a vote of no confi- 
dence signed by at least one-fifth of the 
members of the Batasang Pambansa. 
(Sec. 13, Par. (1), Art. VIII, Res. No. 
2; see also discussion on proposed 
amendments to Art. IX) 

Q. When and for how long shall the Batasang 
Pambansa convene for its regular ses- 
sion? 

A. The Batasang Pambansa shall convene 
once every year on the fourth Monday 
of July for its regular session, unless a 
different date is fixed by law, and shall 
continue to be in session for such num- 
ber of days as it may determine. (Sec. 
6, Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. Are the sessions of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa limited to regular sessions? 



7 



A. No. The President may also call the 
Batasang Pambansa to session at^ any 
time to consider such subjects or legis- 
lations as he may designate. (Sec. 6, 
Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. May the Batasang Pambansa be dis- 
solved? If so, under what circums- 
tances? 

A. Yes. The President may dissolve the 
Batasang Pambansa upon the written 
advice of the Prime Minister whenever 
the need arises for a popular vote of 
confidence on fundamental issues. 
(Sec. 13, Par. (2), Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. In case the Batasang Pambansa is dis- 
solved and a special election is held to 
elect new members to the Batasang 
Pambansa, for how long shall the newly 
elected members hold office? 
A. They shall serve the unexpired portion 
of the term from the time the President 
convokes the assembly, which shall not 
be later than 30 days following their 
election. (Sec. 3, Par. (2), Art. VIII, 
Res. No. 2) 

Q. How often may the Batasang Pambansa 
be dissolved? 

A. The Batasang Pambansa shall not be dis- 
solved more than once every twelve 
months. (Sec. 13, Par. (2). see also dis- 
cussion in the next topic.) 

Q. Compare briefly the present provisions 
of Article VIII of the Constitution with 
the proposed amendments. 

A. 1. As to composition 

1973 Constitution - The National 
Assembly shall be composed of as 
many members as may be provided 
by law to be apportioned among 
the provinces, representative dis- 
tricts and cities in accordance with 
the number of their respective in- 
habitants and on the basis of a uni- 
form and progressive ratio. (Sec. 2, 
Art. VIII) 



Proposed Amendment. - The Batasang 
Pambansa shall be composed of not 
more than 200 members unless 
otherwise provided by law, and 
shall include representatives elected 
from the different regions of the 
Philippines, those elected or select- 
ed from various sectors as may be 
provided by law and those chosen 
by the President from the members 
of the Cabinet. (Sec. 2, Art. VIII, 
Res. No. 2) 

2. As to manner of selection 

1973 Constitution - The members of 
the National Assembly shall be elec- 
ted by qualified electors in their 
respective districts. (Sec. 3, Par. (1), 
Art. VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — 

(a) The regional representatives 
shall be elected from the regions, 

(b) Sectoral representatives shall be 
elected or selected from various 
sectors as may be provided by law, 

(c) Members of the Cabinet shall be 
chosen by the President. (Sec. 2 X 
1st Par. (l),Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

3. As to qualifications 

1973 Constitution - Members of the 
National Assembly shall be: 
(a) A natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines, (b) At least 25 years of 
age on election day, (c) Able to 
read and write, (d) A registered 
voter in the district in which he 
shall be elected, (e) A resident in 
the district for a period of not less 
than one year immediately pre- 
ceding the election (Sec. 4, Art. 
VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — Regional Re- 
presentatives: 

(a) Same as (a) to (c) above. 

(b) A registered voter in the region 
in which he shall be elected. 

(c) A resident of the region for a 



8 



period of not less than one year 
immediately preceding the elec- 
tion. (Sec. 4, 1st paragraph, 
Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 
Sectoral Representatives: 
(a) Natural-born citizen of the 
Philippines, (b) Able to read and 
write, (c) Such other qualifications 
as may be provided by law (Sec. 4, 
2nd paragraph, Art. VIII, Res. No. 
2) 

As to frequency of election 
1973 Constitution - Unless other- 
wise provided by law, the re- 
gular election of members of 
the National Assembly shall be 
held on the second Monday of 
May and every six years there- 
after. (Sec. 5, Par. (1), Art. 
VIII) 

Proposed Amendment - The re- 
gular election of the Members 
of the Batasang Pambansa shall 
be held on the second Monday 
of May, 1984 and every six 
years thereafter. (Sec. 5, Par. 
(1), Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

As to the filling of a vacancy 

1973 Constitution - In case a 
vacancy arises in the National 
Assembly one year or more 
before a regular election, the 
Commission on Elections shall 
call a special election to be held 
within sixty days after the va- 
cancy occurs. (Sec. 5, Par. (2), 
Art. VIII) 
Proposed Amendment - In case a 
vacancy arises in the Batasang 
Pambansa eighteen months or 
more before a regular election, 
the Commission on Elections 
shall call a special election to be 
held within sixty days after the 
vacancy occurs to elect the 
member to serve the unexpired 



term. (Sec. 5, Par. (2), Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 

6. As to legislative procedure 

a) Who convokes the body to a 
special session? 

1973 Constitution - 

The Prime Minister (Sec. 6, 
Art. VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — 

The President (Sec. 6, Art. VIII, 
Res. No. 2) 

b) Number of session days 

1973 Constitution - 

The National Assembly shall 
convene once every year on the 
fourth Monday of July for its regu- 
lar session, unless a different date 
is fixed by law, and shall continue 
to be in session until thirty days 
before the opening of its regular 
session, exclusive of Saturdays, 
Sundays and legal holidays. (Sec. 6, 
Art. VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — 

The Batasang Pambansa shall 
convene once every year on the 
fourth Monday of July for its re~ 
gular session, unless a different date 
is fixed by law, and shall continue 
to be in session for such number of 
days as it may determine. (Sec. 6, 
Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

c) Bills calendared upon recom- 
mendation of the Cabinet 
1973 Constitution - 

No bill, except those of local 
application, shall be calendared 
without prior recommendation of 
the Cabinet. (Sec. 19, Par. (3), Art. 
VIII) 

Proposed Amendment - 

Above provision is proposed to 
be deleted. 



9 



d) Who signs or vetoes bills 
1973 Constitution - 

Every bill passed by the Na- 
tional Assembly shall, before it be- 
comes a law, be presented to the 
Prime Minister. (Sec. 20, Par. (1), 
Art. VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — 

Every bill passed by the Bata- 
sang Pambansa shall, before it be- 
comes a law, be presented to the 
President. (Sec. 20, Par. (1), Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 

7. No confidence vote 

1973 Constitution - 

The National Assembly may 
withdraw its confidence from the 
Prime Minister only by electing a 
successor by a majority vote of all 
its members. (Sec. 13, Par. (1), Art. 
VIII) 

Proposed Amendment — 

The Batasang Pambansa may 
withdraw its confidence from the 
Prime Minister by a majority vote 
of all its Members on a motion for a 
vote of no confidence signed by at 
least one-fifth of the Members of 
the Batasang Pambansa. (Sec. 13, 
Par. (1), Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

8. Dissolution 

1973 Constitution - 

Whenever the need arises for a 
popular vote of confidence on 
fundamental issues and upon advice 
of the Prime Minister, the President 
may dissolve the National Assembly 
not earlier than five days nor later 
than ten days from receipt of the 
advice. Me shall call for an election 
on a date set by the Prime Minister 
which shall not be earlier than forty- 
five days nor later than sixty days 
from the date of such dissolution. 
However, no dissolution shall take 
place within nine months imme- 



diately following any general elec 
tion. (Sec. 13, Par. (2), Art. VIII) 
Proposed Amendment — 

Under the same conditions as 
above, the President may dissolve 
the Batasang Pambansa but not 
earlier than seven days nor later 
than fourteen days from receipt of 
the advice and shall set the date of 
the election. However, no dissolu- 
tion shall take place within eighteen 
months immediately following such 
election or during the pendency of 
impeachment proceedings against 
the President or when the powers 
of the President ate exercised by 
the Executive Committee or the 
Speaker. The Batasang Pambansa 
shall not be dissolved more than 
once every twelve months. (Sec. 13, 
Par. (2), Art. VIII, Res. No. 2) 

9. Disqualifications and Prohibitions 
1973 Constitution - 

(a) A member of the National 
Assembly shall not hold any 
other office or employment 
in the government, or any 
subdivision, agency, or ins- 
trumentality thereof, in- 
cluding government-owned 
or-controlled corporations 
during his tenure except 
that of Prime Minister or 
Member of the Cabinet. 
(Sec. 10, Art. VIII) 

(b) He shall not appear as coun- 
sel before any court inferior 
to a court with appellate 
jurisdiction, before any 
court in any civil case 
wherein the government, or 
any subdivision, agency, or 
instrumentality thereof is 
the adverse party, or before 
any administrative body. 
(Sec. 11, Art. VIII) 

Proposed Amendment 

(a) A member of the Batasang 



10 



Pambansa is likewise pro- 
hibited from holding the 
same office or employment 
as those abovementioned. 
However, the exceptions are 
extended to the positions of 
Deputy Prime Minister, 
Member of the Executive 
Committee and Deputy 
Minister. (Sec. 10, Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 
(b) In addition to the above 
prohibitions, a member of 
the Batasang Pambansa shall 
not appear in any criminal 
case wherein any officer or 
employee of the govern- 
ment is accused of an of- 
fense committed in relation 
to his office. (Sec. 11, Art. 
VIII, Res. No. 2) 

Proposed Amendments on 
The Prime Minister and the Cabinet 
(Article IX) 

Q. Compare briefly the existing provisions 
on the Cabinet in Article IX of the 
1973 Constitution with the proposed 
amendments. 

A. 1. As to composition 

1973 Constitution - The Cabinet is 
composed of the heads of ministries at 
least a majority of whom shall be 
chosen from among the Members of the 
National Assembly. (Section 1, Art. IX) 

As proposed — The Cabinet shall be 
composed of Ministers with or without 
portfolio. At least a majority of the 
Members of the Cabinet who are heads 
of ministries shall be chosen from 
among the Regional Representatives of 
the Batasang Pambansa. (Sec. 1, Art. 
IX. Res. No. 2) 

2. As to appointing authority 

1973 Constitution — The Members 
of the Cabinet are appointed by the 
Prime Minister. (Sec. 4, Art. IX) 



As proposed — The Members of the 
Cabinet shall be appointed by the Pres- 
ident. (Section 1, Art. IX, Resolution 
No. 2) 

3. As to functions and responsibilities 

.1973 Constitution - The Prime 
Minister and the Cabinet are respon- 
sible to the National Assembly for the 
program of government and shall deter- 
mine the guidelines of national policy. 
(Sec. 2, Art. IX) 

As proposed - The Prime Minister 
and the Cabinet are responsible to the 
Batasang Pambansa for the program of 
government as approved by the Pres- 
ident. (Sec. 2, Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

4. As to the effects of resignation 

1973 Constitution - Any Member 
of the Cabinet may resign for any cause 
without vacating his seat in the Nation- 
al Assembly. (Sec. 9, Art. IX) 

As proposed — Any Member of 
the Cabinet may resign for any cause 
without vacating his seat as regional or 
sectoral representative in the Batasang 
Pambansa or any other government 
position. (Sec. 9, Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

5. As to removal from office 

1973 Constitution - Members of 
the Cabinet may be removed at the dis- 
cretion of the Prime Minister (Sec. 4, 
Art. IX) 

As proposed — Any Member of the 
Cabinet may be removed at the discre- 
tion of the President. (Sec. 4, Article 
IX, Resolution No. 2) 

Q. Compare briefly the provisions of the 
1973 Constitution and the proposed 
amendments on the Prime Minister. 

A. 1 . As to manner of selection 

1973 Constitution - The Prime 
Minister is elected by a majority of all 
the Members of the National Assembly 
from among themselves. (Sec. 3, Art. IX) 

As proposed — The Prime Minister, 
upon nomination of the President from 



11 



among the Members of the Batasang 
Pambansa, shall be elected by a major- 
ity of all the members thereof. (Section 

1. Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

2. As to extent of authority over 
ministries 

1973 Constitution — The Prime 
Minister has control over all ministries. 
(Sec. 11, Art. IX) 

As proposed — The Prime Minister 
shall have supervision of all ministries. 
(Sec. 10, Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

3. As to tenure of office 

1973 Constitution — The tenure of 
office of the Prime Minister commences 
from the date of his election by the 
National Assembly and ends upon the 
withdrawal of confidence and the elec- 
tion of a successor by a majority vote of 
all its Members, or upon the expiration 
of his term as Member of the National 
Assembly, whichever comes first. (Sec. 
3(1), Sec. 13(1), Art. VIII) 

As proposed — The tenure of office 
of the Prime Minister shall commence 
from the date of his election by the 
Batasang Pambansa and shall end on 
the date the nomination of his succes- 
sor is submitted by the President to the 
Batasang Pambansa, or upon the with- 
drawal of confidence by a majority 
vote of all the Batasang Pambansa 
Members, or upon the expiration of his 
term as Member of the Batasang Pam- 
bansa, whichever comes first. (Sec. 4, 
Art. IX, Resolution No. 2) 

4. As to powers and duties 

1973 Constitution - The Prime 
Minister: 

(a) is head of the Government, (b) 
is responsible, together with the 
Cabinet, for the program of govern- 
ment and determines the guidelines 
of national policy, (c) appoints the 
Members of the Cabinet, (d) re- 
moves the Members of the Cabinet, 
(e) appoints the Deputy Prime 



Minister and the Deputy Ministers. 
(Sees. 1, 2, 4, 5(1) and (2), Art. IX) 
As proposed — The Prime Minister 

is: 

(a) head of the Cabinet, (b) is res- 
ponsible, together with the Cabinet, 
for the program of government as 
approved by the President. (Sees. 1 
& 2, Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

5. Other Powers 

1973 Constitution - The Prime 
Minister: 

(a) is Commander-in-Chief of all 
armed forces of the Philippines, (b) 
appoints officials of the govern- 
ment, (c) grants amnesty with the 
concurrence of the National Assem- 
bly, (d) may contract foreign and 
domestic loans for the Republic. 
(Sees. 12, 13, 14 & 15, Art. IX) 
As proposed — The above powers 
are transferred to the President under 
Article VII. (Sees. 9, 10, 11 & 12, Art. 
VII, Res. No. 2) 

6. Powers under the 1935 Constitution 

1973 Constitution — The Prime 
Minister exercises all powers vested in 
the President under the 1935 Constitu- 
tion as well as residual powers under 
the other laws of the land. (Sec. 16, 
Art. IX) 

As proposed — The above powers are 
transferred to the President. (Sec. 16, 
Art. VII, Res. No.' 2) 

Q. Compare the provisions on the Deputy 
Prime Minister of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion with the proposed amendments. 
A. 1. As to manner of selection 

1973 Constitution — The Prime 
Minister appoints the Deputy Prime 
Minister from among the Members 
of the National Assembly. (Sec. 
5(1), Art. IX) 

As proposed - The President 
may nominate from among the 
Members of the Batasang Pambansa 
a Deputy Prime Minister who shall 



12 



be elected by a majority of the 
Members thereof. (Sec. 5(1), Art. 
IX, Res. No. 2) 

2. As to functions 

1973 Constitution - The De- 
puty Prime Minister is head of a 
ministry' and performs such other 
functions as may be assigned to him 
by the Prime Minister. (Sec. 5(1), 
Art. IX) 

As proposed - The Deputy 
Prime Minister shall perform such 
functions as may be assigned to him 
by the Prime Minister. He may or 
may not be head of a Ministry. 
■ (Sec. 5(1), Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 
Q. Who appoints Deputy Ministers? 
A. 1973 Constitution - The Prime Minister 
appoints the Deputy Ministers. (Sec. 
5(2), Art. IX) 

As proposed - The President shall 
appoint the Deputy Ministers. (Sec. 
5(2), Art. IX, Resolution No. 2) 
Q. What is the Executive Committee? 
A. The Executive Committee is a body de- 
signated by the President composed of 
the Prime Minister as Chairman, and 
not more than fourteen other members, 
at least half of whom shall be Members 
of the Batasang Pambansa. It shall assist 
the President in the exercise of his 
powers, functions and duties. (Sec. 3, 
Art. IX, Resolution No. 2) 

Q. What are the qualifications of a Member 
of the Executive Committee? 

A. A Member of the Executive Committee 
shall have the same qualifications as the 
members of the Batasang Pambansa. 
(Sec. 3, Art. IX, Res. No. 2) 

Q. What is the role of the Executive Com- 
mittee in the proposed scheme of gov- 
ernment? 

A. The Executive Committee shall assist 
the President in the exercise of his 
powers and functions and in the per- 
formance of his duties as he may pre- 
scribe. In addition, it shall exercise the 



powers and discharge the duties of the 

President when: 

On the date fixed for the beginning 

of his term: 

a) The President-elect dies, (b) The 
President-elect fails to qualify, (c) 
The President has not been chosen 

After assumption, the President: 

(a) Suffers a permanent disability, 

(b) Dies, (c) Is removed from 
office, (d) Resigns. 

(Sec. 3, Art. VII, Res. No. 2) 

Q. What is the proposed amendment to 
Amendment No. 2 of the 1973 Consti- 
tution? 

A. 1973 Constitution - Amendment No. 2. 
The Interim Batasang Pambansa shall 
not exercise the treaty-making power 
provided in Article VIII, Sec. 14(1) of 
the Constitution. 

As proposed - The Interim Bata- 
sang Pambansa shall exercise the 
treaty-making power. (Sec. 7, Res. No. 

2) 

RESOLUTION NO. 3 
PROPOSED ELECTORAL REFORMS 

Q. What is the present provision of Sec. 10, 
Article XII, C, of the 1973 Constitu- 
tion? 

A. "Sec. 10. No elective public officer may 
change his political party affiliation 
during his term of office, and no candi- 
date for any elective public office may 
change his political party affiliation 
within six months immediately preced- 
ing or following an election/' 

Q. What is the proposed amendment? 

A. The phrase "unless otherwise provided 
by law" is added to read thus: 

"SEC. 10. No elective public officer 
may change his political party affilia- 
tion during his term of office, and no 
candidate for any elective office may- 
change his political party affiliation 
within six months immediately preced- 



ing or following an election, unless 
otherwise provided by law." 

Q. What is the existing provision on the 
appointment of an elective official to 
Othe'i office or position during his term 
of office? 

A. Sec. 4, paragraph (1), Article XII, B, of 
the 1973 Constitution prohibits the 
appointment of an elective official to 
any office or position during his term 
of office. 

Q. What is the proposed amendment on the 
above constitutional prohibition? 

A. Under the proposed amendment, an elec- 
tive official may not be appointed to any 
other position or office during his te- 
nure, except as member of the Executive 
Committee. (Sec. 1 , Res. No. 3) 

Q. What is the present provision of the 
Constitution on the accreditation of 
political parties? 

A. A political party shall be entitled to ac- 
creditation by the Commission if, in 
the immediately preceding election, 
such party has obtained at least the 
third highest number of votes cast in 
the constituency to which it seeks ac- 
crediiation. (Sec. 8, Article XII, C, 
1973 Constitution) 

Q. What is the proposed amendment? 

A. The political parties whose respective 
candidates for President have obtained 
the first and second highest number of 
votes in the last preceding election for 
President under this Constitution shall 
be entitled to accreditation if each has 
obtained at least ten percent (10%) of 
the total number of votes cast in such 
election. If the candidates for President 
obtaining the two highest number of 
votes, do not each obtain at least ten 
percent (10%) of the total number of 
vote cast, or in case no election for 
President shall as yet have been held, 
the Commission on Elections shall 
grant accreditation to political parties 
as may be provided by law. 



Q. What are the conditions under which a 
political party may be granted accredi- 
tation? 

A. 1, A political party must nominate a 
candidate for President 
2. Its candidate for President must 
obtain either the first or second 
highest number of votes in the last 
preceding election and at least ten 
percent (10%) of the total number 
of votes cast. (Sec. 2, Res. No. 3) 
Q. What are the other rights and privileges 
of accredited political parties under the 
proposed amendment? 
A. Accredited political parties shall be re- 
presented in the registration board, 
board of election inspectors, board of 
canvassers, or other similar bodies and 
shall have other rights and privileges as 
may be granted by law. (Sec. 2, Resolu- 
tion No. 3) 

Q. What is the proposal under Resolution 
No. 1? 

A. It enables a natural-born citizen who 
has lost his Philippine citizenship to be 
a transferee of private land, for use by 
him as his residence, as the National 
Assembly shall provide. 

Q. What is a natural-born citizen? 

A. Sec. 4 of Article III of the Constitution 
defines a natural-born citizen as one 
who is a citizen of the Philippines from 
birth without having to perform any 
act to acquire or perfect his Philippine 
citizenship. 

Q. What laws shall govern the conduct of 
the plebiscite on April 7, 1981 ? 

A. Batas Pambansa Big. 122, and the 1978 
Election Code. (Sec. 10, BP Big. 122) 

Q. What languages or dialects shall be used 
to present the plebiscite questions in 
the ballot? 

A. The ballots to be used in the plebiscite 
shall be printed in English, and in ap- 
propriate cases, in Arabic, as provided 
by the 1978 Election Code. (Sec. 3, BP 
Big. 122) 



14 



Q, Who will supervise the voting in the 
voting centers on plebiscite day? 

A. The Citizens Election Committees that 
functioned in the local elections of 
January 30, 1980 are reappointed to 
serve in the same polling centers, sub- 
ject to the power of the Commission on 
Elections to make new appointments or 
transfers whenever the need arises. 
Their functions include the counting of 
votes cast by the voters, and the prepa- 
ration of plebiscite returns. (Sec. 4, BP 
Big. 122) 

Q. How many copies of the plebiscite 
returns shall be prepared by the 
Citizens Election Committee? 

A. The Citizens Election Committee shall 
prepare and sign three copies of the ple- 
biscite returns. (Sec. 5, BP Big. 122) 

Q. To whom shall the copies of the plebis- 
cite returns be delivered? 

A. The Citizens Election Committees shall 
distribute the plebiscite returns as fol- 
lows: 

1. Two copies shall be delivered to the 
Election Registrar who shall imme- 
diately deliver: 

(a) the original copy to the Pro- 
vincial Election Officer for use in the 
provincial canvass. 

(b) the other copy to the Com- 
mission on Elections. 

2. One copy shall be deposited in the 
ballot box for the valid ballots. 
(Sec. 5, BP Big. 122) 

Q. Who will canvass the plebiscite returns? 
A. 1. The Provincial Board of Canvassers 

for provinces. 
2. The City Board of Canvassers for 

cities. 

After canvass on the basis of 
the plebiscite returns, the canvass- 
ing boards shall prepare a certificate 
of canvass. (Sec. 6, BP Big. 122) 
Q. How many copies of the certificate of 

cdnvass shall be prepared? 
A. The Provincial or City Board of Canvas- 
sers shall prepare the certificate of 
canvass in duplicate. (Sec. 6, BP 
Big. 122) 



Q. To whom shall the certificate of canvass 

be delivered? 
A. 1 . The original shall be delivered to the 
Commission on Elections. 
2. The other copy shall be filed in the 
Office of the Provincial Election 
Officer. (Sec. 6, BP Big. 122) 
Q. Who will proclaim the results of the 
plebiscite? 

A. The Commission on Elections, sitting en 
banc, shall canvass and proclaim the 
results of the plebiscite using the certifi- 
cates of canvass submitted, authentic- 
ated and certified by the Boards of 
Canvassers of each province or city. (Sec. 
7, BP Big. 122) 
Q. What means shall be adopted to inform 
the people of the proposed constitu- 
tional amendments? 
A. 1. The amendments shall be published 
at least once in each of the English 
and Pilipino newspapers of nation- 
wide circulation, the last publica- 
tion to be made not later than 
March 17, 1981. 

2. Printed copies of the proposed 
amendments shall be posted in a 
conspicuous place in every muni- 
cipal, city and provincial office 
building not later than March 17, 
1981. 

3. During plebiscite day, sufficient 
copies of the proposed amendments 
shall be furnished each polling place 
for examination by the voters. 

4. Whenever practicable, the proposed 
amendments shall be translated in 
the principal dialects as may be 
determined by the Commission on 
Elections and copies thereof print- 
ed and posted for examination by 
the voters. 

5. The Commission on Elections is 
empowered to promulgate rules and 
regulations to assure widest dissemi- 
nation of information on the pro- 
posed amendments through the 
broadcast and print media and the 
barangays. (Sec. 2, BP Big. 122) 



ARGUMENTS FOR A "YES" VOTE 



ARGUMENTS FOR REJECTION 



I. On the establishment of a modified parliamentary 

system: 1. Approval means the return to the 
people of the right to vote directly for their President 
who is the head of state and Chief Executive. Under the 
1973 Constitution, the head of state (President) and the 
head of government (Prime Minister) are elected, not by 
the people directly, but by their elected representatives 
in the National Assembly. Restoring the direct right of 
the people to elect the President is more democratic, 
and conforms more to the traditions, culture, customs 
and habits of the Filipino people. 2. The stability 
of government and progress of the nation are assured. 
Political parties, under the regional system of election 
and through the leadership of the President, will become 
strong and real instruments for governing the nation. 
The President, the Prime Minister and the Batasang Pam- 
bansa work together in a well-balanced system of co- 
ordination and cooperation. They are not hampered by 
the doctrine of separation of powers. With strong party 
discipline, programs of government can be implemented 
faster. The long deadlocks and stalemates of the defunct 
Congress will not return. 3. The process of political 
normalization will be, hastened. Once the President is 
elected this year (1981), he can then nominate the 
Prime Minister to be chosen by the Batasang Pambansa 
from among its members. Thus, we shall have made a 
total shift to the parliamentary system. 4. The 
creation of an Executive Committee composed of the 
Prime Minister and 14 other members to assist the Pres- 
ident in the exercise of his powers and functions and in 
the performance of his duties provides for an effective 
training of leaders. There is a provision for a rule on 
succession because the Executive Committee shall exer- 
cise the powers and discharge the duties of the President 
when the President-elect dies, fails to qualify or when 
the President has not been chosen, suffers a permanent 
disability, dies, is removed by impeachment or re- 
signs. 5. The qualifying age of the ceremonial Pres- 
ident under the 1973 Constitution was fixed at 50 by 
the 1971 Con-Con. If a mere symbolic President with- 
out real powers has to be 50, why should it not be 
proper to require that a governing President with strong 
powers to be of the same age to assure maturity and 
stability of judgment for a judicious exercise of his 
powers? 6. The immunity from suit of the President 
and those who performed acts pursuant to his orders 
will ensure continuing national unity. There will be no 
vindictiveness against the out-going President. Only acts 
performed by subordinates pursuant to legal orders will 
be covered. Abuses are not included. 

IL On electoral reforms: 1. The right of political 
parties to be represented in the boards of inspectors, 
boards of canvassers, and other bodies is restored. This 
is expected to prevent electoral frauds and other irre- 
gularities. 2. To be accredited are the political 
parties that show real strength and power to attract 
votes. A two party system is contemplated. A system 
with many political parties is to be avoided because it 
leads to fragmentation, stalemates, and horsetrading. 

III. On the right of natural-born citizens who have been 
naturalized abroad to acquire land for residential pur- 
poses. This will encourage Filipinos who have lived 
abroad to return to their native-land to spend the rest of 
their days here and invest their well-earned savings in 
ventures beneficial to our people. 

Submitted by: 

LEONARDO B. PEREZ 
Presidential Adviser on Political Affairs 



ON QUESTION NO. 1 The Interim Batasang Parnba%a \ 
has no legal power nor moral authority to p&pose aify \ 
amendment to the Constitution. 

The 'modified parliamentary system' concentta<& bothnj 
executive and legislative powers in the President as "the head i 
of state and chief executive/' without necessary check and j 
balance. 

(a) The President nominates the Prime Minister and I 
Deputy Prime Minister. The heads of the Legislative J 
Department are his nominees or personal choice; (b) J 
The president may dissolve the Batasan -. and call for an 1 
election on a date set by him; (c) The fourteen mem- j 
bers of the 'Executive Committee' are designated by the i 
President and may be removed at the discretion of the 
President; (d) The term of six years of the President, j 
without limitation or prohibition against re-etecsion will i 
enable the incumbent President to be the President from j 
1965 to 1973, from 1973 to 1981 under Martial Law, J 
from 1981 to 1987 under the proposed amendment and 
during his lifetime. He can be President for life: (e) 
Immunity to the President and to other officers during 
and after their tenure violates ''Accountability of Public j 
Officers," which provides that "public office is a public 
trust" and "public officers shall remain Accountable to 
the people." Immunity is license to abuse, without 
criminal nor civil liability, for acts performed without « 
or in excess of authority. Public officers who are pubiic 
servants become masters of the people; (f) 
Regional and sectoral representatives to the National 
Assembly deprive electors of "Assembly district" of 
their right to elect their own representatives; (g) The 
qualifying age of fifty years for the ceremonial President 
as "the symbolic head of state" must not apply to the 
President as "the head of state and chief executive." 
The age of a member of the National Assembly is "at 
least 25 years," and the Speaker and Prime Minister arc- 
elected from the members thereof. The age of 50 years 
discriminates against the youth.; lh) The 1976 
Amendment No. 6 which permits Mr. Marcos at fct his 
sole judgment" to "issue decrees and orders to form 
part of the law of the land" is not repealed, despite 
Proclamation No. 2045 ostensibly terminating martial 
law. 

ON QUESTION NO. 2 AccTedition of political parties 
must not be based on the supposed elections of April 7, 
1978, held under martial law, which was not "free, honest 
and orderly." 

4 The right to be represented in the registration board 
and similar bodies" must not be limited to supposed political 
parties, whose candidates "obtained the first and second 
highest number of votes" in the April 7, 1978 elections. 

ON QUESTION NO. 3 "The Citizens Election Com- 
mittee" in the local elections of january 30, 1980 Election 
Code (Pres. Decree No. 1296) under martial law must not 
govern future elections and/ or plebiscite, and the Election 
Code before martial rule must be applied. 

(Submitted by Ex-Sen. A.B. Padilla) 
Counsel to UNIDO 



