^Program 

of 

(Sevemonies at the Inaugural 
Platform 



Tkucsday, July tke PouctK 
nineteen kundeed and forty -six 

Luneta, City of Manila 
'Philippines 



Program 

of the Ceremonies attending the 



PROCLAMATION AND INAUGURATION OF THE 
REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 



and 

INDUCTION INTO OFFICE 

of the 

^President and ^ice ^President 
of the 

Republic of the Philippines 
at the 

Luneta, City of Manila 



Thursday, July the Fourth 
nineteen hundred forty-six 



Page Three 



Admission by 
Card Only— Vehicles 



No person will be admitted to the Inaugural Platform without 
a card signed by the Executive Secretary of the Joint Executive 
Committee. 

Only vehicles bearing a special automobile pass will be 
permitted to enter the Inaugural Grounds. All other vehicles 
will be excluded therefrom until after the conclusion of the 
ceremonies. 



Page Five 



Place of Assembly 



6:30 o'clock a. m. 

The right and left wings of the Inaugural Platform will be 
opened to the guests with admission cards. 

Holders of box seats are requested to occupy them not 
later than 7:00 o'clock. 

Groups and other delegations representing the various de- 
partments, bureaus, offices and agencies of the national gov- 
ernment, the provincial and municipal governments, civic, 
commercial and industrial organizations, foreign communities, 
educational institutions, and civic organizations will occupy the 
sections respectively assigned to them on the Luneta grounds. 

The general public will likewise assemble at the places 
designated for them. 

7:10 o'clock a. m. 

All guests who have reserved seats are requested to be 
in their respective places. 



Page 

Place of Assembly 



7:20 o'clock a. m. 

The following officials and distinguished guests are re- 
quested to assemble in the Reception Hall of the Inaugural 
Platform, whence they will be escorted to the Presidential 
Platform during the processional ceremony: 

General of the Army Douglas MacArthur and Staff 

The Visiting Members of the Senate and the House of 

Representatives of the United States 
The Representatives of foreign governments 
' Members of the Cabinet of the United States 
Governors of the States of the United States 
The Chief of Staff of the Army and Staff 
The Chief of Naval Operations and Staff 
Former Governors-General of the Philippines 
Former High Commissioners of the Philippines 
The Commanding General of the AFWESPAC and Staff 



Page N%7ie 



Place of Assembly 
Procession 



The Commander, Philippine Sea Frontier, United States 
Navy and Staff 

The President of the Philippine Senate 
The Speaker of the Philippine House of Representatives 
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines 
The Members of the Cabinet of the Philippines 
The Resident Commissioner to the United States 
The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the Phil- 
ippines 

The Members of the Senate and the House of Representatives 

of the Congress of the Philippines 
The Joint Executive Committee 

7:40 o'clock a.m. 

The President and Vice President of the Philippines will 
leave Malacanan Palace preceded by a cavalry escort of the 
Philippine Army and will proceed to the Inaugural Platform. 

The United States High Commissioner to the Philippines 
will leave his residence preceded by a cavalry escort of the 
United States Army and will proceed to the Inaugural Platform. 



Page 



Arrival at the Ceremonial 
Platform 



7:55 o'clock a. m. 

The arrival at the ceremonial platform of the following offi- 
cials will be. announced by a bugle call which will be the 
signal for the public to rise: 

The Vice President of the Philippines 

The President of the Philippines 

(Upon the appearance ol the President of the Philippines at the ce- 
remonial stand, four ruffles and four flourishes will be sounded.) 

The United States High Commissioner to the Philippines 

(Upon the appearance of the United States High Commissioner to 
the Philippines at the ceremonial stand, four ruffles and four flourishes 
will be sounded.) 



Page Thirteen 



Inaugural Ceremonies 



8:00 o'clock a. m. 

1. Invocation— By the Rt. Rev. Robert F. Wilmer. 

2. Address by the Honorable Millard E. Tydings, United 

States Senator. 

3. Address by General of the Army Douglas MacArthur, 

Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers in the Pacific. 

4. Address by His Excellency Paul V. McNutt, United States 

High Commissioner to the Philippines, and reading of 
the Proclamation of the Independence of the Republic 
of the Philippines. 

(As the United States High Commissioner to the Philippines rises 
the public will also rise and will remain standing until the ruffles 
and flourishes, the playing of the American National Anthem, and the 
/lag ceremonies (No. 5 on this program) in the order indicated, are 
completed.) 

5. Flag Ceremony and Gun Salute— Lowering of the Amer- 

ican Flag,* accompanied by the playing of the American 
National Anthem, and the immediate hoisting of the 
Philippine Flag thereafter, accompanied by the playing 
of the Philippine National Anthem to be followed by 
gun salute. 

(As soon as the Philippine Flag is hoisted church bells will ring all 
over the Philippines. In the City of Manila, the blowing of a siren 
will announce this event.) 



* The 48 stars on the American Flag were sewed thereon by different 
groups of ladies representing all the provinces of the Philippines 
under the direction of Mrs. Manuel Roxas, Mrs. Manuel L. Quezon 
and Mrs. Sergio Osmena. The Philippine Flag used in this ceremony 
was donated by the Government of the United States. The size ot 
the flag is 10 by 19 feet. 



Page Fifti 



Inaugural Ceremonies 



6. Administration of the Oath of Office to the Honorable 

Elpidio Quirino, Vice President of the Republic of the 
Philippines, by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court 
of the Philippines. 

(The public will rise and will remain standing throughout the oath- 
taking ceremonies of the Vice President and the President. The public 
will be seated upon the commencement ol the President's address.) 

7. Administration of the Oath of Office to His Excellency 

Manuel Roxas, President of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines, by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the 
Philippines. 

(The oath-taking ol the President of the Republic of the Philippines 
will be preceded by ruffles and flourishes and the playing of the 
Philippine National Anthem.) 

8. Address by the President of the Republic of the Philippines. 

9. Public signing of an Agreement for the Promotion and 

Establishment of Diplomatic Relations between the United 
States of America and the Republic of the Philippines. 

10. Philippine Independence Hymn— To be sung by a chorus 

of 1,000 members from the Arellano Colleges- and the 
Conservatory of Music of the University of the Philippines. 

11. Closing Invocation by His Grace, the Most Reverend Ga- 

briel M. Reyes, D.D., Archbishop of Cebu. 



Page Seventeen 



Military and Civic 
Parade 

11:00 o'clock a. m. 

A bugle call will be sounded to indicate the start of the pa- 
rade to be reviewed by the President of the Republic of the 
Philippines. 

m 

ORDER OF UNITS 

GRAND MARSHAL 

Maj. Gen. Rafael Jalandoni 

Chief of Staff, Philippine Army 

Military — 

Philippine Army Units 
Offshore Patrol P. A. 
Air Corps P. A. 
U. S. Army 
U. S. Air Corps 
U. S. Navy 
U. S. Navy Air Corps 
Legion de Veteranos de la Revolucion 
Guerrilla Units 
Civic — 

Drum and Bugle Corps of the Boy Scouts 
The Living Flag 

Symbolic Floats 

American Chamber of Commerce 
Public Works and Communications 
Agriculture 
Labor 

First Philippine Assembly 

Commonwealth (City of Manila) 

Private Education 

Public Schools 

University of the Philippines 

Philippine Chamber of Commerce 

Miss Columbia and Filipinas 



Page Nineteen 



Recession 



12:00 o'clock noon 

Upon the conclusion of the Inaugural Ceremonies, the fol- 
lowing officials will retire in the order given: 

(The public -will rise and will remain standing until after the officials 
named hereunder shall have left) 

The President of the Republic of the Philippines 
The United States High Commissioner to the Philippines 
The Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines 
General of the Army Douglas MacArthur and Staff 
The Visiting Members of the Senate and House of Repre- 
sentatives of the United States 
The Representatives of foreign governments 
The Members of the Cabinet of the United States 
Governors of States of the United States 
The Chief of Staff of the Army and Staff 
The Chief of Naval Operations and Staff 
Former Governors-General of the Philippines 
Former 'High Commissioners of the Philippines 
The Commanding General of the AFWESPAC and Staff 
The Commander, Philippine Sea Frontier, and Staff 
The President of the Philippine Senate 
The Speaker of the Philippine House of Representatives 
The Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the Philippines 
The Members of the Philippine Cabinet 
The Resident Commissioner to the United States 
The Associate Justices of the Supreme Court of the Philip- 
pines 

The Members of the Philippine Senate 

The Members of the Philippine House of Representatives 

The Joint Executive Committee 

The Chief of Staff of the Philippine Army and Staff 

The Consular Corps 

The Under Secretaries of Departments 

(Upon the completion of the Parade the President will proceed to 
Malacanan Palace preceded by a cavalry escort. Outside the gates 
of Malacanan, the cavalry escort will be relieved by the Presidential 
Guards.) 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1946 



