
I 





( 



# / 









S-6432 

October - 1944 



I 



AIJERICA 1 S C OITTRIBUTIOII TO PHILIPPINE EDUCATION 
By Dr. W. W. Marquardt 

Former Director of Public Education for the Philippines 



On a June day in 1901, three years after the Spaniards had 
surrendered to American troops in the Philippines, a public school 
was opened in a palm- thatched building on the island of Leyte. The 
teacher was American* the pupils were Filipinos* aged 7*3* and 9$ 
al ort* apprehensive and curious# Most of them had never gone go 
school before, had never expected to go to school* Now they were 
pioneers in an experiment without parallel in hiscory; these young 
Pacific islanders were embarking on a system of free education on 
the American plan and throughout their school years they v;ere go- 






« 4- AV I r\ /A «-» 4- «•» r> 




nguage that was foreign 
black oilcloth from the 
blackboards did not 
ole - and the first words 



through the islands by 
t to the Philippines to 
uage was designed to 
te dialects were spoken; 



^ ^ ^ w ~ fZIw f _ j-— Wx l»jj. ino uther halx oi gxig wcxld, 
particularly the United States; and to produce, in the next few 
generations " of school children, the capacity for self-government 
under modern conditions. 



The Filipinos were generally suspicious of the alien newcom- 
ers whose secularization of the schools was distrusted, whose 
habits were strange and whose language was not understood. Sporadic 
fighting was still going on in 1901 and they felt it was unpatri- 
otic to send Filipino children to a school taught by Americans. The 
more favored classes looked askance at democratizing of the scnools 
because, even though free schools had been nominally established in 
almost every town during the last decades of the Spanish occupation, 
the teachers nevertheless paid attention principally to the children 
of the upper classes and very few schools were open to the children 
of, the country and village districts. 






X 









- 2 - 



S-6432 



y N° Buildings Or Supplies 

For the newly arrived Americans the problem of going into a 
foreign village and beginning school in English was a novel exner- 
ience. Sent to isolated places, with no set course of study to 
loilow, in some cases without even a school building and fr^rmpmt-iTr 

” = u ? pU S?V hese PK«-« teachera ffuS ^rtS^I 

to do that are not taught in any normal school or college of educa- 
tion. Brusque American methods frequently clashed with°the more 
suave ana easy going ways of the country. Only the sturdy optimism 
of the pioneer teachers and the universal desire of the Filipinos 
that tneir children might have a better chance in life than they 

had, made the teaching experiment a success. The language difficul- 
ties can readily be imagined. b aimcui 

"The inception of the plan was too bold to be anything but 
American," according to a committee of Philippine educators quoted 

J-H. Hayden in "The Philippines, A Study in National Develop- 

^ teachers we re intensely in earnest, the Filipino 
pupils had a keen desire for education and a marked intellectual 
capacity, and it was not long before order was brought out of chaos 0 
Distrust changed to acceptance and acceptance to hearty cooperation. 

?, rro f ^ was soon found that rapid progress could be 
made, not by the translation method, but by having the Filipino 

pupils learn English much as the little American children learn to 
speak their own language. 

American texts were adapted to use for Filipino children and 
it was not many ^ years before texts we re written by Filipinos them- 
selves for use in the Philippine schools. 

When the first Filipino pupils finished high school some of 
them went on to Normal schools and universities to study for the 
teaching profession. The number of American teachers was reduced 
as one proiiciency of the Filipinos increased, and by 1940 there were 

80 Am ®^ i ° ans le f t in the Bureau of Education in com- 
parison with 3ome 40,000 Filipino teachers and over 2,000,000 pupils. 

Agricultural Instruction Given 

As agriculture is the basis of prosperity for all tropical 

J? U 2^Sv eS v,i a S rl0Ul J U f al f nstruction held first rank in the" vocation- 
was taken by all pupils as a part of their schooling 
aer tne new system. Thousands of pupils, as members of agricul- 
tural clubs, did splendid work in the raising of farm animals and 
cnickenso Vegetable markets were started in districts where fresh 
garden vegetables were formerly unprocurable. Beneficial results 




-3> 



S-6432 



■were felt both in the Increase of family Incomes and in the improve- 
ment of health due to the use of a more varied diet* 

Agriculture was not the only, vocation fostered by the English- 
speaking schools. A telegraph school was opened by the government 
and before long all of the telegraphic work was done by Filipinos. 
Similar progress was made in the teaching of navigations, When the 
Coast Guard fleet was established, practically all of the officers 
were Americans. In a surprisingly short time all of these vessels 
were manned by Filipino officers trained either in tne service or 
in the Government Nautical School. 

In the early days the public school system was roundly criti- 
cized for t tirning out too many clerks* However, when business 
firms learned that they could replace most of their western steno- 
graphic and clerical staffs with Filipinos trained In the Philip- 
pine School of Commerce there was a demand for more graduates 
trained along clerical lines. 

The hat, shoe and embroidery industries were stimulated by 
vocational classes in these subjects. The teaching of embroidery 
for example resulted in the development of an export trade of more 
than §4,000,000 annually out of what was formerly only a woman's 
pastime# 

New trade schools were Instituted in practically all of the 
provinces. Trained workers in woodworking, ironworking, machine- 
shop practice and automobile repair provided greatly needed skilled 
workers in the mechanical industries. 

The increase in population from 7,000,000 to 17,000,000 indi- 
cates in a general way the results of health education. 



Government Establishes Nurse Training School 

The Philippine Medical School and a number of private medical 
schools furnished a competent staff of Filipino doctors. It was 
quite an innovation to have women take up the medical profession. 

It was an even greater innovation when the first training school 
for female nurses was established by the government. Very quickly, 
however, the new nurses proved their worth and now there is never a 
question raised as to whether nursing is a proper field of endeavor 
for Filipino women. 

After the Japanese are driven out, progressive public educa- 
tion will be resumed in the Philippines. As a former Secretary of 
Public Instruction, President Sergio Osmena is well acquainted with 
the administrative problems; and having been trained himself in the 
public schools, he has full appreciation of the worth of the system 
to the Republic of the Philippines. 



