INAUGURAL ADDRESS 
GOVERN OR- GENERAL 

Henry L. Stimson 

ON THE 
NEW LUNETA, MANILA 

DELIVERED MARCH 1, 192S 




[IN ENGLISH AND SPANISH] 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1928 



i? r 



A 



oozs 



INAUGURAL ADDRESS 



OF 

Governor-General; STIMSON 

Delivered on the New Luneta upon his arrival in the Philippine 
Islands on the morning of March 1, 1928 

Fellow-Countrymen : 

I thank you for the warmth of your greeting:. Previous 
contact with the people of these Islands has acquainted me 
with their kindness to the stranger, and I welcome it now 
as a hopeful augury of success in the difficult task before 
me. What we have to accomplish together in the success- 
ful administration of government in these Islands, can only 
be achieved by the fullest possible measure of sympathetic 
and patient cooperation. For my own part, I shall use 
my utmost endeavor to establish such harmonious coopera- 
tion under the Organic Law under which it is our joint 
duty to labor. 

It is not within the province of the Governor-General to 
determine the future relations of the inhabitants of these 
Islands to the United States; that duty rests with the Gov- 
ernment of the United States. But it is his duty, so long 
as the present connection remains, to endeavor to make 
that union a happy and fruitful one, and to carry on the 
government of these Islands, so far as it rests in his hands, 
in full conformity with the noble and unselfish purpose of 



Inaugural Address of 



the American leaders who in past years have devised, 
created, and administered it 

It has been my good fortune during my life to come into 
close contact with several of these men. I have sustained 
both personal and official relations with that statesman who, 
as Secretary of War, first laid the broad and enduring 
foundations of American policy in the Philippines upon 
which all subsequent growth has been predicated, Elihu 
Root ; with that devoted founder of your civil government 
and laws, William Howard Taft; with that efficient admin- 
istrator, so justly beloved throughout the Archipelago, W. 
Cameron Forbes; and finally with that faithful friend of 
the Filipino people whose recent labors have made possible, 
we believe, a new era of constructive accomplishment, 
Leonard Wood. These great men, each in his own time 
and way, have helped to formulate the doctrine of trust 
responsibility which underlies the sovereignty of America 
in these Islands and places upon the shoulders of the Gov- 
ernor-General a duty of protection toward the liberties of 
the humblest citizen. No one can approach such a task, 
in the light of such examples, in any other than a spirit 
of profound humility. 

For many years I have earnestly followed and observed 
the development of government in the Philippines and have 
noted with gratification the progress which has been made. 
During the past two years, I have had occasion to visit 
and study other peoples both in the Orient and in the 
Americas, and I congratulate you on the contrast between 
the peace, the order, the general contentment prevailing 
here, and conditions which I observed in some of these 
countries. 



Governor-General Stimson 

I congratulate you especially upon the zeal which you 
have consistently displayed towards education and the prog- 
ress which has been made through that instrumentality 
in the direction of achieving national consciousness and a 
common language. In so doing you have grasped at one 
of the basic necessities of a self-governing people, and the 
vigor and readiness to make sacrifices which have accom- 
panied your efforts have been in a high degree remarkable 
and encouraging. Errors in the methods and character 
of education have possibly been committed; by too many 
students it has been regarded as the object and end of 
their endeavor, instead of merely the means towards fur- 
ther effort in the never-ending struggle of life. Yet when 
all is said, in following the injunction of Solomon to take 
fast hold of instruction, you have taken a long step for- 
ward on what President Roosevelt has called, "the stony 
and difficult path which leads to self-government." 

I venture to hope that during my administration further 
progress may be made along that same road, and among 
the various matters which I deem important, I lay partic- 
ular stress upon industrial and economic progress. It has 
often seemed to me that sometimes in our insistence upon 
political development we overlook the importance of the 
economic foundations which must underlie it and upon 
which it necessarily rests. By some of us, industrial de- 
velopment has even been dreaded as if it were inconsistent 
with the liberties of a people. As a general proposition, I 
believe that no greater error could be made. History shows 
that it has been the great commercial and industrial nations 
which have first developed individual liberty and free insti- 
tutions and which have most tenaciously clung to them. It 



Inaugural Address of 

has shown further that within such countries it has been the 
middle artisan class, produced by industry and commerce, 
which has been the pillar and support of their free institu- 
tions. The industrial guild, in ancient times, was a birth- 
place of common rights, and in later days the trade union 
brought forth, by industrial development has often been 
a bulwark against governmental oppression. On the other 
hand, those nations which have depended solely upon agri- 
culture and the tillage of the soil, where there was no 
commerce or industry and no middle class of citizens en- 
gaged in them, have been the ones most prone to drift 
into the abuses of serfdom and peonage and other varying 
forms of servitude. If there is danger today of the loss 
of personal freedom in these Islands, if for example the 
threat of the usurer overhangs any class of your citizens, 
it is the tillers of your rice paddies who are subject to the 
danger rather than the artisans of your shops and factories. 

Furthermore, the world has now reached a stage of prog- 
ress where government is expected to engage in activities 
for the social benefit or protection of the individual, all 
of which are expensive and require greater governmental 
revenues. The constantly expanding system of public edu- 
cation, to which I have just alluded, is but a single example. 
The government of today is expected to furnish not only 
schools and colleges, but also hospitals, asylums, libraries 
and museums, public roads, aqueducts and post offices, and 
a constantly increasing variety of services of health and 
education, travel and communication, protection and social 
welfare which modern civilized life regards as essential. 
All of these services minister to the comfort and welfare 
of the individual citizens; some of them, like education, 



6 



Governor-General Stimson 

directly conduce to his ability to govern himself. Some 
of them are particularly necessary in the tropics with its 
constant threat of epidemic disease. But they all 'cost 
money. They all make inroads on the revenues which come 
from taxation. To support them a community must pos- 
sess the wealth which comes only with industrial develop- 
ment. Today your budget and your tax laws indicate that 
you are already reaching the limit of the revenues obtain- 
able upon your present economic development. You are 
faced with the alternative of increasing your taxable wealth 
or checking and holding back some of the necessary activ- 
ities of your government and important public improve- 
ments. 

In short, it is the simple truth not only that individual 
freedom and the practice of self-government are found to 
be most prevalent and firmly held in those communities 
and nations which have a highly developed system of in- 
dustry and commerce as a foundation, but it is also true 
that only in such communities and nations can the average 
citizen attain the degree of individual comfort, education 
and culture which modern civilization is coming to demand. 

Is there any reason why the Filipino people should not 
attain such an economic development? Manifestly it lacks 
it today. Manifestly its attention during the past genera- 
tion has been more concentrated upon political than eco- 
nomic development, with the result that progress in the 
latter field has not kept pace with the exceptional progress 
made in education and public affairs. 

But the Philippine Islands today are possessed of a 
political connection with the foremost industrial nation in 
the world— the nation where not only has mechanical in- 

7 



Inaugural Address of 

vention made the greatest advances, but where the organ- 
ization and methods of industry and the relations of capital 
and labor are more enlightened and fruitful than in any- 
other country under the sun. Is it not the part of wisdom 
and of prudence for this people to absorb to the uttermost 
the lessons and benefits which can be derived from the 
teaching of such a successful practitioner? 

Have not the people of the United States sufficiently de- 
monstrated the unselfishness of their attitude toward these 
Islands in the matter of political development to make them 
worthy of confidence in the matter of economic develop- 
ment? I believe that nowhere in the world are the rela- 
tions of capital to the public watched with a more jealous 
eye than today in the United States. The abuses of capital 
which excited criticism a generation ago have been curbed. 
The American captains of industry of today have a very 
different standard of duty toward the public from their 
predecessors of the nineteenth century. It should be an 
easy matter for wise statesmanship to gain for these Islands 
the inestimable benefit of the guidance of American indus- 
trial experience and capital, upon terms which would not 
only share present profits with the Filipino people but would 
also leave their rights and resources unimpaired for the 
generations to come. 

Moreover, I believe that the establishment of such in- 
dustrial relations with the United States would greatly 
benefit the social relations of the two peoples. Business 
relations between worthy partners tend to produce mutual 
confidence. On a small scale I witnessed a striking exam- 
ple of this tendency when I visited Hawaii on my journey 



8 



Governor-General Stimson 

hither. The Filipino laborers who go from here to the 
Hawaiian sugar plantations occupy a very different position 
in that community today than they did tqn years ago. They 
have won their place in the confidence of those with whom 
they come in contact. They have become almost indispen- 
sable to the industry of those Islands, while at the same 
time they have themselves derived corresponding benefit in 
training, in responsibility and in earning power. As I 
listened to the generous praise spoken of them by their 
employers in Hawaii, I could not help feeling that if such 
a change of sentiment could be effected by the mere contact 
of a few laborers engaged in field labor, what an enor- 
mous social benefit could be derived should the Filipino 
people in large numbers and of all classes, laborers, arti- 
sans and investors, be brought into friendly, profitable and 
cooperating contact with the representative business men 
of industrial America. 

Three centuries ago, under the leadership of Spain, you 
turned your faces from the Orient toward the Western 
World. You accepted a civilization and a religion which 
marked you as a separate people from those who surround 
you. Now with the passage of those three centuries, your 
connection with the West has itself become transformed into 
a promise of new opportunities. The nation with which 
you are now connected represents not only political freedom 
but the highest average standard of social and material 
welfare which has yet been developed in this world. 

I cannot believe that this opportunity will not be grasped 
by the Filipino people. On the contrary, I believe that it 
will, and through it that they will press forward into new 
stages of political freedom, individual comfort and social 
welfare. 

9 



Inaugural Address of Governor-General Stimson 

I have addressed myself thus far to the Filipino people, 
because the steps necessary for the solution of the problem 
which I have been discussing must primarily be taken by 
them. Before closing, may I add a word of appreciation 
and good wishes to the American residents of these Islands. 
I am keenly sensible of the debt of gratitude which both 
the Filipino people and the people of the United States 
owe to them and of the duty which rests upon the shoulders 
of the Governor-General to protect their legitimate rights 
and interests. Whether in the military uniform of the 
United States, whether as civil servants and teachers of 
this Government, or whether as business men risking their 
all in the development of its resources, these Americans 
have rendered inestimable service to this land. They have 
been the pioneers in the performance of an American service 
to an Oriental people, such as no other nation of the world 
has even attempted. It would be a shortsighted policy 
indeed which allowed them to be treated either with neglect 
or injustice, for such a policy could result only in ultimate 
injury to this country where their service was rendered. 

In the conduct of this office into which I have now been 
inducted, it will be my earnest endeavor to be watchful of 
the interests of both Americans and Filipinos alike, to be 
equally accessible to all and patient in hearing all sides of 
such issues as may arise. 

Working all of us together in a spirit of sympathetic co- 
operation, I trust that under the providence of God, we may 
be successful in carrying forward the high aims and pur- 
poses of the noble men who have preceded us. 
Manila, March 1, 1928. 



10 



DISCURSO INAUGURAL 

DEL 

GOBERNADOR GENERAL 

Henry L. Stimson 

EN LA 

NUEVA LUNETA, MANILA 
PRONUNCIADO EL |.« DE MARZO DE 1928 




MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1928 



DISGURSO INAUGURAL 

DEL 

GOBERNADOR GENERAL STIMSON 

Pronunciado en la Nueva Luneta el dia de su llegada a las Islas 
Filipinas en la manana del 1.° de marzo de 1928 

COMPATRIOTAS : 

Os doy las gracias por vuestra afectuosa bienvenida. El 
contacto que anteriormente he tenido con los habitantes 
de estas Islas me ha hecho conocer vuestra bondad con 
el forastero, y esto lo recibo con agrado ahora como un 
venturoso augurio de buen exito en la dificil empresa que 
tengo delante. La labor que tenemos que realizar jun- 
tamente para el buen exito de la administration publica 
de estas Islas solo podra ejecutarse por medio del mas 
alto grado de simpatia y paciente cooperation. Por mi 
parte, hare los mayores esf uerzos por establecer esa coopera- 
cion armoniosa bajo la Ley Organica, con sujecion a la cual 
tenemos el deber solidario de trabajar. 

No esta dentro de las atribuciones del Gobernador Ge- 
neral el determinar las relaciones futuras de los habitantes 
de estas Islas con los Estados Unidos ; este deber corresponde 
al Gobierno de los Estados Unidos. Pero, mientras exista 
la conexion actual, es deber suyo esforzarse por que esa 
union sea feliz y fructifera, y llevar el gobierno de estas 
Islas, en lo que se halle en sus manos, en plena conformidad 
con el noble y desinteresado proposito de los estadistas ame- 



13 



DiacuTQo Inaugural del 

ricanos que, en los anos pasados, lo han ideado, creado y 
administrado. 

Durante mi vida he tenido la buena suerte de tratar muy 
de cerca a algunos de estos hombres. He sostenido rela- 
ciones particulares y oficiales con aquel estadista que, como 
Secretario de Guerra, coloco loaprimeros cimientos, amplios 
y duraderos, de la politica americana en Filipinas, sobre 
los cuales se ha fundado todo el ulterior desarrollo, Elihu 
Root; con aquel leal fundador de vuestro regimen y leyes 
civiles, William Howard Taft; con aquel eficaz gobernante, 
tan justamente querido en todas partes del Archipielago, 
W. Cameron Forbes; y, por ultimo, con aquel fiel amigo 
del pueblo filipino, cuyos ultimos trabajos han hecho posi- 
ble, segiin creo, una nueva era de labor constructiva, Leo- 
nard Wood. Estos grandes hombres, cada uno en su propia 
epoca y manera, han contribuido a formular la doctrina 
de la responsabilidad de fideicomiso en que se asienta la so- 
berania de America en estas Islas y que coloca sobre los 
hombros del Gobernador General un deber de proteccion 
para los derechos del mas humilde ciudadano. A la luz de 
• semejantes ejemplos, nadie puede acometer semejante 
empresa en un espiritu que no sea de profunda humildad. 

Durante muchos anos he venido siguiendo y observando 
atentamente el desarrollo del Gobierno en Filipinas, ha- 
biendo notado con agrado los progresos que se han al- 
canzado. En estos dos ultimos anos he tenido ocasion de 
visitar y estudiar otros pueblos del Oriente y de las Ame- 
ricas, y os felicito por el contraste que existe entre la paz, 
el orden y la satisfaccion general que reinan aqui, y la 
situaci6n que he observado en algunos de esos paises. 



14 



Gobernador General SUmson 

Yo os congratulo especialmente por el celo que hab§is cons- 
tantemente demostrado por la educaci6n, y por el progreso 
que se ha logrado por ese medio en cuanto a la formation 
de la conciencia national y un idioma comun. HaciSndolo 
asi, habeis comprendido las necesidades fundamentales de 
un pueblo que se gobierna por si mismo, y el vigor y la dis- 
posici6n al sacrificio que han acompanado a vuestros es- 
fuerzos han sido notables y alentadores en alto grado. 
Es posible que se hayan cometido errores respecto a los 
metodos y el caracter de la education ; es demasiado grande 
el numero de los estudiantes que han considerado a la edu- 
caci6n como el objeto y fin de sus afanes, en vez de ser 
simplemente el medio para realizar un nuevo esfuerzo en la 
incesante lucha por la existencia. Con todo, y juzgando las 
cosas en conjunto, siguiendo el mandato de Salomon de 
que nos dediquemos fuertemente a la instrucci6n, habeis 
dado un gran paso en aquello que el Presidente Roosevelt 
llam6 "la pedregosa y dificil senda que conduce al go- 
bierno propio." 

* Yo me aventuro a esperar que durante mi administraci6n 
se puedan lograr nuevos progresos por este mismo camino, 
y entre los varios asuntos que considero importantes, doy 
particular importancia al progreso industrial y econ6mico. 
Frecuentemente me ha parecido que algunas veces, en 
nuestra insistencia por el desarrollo politico, hemos des- 
cuidado la importancia de los cimientos econ6micos en que 
este se debe asentar y sobre los cuales necesariamente 
descansa. Algunos de nosotros hemos llegado al extremo 
de temer el desarrollo industrial como si f uese incompatible 
con las libertades de un pueblo. En t6rminos generales, 



15 



Discurso Inaugural del 



creo que no se podia cometer un error mas grande. La 
historia nos ensena que las grandes naciones comerciales e 
industriales son las que primeramente han desarrollado la 
libertad individual y las instituciones libres y que son las 
que con mas tenacidad se han asido a ellas. Tambien se 
ha demostrado que en esos pafses la clase media artesana, 
formada por la industria y el comercio, ha sido la columna 
y fundamento de sus instituciones libres. En los antiguos 
tiempos, los gremios industriales fueron la cuna de los dere- 
chos comunes, y en los tiempos modernos los gremios obre- 
ros, productos del desarrollo industrial, han servido a 
menudo de baluarte contra la opresion de los gobiernos. 
Por otra parte, aquellas naciones que han vivido exclusiva- 
mente de la agricultura y de la labranza del suelo, donde no 
existe comercio ni industria ni la clase media de ciudadanos 
dedicados a uno y otra, han sido los mas dispuestos a ser 
arrastrados hacia la tirania de la servidumbre y del peonaje 
y a otras diversas formas de esclavitud. Si hoy dia existe 
algun peligro de que se pierda la libertad individual en estas 
Islas, son los labradores de vuestros arrozales los que se 
hallan sujetos a ese riesgo, mas bien que los artesanos de 
vuestros talleres y de vuestras fabricas. 

Aun mas: El mundo ha llegado ya a un estado de pro- 
greso en el cual se espera que el gobierno se consagre a 
actividades para el beneficio social o la protection del in- 
dividuo, las cuales son dispendiosas y exigen mayores rentas 
piiblicas. El sistema de la instruction publica, que se dilata 
constantemente, y al cual acabo de referirme, no es mas que 
uno de los ejemplos de ello. Del gobierno de hoy dia se 
espera que proporcione no solamente escuelas y colegios, 
sino tambien hospitales, asilos, bibliotecas y museos, carre- 



16 



Gobernador General Stimson 

teras, acueductos y casas de correos, y una variedad cada 
vez mayor de servicios de sanidad y de education, de comu- 
nicacion y transporte, de protection y bienestar social, que 
la vida en la civilization moderna considera indispensables. 
Todos estos servicios suministran la comodidad y el bien- 
estar de los ciudadanos, individualmente ; algunos de ellos, 
como la education, conducen directamente a proportionate 
capacidad para gobernarse por si mismo. Algunos son 
particularmente necesarios en los tropicos, donde es cons- 
tante el peligro de enfermedad epidemica. Pero todos estos 
servicios cuestan dinero. Todos ellos hacen mengua en las 
rentas que provienen de la tributacion. Para sostenerlos, 
una comunidad debe poseer la riqueza que sblamente pro- 
cede del desarrollo industrial. Hoy dia, vuestras leyes de 
presupuestos y de tributacion indican que ya os estais acer- 
cando al limite de los ingresos que se pueden obtener de 
vuestro actual desarrollo economico. Os hallais ante la al- 
ternativa de aumentar vuestra riqueza tributable o sus- 
pender y detener algunas de las actividades que son 
necesarias en vuestro gobierno y mejoras publicas impor- 
tantes. 

En suma, es una sencilla verdad no solo que la libertad 
individual y la practica del gobierno propio imperan y se 
sostienen con mas firmeza en -aquellas comunidades y 
naciones que poseen un sistema de industria y comercio 
muy desarrollados, como los f undamentos en que se asientan, 
sino tambien que solo en dichas comunidades y naciones 
puede la generalidad de los ciudadanos alcanzar la co- 
modidad, la educacion y la cultura que la civilization mo- 
derna vendra a imponer. 



17 



Discurso Inaugural del 
iExiste, por ventura, algun motivo por el cual el pueblo 
filipino no deba alcanzar semejante desarrollo economico? 
Es evidente que hoy carece de dicho desarrollo. Es evidente 
que la atencion del pueblo en la generacion pasada se con- 
centro mas en el desarrollo politico que en el economico, con 
el resultado de que el progreso en este ultimo campo no ha 
marchado al compas del extraordinario progreso logrado 
en el terreno de la education y de los asuntos publicos. 

Pero es el caso que hoy las Islas Filipinas poseen un lazo 
politico con la principal naci6n industrial del mundo, la na- 
ci6n donde no solamente se han alcazado los mayores ade- 
lantos en la invention mecanica, sino tambien donde la 
organization y los metodos de la industria y las relaciones 
del capital y el trabajo son mas ilustrados y provechosos 
que en cualquier otro pais alumbrado por el sol. £No es, 
por ventura, la parte que corresponde a la sabiduria y pru- 
dencia de este pueblo aprovechar cuanto sea posible las 
lecciones y los beneficios que se pueden derivar de la en- 
senanza que viene de profesores tan eminentes? 

iNo ha demostrado suficientemente el pueblo de los Es- 
tados Unidos la generosidad de su actitud hacia estas Islas 
en lo que toca al desarrollo politico para hacerse digno de la 
confianza en lo que toca al desarrollo economico? Creo que 
en ninguna parte del mundo se vigilan con ojos mas celosos 
las relaciones del capital con el publico que en los Estados 
Unidos en la actualidad. Los abusos del capital, que en la 
generacion pasada excitaron la critica, han sido reprimidos. 
Los grandes capitanes de la industria americana de la epoca 
presente poseen una norma muy dif erente del deber hacia el 
publico de la de sus predecesores del siglo XIX. Para la 
prudencia de un estadista.seria empresa facil alcanzar para 



18 



Gobernador General Sthnson 

estas Islas el inestimable beneficio de la guia de la experien- 
cia industrial y del capital amerieano, en condiciones tales 
que no solamente participasen de las utilidades pre.sentes 
con el pueblo filipino, sino tambien legasen sus derechos y 
recursos intactos a las generaciones futuras. 

Ademas, yo creo que el establecimiento de esas relaciones 
industriales con los Estados Unidos serfa grandemente be- 
neficioso a las relaciones sociales de los dos pueblos. Las 
relaciones mercantiles entre socios dignos tienden a producir 
la confianza mutua. En una proportion menor, yo he pre- 
senciado un sQrprendente ejemplo de esta tendencia a mi 
paso por Hawaii en mi viaje para este pais. Los obreros 
filipinos que desde aqui van a las plantaciones azucareras de 
Hawaii ocupan hoy una position muy diferente de la que 
ocupaban hace diez anos. Se han granjeado un puesto en la 
confianza de las personas con quienes se han puesto en con- 
tacto. Se han hecho casi indispensables a la industria de 
aquel archipielago, mientras que, al mismo tiempo, han ob- 
tenido para si proporcionados beneficios en instruction, en 
responsabilidad y en potencia adquirente. Cuando yo oia 
las calurosas alabanzas que de ellos hacian sus patronos en 
Hawaii, no pude menos de pensar que, si se podia lograr 
semejante cambio de sentimientos por el simple contacto 
de unos cuantos obreros dedicados a las labores del campo, 
i cuan enorme beneficio social se lograria si el pueblo filipino, 
en grupos numerosos y de todas las clases, jornaleros, arte- 
sanos y capitalistas, fuese colocado en contacto amistoso, 
provechoso y cooperativo con el hombre de negocios repre- 
sentative de la America industrial! 

Hace tres siglos, bajo la guia de Espana, volvisteis el ros- 
tro desde el mundo oriental al occidental. Aceptasteis una 



1!l 



Discurso Inaugural del 

civilization y una religion que os hicieron un pueblo drs- 
tinto de los pueblos que os rodean. Hoy, transcurridos esos 
feres siglos, vuestro contacto con el Occidente se ha trans- 
formado en una promesa de nuevas oportunidades. La na- 
tion con la cual estais ahora en contacto representa, no 
solamente la libertad politica, sino tambien la norma me- 
dia mas elevada del bienestar social y material que hasta 
ahora se ha logrado en este mundo. 

Yo no puedo creer que esta nueva oportunidacl no sera 
comprendida por el pueblo filipino. Por el contrario, yo 
creo que si lo sera, y que, por medio de ella, el pueblo filipino 
se abrira paso hacia nuevos estados de libertad politica, 
comodidad individual y bienestar social. 

Hasta ahora me he dirigido al pueblo filipino, porque los 
pasos que son necesarios para la solution del problema de 
que he tratado deben ser dados primeramente por dicho pue- 
blo. Antes de terminar, me permitire anadir una palabra 
de agradecimiento y de buenos deseos a los americanos que 
residen en estas Islas. Yo reconozco profundamente la 
deuda de gratitud que el pueblo filipino y el pueblo de los 
Estados Unidos han contraido hacia ellos y el deber que 
incumbe al Gobernador General de defender sus derechos 
e intereses legitimos. Ya vistan el uniforme militar de los 
Estados Unidos, ya sea como empleados civiles y maestros 
en este Gobierno, o ya como hombres de negocios que arries- 
gan todo lo que poseen en el fomento de las fuentes de ri- 
queza, todos estos americanos han prestado un servicio de 
valor inestimable a su patria. Ellos f ueron los que abrieron 
el camino en la empresa de que America prestase *a un 
pueblo oriental un servicio que ninguna otra nation del 



20 



Gobernador General Stimson 

mundo habia intentado hasta entonces. Seria, en verdad, 
una politica imprevisora el permitir que sean tratados con 
negligencia o injusticia, porque semejante conducta solo 
podria dar por resultado, en ultimo caso, un daiio al pais 
donde se han prestado sus servicios. 

En el desempeno del cargo al que ahora ingreso, mi ma- 
yor empeiio sera guardar celosamente los intereses de los 
americanos y de los filipinos por igual, ser accesible por 
igual a todos y oir con igual paciencia a todas las partes 
en todas las cuestiones que se susciten. 

Trabajando todos juntos con un espiritu de cooperaci6n 
simpatica, confio en que, bajo la proteccion de Dios, logra- 
remos exito en llevar adelante las altas empresas y fines 
de los nobles hombres que nos han precedido. 

Manila, l.° de marzo de 1928. 

O 

LIBRARY 
MALAC^KAN PALAlSl 



2] 



