
Featuring Pres. Manuel L. Quezon's 69th Birthday Anniversary, 
The Roxas Cabinet, Chief Delegates to United Nations, Music, 
The Tagalog Language, Government and Business Directory, Etc. 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

DEPARTMENT OF INSTRUCTION 
OFFICE OF PRIVATE EDUCATION 

TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN: 

This is to CERTIFY that the following SPECIAL VOCATIONAL SCHOOLS in Manila (arranged alphabetically) haw 
complied with the provisions of the Private School Law, the requirements of the Department of Instruction, and the regula- 
tions of the Office of Private Education and have been duly authorized by the GOVERNMENT to offer the course or courses 
indicated under them. 

Under Sec. 3 of Act 2706 as amended by Commonwealth Act 180 "any person or group of persons desiring to open 
or establish a private school or college must first secure the permission of the Secretary of Instruction before opening or 
establishing the same." Under Sec. 6 of the same Act as amended, the advertisement of an unauthorized private school 
or college is punishable by law. 

In order to provite ample protection to students and parents and the general public before enrolling and paying any 
fee in unauthorized courses or schools they should require the exhibit of the government permit or recognition signed by 
the Secretary of Instruction and the Director of Private Education. 

MANUEL L. CARREON 

Director of Private Education 



BEAUTICIAN'S ACADEMY 

•167 Quezon Hon levari!. Quiapo 
Pacing Times Th ater 



Courses : 

Hair Culture. Beauty Culture 

and Dressmaking 

Director:: A.mado Eug nio 
President: Marc.lo Eugenio 



MAFFEI-ACADEMIA DE 
ARTES DEL HOGAR 

Samanillo Bldg.. Escolta 
Directress: S. Maffei 

Courses : 
DRESSMAKING 
Extensive Course In Dressmaking 
Decorative Painting 
Embroidery 
Master (Men's) Tailoring 
Hair Culture 
Carmen Rcmiuo. Dean ot Hair Cultun 



SOCIALITE FASHION 

INSTITUTE 

428-430 Evangelista. Behind Quiapo Church 
878 Antonio Rivera 

Directress: Andrea B. Local n 
Courses: 

* Dressmaking * Embroidery * 
Pleating 

Dean: Andrea B. Locsin 
HAIR A BEAUTY CULTURE 
Dean: Bscoiastico Lopez 



DE LUXE FASHION 
SCHOOL 

Rizal Ave., corner Carriedo 
Doroteo Jose (corner) Misericordia 
Directress: Josefina B. Manalo 
COURSES: DRESSMAKING 
Dean: Kcmedios Rocjue 
HAIR & BEAUTY CULTURE 
Dean: Paulino Verzosa 
Embroidery : Head. Consuelo de Leon 
MASTER (Men's) TAILORING 
»ead: A. J'ajardo 



GALA FASHION ACADEMY 

1089 R. Hidalgo. 634 Isabel 

Directress: Ygnacia T. Yamzon 
Courses: Dressmaking & Embroidery 

Dean: Ygnacin T. Yamzon 
Hair A Beauty Culture 
Dean: Parita Ruiz 

Master (Men's) Tailoring 
1 1 rln: fticardo Villareal 



PARIS-MANILA FASHION 
ACADEMY 

671 Evangelista, Quiapo, 
(Near Azcarraga) 

Pres.: Dr. Presentacion C. Bay an i 
de Santos 

Directress: Dr. Belen C. Bayani 
Courses: 

DRESSMAKING EMBROIDERY 



REALISTIC INSTITUTE 

2117 Azcarraga. Manila 
Director: Jose A. del Rosario 
President: Gain l\ Melt ton 

Adviser: Mrs. M. Teague 
Courses: 

HAIR A BEAUTY CULTURE 



STATE FASHION & BEAUTY 
ART ACADEMY 

•101' Espana, facing U.S.T. Gate 
Courses: HAIR CULTURE 

Directress: Pellcisima J. Patacsil 
Courses: Dressmaking & Embroidery 
Dean: Pelicisima J. Patacsil 
Master (Men's) Tailoring 
Dean: M. R. Llaguno 



UNDERWOOD FASHION 
SCHOOL 

Main Bid*.: R. Hidalgo, Quiapo 

Branch: 428 Rizal Ave., 2nd Floor 
Director: Atty. Salvador C. Reyes 

Courses: 
Dressmaking & Embroidery 
Master (Men's) Tailoring 

Head : Vict* ria Manoscti 



LI WAN AG FASHION 
ACADEMY 

241-2-13 Carriedo 

j 101 Misericordia rorner Zurlmrau 
Director: Pio D. Livvanag 

Cour»es : 
M;i . lt er (Men'Kl Tailoring 
Dean: Geronimo D. Liwnnng 
Dressmaking 
Dean: Virginia D. Liwnnng 



SAMSON FASHION SCHOOL 

859 Oroquieta, near corner 
Azcarraga. Manila 
Cor. Escolta and Plaza Sta. Cruz 



Directress: A. T. Samson 
Courses: Dressmaking & Embroidery 
Hair & Beauty Culture 
D«:m: Eel i no Hautisla 



WOMEN'S SCHOOL OF 
FASHION AND APPLIED 
ARTS 

1110 Azcarraga corner Reina Kegcnte 
Directress: Magdnlena Tuazon Carpena 
Courses: Dressmaking 
Dean: Consuelo G. Marcial 

Hair & Beauty Culture 
Dean: M. Tuazon Carpena 
Embroidery: Head. Isabel Aguikn 
Handicraft, Knitting. Elowermnking and 
Painting 
Dean: Fernando Domingo 



*4. 



PUBLISHED 

MONTHLY 
by 

MIGUEL R. CORNEJO 

MANAGING EDI.TOK & PROPRIETOR 



Magdaleno M. Palacol 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR 

* * * 

Crispin Torres 

BUSINESS MANAGER 

* * * 

Dr. Melania D. Miranda 

IN CHARGE, ADV. DEPT. 



PRINTERS^ 

M. Colcol and Company 

878 RIZAL AVE., MANILA 



The REPUBLIC Magazine and Director*/ will 
publish all information of general interest to 
the public. All signed articles published rep- 
resent the personal opinions of their authors 
and do not necessarily reflect the opinion of 
the Editorial staff of this publication. SUB- 
SCRIPTION RATES paid for in advance: In 
the Philippines, PI 2.00 a year; in U.S. and 
possessions, $10.00 a year; and in Foreign 
Countries, $12.00 US. Currency or equivalent 
amount. Each regular copy. Pi. 50." This special 
issue for August and September, 1947. P3.00 a 
copy; in U.S. and Foreign Countries, $2.00 per 
copy. 



PRICE: P3.00 





PUBLIC 



Magazine and Directory 

DEVOTED TO THE PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC, SO- 
CIAL, POLITICAL AND EDUCATIONAL INTERESTS OF 
THE PHILIPPINES AND HER RELATIONS WITH FOR- 
EIGN COUNTRIES. 



Volume 1 



August-September, 1947 



Special Issue 



CONTENTS 



Pages 

EDITORIALS 3— 4 

Peace and Order — United Nations — Honoring Our 
Heroes 

PRESIDENT MANUEL L. QUEZON 5—10 

Biographical Sketch — His Favorite Pictures — His 
Last Message — Pres. Quezon and Gen. Mac Arthur 
— How Quezon Died — How Quezon was Honored 
in U. S. 

THE PHILIPPINES n_ 13 

Discovery — Name — Geography — Population 

Religion — Government — Peace and Order 

Languages and Dialects — Commerce 

IMPORTANT EVENTS AND HISTORIC DOCU- 
MENTS 14—24 

Magellan and Lapulapu — Legaspi and His Con- 
quest — Rajah Lakandula — Magat Salamat — First 
Revolts and Uprisings — Gov. Blanco and Fr. Gil 
on Rizal and the "Katipunan' — Andres Bonifacio 
— Governor Primo de Rivera — Gen. Emilio Agui- 
naldo and the Revolution of 1896 — The Pact of 
Biac-na-Bato — U. S. Consul General Pratt's Let- 
ter to the Secretary of State on General Aguinal- 
do and Admiral Dewey — The Battle of Manila 
Bay — The Revolutionary Government — The Pro- 
tocol of Peace. The Treaty of Paris, PresI 
ident McKinley's Message of December 5, 1899 
to U. S. Congress on the Philippines 

THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL LANGUAGE 

(Tagalog) 24— 25 

The Tagalog Alphabet and Pronunciation— Lesson 
I: The Articles — Vocabulary 

UNITED PHILIPPINES ORGANIZATION (BUK- 

LOD) 26-27 

"BUKLOD" MILITARY MARCH By Dr. R. R. Cor- 

ne -i° 28— 30 

UNITED NATIONS 32 _ 60 

A scene of the United Nations' General Assem- 
bly In Actual Session— The President and Seven 

(SEE NEXT PAGE) 



It is because of the nearly five decades of public 
service and self-sacrifice for the cause of his country 
and people that Don Sergio remains with steadfast 
majesty in the hearts of the people. We reckon him in 
the light of statemanship, not as a politician, so that 
political defeat for him can never lessen the grandeur 
and solidity of public honor for him. 

We look up to him as an institution. He has built 
himself magnificently into one. In his public career 
that covered the transcendental years from 1903 to 
1946, Don Sergio gave excellent service successively as 
provincial fiscal, provincial governor of Cebu, Speaker 
of the first Philippine Assembly, Speaker of the first 
House of Representatives, Senator, Vice President and 
concurrently Secretary of Public Instruction, and Pres- 
ident of the Philippines. 

When President Quezon assumed the leadership 
of the nation in 1922, Don Sergio had labored with the 
same spirit and enthusiasm for the success of the Na^ 
cionalista Party's platform and remained loyal to the 
late President until the latter's death in the United 
States in 1944. Returning to the Philippines in the 
latter part of same year with the liberation forces of 
General Douglas MacArthur, Don Sergio reestablished 
the Commonwealth government, guided the people 
through the most difficult months of the post liberation 
era, when the country was ravaged by war, the people 
were starved and were claiming for more than he could 
give under those trying and extraordinary circum- 
stances. 

During the crucial election for presidency, Don Ser- 
gio never campaigned for himself. He devoted him- 
self to the administration, letting only his supporters 
take the field for him. It was here that he showed 
himself a great man. It was here that he rose to new 
heights of nobility. He has never gone to active pol- 
itics since then, and in the present election, he has kept 
himself away from any commitment, except to say to 
the people that they should strive to do the best for 
their country, regardless of political and religious dif- 
ferences. His interest is the nation and the people, 
not the party and the individuals. This is the glorious 
height of statesmanship. 



★ 



We Need Clean And Honest Elections 

The alleged anomalous multiple registration of tens 
of thousands of "ghost" voters in Negros Occidental 
"must stagger the imagination of all those who believe 
in clean and decent elections," according to ex- Judge- 
Pablo S. Rivera in an editorial published in the Planters 9 
Revieiv, dated Oct. 31, 1947, copies of which were re- 
leased to the press by the information bureau of the 
Nacionalista Party. 

Judge Rivera, a prominent Liberal and supporter 
of President Roxas, is editor of "The Planters' Revietv", 
official organ of the Confederation of Associations of 
Sugar Cane Planters, with offices at Bacolod City. A 
native of Bataan, Rivera has resided in Negros for many 
years. 

"All residents of Occidental Negros," Rivera de- 
clared in his editorial, "know more or less that the fig- 
ures published in the papers of voters in certain mun- 
icipalities are absurdly out of proportion to their po-. 
pulations. The magnitude of the offense is that it is 
done in wanton disregard of public opinion and the 
public conscience, and perpetrated by managers who 
(have been) lulled by a sense of impunity, because they 
have become infinitely mighty. . . any attempt to justi- 
fy these figures is political chicanery, and only aggrav- 
ates the situation because it seeks to justify a macabre 
state of affairs the existence of which no honest man 
denies. 

'The situation is abnormal and extraordinary, and 
it calls for an extraordinary remedy. In such a situa- 
tion we have only two hopes: One is public opinion 
whose conscience had been flouted at, and which can yet 
do something to deter the perpetrators thereof. . . We, 
therefore, appeal in these lines to the chief magistrate * 
of the nation. . . to use his unlimited emergency powers 
in preventing unscrupulous political racketeers the use 
of those ghost voters in defrauding the public will... 

"The Planters' Review owes it to itself and to the 
people to voice its protest against the consummation of 
such a scandal, the blackest in the history of our elec- 
tion." 

In the same issue of The Planters' Revieiv, ex-Fis- 
cal Melanio 0. Lalisan, also a Liberal, wrote that "it 
is certain that the choice of the people can be entirely 
left to the whim of a few dishonest and unprincipled 
stalwarts who are prepared to disregard decency for 
the sake of election victory. 

"The social dangers that would result from this 
evil will be more real than imaginary. It will sow, as 
it had sown, the seeds of revolution in the not too dis- 
tant future." 



FAOR < 



THE REPUBUC 



President MANUEL L. QUEZON 



Soldier, writer, lawyer, orator, political leader, states- 
man, and champion of social justice, Manuel L. Quezon 
has no parallel in Philippine political history of the 20th 
century. His pleasing personality, strong character, keen 
foresight, wit, tact, courage and determination in all his 
struggles for supremacy as a leader of his people had 
kept himsetyin power for many years. He was kind and 
just, considerate and grateful to everbody, but he did 
not tolerate any wrongdoing, much less any corruption 
in office, for he knew how to apply the law and to deal 
with lawless elements when he was provincial fiscal, later 
on governor of Tayabas province and, lastly, when he 
became the highest chief executive of the Philippines. 

He was born in Baler, Tayabas, on August 19, 
1,878; son of Lucio Quezon and Maria Molina 
Quezon ; attended the San Juan de Letran College where 
he finished his secondary course; studied law in the Univ- 
ersity of Sto. Tomas, and was admitted to the Philippine 
Bar in 1903. 

During the Philippine revolution against the United 
States, he served on the staff of General Tomas Mascar- 
do as first lieutenant of infantry in 1898, when he was 
barely 20 years old ; promoted to the rank of captain, and 



then major, designated as chief of staff "of tig Depart- 
ment of Central Luzon under General Mascardo in 1899. 

Soon after he passed the bar examinations in 1903, 
he practiced law in his home province and was elect- 
ed municipal councilor of Baler. That same year he was 
appointed provincial fiscal for Mindoro, and later fiscal 
of Tayabas, 1904; elected provincial governor of Taya- 
bas, 1906-07; elected Deputy to the First Philippine As- 
sembly where he was chosen floor leader of the majority, 
1907-08. The Philippine Legislature had elected him as 
Resident Commissioner to the U. S. to represent the 
Philippines in the lower house of Congress. He stayed at 
Washington, D.C., from 190$ to 1910, and had obtained 
the passage of the Jones Law or Act of Congress of 
August 29, 1916, which granted the Islands a more au- 
tonomous government, creating the Philippine Legi s l a . 
ture composed of the Senate and House of Representa- 
tives. He was then elected in 1916 Senator from the fifth 
senatorial district and elected President of the Senate, 
while Speaker Osmeha became the Head of the lower 
chamber or House of Representatives. In 1922 he organ- 
ized and headed the Colectivista party, which seceded 
from the Nacionalista party headed by Speaker Osmefta, 
and the latter retained his power as president of the Uni.' 








Governor-General Frank Murphy ami President-Elect manuel L. Quezon, of the Philippines, entering the grandstand u>Jierl 
the tatter took his oath of office on November 15, 1035. 



THS REPUBLIC 



PAc;£ 




I 



in 







I 




ll 







■ 



President Quezon delivering his inaugural address at Manila 
on November 15, 1035, before an audience of approximately 
100,000 people from different parts of the country. 

personalista party. The two parties formed a Coalition 
after the special elections in 1923 but did not effect the 
fusion into the so-called Partido Nacionalista Consohdado 
until 1928, when Senate President Quezon was elected 
President of said party. In 1933 another split between 
the two leaders took place as a result of the passage of 
the Hare-Hawes-Cuting Bill, and President Quezon suc- 
ceeded in getting the Democrata leaders to side with him 
in his fight against the acceptance of said HHC Bill. 
He organized and headed the "Anti-HHC Party", 
1933-34, and later tiie Nacionalista-Democrata Party 
w hich he headed from 1933 to 1935. Before the national 
elections of 1935, the two major parties, "Pro" and 
Anti'\ were merged again under the name "Nacionalista 
Party", 0 f W h ich Senate President Quezon was elected 
president, and on September 17, 1935, he was elected first 



President of the Government of the Commonwealth oi 
the Philippines with former Senator Sergio Osmena aa 
Vice-President, and took his oath of office on November 
15, 1935. 

President Quezon headed several important legisla- 
tive missions to the United States, the last of which was 
the 12th Mission which brought home the Tydmgs-Mc- 
Duffie Independence Law. In 1937, he left for the 
United States again, and while in Washington, D.C., 
he delivered his "Immediate Independence" speech over 
the radio at 7:30 a.m., Manila Time, April 5, 1937; and 
upon his return to Manila in August of same year, he 
brought home the P100,000,000.00 oil-tax refund, with 
which the Commonwealth was able to carry out impor- 
tant projects, like the construction of the Quezon Bridge 
and Boulevard, the Dewey (Cavite) Boulevard, etc., etc. 

He married in 1918 the former Miss Aurora Aragon, 
of Baler, Tayabas, and of the happy union were born 
three children — Aurora (nicknamed Baby), now a 
holder of LL.B. degree; Zenaida (nicknamed Nini), now 
Mrs. Buencamino; and Manuel, Jr. (nicknamed Nonong), 
whose pictures appear in the cut on the opposite page. 

President Quezon was conferred the LL.D. degree, 
honoris causa, by the University of Sto. Tomas in 1936, 
and honorary LL.D. by the George Town University 
in 1937. He was decorated officer of the Legion of 
Honor (France), Order du Jade (China), Gran Caba- 
llero de la Republica (Spain), and for several years was 
Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted 
Masons of the Philippines, but on the eve of his birthday 
anniversry in 1930, while he was crossing the Pacific 
en route to the United States, he made and signed a 
letter of retraction, in wiiich he signified his intention 
of leaving the ranks of Masonry and returning to the 
Catholic Church. 

Ifis Last Message 

In the issue of The FREE PRESS for July 26, 1947, 
President Quezon's Last Message to the Filipino People, 
written at The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Mary- 
land, on October 23, 1934, was published for the first 
time. Said message in Tagalog, as translated into Eng- 
lish, reads as follows: 

"To the Filipino People: 

I have served you, people that I love, to the full extent 
of my capacity. You in turn have shown me a true and 
sincere faith. I will never forget till the last beat of my 
heart what you have shown me. T regret that I cannot be 
with you in the fortunate hour when you will be wholly free. 
But you are almost there and have to go but a short way. 

So that the lives that were given up for you be not 
brought to naught and so that you as well as your sons may 
profit from the freedom that you will very soon receive, 
my last words to you are: 

1) Value your honor, freedom and independence, fight 
for them to the last. 

2) Always remember that you are one nation and 
your unity is the source of your strength, peace and happi- 
ness. 



TftK republic 



PAGE T 



President and Mrs. 
Quezon and Vice-Pres. 
and Mrs. Osmena. 




Pres. and Mrs. Que- 
zon receiving the 
quests at Malacanan. 




Former U. S. High 
Commissioner a n d 
Mrs. Paul V. McNutt 
nnd others at the re- 
ception line. 



3 



P ™*- Quezon ayid 
U. S. High Commis- 
sioner McNutt at a 
cordial toast. 




H/nnofi m n ^ 1a/c 
function nt Main™. 




W 1 



3) Do not pay heed to evil counsel, couched in beauti- 
ful words by those who wish for nothing but self-aggrandize- 
ment. 

4) Regard America as the true ally of the Philippines 
and adopt the policy never to quarrel with America. 

5) Beware of Japan. Let us not be wanting in fair 
dealing" with her but we should never permit ourselves to be 
under her. We will not profit from it. 

6) Be at peace with every nation, but from anyone 
except America ask nothing. 

7) Be mindful of our indebtedness to Spain. The 
Spaniards have an affection for us. 

Farewell, dear Motherland. Pray to God for me. And 
in Him repose your hope. He is most powerful and He is 
the origin and source of happiness. No nation will prosper 
and be happy that is without faith in God, or who forgets 
Him. 

My God, bless my native land. 

Manuel L. Quezon." 
The above was written on the eve of a serious oper- 
ation he underwent at said hospital in 1934, not knowing 
whether lie would live or die. To his "sweetheart", his 
wife, Dona Aurora A. Quezon, and his three children, 
he also left a message in Tagalog before he went into the 
operating room. Because Quezon recovered, the mes- 
sages were never published and were forgotten, and on- 
ly recently discovered among the Quezon Archives by Luis 
Montilla. Shown for the first time to the widow thev 
brought tears to her eyes. The two documents are t 
his widow and children, of infinite sentimental valu ° 
to the Philippines they are documents of historic siznif 
canefc. Few would doubt that had Quezon written th 
not in 1934 but 10 years later, in 1944, when death fi n ' 
overtook him, they would not have been, i n temn 
sentiment, very much different. In Tagalog, with ^ 
tion into English alongside, the two aforementio 
sages were published in full by the FREE PRE<^ 
made a comparison to Rizal's last message to th ^ Vh } ch 
no people and another to his family, whom TT Filipi " 
his death would release from trouble and ^ hoped 
when he wrote them in 1892 on the eve of h . Persecuticm 
from Hongkong for the Philippines, wher h departu?; * 
Spanish authorities were waiting f or hj m ? knew the 
subversive activities against the tyranni 1 ause of his 
in the Philippines which he depicted inV Ule ° f Spa5n 
"Noli-Me-Tangere" (Social Cancer) »„ A « hvo novels, 
rismo" (The Reign of Greed). nd ' E l Filibuste- 

Vr,s. And M 

Quezon survived the operation and • 
to continue his work as leader of his ned h °me 

diately after his election as President' of ^t^ 6 * Imme " 
wealth of the Philippines on Sept embei . the Common- 
his best to convince General Dougl as ]u. * 19 35, he did 
cept the position of Military Adviser and°^ *' thur to ac " 
of the Army of the Philippines which he Id Marshal 
ing to create when he should assume th 3 Cont emplat- 
of the new government. He then recom ° ±f * Ce as head 
first message to the National Assembly t} men< ted in his 
National Defense Act, and General ^ pass age of the 
to the Philippines to assume his new pogf* n^ rthuv camo 

' * That diploma- 



ur 



Republic 




The abi photograph shows Pres. Quezon m the center imth 

the host Mr Pirovano on his right, and former Secretary < o, Fw- 
aZe Mam^el A. Rox««, nmi President of the PMwpm* RepttNie, 
at the extreme left. 

tic gesture of President Quezon won for his country the 
love and admiration of the Government and people of the 
United States of America, as well as the confidence of 
the Filipino people who remained loyal to both the Com- 
monwealth and U.S. governments when the war broke 
out on December 8, 1941. And after three long years 
of continuous suffering, the Filipinos and their allies in 
the Philippines were liberated by General MacArthur 
and his armed forces with the cooperation of Guerrilla 
units from Japanese occupation and restored the govern- 
ment of the commonwealth to our people. 

President Quezon died a Catholic, before the libera- 
tion of his people, as described by Rev. Fr. Pacifico Or- 
tiz, S. J., in his article entitled : 

How Quezon Died 



"He had always said he would 
never die on a bright sunny 
day-— and this day, August 1, 
three years ago, the sun rose 
in cloudless splendor over Sa- 
ranac Lake, New York. 

From his sleeping porch, the 
President could see the little 
chapel just a stone's throw 
*way, and close by thr chapel 
a grotto of Our Lady of Lour- 
d cs. The day before, he had 
asked Mrs. Quezon to have the 
trses along the path trinnned 
°ff. so he could see the face 
°* Our Lady. He had come a 
*°ng way into the Faith. Some- 
how the tragic years of the 
w ar had brought him closer to 
G °d. He stood at the peak of 
hfe with its joys and suffer- 
m gs, its glories and .iefeats. 
an d he had come to realize as 
Jiever before that life coul i on 
v h^ve a meaning when one 
°° k s at it through the win- 



dows of the faith, the Catholic" 
faith which he knew in his 

youth. 

In a sense he recaptured the 
glow of youth in his old ago. 
When he served at mass in the 
tunnels of Corrcgidor and in 
the chapel of his Washington 
apartment, when he gathered 
his wife and children around 
him to pray the rosary in the 
evenings, when he and his fam- 
ily received Holy Communion 
almost every day. it was with 
the same humility, the same 
enthusiasm of faith that he had 
known in youth. 

Lesser men have found the 
faith an obstacle to vaulting 
ambition. This man was not 
afraid to practice it to the hilt. 
To him faith had become the 
source of inner strength and 
the secret path to nobler and 
broader vision. 

That is why perhaps this man 



who walked with kings never 
lost the common touch. Faith 
had given him eyes to see 
even beneath the uncouth, un- 
gainly appearance of the com- 
mon tao, the inviolable dignity 
of the human soul, the free- 
dom of the sons of God. That 
is why he fought for the for- 
gotten man. That is why he 
fought, for social justice for the 
poor and the rich alike, but 
justice for the poor especiallv, 
because the poor have no other 
means of protecting themselves, 
Whatever defects may be found 
in his social justice program, it 
will forever remain his irloiy 
to have championed a cause 
which to others was a lost 
cause, the cause of the forgot- 
ten tao, the exploited farm- 
hand. He blazed the trail, he 
pointed the way of the Goo«l 
Samaritan. 

It is a tragedy that we should 
have lost him at the cross- 
roads of our national history, 
at a time when we needed most 
his clear vision, his just and 
forgiving heart, his strong 
leadership. 1$, is a tragedy that 
he who had done more for our 
country than anyone else — the 
man who before the eyes of 
America and of the world ful- 
ly embodied the dignity, the 
culture and the courage of our 
people, it is a tragedy that such 
a man should die in exile on 
the eve of our liberation. 

Hut if there was any doubt 
at all as to the greatness of 
the man. his last days on earth 
are the best proof of great- 
ness. For man's worth is test- 
ed on the crucible of suffer- 
ing and Calvary is the only 
true measure of greatness. This 
was his Calvary and he bore 
his cross willingly, even joy- 
fully. 

It was his fifteenth month 
in bed. He woke up that morn- 
ing feeling fine and in high 
spirits. As was his custom, he 
asked his attending physician 
to read the Bible to him. On- 
ly this time he picked his own 
favorite chapter. . . the Sermon 
on the Mount. "Blessed are the 
poor for theirs is the kingdom 



of Heaven — Blessed are the^ 
that mourn for they shall bej 
comforted." He needed com-i 
fort, this man with a big heart* 
and a giant, unfinished dream*" 
It was not easy for a man" lik^ 
him, so full of life, so full of< 
bold ideas, to be . kept in bed 
while history was being writ- 
ten on the beach-heads of Ta- 
rawa, the Admiralties. Saipan. 

Each iuw landing brough 
him closer back home. But Ik 
knew it was a race against 
time and that for him the 6ands 
were running low. He askee 
the doctor to turn on the ra- 
dio for some news. Over the 
radio that morning came the 
news that General MacArthir 
had landed on Sansapor, six 
hundred miles from the Philip- 
pines. Joy sparkled in his eyes 
as dying ember even as he faint- 
ly whispered, "Six hundred 
miles!" So near and yet so 
far! It was too much for hi? 
old heart to bear. He had an 
attack of hemorrhage. Short- 
ly after, without strugglt*. 
without much suffering, conv 
foited by the Sacraments, he 
passed to his eternal reward! 

He had always said he wool I 
never die on a bright sunnv 
day. This day three years ago 
the sun rose in cloudless splen 
dor over Saranac Lake, N. V. 
Perhaps he was right after all. 
He would never die in the 
hearts of our people as long 
as there is gratitude in the 
world. 

And as long as our country 
is at grips with danger or faced 
with a challenge to her nation- 
al independence and solidarity, 
we shall always remember him 
and draw strength from bis 
courage and decision, from his 
serene consciousness of our na- 
tional dignity, from his gen- 
uine love for the poor and 
the working classes, from his 
firm faith in God. We shall 
strive in our own little way 
to live up to his motto, a mot- 
to ehosen for him by his own 
wife and stamped in all his 
books, and I might add, in all 
the jrreat decisions of his IHc | 
-NON SIBI SED PATRIAE, 
country before self." 



' 1HI - REPUBLIC 



Hon {Quezon Was Honored In ■ • *- 

Chief of Staff G. C. Marshall, of the War Depart- 
ment, in his General Order No. 62, dated at Washington 
25, D. C, 2 August 1944, made the following announce- 

T>a<;k o ; 



ment : 

-The death of President MANUEL QUEZON of the 
Philippine Commonwealth, which occurred at Saranac Lake, 
New York, on 1 August 1944, is announced with deep re- 
gret. 

President QUEZON was a most effective leader of the 
Filipino people in their long struggle for self-government and 
independence. The establishment of the Philippine Com- 
monwealth has been in large measure due to his courage 
and intelligence. He was a strong and appreciative friend 
of the United States. As a result of his efforts, through- 
out the agonies of the Japanese invasion, and in spite of all 
the efforts of our enemies, the Filipino people have re- 
mained loyal to our Government. The people of the Philip- 
pine Commonwealth and liberty-loving people everywhere 
have lost an outstanding leader in the death of Pi*esident 
QUEZON. 

BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF WAR: 

G. C. MARSHALL, 

Chief of Staff. 

OFFICIAL: 
J. A. ULIO 
Major General, 

The Adjutant General" 

The body of the President was carried to Washing- 
ton, P. C, by special train, to be accorded a state funeral 
with full military honors, and to be interned in Arlington 
Cemetery 4 'until the enemy is driven from his home- 
land/' The body arrived at Union Station where it was 
met by a Military Guard of Honor and by officials of the 
Commonwealth Government including President Sergio 
Osmena, Joaquin Elizalde, and Carlos P. Romulo. The 
casket, draped with the Filipino and American flags, was 
taken from the station to St. Matthews Cathedral, to 
lie there in state until 9 a.m., August 4. The guard 
)f honor remained in attendance throughout the night 
vhile members of the Commonwealth Government kept 
vigil. Requiem mass was said on the morning of Aug- 



ust 4, with friends and admirers of the dead President 
filling the cathedral. Honorary pall bearers included 
General George C. Marshall, then Chief of Staff, and 
Admiral Ernest J. King, Commander in Chief of U. S. 
Fleet, who were designated by Pre&ident Roosevelt to re- 
present him, as he could not attend the funeral being out 
of the country at the time. After the services in St. 
Matthews Cathedral, the funeral cortege proceeded un- 
der metropolitan police escort across Memorial Bridge 
where it was met by the Army, Navy and Marine Escort 
of Honor. The casket was transferred to a caisson and 
the cortege was led by the escort of honor to the crypt 
in Arlington National Cemetery. 19-gun salute was fired 
for President Quezon. Former U. S. High Commission- 
er to the Philippines Francis B. Sayre, with whom Que- 
zon had many an argument, was present. Taps was 
sounded as the body of Manuel L. Quezon was temporarily 
laid to rest in the crypt at Arlington National Cemetery 
from which it was to be moved in its last journey back to 
his beloved country, the Philippines, two T^ l^ 
Former Governor-General Frank Murphy mid M w 
tribute to the deceased, when he ^^^^ 

*— <° "** * WS «*» 

Beginning this year, we hope Quezon's birthday an- 
niversary would be observed in many parts of the coun- 
try, particularly in Quezon City and his home province 
Tayabas (now known as'Quezon province) This - 9 
of THE REPUBLIC is especially dedicated to 
mory of President MANUEL L. QUEZON, who w a t 
only an intelligent and courageous national l ea d ^ w 
also a man with a big heart, who never entertain T 
sonal grudges against his enemies and who kn u**' 
to reward his people for their loyal and meritor 
vices to the country. We hope our political l oa i° US Sei " 
in power will imitate Quezon's example. ° ers now 



GATDULA'S STAND 

San Andres Market 
The Homo of SJJJ!. Products 
Coca-Cola Fir.; Soda P.20; Tni-Oranffe P.'iO; Beer P.oO 

Ice P. 10 up 

Open from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
C. GATDULA, Propreitor 

B M. Cofteyco St , RizaJ Citv 



Jai Alai Bakery 

■20-1 Dolores St., RizaA city 

SANITARY and DELICIOUS 
Free Home Delivery 



YAP JIONG 
Proprietor 



Roman Tuazon & ftm** 

DEALERS IN PIANO ^"llTl 



Qffi 



iee 



FEDERIOC TUASON 
Piano Tuver mid Repairer 
L06 Leprarda St. Residence* 
MANILA 



42 L 



°£ard 



a s:t. 



CAKES, PIES, COOKIES AND A - 

MADE BY THE CITY PIE BAKEPv 7 AD 
DELICIOUS, WHOLESOME APppL^K 
SANITARY and DELICIOUS 1 l7 'ER 



Wedding and Birthday Cakes are Our 
The Cakeiy that is Dependable on All 



Spel eialty 
()(( ^sions 



CITY PIE BAKERY 



J80-232 K ». Harrison 
RIZAL CITY 




The PHILIPPINES 




Discovery 

• Ferdinand Magellan (Hernando Magalhaes) a 
Portuguese navigator who made a daring 
under the auspices of Spain in his search for the Spue 
Islands, accidentally discovered the is ands. now known 
as the Philippines, on March 16, lo21. 

He and his men sailed from Seville Spam on *g 
ust 10, 1519, with a fleet composed of five stops^-La 
Trinidad. Victoria. San Antonw, Conception and San- 

i • /NfVkTvi anrl Of tllOSC VCSSels Ollly <>lle, 

lia<jo, under his command, ui 

VtAVMnria returned to Spain three years later; the 
the I u tof ^ cti a neo i v hundred 
rest were either destroyed 01 iu&*. ^ 
and seventy men who had set out on .that^irney, only 
eighteen saw then- native land again. Magellan he 
discoverer, was killed in Mactan, Cebu, 6n April 27. 
1521 by Lapulapu and his brown warriors, who re- 
pulsed the first European invaders. 

Name 

This rich and beautiful group of islands has been 
known formerlv under many names. About 4o0 B.C., 
it was known, according to ancient writings, by 
the name of Mdhi, or Ma-yi. Chinese merchants who 
traded with the natives about 300 B.C. called the Ar- 
chipelago "Ma-yi-ya." Later in 260 B.C., Claudios 
Ptolemaeus, an astronomer and geographer who resid- 
ed at Alexandria, Egypt, called it "Insulae Manilae. 
When Magellan accidentally landed on its shores m 
1521, A.D., it was named "Islas de San Lazaro," be- 
cause it was on the day of this Saint that he discover- 
ed the islands. The archipelago was also called "Is- 
las Ponientes" or Western Islands. Spanish voyager 
Ruy Lopez de Villalobos gave it the name, Felipinas, 
in honor of King Philip II of Spain. In 1564, how- 
ever, Miguel Lopez de Legaspi and Fr. Andres Urda- 
neta called the archipelago "las Islas Filipinas"-,^ 
Pmppirie Islands. By the Constitution of the Phil- 
ippines which went into effect upon the inauguration 
of the Commonwealth Government on November 15, 
1935, the name "Philippines" has been officially adopt- 
ed. 

Geography 

The Philippines is composed of approximately 
7,083 islands, of which 2,441 are so far known by 
»ames; and the rest mostly of coral reefs, are still 
w ithout names. 

Area.-Of the reported 7,083 *» largest 

is Luzon, on the North, with an area ot 40,814 square 
miles. This island is about the size of Denmark Bel- 
***** and Holland combined. The next in size is Mm- 
%ao, on the South, with an area ol 36,906 square 
about the size of Portugal. The other large is- 
lan <k in the order of their respective areas, are: Sa- 
5,124 sqm.; Negros, 4.903 sq.m.; Palawan, 



A 

r 



sq.m.; Panay, 4,448 sq.m.; Mindoro, 3,794 sq.m.; Ley- 
te, 2,799 sq.m.; Cebu, 1,695 sq.m.; Bohol, 1,534 sq.m.: 
Catanduanes, 680 sq.m.; Basilan, 350 sq.m.; Busuanga, 
323 sq.m.; Marinduque, 287 sq.m.; Dinagat, 259 sq.m.; 
Tablas, 250 sq.m.; and Sulu, 241 square miles. 

The total land area of the country is 115,000 
square miles. This is larger than the combined area 
of the Stats of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, 
and Delaware. It is about two-thirds the size of Spain; 
about 5,000 square miles larger than Italy: twice as 
large as either Cuba or Java; and only about 7,000 
square miles smaller than the British Isles. The whole 
Philippines measures 1,152 statute miles from north 
to south, and 688 statute miles from east to west. 

Physical Features. — The great majority of the is- 
lands are mountainous with alternative fertile valleys 
or plains, endowed with the beauty of limpid lakes 
and gorgeous waterfalls or streaked with rushing riv- 
ers and landlocked harbors. The mountain ranges 
serve as the natural fortifications against the elements 
to protect the abundant resources from heavy monsoons. 

Climate. — The climate of the Philippines, being a 
tropical country, is genrally warm: but it is regarded 
as one of the most healthful in the tropics. Sunstrol 
is unknown in the Islands. It is agreeably warm dur 
ing the day, with pleasant early mornings, delightful 
late afternoons, and cool nights. Monsoon breezes 
regulate the temperature the year round. All parts 
of the islands receive sufficient rainfall for agricul- 
ture. 

Seasons. The year is divided practically into 

three seasons: (1) the wet season (from June to Nov- 
ember) ; (2) the dry-cool season (from December to 
February) ; and (3) the dry-hot season (from March 
to May). The most delightful months are November, 
December, January and February, when the days are 
clear, sunny and dry. with an average temperature of 
78 degrees F. (25.5 degrees C), and the minimum tem- 
perature early in the morning is 17 degrees F. (9.5 de- 
grees C.) lower than the maximum in the afternoon. 
The maximum day temperature during the dry-hot 
season is from 91 degrees to 93 degrees F. (33 degrees 
to 34 degrees C.) ; while the minimum night tempera- 
ture is 70 degrees to 75 degrees F. (21 degrees to 24 
degrees C.) 

Population 

According to the census of 19;59, the total popula- 
tion of the Philippines was 15,984,247, as against that 
of 10,314,810 for the year 1918. Prior to the outbreak 
of World War II, the foreign population of the Phil- 
ippines was estimated as follows: Chinese, 98.000: Ja- 
panese, 25,000; Americans, 8,000 (including those in 
in the army and naval service of the United States of 



WW KEPUBUC 



America; Spaniards, 5000; German, 700; British, 600; 
French, 250; Swiss, 100; and others, 1,500, or a total 
of approximately 139,150, not including the Jews who 
came as refugees from Europe. The present popula- 
tion is- estimated at 18,000,000. 

ICeligioit 

Of the total Philippine population, about 92 < c are 
Christians, and about 8 c /c only are non-Christians. The 
Christian Filipinos are divided into three principal de- 
nominations known as the Roman Catholic, the Philip- 
pine Independent Catholic or Aglipayanos, and the Pro- 
testant, which includes the Evangelical, Episcopalian, 
Methodist Episcopal, Presbyterian, the Baptists, the 
Seventh -Day Adventists, the Churches of Christ, and 
jther independent protestant units. The "Iglesia Ni 
Kristo," headed by Felix Manalo, from Taguig, Rizal, 
was founded in 1914 and is fast spreading throughout 
the country. 

The Non-Christian Filipinos are the Malay Mo- 
hammedans, or Moros, and the Pagans. The Moros are 
concentrated chiefly in Mindanao and Sulu, and they 
number more than eight hundred thousand. The Pa- 
gans, numbering around 300,000, are semi-civilized Ma- 
lay descendants who live in the mountainous regions 
of Northern Luzon, East Coast of Luzon, Zambales, 
Mindoro, Panay, Negros, Samar, Palawan, and Min- 
danao. The Moros and the Igorots are now enjoying 
the same opportunity and have their own representa- 
tives to the Congress of the Philippines. 

Govern iiieiitf 

The Philippines, as a free and independent coun- 
try, since July 4, 1946, is enjoying a democratic form 
;>f government, called the Republic of the Philippines, 
consisting of three main departments, namely, the Le- 
gislative, the Executive, and the Judicial provided for 
in the Constitution adopted by the Constitutional Con- 
vention on February 8, 1935; sumbitted to the Pres- 
ident of the United States of America (then, Franklin 
D. Roosevelt) on March 18, 1935, and certified by the 



Peace And Order 

In spite of their religious differences, the Filipi- 
nos as a whole are a united people, generally peace- 
ful and law-abiding, and very hospitable; but these 
beautiful traits of the Filipinos, especially in Central 
Luzon, are now being hampered by the frequent trou- 
bles arising between the MPs and civilian guards, on 
the one side, and the so-called Huks or dissident el- 
ements, on the other. Communism is said to be the 
cause of all these troubles, but the communists claim 
that they are fighting for freedom and social justice of 
the laboring classes. Public peace and order, or na- 
tional tranquility, cannot be restored for lack of nation- 
al unity and mutual understanding between the differ- 
ent groups or factions in the Philippines, according to 
neutral observers, unless political favoritism, nepo- 
tism, grafts, briberies, abuses of power, election frauds, 
oppressions, and other forms of corruption in the gov- 
ernment service are eradicated. 

Languages And Dialects 

There are more or less eight established native lan- 
guages in the Islands, the most prominent of which are 
the Tagalog, the Ilocano, and the Visayan The other 
five languages used in some regions of Luzon Island are 
the Pangasman, the Pampango, the Bikol the Ibanacr 
and the Sambal. All the rest of the 
their local dialects in their homes; but^^Z 
people throughout the country spe ak English esnedallv 
in schols, government and private offices «! 
ings, and other occasions; while SpS ^^^Z 
the official languages used in courts S 1 ^ ^ 
circles. hlgh sociaI 

On December 30, 1937, the Tagalog lanirua^P 
a»4-;™ ^ ihn TiiQfif„+„ ~* "k t # • u *>uage, 



recommendation of the Institute of Katio^T^' UP ° U 
(created by Commonwealth Act No. 184) L<T ^f^f 
ly proclaimed by the President of the ErfitJ2i2 5 
Manuel L. Quezon, as the basis for the aclonf 
national language; and by virtue of the n*««*E] 10 ? f 
monwealth Act No. 570, 



», mtrod-'ood'l inS?,^- 
Gregorio Perfecto, ami signed by President n e 

ICUL Quezon 



President to the Congress of the United States to be June 7, 1940, said national language (Tagalog) be " ™ 

~r 4.u.. \,.4 rw,_ automatically one of the official u ' ,n 

ippines effective July 4, 1946. 



in conformity with the provisions of the Act of Con- 
gress approved March 21, 1931 (known as the Tydings- 
McDuffie Independence Law), and ratified by the Fil- 
ipino people in a national plebiscite held on May 14, 
l$85; which Constitution went into effect on the inau- 
guration of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, at 
Manila, on November 15, 1935, with Manuel L. Que- 
zon as the first president. The Constitution was sub- 
sequently amended shortly before the national elections 
of November 11, 1941, reducing the term of office of 
the President from six to four years with right to be 
re-elected once, and restoring the bi-cameral system 
of the legislative department from the National As- 
sembly to Congress of the Philippines, consisting ol' 
the Senate and the House of Representatives; and 
creating the permanent CommisBion on Elections, which 
Constitution as amended is now in force for the new 
Ropnblie of the Phijiwiines. 



Ol; 

e 



'•"Wages of the Phil. 



The Institute of National Language has 
a Filipiuo national language dictionary and oth pted 
needed for teaching it in the public and privat ^ kS 
of the country. At present it is widely spoken th* 8 
out the Islands. There are several Tagal 0t r Ugh " 
pers and magazines, not to mention thousand? J e ^ Spa " 
novels, and pamphlets published in this lanjrua* £° ks ' 
in the United States of America, i n the Te •* n 
Hawaii, and in the neighboring countries of « y ° f 
pines, the Tagalog language is used ag tne Philip- 
tongue of Filipinos from different regi 0 i, s \ common 
and other foreigners who may be interested t ' icans 
establish business in the Philippines will fj 0 ^ 01 * 08 ™* 
interesting and profitable to learn Tagalog' 11 both 
lipino national language. (For the convenien 1 * he Fi ~ 
leaders and subscribers interested to lea™ of Our 

the Tagalog 



or Filipino National Language, we are giving in this 
magazine special lessons in said language.) 

Commerce 

Because of the strategic position of the Philip- 
pines in the international commercial route in the Orient, 
there is every reason to believe that, with the existence 
of a Treaty of General Relations between the United 
States of America and the Republic of the Philippines, 
signed at Manila on the 4th day of July, 1946, by Paul 
V. McNutt, first American ambassador to the Philip- 
pine, for and in behalf of his country, and President 
Manuel A. Roxas, for and in behalf of the Government 
of the Republic of the Philippines, followed by the exe- 
cution of other pacts on military and naval protection, 
economic rehabilitation, etc., between the two counrties, 



Manila will be the distributing center for the Asiatic 
trade. 

The Port of Manila— Taking the outer or sea-end 
of Pier No. 7 as the point of calculation, the Port of 
Manila is situated in latitude 14* 34' and 58" N., and 
longitude 120' 57' and 55" E. It is on the eastern 
shore of Manila Bay, approximately 30 miles from the 
entrance to the Bay on the west central coast of the 
Island of Luzon, and about 600 nautical miles from the 
nearest commercial point of the Continent of Asia, near 
Hongkong. Taiwan on the north, Celebes on the south. 
Borneo, Java and Sumatra on the southwest, are the 
important islands which surround the Philpipines. With 
the establishment of new air routes between Manila area 
and Asiatic countries, transportation is made easier for 
travelers and businessmen in the Far East. 



BONIFACIO FERRERAS 

Lumberman and Building Contractor 

Office: PACIFIC COUSTRUCTION AND 
SAWMILL. INC. 
188 Libertad St., Rizal City 
Res., 2121 Tramo (Cavite Line) 
Near the Pasay Catholic Church 



UP-TO DATE STUDIO 

(In Front of Pasay Catholic Church) 
521 P. Burgos, Kizal City 

Punctual services available for all occasions — Bap- 
tismal, Nuptial Ceremonies, Picnics, Graduation 
Exercises, Etc. 

We specialize in processing- colored Films for Mo- 
vie Slides, Lamp Shades, and other purposes. 
Our most delicate customers speak highly of our 
work. 

Prices are within the reach of all. 

T. LEONARDO, Proprietor 



Robles Studio 

."».*» 7 ItiirgoK Si.. 
Hi z.i I <iiv 

Wli SEjfcVE TO SATISFY 

all or ii <i sto»ii:iis 
\\v\viii;iu: wn «-o with 
one CAMERA. 



(Founded in 



Republic Art Studio 

100 Libertad si.. 
Ilizal City 

\vi: TAR*] I'M I I icls 
AXY TIME. 

ii a v a x ii $ i <. ii t 
sikvki:. 

00 MM A XII VISIT 
OIK STITIIO. 



IMPORTANT EVENTS and 

HISTORIC DOCUMENT^ 



Magellan And Lapulapu 

According to ancient writings, the Filipinos or 
natives of the Philippines called Mate, or Ma-yi, about 
450 B.C., had a government of their own, which was 
patriachal or tribal in form. When Magellan disco- 
vered the islands on March 16, 1521, and after making 
friendship with the chieftain of Cebu, he joined the 
latter's army in attacking the chieftain of Mactan is- 
land, called Lapulapu, who defended his barangay- 
kingdom and repulsed the invaders after killing Ma- 
gellan and his men on April 27, 1521. 

Legaspi And His Conquest 

In 1566 Miguel Lopez de Legaspi founded the first 
permanent Spanish settlement in Cebu. Later he mov- 
ed to Panay which became the base of Spanish opera- 
tions to conquer the other islands. In 1571 he went 
to Manila, then a flourishing Mohammedan Malay king- 
dom under the rule of Rajah Soliman. In defense of 
his kingdom, Soliman engaged the Spaniards in a na- 
val^ battle at Bankusay channel, Manila Bay, on June 3, 
1571, and died in action. Legaspi took possession of 
Manila and made it the capital of the Philippines. 

legaspi became the first governor-general of the 
Philippines with the title of "Adelantado." Although 
the Filipinos, whom the Spaniards called "Indios" those 
clays, became subjects of Spain and Christian converts, 
they oftentimes staged revolts and tried to free them- 
selves from the Spanish domination. 

ICajali Lakandula 

Rajah Lakandula, the king of Tondo, on the north 
delta of the Pasig River, had peacefully accepted Spa- 
nish sovereignty in 1571, after realizing the futility of 
resistance to superior forces of Spain. Lakandula bo- 
came a friend to Legaspi and cooperated with the lat- 
ter in the maintenance of peace and order within his 
district, and Legaspi granted the native chieftain cer- 
tain concessions and privileges, such as exemption from 
tribute and forced labor. But the time came when the 
Proud Spaniards trampled down the rights and hap- 
piness of his people and even ignored the privileges 
hitherto granted him. Regardless of his old age, Lakan- 
dula mustered his Tondo warriors at Navotas peninsula 
and proclaimed his revolt against Spain in the last par. 
of 1574, when the Chinese pirate, named Lim-Ah-Hong 
attacked Manila and the Spanish defenders were un- 
able to suppress the revolt. So Legaspi made peace with 
Candida, and, on his promises of better treatment of 
the natives, the aged Tondo rajah assisted the Spaniards 
w driving away the Chinese invaders 



Magat Salamat 

In his efforts to regain the freedom and lordslw 
from the Spaniards, who did not treat his follow^ 
justly, Magat Salamat, the fighting son of Rajah r 
kandula, who was already dead, secretly assembled oth^ 
Filipino chieftains in Tondo and conspired agai n ^ 
Spain in 1587. The Spanish authorities discovered tl^ 
plot before the conspirators could strike and the leacl 0b 
and his principal followers were executed in 1588, wft^ 
others were exiled or imprisoned. 

First Revolts And Uprising* 
Many revolts and uprisings as a result of Spani^ 
misrule took place after the death of Magat Salary c 
and his companions. Among those uprisings were: tl^ 
revolt headed by the Magalat brothers in 1596; Igoro^ 
revolt in 1601; Gaddang revolt of 1621; Bankaw's 
volt of 1622; Tamblot's uprising of 1621-22; Cagay Ui , 
revolt in 1625-28; Carang revolt of 1630; Cagayan revolt 
in 1639; Ladia's revolt of 1643; Malong's rebellion i n 
1660-61; Tapar's religious uprising of 1663; Dagoho\ -\ s 
rebellion of 1744, Silang's uprisings of 1762-1763; Pal a . 
ris' revolt of 1762-65; Nueva Ecija revolt of 1804; IIck 
cos revolt of 1814; Religious Uprising of Apolinario <Je 
la Cruz in 1840-41; Samaniego's revolt of 1843; and the 
Cavite mutiny of 1872, which caused the martyrdom of 
the three Filipino priests — Fathers Mariano Gomez, Jose 
Burgos, and Jacinto Zamora, who, on February 17, 1872, 
were publicly executed at the Luneta, Manila, after hav- 
ing been condemned to such ignominious death by a 
farcial courtmartial, because, in reality, they defended 
the right of the Filipino clergy and tried to free the 
people from Spanish oppression. 

After their death, 
a vigorous cam- 
paign for colonial 
reforms was launch- 
ed by Jose Rizal, M. 
H. del Pilar (Plari- 
del), Ponce, Panga- 
niban, Lopez-Jaena, 
and other youthful 
Filipino leaders. Ri- 
zal wrote and pub- 
lished his immortal 
novel, "El Filibus- 
terismo," which he 
dedicated to the me- 
mory of the throe 
martyred priests. 
RIZAL AND THE 

"LIGA FILIPINA" 

Dr. Jos*' liizal, Murcelo H. del Pilar, 

avd Maria/no Ponce. The Filipino pro- 





pagandists fought for the cause of their oppressed 
countrymen. In their petitions, articles, and orations, 
they portrayed the lamentable conditions of their 
country and denounced the series of abuses committed 
by the Spainsh authorities in the Islands. They fled 
to foreign cities — Madrid, Barcelona, Berlin, Ghent. 
Paris, London, and other places, to carry on the fight 
against Spanish tyranny. Rizal returned to Manila and 
organized the "Liga Filipina" (Philippine League) . On 
July 7, 1892, four days after the founding of the "Liga 
Filipina, ,, he was arrested and exiled to Dapitan, where 
he stayed for nearly four years. 

Gov. Blanco And Fr. Gil On Itizal 
And The ^Katipiuian" 

Ramon Blanco y Erenas, governor-general from 
1893 to 1896, was a kind and just man. He believed 
in liberal ideas, and for this reason was disliked by his 
own countrymen in the islands who approved of the 
old way of subjugating the Filipinos. Blanco desired 
to attach the Filipinos to Spain by ties of affection and 
was opposed to any violence. When Father Gil de- 
nounced the existence of the "Katipunan" to Governor 
Blanco, the latter appeared to be the only cool-headed 
man in Manila. A period of terror reigned in the city. 
Every Filipino, whether connected with the association 
(Katipunan) or not, feared for his safety. By the last 
week of August, 1896, as many as three hundred men 
were under arrest. During the month of September, 
many more were arrested, and thirty-seven men were 
executed upon the charge of insurrection. Governor 
Blanco then granted Dr. Rizal's request to go to Cuba 
as a surgeon in the Spanish hospitals and permitted 
him to return to Manila from his exile at Dapitan, so 
as to enable him to take a steamer to Cuba by way of 
Spain. But unfortunately Rizal reached Manila about 
two weeks before Father Gil made his discovery of the 
"Katipunan/' Governor Blanco was convinced that Ri- 
zal had nothing to do with it, and after about a month's 
delay allowed him to start on his trip. Rizal's enemies, 
however, used every means within their power to im- 
plicate him in the uprising. They sent a message by 
cable to Spain. As a result of this intriguing, Rizal 
was imprisoned on his arrival in Spain and was soon 
sent back to Manila. He was tried hy a court-martial 
for sedition and rebellion. 

Camilo G. cle Polavieja, governor from 1896 to 
1897, assumed office on December 13, 1896. Dr. Rizal 
was condemned to death after a mock trial by the court- 
martial, and early in the morning of December 30, 1896, 
he was taken to the Luneta (Bagumbayan) and shot 
to death. Early in 1897, Governor-General Polavieja. 
at the head of about 28,000, took the field against the 
revolutionists. 

Andres Bonifacio 

It was Andres Bonifacio, the so-called ''Great Ple- 
beian/' who founded the "Katipunan," a secret revo- 
lutionary society of patriotic Filipinos, way back in 
1892. One of the passwords of this society was "Goni- 
Bur-Za," meaning Gomez, Burgos, Zaniora. Bonifacio, 



who was fiery and fearless, believed in the gospel of 
revolution, as he said: "A nation's freedom could not 
be won simply by pen and words, but rather by bolo and 
blood." On August 26, 1896, Bonifacio raised the cry 
of revolution in the hills of Balintawak, where the old 
monument was erected in his honor. That revolution 
hastened the death of Dr. Jose Protacio Rizal y Mer- 
cado, the author of "Noli Me Tangere" and "El Fili- 
busterismo," which depicted the sufferings of the Fil- 
ipino people and the social cancer then prevailing in 
his land. 

Governor Primo De llivera 

Fernando Primo d'e Rivera, who had been gover- 
nor from 1880 to 1883, was sent back to rule again the 
Philippines during the revolution in 1897. In April 
of that year, Spain was already beginning to feel the 
drain of war, for a widespread rebellion had broken out 
in Cuba a year before the uprising in the Philippines. 
He then tried to make peace with the Filipino revolu- 
tionists. He offered pardon to all who would lay down 
their arms. Although many Filipinos took advantage 
of this amnesty, many more chose to continue the strug- 
gle. Rivera became convinced that drastic measures 
were necessary. He commanded in person the Spanish 
forces operating in Cavite. He attacked the towns of 
Tndang, Naic, Alfonso, Maragondon, Mendez-Nunez, and 
others. At the same time, he sent General Monet to 
Zambales and Pangasinan, and had General Nunez con- 
duct the campaign in Nueva Ecija. In those campaigns 
many brave men, on both sides, gave up their lives. 

Oen. Einilio Aguinaldo And Tlio 
The Revolution Of 189ft 

Out of the bloody battlefields of Cavite emerged a 
new war lord wfio was destined to replace Bonifacio 
from leadership in the early part of 1897. He was 
Emilio Aguinaldo, a youthful "capitan municipal" of { 
Kawit, Cavite. Adjutant E. Hannaford, in his book 
entitled 'The Picturesque Philippines," described Agui- 
naldo and the Insurrection of 1896 in the following art- 
icle : 

'The Governor-General, Despujol, was an eminent 
example of how a just administrator might be over- 
borne for selfish ends, by an incorrigible bureaucracy 
and the friars. The Filipinos idolized him as thti/ sa- 
vior, and when he left, recalled by cable, an innumer- 
able multitude crowded the shore to wave farewells, 
and every steamer belonging to the port accompanied 
him far out to sea. This was late in 1892. By the 
year 1895 ominous whisperings began to circulate at 
Manila, noting among other things the peculiar night 
fires seen high up on the mountainsides in the interior, 
and suddenly going out. Men shook their heads at men- 
tion of the gathering strength of the Katipiivan or i 
League of Blood, the secret revolutionary society that 
the government had striven in vain, by craft and cruel- 
ty, to stamp out. That in the financially important 
nestizo-Chino class certain individuals were known to 
oe seriously disaffected was a fact working both ways; 
for, though with characteristic cunning these kept h\ 



IH -: REPUBLIC 



PACE i ; 



-he back-ground, many high-grade natives rather than 
affiliate in any way with so despised an element at first 
held aloof. Considering how feeble class distinctions 
are in Manila, the extent to which it makes a virtue of 
racial antipathies is remarkable. 

The agitation -set on foot by the rich mestizos and 
Creoles at Madrid for colonial reform was a flat failure, 
the only significant response it called forth being that 
Political rights were gained not by begging, but by 
lighting for them— a brutal rebuff that largely decided 
the course of some. In August, 1896, the expected hap- 
pened. A revolution broke out in the province of Ca- 
vi te, and in the following December Governor-General 
Blanco, unwilling to lend himself to a policy of indiscrim- 
inate vengeance, was replaced by Polavieja, and the lat- 
ter in a few months by Rivera. Meanwhile the leader- 
ship of the revolt, the fury which astonished every- 
body, had gradually been taken by a young Tagal with 
some training in Spanish military tactics, a small landed 
Proprietor of Imus, his native pueblo in Cavite province, 
named Emilio Aguinaldo, who 
ten years before had been a 
Plodding student at the thres- 
hold of the University of Ma- 
nila, and later was the "little 
governor" of his town, and then 
*ts municipal captain. Aguinal- 
do was born about 1870. He is 
described as weighing scarcely 
°ne hundred pounds, being un- 
dersized for even a Tagal. The 
accounts that made him teach 
* term or two in a pueblo school 
Possibly confounded him with 
dn C °v Sin ' Bald omero Aguinal- 

veU V V Vas a P eda g°«« e for 
IT" . 0ne legend respecting 

"JJ! 18 th at when a Spanish 

sol 1 With a fl,e of native Gen - E - AGUINALDO 

J S came to apprehend him, Aguinaldo shot 
so h i With his pisto1 ' then turned to the amazed 
si ^ and made them an impassioned address, with 
th • Q ffeCt that they decided to quit the service of 
jjeir Spanish oppressors, and on the spot chose him 
r ca P tai n for revolutionary service. His ascendan- 
cy over the minds of his countrymen cannot be lightly 
expiamed away. The superstition that held him to be 
an antmg-anting-man helped with the more ignorant, 
nut his reputation for courage and generalship counted 
tor vastly more, swaying all classes. Judged by the 
test of adapting limited means to comprehensive ends, 
Agumaldo's capacity could not be doubted. The Tagals 
trusted him implicitly and the serious mindedness which 
he brought to his undertaking makes a creditable con- 
trast with many later flippant references to him on the 
Part of uninformed people. The struggle continued 
more than fifteen months, when notwithstanding the re- 
mforcemensts that had come from Spain, amounting to 
nearly thirty thousand men, Governor-General Rivera 
had so wearied of it that he induced a wealthy native of 




Manila, named Paterno, to negotiate a peace. o lt ^ 
cember 14, 1897, was signed the treaty of Biacn a j/\ 
the outcome of which General Francis V. Greene, ^ \ 
official report to the American government, sumniavj ^ 
(September, 1898) as follows: ^ 

"It required that Aguinaldo and the other insurgent 
ers should leave the country, the government agi- eej *<w 
pay them $800,000 in silver, and promising to introduce 
erous reforms, including representation in the Spanish, *q 
tes, freedom of the press, amnesty for ali insurg, )lts ^o, 
the expulsion or secularization of the monastic orders '• ' l> >ift 
naldo and his associates went to Hong-Konu. A la^^a 
shortly arose between Aguinaldo and one of his subo^j.^Ujd 
chiefs, named Artacho. Artacho sued for •■< division t -" ; h 
money among the insurgents, according to rank. ' ■ 
Aguinaldo claimed that the money was a trust f U)1(( \^ 
- was to remain on deposit until it was seen whether t!,„ <, /'Id 
iards would carry out their promised reforms, and if ' )! >*u 
failed to do so, it was to be used to defray the e\ t) 
of a new insurrection. The suit was settled out () f 1,Si o s 
by paying Artacho $5,000. No steps were taken to ; 
duoe the reforms, more than two thousand insurgents 
had been deported to Fernando Po and other places 
kept in confinement, and Aguinaldo is now using the m 
to carry on the operations of another insurrection. 0? **y 

"On the twenty-fourth of April, Aguinaldo m et i 
United States consul and others at Singapore," contij/^ 
General Greene, "and offered to begin a new insurr©^** 
in conjunction with the operations of the United States j.* 0 '* 
at 'Manila. This was telegraphed to Commodore Dewey*^' 
Hong-Kong and, by his consent or at his request, Agvd h a * 
do left Singapore for Hong-Kong on April 26th, and \ v i*^ 
the dispatch-boat "Hugh McCulloch" returned to HnJ* n 



Ho 

Kong early in May to carry the news of Commodore ^ 
wey's victory, it took Aguinaldo and seventeen other rs v *~ 
lutionary chiefs on board and brought them to Manila ba° 
They landed at Cavite, and Admiral Dewey allowed tho^ 
to take such guns, ammunition and stores as he did not ^ 
quire for himself. With these and some other arms w^j . 
he had brought from Hong-Kong, Aguinaldo armed ^ 
followers, who rapidly assembled at Cavite, and in a f e * 
weeks he began moving against the Spaniards. Part 0 f 
them surrendered, giving him more arms, and the oth 0 ^ 
retreated to Manila. Soon afterwards two ships, the p ri 
vate property of Senor Agoncillo and other insurgent ay^ 
pathizers, were converted into cruisers, and sent with i^. 
surgent troops to Subic Bay and other places to capti lr 
provinces outside of Manila. They were successful, the 
native militia in Spanish service capitulating with their a llTls 
in nearly every case without serious resistance. Between 
2,000 and 3,000 of the native troops in the Spanish sevvic. 
surrendered during the months of June and July. Thev 
captured tlu waterworks of Manila, and cut off the watei 
supply, and if it had been in the dry season it would havo 
inflicted great suffering on the inhabitants for lack 0 f 
water." 

The Vaet Of Biac-Na-ltato 

In Aguinaldo's True Version of the Philippine R e 1 
volution, published at Tarlac, September 23, 1899, * 
the Biacnabato treaty he says: 

"Don Pedro Alejandro Paterno came several times ta 
Biac-na-Bato to make propositions of peace* which, after 
five months of lengthy deliberations, was concluded and 
signed on the I4th of December of said year, 1897. on thf 
following basis: 

Firstly. I was to be free to live abroad with the cornel 



of 



PAGE 16 



THE REPUBLIC 



i 



THE PACT OF IHA4 -\ V-BATO 

A group of Generate and Officers of the Philippine Revolutionary Government iri l0 were text to Hongkong as a result of 
act of Biac-na-Bato, posing with the representatives of the SpahisliGuvernment, at Hongkong, 1897-1898. 




(1) General Kmilio Ak'uinaldo y Kamy. President of the Philippine Republic; (2) Hon. lVUro Alejandro £atcrno, Mediator; (3) Lifun-nnnt-Colono! 
Miguel Primo de Rivera, of Spain (later on Captain General, Prime Minister and Dictator of Spain): (4) Mr. Celvttina Esr^nosa, Captain ••»* Cavalry : 

(5) Minister of War Antonio Pezi ; (,6J General Vicente LuKban : (7) General Mariano Llanera : «M General Antoolo Montonejrro: General Grejco- 

rio H. dl Pilar, (later Hero of Tfrad Pa>s > : (10) Dr. Maximum Patemo ; (ll) Mr. PrUnitivo Artacho; (32) Colonel Ajrnpito IVenzon ; (1J11 General M«- 
nico Estrella: (14) Mr. (Ylestino Arniron j I l > Colonel StlvMtrc Legaspi : (16) Colonel WencesUU) \ ni.--a; (J7) General Mama-I Tinio; (18 and li>) 
Unidentified; (20) Mr. Aprustin de la Rosa; (21) Unidentified: (22) Mr. Egoplaatica Viola; <J3) Major Benito Nat n id ad : (24) Dr. Aoaatacic FVraefeco: 

(25) Mr. Leon Novenario. Secretary to General Ricnrte . rj<; ) Valentin Diaz: i 27 ) Go\ vrnor Li»Q Viola: (28) Mr. Carlos RonquiUo, journalist; (29) Mr. - 
dro Agniinaldo. Aide: (30) Major Maximo Kabifftinjp ; 1 9i i 'Ivneral Tomas Masranlo; (82.) Mr. Ricntdo Basft, son Mr. .]«,-<• Rasa; and (88) Mr, M»t«nio 
< 'arlos. 



panions who were willing to follow Bid; and in Hongkong, 
which I had decided on as a place of r< sidenee, the payment 
of $800,000 indemnification money was to bo made in three 
installments, $400,000 on receipt of all the arms that were 
in Biacnabato, $200,000 when the number of arms delivered 
up should amount to 800, and the remaining $200,000 on 
the total number of the same reaching 1000, when, as a 
thank offering, the TV Deum should be celebrated in the 
cathedral of Manila. The last two weeks of the month of 
February were fixed upon as the final term for the deliv- 
ering up of the arms. 

Secondly. The money was all to be delivered to me per- 
sonally, and I was to settle without interference with my 
companions and the other revolutionists. 

Thirdly. Before the Philippine n volutionists should 
evacuate Biac-na-Bato, Captain General Don Primo de Ri 
vera was to send me two Spanish generals who were to re- 
main as hostages till I and my companions reached Hone- 
kong and the first installment of the indemnification, that 
is $400,000 had been received. 

Fourthly. It was also agreed to suppress the religious 
societies in the Islands, and that political and administra- 
tive autonomy should be established, although by request of 
General Primo de Rivera these latter conditions were not 
put down in writing, owing to his assertion that otherwise 



thp treaty would be in too humiliating a form for the Span- 
ish government, while on the other band he guaranteed on 
his word as gentleman and officer the fulfillment of the 

same. 

General Primo de Rivera paid the first installment of 
$400,000. while the two generals were still detained us 
hostages. 

On our side, we the revolutionists, fulfilled the condi- 
tion of delivering up the arms, the number of which ex- 
ceeded one thousand, a fact that was known to everybody 
and published in the papers of Manila. But the Captain 
General failed to carry out the rest of the conditions, name- 
ly, the payment of the other installments-, the suppression 
of the friars and the reforms agreed upon, although th»? 
Te Deum was sung. This caused great grief to me and my 
companions, grief which changed into despair on receiving 
the letter of Lieutenant Colonel Don Miguel Primo de Ri- 
vera, nephew of the captain-general and his private secre- 
tary* informing us that neither my companions nor 1 could 
I'Yi r return to Manila." 

It was after receiving said letter from Lieutenant 
Colonel Primo de Rivera when General Aguinaldo de- 
cided to return to the Philippines, and it so happened 
that on April 21, 1898, the United States of America de- 
clared war on Spain because of the sympathy the Amer 



THE JTErimLTC 



PAGE 17 



ican government had ^ ^ , „ u 

who started an insurJ ■ * ^ ° f C " 

also, of the iniu rTeausf;? T*** ^ fT"' 
ness by said faSSS? & ?T 

U. S. battleship "M a t , COUPled by the ***** °1 
Spanish submarine ^ ^ harb ° r ° f HaVa ™ * 

who was then a Coml !i ^ Admh " al Ge01 * g6 ^T*'' 
Honekontr Wao ^ ommod oi-e of a squadron stationed at 

fppint ZrtZgSS* 5*** * °™ t0 *f 
has already been 1 ♦ V&msh fleet in Manila ^ ^ 
Adiutant E "f^oned in the foregoing ax-tide of 

ie^Aj^fT; Z the 24th day of Apri S 1898 ' 

eral Hon * • q let the Un5 ted States consul-gen- 

rations of the Unil i « m con -j unction with the ope - 
ter of U.S Conln n ***** naVy at Manil& - TKe l< *~ 
Secretary of state i ^ nG1 * al Pratt ' addressed to the 
A.Dril 9g ions at Washington, D.C., under date of 

P 898 ' 18 ^Produced herein-below: 

"CONSULATF pitxt^t-, 

UEN EERAL OF THE UNITED STATES 

Singapore 

April 28, 1898 



S i r 



instant ^toJ^V? re ^ ori that 1 sent on the 27tl) 
a tele-ram bhIT my d 'spatch No. 211 of that date, 
' .. Sepi . ot Ch ' deci Phe.-ed, read as follows: 
^.etary of State 
Washington 
General a 

arrange with ' r ^ Ulna | do S°ne my instance Hongkong 
tnvey ' s cooperation insurgents' Manila 

W« faet.^ Pratt" 
2 '°>i'd instant, th ° Se: ()r! tlu evening of Saturday, the 

incognito of Confiden tially informed of the arrival 
"nsuvgents, Gem ° su l u °m- leader of the Philippe 

an English geiiti io ^tnaido'i by Mr. H. W. Bray, 

>' ( 'ars, resident n ° f high stalldil1 ^ who > after fifteen 
had been compel! ? 1 and a Planter in the Philippines, 
resulting f> om g*? by th ^ disturbed condition of things 
and leave there a H ^ misrule to abandon his property 
much valuable i f ' ^ who ™ I had previously obtained 
mg fortification/ ° nnation for Commodore Dewt-y regard- 
Ghe islands' C ° al do l )OKits » etc., at different points in 

Being awai t ( ,f n! . , 

do with the i W»at P reSli ^ of General Agumal- 

OY abroad, ^a**^^ that n ° ° ne ' ° lther at h °™'' 

control that he ' GXort (>Vl r them the same influence and 
at my reduest &° 1 dv termmecl at once to sec him. and, 
for thr foil ! \ S( ' C1 1 fc intll rvie\v was accordinglv arranged 
besides Q^S n f mov ™»*> Sunday, the 24th, in which, 

trusted advisM-, ! m ^ l °' m * C ° ,lly "P*** the General's 
* b and Mr. Hray, who acted as interpreter. 

M*h the Ife 3R Jcarning fr ° m Gem ral f*f 
prsent insur r JeCl sou * ht to be obtained by the 

tV SMI. U ' ct,,,nar y niovemmt, which though absent from 

vs S^SSJ^ ^ 8tUi I took it upon 

™>s. f, whilst explaining that j w ft0 authority to spca i, 

fo the Goverment to p oint out thr d t of continuin g in- 

rtependent action at this stage; and having convinced him 

of the expediency of coop,ratin K with our fleet, then at 

Hongkong and obtained the assurance of his willingness 

to proceed thither and confer with Commodore Dewey to 

that end should the latter so desire, 1 telegraphed the 

, Commodore tin- same day as follows, throu&h our Consul 

^neral at Hongkong: 

'Af/ubuildo, insurgent leader, here. Mill cptye 
Hongkonn irith Cwinnndore for geurral cooperation h\- 



twrgente Manila if ttrrtwige desired. Telegraph. 

Pratt r 

The Commodore's reply reading thus: 

"Tell Aguinaldo conic soon as possible r 
I received it late that night, and at once communj 
ed it to General Aguinaldo, who, with his aide-de-cam 
and private secretary all under assumed names, I su 
ceeded in getting off by the British steamer "Malacca" 
which left there on Tuesday, the 26th. 

Just previous to his departure, I had a second and l as 
interview with General Aguinaldo, the particular of which 
I shall give you by next mail. 

The General impressed me as a man of intelligence, 
ability and courage, and worthy the confidence that had 
been placed in him. 

T think that in arranging for his direct cooperation with 
the commander of our forces, I have prevented possible 
conflict of action and facilitated the work of occupying 
and administering the Philippines. 

If this course of mine meets with the Government's ap, 
proyal, as I trust it may, I shall be fully satisfied; to Mr. 
Bray, however, I consider there is due some special recog, 
nition for most valuable services rendered. 

How that recognition can best be made, I leave to y 0 
to decide. 

E. SPENCER PRATT 
United States Consul-General. " 

Tho Battle Of Manila Bay 

Early in the morning" o 
.May 1, 1898, Conrmoclor 
Dewey, with his, fleet oX si 
ships, secretly entered th 
Manila Bay, where a bat 
tie between his squadixr 
and a Spanish fleet too 
place that same morning. 
As a result of said b^ ttl( ^, 
ten Spanish ships ^ ver 
destroyed, and about si 
hundred Spaniards ^ers 
killed, but the Americans 
suffered no casualty- 

After the said battle, 
Governor-General Basilio 
Augustin and Archbishop 
Bernardino Nozaleda issued 
the Filipi nos to aid 
Spaniards in the war against the Americans, but General 
Aguinaldo paid no attention to their promises; he reor- 
ganized his army and fought in cooperation with the 
American navy and won several battles against the SP an - 
iards in all the territories outside the City of Manila 

Tho Hovoliitionarv tiovernifieii* 

En the honest belief that the Filipinos had accom- 
plished their mission to free themselves from the ' SP an ~ 
ish sovereignty and it being necessary to maintain pe a(v 
and order in all the territories they took hold of f rom 
the Spaniards, a dictatorial government was establish- 
ed cm May 24, 1898, upon the advice of Don Arribrosio 
Rianzares Bautista, with General Emilio Aguinaldo as 




Admiral George Dewey 
proclamations calling on 



PAGE 



18 



Dictator. Later, on June 12, 1898, the Independence of 
the Philippines was proclaimed by General Aguinaldo 
at Cavite. The dictatorial government gave way to the 
Revolutionary Government on June 23rd, same year! 
The Revolutionary Congress which, according to F. D. 
Millet, a journalist, was composed of "delegates excep- 
tionally alert, keen, and intelligent in appearance," as- 
sembled at the church of Barasoain, Malolos, Bulacan, 
on September 15, 1898, and approved the Political Con- 
stitution of the First Republic of the Philippines, which 
Don Emilio Aguinaldo y Famy, as President of the Re- 
public and Captain-General and Commander-in-Chief of 
the Army, promulgated on the 21st day of January, 
1899. 

(We will publish the English translation of said 
Constitution in the next issue of this Magazine.) 

On July 18, 1898, Duke de Almodovar, the Minister 
of State at Madrid, sent a telegram to the Spanish Am- 
bassador at Paris with the object of finding out if 
France, through her Ambassadoi at Washington, His 
Excellency, Jules Cambon, could transmit to the Pres- 
ident of the United States a message of the Spanish 
Government relative to the preliminary peace negotia- 
tions. After several communications, a protocol of peace 
between the United States and Spain was signed on 
August 12, 1898, but the news of the signing of said 
document did not reach Manila before August 13, when 
ten thousand American soldiers occupied the City, while 
the Filipinos were organizing their own government 
outside the city of Manila. 

Said protocol reads in full as follows: 
Protocol Of Peace 

His Excellency, Jules Cambon, Ambassador Extraordinary 
and Plenipotentiary of the Rejmblic of France at Washi?igton, 
and William R. Day, Secretary of State of the United States, 
respectively possessing for this purpose full authority of the 
Government of Spain and Government of the T J nited State's, 
have concluded and signed the following articles, embodying tlte 
terms on which the %wo Governments have agreed in respect to 
the matters hereinafter set forth, having in view the establish- 
ment of peace beUveen the two countries, that is to say; 

Article I 

Spain will relinquish all of her sovereignty over and title 
to Cuba. 

Article II 

Spain will cede to the United States the island of Porto Rico 
and other islands now under Spanish sovereignty in the West 
Indies, and also an island in the Ladrones to be selected by the 
United States. 

Article III 

The United States will occupy and hold the city, bay and 
harbor of Manila pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace 
which shall determine the control, disposition and government of 
the Philippines. 

Article IV 

Spain will immediately evacuate Cuba, Porto Rico and other 
islands, now under Spanish sovereignty in the West Indies; 
and to this end, each Government will, within ten days after the 
filing of this protocol, appoint Commissioners, and the com- 
missioners so appointed shall, within thirty days after the sign- 
ing of this protocol, meet at Havana for the purpose of arranging: 
and carrying out the details of the aforesaid evacuation of Cuba 



and the adjacent Spanish islands; and each Government will, 
within ten days after the signing of this protocol, also appoint 
other commissioners, who shall, within thirty days after the 
signing of this protocol, meet at San Juan, in Porto Rico, for 
the purpose of arranging and carrying out the details of the 
aforesaid evacuation of Porto Rico and other islands, flow under 
Spanish sovereignty in the West Indies. 

Article V 

Spain and the United States will each appoint not more than 
five commissioners to treaty of peace, and the commissioners so 
appointed shall meet at Paris not later than October 1, 1898, 
and proceed to the negotiation and conclusion of a treaty of 
peace, which treaty shall be subject to ratification according- to 
the respective constitutional forms of the two countries. 

Article VI 

Upon the conclusion and signing of this protocol, hostilities 
between the two countries shall be suspended, and notice to that 
effect shall be given as soon as possible by each Government to 
the Commanders of its military and naval forces. 

Done at Washington, in duplicate in French and in English, 
by the Undersigned who have hereunto set their hands and seals 
the 12th day of August; 1898. 

(Sdp:.) JULES CAMBON 
(Sgd.) WILLIAM R. DAY 

As provided for in Articles IV and V of the preced- 
ing protocol, the two peace commissions assembled at 
Paris, France, in the latter part of September, 1898. 

The American Commissioners were: 

Hon. William R. Day, Secretary of State, who resigned as 

secretary to become President of the Commission with 

tin- following Members: 
Hon. Cushman K. Davis, Senator; 
Hon. William P. Frye, Senator; and 
Hon. George Reid, former Minister to France. 

The Spanish Commissioners were: 

Hon. Eugenio Montero Rios. President of the Senate, as 
president of the Commission, with the following Mem- 
bers: 

Hon. Buenaventura Abarzuza, Senator; 
/ Hon. Jose de Garnica y Diaz, Associate Justice; 

Hon. Wenceslao Ramirez de Villa-Urrutia, Minister Plen- 
ipotentiary to the Belgian Court; and 
General Rafael Cerero y Saenz. 

The Philippine question was taken up before the 
two peace commissions on October 31, 1898. There had 
been a divergence of opinion among the American com- 
mission. Some favored demanding the entire Philippine 
Archipelago from Spain, while the others thought it ad- 
visable to only retain the Island of Luzon and certain 
other islands. But, after most thorough consideration 
of the subject, the Americans reached the conclusion 
that the cession must be of the whole Archipelago, to 
which Spain opposed tenaciously, maintaining that the 
peace protocol only contemplated a temporary occupa- 
tion of the City of Manila and did not affect the Spanish 
sovereignty in the Philippines. However, the Spanish 
Commissioners yielded to the American proposal and 
the treaty of peace was concluded to the effect that 
Spain should cede to the United States the whole Archi 
pelago; that the United States should pay to Spain the 
sum of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000.00) ; and 
that the civil rights and political status of the native 
inhabitants of the territories thus ceded to the United 
States should be determined by the Congress. The said 



THF BEPUBLTC 



page in 



treaty, known as "The Treaty of Paris", was signed at 
Paris on December 10, 1898, notwithstanding the oppo- 
sition raised by the Representatives of the Philippine 
Revolutionary Government, and same was ratified by the 
TJ. S. Senate on February 6, 1899, and by the Cortes of 
Spain on March 19, that year. The ratifications were 



exchanged on April 11, 1899, and the treaty puWicly 
proclaimed. 

On March 2 1899, the Congress of the United States 
voted the sum of §20,000.000.00 and paid it to Spain 
on May 1,-1899. 



THE THE ATI OF PARIS 

(U. S. Statutes at Large, Vol. 30, Page 1754) 

TREATY OF PEACE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA AND THE KINGDOM OF SPAIN, SIGNED 
AT PARIS DECEMBER 10, 1898; RATIFICATION AD- 
VISED BY THE SENATE FEBRUARY 6, 1899; RATI- 
FIED BY THE PRESIDENT FEBRUARY 6, 1899; RATI- 
FIED BY HER MAJESTY, THE QUEEN REGENT OF 
SPAIN, MARCH 19, 1899; RATIFICATIONS EXCHANGED 
AT WASHINGTON APRIL 11, 1899; PROCLAIMED, WA- 
SHINGTON, APRIL 11, 1899. 

BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF 
AMERICA— A PROCLAMATION 

Whertras, a Treaty of Peace between the United States of 
America and Her Majesty, the Queen Regent of Spain, in the 
name of her August Son, Don Alfonso XIII, was concluded and 
signed by their respective plenipotentiaries at Paris on the 
tenth day of December, 1898, the original of which Convention 
bem g m the English and 
as follows: 



Spanish languages is, word for word, 



ReircJ^ ^ SUteS ° f America and Her Majesty, the Queen 
XIII A n ' in the name of her August Son, Don Alfonso 

two 'coS 1 * *u the State 0f war I10W between the 

tiaries: f ° r that P ur P<>se appointed as plenipoten- 

The President of the United States, 
Grav Jif wl^ Bushman K. Davis, William P. Frye, George 
A H UV Reid > citize » s of the United States; 

Don Eu" MajCSty ' QUGen ***** ° f SpHin ' 
BuenavonturrT ^ nUiro Rios > President of the Senate; Don 
minister of the Cr ' senator of thc Kingdom and ex- 

tea and associate D °! J ° s6 dc Gar ™a, deputy to the Cor- 

Hamirez de VilH u V ^ suprcme court >' Don Wenceslao 
Plenipotentiary at WVOy extraordinary and minister 

the Division; wru88c «. ™* I>on Rafael Cerero, General of 

their^un svlTcW d ^ P ^ and havin * changed 

form, have a t! ^ ° f ° Und t0 bc in duc and Vro V er 

-Pon the SbSi^ffi ° f *? matt ^ S th ™> 

ARTICLE I 

to Cuba 3 ' 11 rG,inqUi8hcS * U cla ™ of sovereignty over and title 

occu^S Il^kS^ iS> UP ° n its evacuation by Spain, to be 
occup,ed by the United States, the United States will, so ong as 

y / ndC ^ mternati ™ al »*rAt from the fact of its oc- 
cupation for the protection of life and property. 

ARTICLE II 

Spain cedes to the United States the Island of Porto Pvico 
and other islands now under Spanish sovereignty in the West 
Indu s, and the Island of Guam in the Marianas or Ladrones. 

ARTICLE III 

Spain cedes to the United States the archipelago known as 
the Philippine Islands, and comprehending the islands lying 
within the following lines: 

A Iinv running* f*om west to etist along or near the twentieth 
Ha ra lie* of north latitude and thmugh the middle of the navie 



able channel of Bachi, from the- one hundred and "ffhfeag 
to the one hundred and twenty-seventh degree mend.an of long,, 
tude cast of Greenwich, thence along the one hundred and I twentd 
seventh decree meridian of longitude east of Greenw.cl o the 
parallel of four degrees and forty-five minutes north latitude, 
thence along the parallel of four degrees and forty-five m.nute, 
north latitude to its intersection with the meridian of longitude 
one hundred and nineteen degrees and thirty-five minutes east 
of Greenwich thence along the mend.an of longitude one 
hundred and nineteen degrees and thirty-ftve m mutes east of 
Greenwich to the parallel of latitude seven degrees and forty 
minutes north, thence along the parallel of at.tude seven de- 
grees and forty minutes north to its intersec .on with the one 
hundred and sixteenth degree mend.an of long.tude east J 
Greenwich, thence by a direct line to the .ntcrsect.on of the 
tenth degree parallel of north latitude with the one hundred and 
eighteenth degree meridian of longitude east of Greenwich, and 
thence along the one hundred and eighteenth degree mend.an 
of longitude east of Greenwich to the point of beginn.ng. 

The United States will pay to Spain the sum of twenty 
million dollars, within three months after the exchange of tM 
ratifications of the present treaty. 

ARTICLE IV 

The United States will, for the term of ten years, from the 
date of the exchange of the ratifications of the present treaty, 
admit Spanish ships and merchandise to the ports of the Ftol- 
ippine Islands on the same terms as shins and merchandise of the 
United States. 

ARTICLE V 

The United States will, upon the signature of the P"»ent 
treaty, send back to Spain, at its own cost, the Spanish sold.ers 
taken as prisoners of war on the capture of Manila by the 
American forces. The arms of the sold.ers in question shall be 
restored to them. 

Spain will, upon the exchange of the jratif ications of the 
present treaty, proceed to evacuate the Philippines,, as well « 
the Island of Guam, on terms similar to those agreed upon by the 
Commissioners appointed to arrange for the evacuation of Por~ 
to Pvico and other islands in the West Indies, under the protocol 
of August twelfth, eighteen hundred and ninety-eight, which is 
to continue in force till its provisions arc completely executed. 

The time within which the evacuation of the Philippine Is- 
lands and Guam shall he completed shall be fixed by the two 
Governments. Stands of colors, uncaptured war vessels, small 
arms, puns of all calibers, with their carriages and accessories, 
powder, ammunition, live stock, and materials and supplies of 
all kinds, belonging to the land and naval forces of Spain in the 
Philippines and Guam, remain the property of Spain. Pieces 
of heavy ordnance, cxclusice of field artillery, in the fortifica- 
tions and coast defenses, shall remain in their emplacements for 
the term of six months, to be reckoned from the exchange of 
ratifications of the treaty; and the United States may, in the 
meantime, purchase each material from Spain, if a satisfactory 
agreement between the two Governments on the subject shall be 
reached. ■ t . . . > 

ARTICLE Vi • • .... I 

Spain will, -crpoii th£ signature of th£ present treaty; , -'release 
a IT. prisoner^ of war; and all persons tietetned % or imprisoned ¥bt 



J'A<TC.40 



political offenses, in connection with the insurrections in Cuba 
and the Philippines and the war with the United States. 

Reciprocally, the United States will release all persons made 
prisoners of war by the American forces, and will undertake 
to obtain the release of all Spanish prisoners in the hands of the 
insurgents in Cuba and the Philippines. 

The Government of the United Stales will, at its own cost, 
i-eturn to Spain and the Government of Spain will, at its own 
cost, return to the United States, Cuba, Porto Rico, and the Phil- 
ippines according to the situation of their respective homes, pris- 
oners released or caused to be released by them, respectively, 
under this article. 

ARTICLE VII 

The United States and Spain mutually relinquish all claims 
for indemnity, national and individual, of every kind, of either 
Government, or of its citizens or subjects, against the other Gov- 
ernment that may have arisen since the beginning of the late 
insurrection in Cuba and prior to the exchange of ratification^ 
of the present treaty, including all claims for indemnity for the 
cost of the war. 

The United States will adjudicate and settle the claims of 
its citizens against Spain relinquished in this article. 

ARTICLE VIII 

In conformity with the provisions of Articles One, Two. 
and Three of this treaty, Spain relinquishes in Cuba, and cedes in 
Porto Rico and other Islands in the West Indies, in the Island 
of Guam, and in the Philippine Archipelago, all the buildings, 
wharves, barracks, forts, structures, public highways, and other 
Immovable property which, in conformity with law, belong to 
the public domain, and as such belong to the Crown of Spain. 

And it is hereby declared that the relinquishment or cession, 
as the case may be, to which the preceding paragraph refers, 
can not in any respect impair the property or rights which by 
law belong to the peaceful possession of property of all kinds, 
of provinces, municipalities, public or private establishments, 
ecclesiastical or civil bodies, or any other associations having 
legal capacity to acquire and possess property in the aforesail 
territories renounced or ceded, or of private individuals, of 
whatsoever nationality such individuals may be. 

The aforesaid relinquishment or cession, as the case may be. 
Includes all documents exclusively referring to the sovereign^- 
relinquished or ceded that may exist in the archives of the 
Peninsula. Where any document in such archives only in part 
relates to said sovereignty, a copy of such part will bo furnished 
whenever it shall be requested. Like rules shall be reciprocally ob- 
served in favor of Spain in respect of documents in the archives 
of the islands above referred to. 

In the aforesaid relinquishment or cession, as the case may 
be, arc also included such rights as the Crown of Spain and its 
authorities possess in respect of the official archives and records, 
executive, as well as judicial, in the islands above referred to, 
which relate to said islands or the rights and property of their 
inhabitants. Such archives and records shall be carefully pre- 
served, and private persons shall without distinctions have the 
right to require, in accordance with law, authenticated copies 
of the contracts, wills, and other instruments forming part of 
notarial protocols or files, or which may be contained in executive 
or judicial archives, be the latter in Spain or in the islands 
aforesaid. 

ARTICLE IX 

Spanish subjects, natives of the l\ninsula, residing in th-> 
te rritory over which Spain by the present treaty relinquishes or 
cedes her sovereignty, may remain in such territory or may re- 
move t herefrom, retaining in either event all their rights of pro- 
perty, including the right to sell or dispose of such property or 
of its proceeds; and they shall also have the right to carry on 
their industry, commerce, and professions, being: subject in res- 
pect thereof to such, laws as are applicable to other foreigners. 



In case they remain in the territory they may preserve their 
allegiance to the Crown of Spain by making, before a court of 
record, within a year from the date ot the exchange of ratifica- 
tions of this treaty, a declaration of their decision to preserxe, 
such allegiance; in default of which declaration they shall be held 
to have renounced it and to have adopted the nationality of the 
territory in which they may reside. (An agreement of March 
29, 1900, extended the time for making declaration for six months 
after April 11, 1900.) 

The civil righst and political status of the native inhabitants 
of the territories hereby ceded to the United States shall be de- 
termined by the Congress. 

ARTICLE X 

The inhabitants of the territories over which Spain relin- 
quishes or cedes her sovereignty shall be secured in the free exer- 
cise of their religion. 

ARTIXLE XI 

The Spaniards residing in the territories over which Spain 
by this treaty cedes or relinquishes her sovereignty shall be 
subject in matters civil as well as criminal to the jurisdiction of 
the courts of the country wherein they reside, pursuant to the 
ordinary laws governing the same; and they shall have the right 
to appear before such courts, and to pursue the same course 
as citizens of the country to which the courts belong. 

ARTICLE XII 

Judicial proceedings pending at the time of the exchange of 
ratifications of this treaty in the territories over which Spain 
relinquishes or cedes her sovereignty shall be determined ac- 
cording to the following rules: 

1. Judgments rendered either in civil suits between private 
individuals, or in criminal matters, before the date mentioned 
and with respect to which there is no recourse or right of review 
under the Spanish law, shall be deemed to be final, and shall be 
executed in due form by competent authority in the territory 
within which such judgments should be carried out. 

2. Civil suits between private individuals which may on 
the date mentioned be undetermined shall be prosecuted to judg- 
ment before the court in which they may then be pending or in 
the court that may be substituted therefor. 

3. Criminal actions pending on the date mentioned before 
the Supreme Court of Spain against citizens of the territory 
which, by this treaty, ceases to be Spanish shall continue under 
its jurisdiction until final judgment; but, such judgment having 
been i-endered. the execution thereof shall be committed to the 
competent authority of the place in which the case arose. 

ARTICLE XIII 

The rights of property secured by copy rights and patents 
acquired by Spaniards in the Island of Cuba, and in Porto Ri- 
co, the Philippines and other ceded territories, at the time of 
the exchange of the ratifications of this treaty, shall continue 
to be respected. Spanish scientific, literary, and artistic works, 
not subversive of public order in the territories in question, shall 
continue to be admitted free of duty into such territories, for 
the period of ten years, to be reckoned from the date of the ex 
change of the rat if ications of this treaty. 

ARTICLE XIV 

Spain shall have the power to establish consular offices 
in the ports and places of the territories, the sovereignty over 
which has been either relinquished or ceded by the present treaty. 

ARTICLE XV 

The Government of each country will, for the term of ten 
years, aecoi'd to the merchant vessels of the other country the 
same treatment in respect of all port charges, including entrance 
and clearance dues, light dues, and tonnage duties, as it accords 
to its own merchant yessels, not engaged in the coastwise trade,. 

This article may at any time be terminated on six months; 
notice given by either government to the other. 



TH£ 4 REPUBLIC 



FAG 



ARTICLE XVI 

It is understood that any obligations assumed in this treaty 
by the United States with respect to Cuba are limited to the time 
of its occupancy thereof; but it will upon the termination of such 
occupancy, advise any government established in the island to as- 
sume the same obligations. 

ARTICLE XVII 

The present treaty shall be ratified by the President of the 
United States, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate 
thereof, and by Her Majesty the Queen Regent of Spain ; and the 
ratifications shall be exchanged at Washington within six months 
from the date hereof, or earlier if possible. 

In faith whereof, we the respective plenipotentiaries, have 
signed this treaty and have hereunto affixed our seals. 

Done in duplicate at Paris, this tenth day of December, in 
the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety- 
eight. 



(Seal) B. DE ABARZUZA. 

(Seal) J. DE GARNICA. 

(Seal) W. R. DE VILLA URRUTIA. 

(Sela) RAFAEL CERERO. 



(Seal) WILLIAM R. DAY. 

(Seal) CUSHMAN K. DAVIS. 

(Seal) WILLIAM P. FRYE. 

(Seal) GEO. GRAY. 

(Seal) WHITELAW REID. 

(Seal) EUGENIO MONTERO RIOS. 



And whereas the said Convention has been duly ratified on 
both parts, and the ratifications of the two Governments were 
exchanged in the City of Washington or. the eleventh day of 
April, one thousand eight hundred and ninety-nine: 

Now, therefore, be it known that I, William McKinloy, Pres- 
ident of the United States of America, have caused the said con- 
vention to be made public, to the end that the same and every 
article and clause thereof may be observed anfl fulfilled with 
good faith by the United States and the citizens thereof. 

In witness whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused 
the seal of the United States to be affixed. 

Done at the City of Washington this eleventh day of April, 
in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and ninety- 
nine, and of the Independence of the United States the one hun- 
dren and twenty-third. 

WILLIAM McKINLEY 

By the President: 
JOHN HAY, 

Secretary of State. 

0O0- 



■>m:siin;\ I Mckinlevs message of dec. s. i8»o. to u.s. contgbes§ 



In his message of December ,'>, 1899, to U. S. Congress, 
resident William McKinley, referrinjr to the Philippine Islands, 
says in part as f„n ows: 

had ,Sla,<ds Wire Ci:ded °y the Government of Spain, which 

were 6611 m Undisnuted Possession of them for centuries. They 
ris aC . Cepted not merely by our authorized commissioners in Pa- 
ul Mid 11 ' lir0cti0 '" of thc Executive, but by the constitution- 
of tl ^, considerf,ri action of the representatives of the people 
reaso t ? U ' d Stllt ' * both Houses of Congress. I had every 
ty w". C und 1 stiU believe that this transfer of sovereign- 

m acco,da nce with the wishes and the aspirations of the 
Meat mass of the Filipino people. 

inir the° m Carliest moment no opportunity was lost of assur- 
fare • J* 0 ** ° f thc isl ands, of our ardent desire for their wel- 
nnt . K , t ° f * ho intention of this Government to do everything 
Mav 1808° ti * their intcl * sts - In my order of the 19th of 
to th pi i conHnandc * of the military expedition dispatched 
to m I lllpnmes was instructed to declare that we came not 
or f, 7 ap ° n the peoplc of that country, nor upon any party 
th i, \ am ° ,1K th€m ' but to Protect them in their homes, in 
Th-* f™? toy ™ ent «< all d in their personal and religious rights. 
IMC there shonld be no doubt as to the paramount authority 
sSL** 1,th ° f Au ^«st it was directed that there must be 

mu^t nl° CCUPat u 0n WitH th ° in6 «««tsi that the United States 
must p les , rv ^ p ,, act . aftd VI . M peMona and rt with . 

•u L V ° CCUpied by tll<Hr military and naval forces; 

SIS °n and authority of the United States. As early as 
he ZL 4 - 1 befor \ thc CCS8i °n. and in anticipation of that event, 
mmTZTl** "\ Manila was ur *«d W restore peace and tran- 
quil. ty and to undertake the establishment of a beneficent gov- 
ernment, which should afford the fullest security for life and 
property. 

On the 21st of December, after the treaty was signed* the 
commander of the forces of occupation was instructed to an- 
nounce and proclaim in the most public manner that we come, 
not as invaders and conquerors, but as friends to protect the na- 
tives in their homes, in their employments, and in their personal 
and religious rights. On the same day, while ordering General 
Utis to see that the peace should be preserved in Iloilo, he was 
admonished that: <It is most important that there should be no 
conflict with the insurgents.' On the 1st day of January, 1899, 
urgent orders were reiterated that the kindly intentions of this 



Government should be in every possible way communicated to the 
Insurgents, x x x 

The future government of the Philippines rests with the Con- 
cress *f the United States. Few graver responsibilities have 
ever been confided to us. If we accept them in a spirit worthy 
of our race and our traditions, a great opportunity comes with 
them. The islands lie under the shelter of our flag. They are 
ours by every title of law and equity. They cannot be abandoned. 
If we desert them we leave them at once to anarchy and finally 
to barbarism. We fling them, a golden apple of discord, among 
the rival powers, no one of which could permit another to seiz^ 
them unquestioned. Their rich plains and valleys would be the 
scene of endless strife and bloodshed. The advent of Dewey's 
fleet in Manila Bay, instead of being, as we hope, the dawn of 
a new day of freedom and progress, will have been the beginning 
of an era of misery and violence worse than any which has 
darkened their unhappy past. The suggestion has been made 
that we could renounce our- authority over the islands and, giv- 
ing them independence, could retain a protectorate over them. 
This proposition will not be found, I am sure, worthy of your 
serious attention. Such an arrangement would involve at the out- 
set a cruel breach of faith. It would place the peaceable and lo- 
yal majority, who ask nothing better than to accept our author- 
ity, at the mercy of the minority of armed insurgents. It would 
make us responsible for the acts of the insurgent leaders and 
give us no power to control them. It would charge us with 
the task of protecting them against each other and defending 
them against any foreign power with which they chose to quarrel. 
In short, it would take from the congress of the United States 
the power of declaring war and vest that tremendous prerogative 
in the Tagal leader of the hour. 

It does not seem desirable that I should recommend at this 
time a specific and final form of government for these islands. 
When peace shall be restored it will be the duty of Congress to 
construct a plan of government which shall establish and main- 
tain freedom and order and peace in the Philippines. The insur- 
rection is still existing, and when it terminates further informa- 
tion will be required as to the actual condition of affairs be- 
fore inaugurating a permanent scheme of civil government. The 
full report of the Commission, now in preparation, will contain 
information, and suggestions which will be of value to Con- 
gress, and which I will transmit as soon as it is completed. As 
long as the insurrection continues the military arm must neces- 
sarily be supreme. But there is no reason why steps should not b* 



PAOTE 2 1 



THE REPUBLIC 



taken from time to time to inaugurate governments essentially 
popular in their forms as fast as territory is held and controlled 
:>y our troops. To this end I am considering the advisability 
>f the return of the Commission, or such of the members there- 
of as can be secured, to aid the existing authorities and facil- 
itate this work throughout the islands. I have- believed that re- 
construction should not begin by the establishment of one cen- 
tral civil government, for all the islands, with its seat at Manila, 
but rather that the work should be commenced by building up 
from the bottom, first establishing municipal governments and 
then provincial governments, a central government at last to fol- 
low. 

Until Congress shall have made known the formal expression 
of its will I shall use the authority vested in me by the Consti- 
tution and the statutes to uphold the sovereignty of the United 
States in those distant islands as in all other places where our 
flag righfully floats. I shall put at the disposal of the Army 
and Navy all the means which the liberality of Congress and the 
people have provided to cause this unprovoked and wasteful 
insurrection to cease. If any orders of mine were required to 
insure the merciful conduct of military and naval operations, 
they would not be lacking; but every step of the progress of our 
troops has been marked by a humanity which has surpassed even 
the misguided insurgents. The truest kindness to them will be 
a swift and effective defeat of their present leader. The hour 
of victory will be the hour of clemency and reconstruction. 

No effort will be spared to build up the waste places desolated 
by war and by long years of misgovernment. We shall not wait 
for the end of the strife, to begin the beneficent work. We shall 
continue, as we have begun, to open the schools and the churches, 
•to set the courts in operation, to foster industry and trade and 
agriculture, and in every way in our power to make these people 
whom Providence has brought within our jurisdiction feel that 
it is their liberty and not our power, their welfare and not our 
gain, we are seeking to enhance. Our flag has never waved Over 
any community but in blessing. I believe the Filipinos will soon 
recognize the fact that it has not lost its gift of benediction in 
its world-wide journey to their shores." 

(EDITOR'S NOTE. — Otlx r important documents, tke "Pres- 
ident's Instructions to the Commission" the "Malolos Constitu- 
tion" the continuation of Hannaford' s accounts of the Insurrection, 
etc., will be published in our next issue , together with other in- 
teresting articles, news-items, Official Direetdry of the Republic 
of tin Philippines, Monthly Business Directory or Buyer's Guide, 
etc., etc.) 



TAFT THEATRE 

The Favorite Showhouse on Taft Avenue, 
Rizal City 



GREEN LINE Theatre 

The Pioneer Postliberation Cinematograph 
in Pasay 



GREEN LINE Trans. 

Taft Ave., Rizal City 
CANTJTO PEREZ, Proprietor 



CIRILO DE RAMOS 



Special Crop Loan Inspector for Laguna Agency 
Philippine National Bank 
Office: Sta. Cruz, Laguna 
Res., Lumbang, Laguna 



< f the 



Join the 

'SYSTOMOR' 

II K A L. T II V IL U it 

SCIENTIFIC: 

* Physical Conditioning 

* Aits Of Self-Defense 
Individualized Instructions 

Modem de Luxe Gymnasium 
SE TO, Business Manager 
IDEAL THEATRE PENTHOUSE 
129 Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz. Manila 



COMPLIMENTS 



Hon. OSCAR LEDESMA 

Representative, 2nd District of Iloilo 
Res.. 2033 Luna St., Rizal City 



University of 
SANTO TOMAS 

The Oldest University in the Philippines 
The Biggest in Enrollment 



Esparia St. 



Manila 



Santiago Maternity Clinic 

81 Del Pan. Sta. Ana, Manila 
Obste t rics — G y n ecol ogy 
Ph ysicicms : 
Dr. I LU MI NAD A SANTI AGO-LOTHO 
Dr. HERMINIA SANTIAGO 
Surgeons : 

£>i\ JAIME LAIfO Dr. ALFONSO UAMOS 



BATAAN DRUG STORE 

2001-2000 Herran St., Manila 
Sole Distributor for the Hiochemiea! Research Laboratories 

SALT D S. PAG UIO 
Prop.- Pharmacist 



TKK REPUBLIC 



VACK M 



THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL LANGUAGE 

(Tagalog) l 




- ncmlwrs. Said Institute took chnrtrc of the stuily. r*«CB«- 
and other ^nent Wks; ,nd on December ». 1989. A NATIONAL LANGUAf.K-KNGLISH VOCABULARY was -ul.m.ttcd by D.rcctor De V.-yra t.. the 
I resident of Uie Philippines for approval. „ n d slmi . wa8 pnWisned for the first time ,„ lfM0 and :l(tai „ in 1945. A ,„ „ 7 

, .v,-,- w-,- k 1 ' " ° *• "ecutive officer of ,.,id Institute polished A MANt* \L OF THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL 

LANGUAGE wh.ch the Institute approved as «uWe through the intri.acics of Ta«ra!o K speech. - 




.upreme Court of the Philippines, is a Visayan himself: and to is the President of the Philippine Republic. OMwral Manuel A ta, who makes an ef. 

^' T, T In PuWiojttd to encourage the tenehinK of same in all public and private schools of the country. Many American officers and s.ed men who 

L t H' ,J an ^.;'a Cr US liberat! ' m cv ™ tri <* «<• 'earn how to speak the Tatfalog and" some otVthem could sneak it well .no U «h 

n ,Uo, be L h/n r ^ *■*"*• " ke " nc **■ Von R. Nielsen, from Vallejo. California, who could speak it with all the Tnsalo* accent and ento- 

rLTrJtV , ,7 Pin "' Mimy Fili » inos ~ ho for the United States many years a,,, without known* how to apeak I a«alo B d.d learn 

val o the "caUed P ? , *° SPV " k amon « '"'—Ives a national Inn SU n«c of thei, own in a foreign country where they live With the appro, 

h^ h nter^tTng o ! S" V " nati ° nal March. American small eapitahsts or businessmen, and even hjdustr al laborer, wdl I .,1 it 

F ^ ,0 ' , arn k ° W <" « the Tagalo* .anguage if they intend to come and stay for business to tto PhU Ppines. 

fango c . " ; \ TaBaloK lan ™ became one of the official languages of the Republic of the Philippines Incidentally we now have threo 
us the de« \,;;V J'l'^ »»« which represent three distinct civih.ations. (a, the 4»^«*o» and the d.st.n. tlv Amer.can that taught 

igfon and lhf t„,*j * v 7 «?* ^ WC "° W enjoy: "'» iofia and the European, which we learned from Spa.n that rave us our , hnstmu rel. 

in noture. ° f ^'"^ thc P 00 "' 0 : »nd «•> the Ulkfajrimdal which we inherited from our ancesto-s. whose government was patnarchal 



£ZS ^ of" ^^^rj'^^^^ • • 

Won and the «,o..«rcMYoI system"*" ruling the 
in nature. 

United Nation* O^^^f^ lhe Phi,! l>n'"« takes pride in presenting her own national language. Fortunately. • we are represented in the 

«■ an English orator nd wVTt^r ^1 *" C ° U " try '* »«»"anent de.egate. Brig. Gen. Carlos I*. Romulo. has the opporunity to make use of his vast e.xper.enw 
"»»- wheu , hp PMlpZJ^, Ut thC " re !S "° for him to introduce his native t»ngue. which may play an .mportant role .n Onentol trade rel.. 

leading world distribution center in the Far East for Amencan and Ku-pean pro, nets. It . 
Tagaiog .anguagc bv introducing it to the different nations of the world through the,.- choaen 



for this reason Ihat weT^T' ** '* U to » ><« 

delegate, to the United X*?-'^ in P™pagating the 1 



thrrmght the courtesy 
United Nat 



»ons General Assembly, whose cuts and biographical skeiches w<- have been able to publish as special feature m this Isst.^ 
?r ! ^^ation of Frances L. Orkin. Photo Distribution Officer, and Mrs. Margaret Arakie, Reference Center, of the Officii 



" ^atjons Photo .rw * T in ^ n ol v ranees U Orkin. Photo Distribution Officer, and Mrs. IMarRarci ^r.vrv... ~_ 
^ve the wav for futur ' ^ * PubHt ' that we may do our share in promoting the cordial relations between their peoples and ou. 

fUtUr<! -online to international law and trade agents that our republic may conclude with their governments. 

r, 8f t, ir, and y, pronounced bah, kali, dah, prah, hah, lah. mali, 
nah, ngah, pah, rah, sah, wah, yah. 

There are letters in the English and Spanish alphabets 
which do not exist in the Tagalog alphabet (Abakada). Those 
letters are thc following: 

C, CH, F, J, LI* N. Q, RR, V, X, Z. 
Said letters are used in writing names of persons or things 
of foreign origin or of proper nouns which do not permit the al- 
teration or substitution of such letters like Cirilo, C/doco. Fa- 
jardo, Jalandoni, L/oret, Nagaza, Quirino, Corregidor, Villa- 
mieva, Xerez, Zamora. However, there are names of countries 
like Filipinas (Philippines)), Espana (Spain), China, Monro- 
via, Japon (Japan), Mexico, etc., which are written in Tagalog 
as Pilipinas, Espaw?/a, Tsina, Monro62/a, Hapon. Me/nko, Hv., 
in accordance with the Tagalog orthography. 

As a matter of fact the Tagalog way of writing is prac- 
tically the same as that of Spanish; and anyone who can read 
Spanish will have no difficulty in reading the Tagalog langu- 
age, although some letters like the above-mentioned consonants 
<% ch, J, L U, *, q, rr, v f x, and z have been substituted for 
by their ,(,uivalents in borrowed or imported words, like the 
following: 

c in cafe (coffee) has been changed to k, as in kwpi. 
c in circo (circus) has been changed to a, as in sirko. 
ch in chelate (chocolate) has been changed to ts, as i n 
tftokolatv. 

rh in ehinelte (slippers) has been changed to s, as in sin<'h,<_ 
f in fog6n (stove) has been changed to p, as in putjox. 
j in cajon (box) has been changed to h, as in kahfo?. 
It in calle (street) has been changed to ly f as in knlyt. 
n in pina (pineapple) has been changed to ny, as in piitya, 
rr in carreton (cart) has been changed to r, as in kwritoiu 
r in rnpor (steamer) has been changed to 6, as in bap>>r. 



The Tagalog Alphabet And 
_ ■'roiiuiu iation 

other wri^ a M!:^^ a ^ cons ^ of twenty letters, although 
letter e, and induing ? V ^ nineteen ' ^eluding the 

0, pronounced ba (bah). 
P Tav*}? Qd ^ (kah) ' which is th « third letter in thee 

* Prj^^^^ <« • - or Spanish. 

e, pronounced eh like e'in English net 
.7, pronounced ga (gah). un ^ I,sn ueu 
\ pronounced ha (haih) 
)> Pounced like i in English bio 

1, pronounced la (lah). 
m > Pronounced ma (mah). 

pronounced na (nah). 
%, pronounced nga (ngah) 
! P^^o^nced like o in English no. 

P, pronounced p a (pah). 
r, pronounced ra (rah). 

pronounced «a (sah). 
^, pronounced ta (tah). 

pronoenced like u in English P? tt. 
w, pronounced wa (wah). 
Ut pronounced ya (yah). 

The Tagalog vowels are a, e, I, «, pronounced the same 
« m Spanish; each vowel has one invariable sound, except the 
glottal m some words marked with grave accent or circumflex 
accent on top of the vowel concerned. 

The Consonants 

The Tagalog consonants are 6, A% d, g f h. I, m t n, ng t p. 



t'AHE L>4 



THE REPUBLIC 



x in English word boxing has been changed to ks, as in bok- 
siny. 

x in Spanish word texto (text) has been changed to s, as in 
testo. 

x in Mexia* has been changed to //, as in Mdtiko. 

z in lupiz (pencil) has been changed to *. as in lapis. 

Lesson I 

THE ARTICLES 

1. Articles of tlie Proper Noun — When referring to a per- 
son, the Tagalog definite article si (nominative, singular) is used 
before the name. For examples: 

(a) Nominative 

Si Maria ay maganda 

Mary is pretty (beautiful) 
Si Ana ay mabuti 

Ann is good 
Si Haring Solomon ay isang matalinong hari 

King Solomon was a wise king 

Si Heneral Wainwright ay isang bayani 
General Wainwright is a hero 

The plural of st is sina, which has no equivalent in English. 
For examples: 

Stmt Maria at Ana ay nag-aaral sa Maynila 
Mary and Ann are studying in Manila 
Sina Haring Solomon at Heneral Wainwright ay ban- 
tog sa kasaysayan 
King Solomon and General Wainwright are fa- 
mous in history 

(b) Possessive. — Ni and niwt, equivalent to of or by, are used 
as particles before personal proper nouns, genitive singular and 
plural, respectively, thus: 

Ito ay aklat ni Maria 

This is Mary's book 

Iyan ay bahay nina Maria at Ana 

That is the house of Mary and Ann 

(c) Dative. — Kay (singular) and kina (plural) are equiva- 
lent to the words to or for in English, which are used before 
proper nouns. For examples: 

Kay Maria 
For Mary 

Kirva Maria at Ana 
For Mary and Ann 

2. Article of the Common Noun. — For common nouns, the 
articles any (singular) and any mga (plural) are used in the 
nominative form; thus: 

(a) No mi mat ire 

Any ibon ay lumilipad 

The bird is flying 

Any mga kabayo ay tumatakbo 

The horses are runnfhg 

(b) Possessive — Ng (pronounced Ytdi^y) and ng mga (pro- 
nounced nang manga), possessive of article any, are used as fol- 
lows : 

Bulaklak ng magandang salita ay nakatutuwa 
Flower of good speech is pleasing 
Ang Hari at Reyna ay Dihirang makita ng mga tfito 
The King and the Queen are seldom seen by the people 

(c) Dative. — .Sa (singula)) ami sa mga (plural), equiva- 
lent to English prepositions on, to, from, of, by, in, for, than, 
and a Tagalog prefix meaning instantly, are also used as art- 
icles (locative or geographical) of common nouns. For exam- 
ples: 

Sa iyo 
To you 

Sa dalagang sapatos ang nakatanghal 
The maiden's shoes are on display 
Sa mga bituwing liwanag ang nakikita natin 
The stars' light is what we see 



3. The English indefinite article a has no equivalent h. Ta- 
galog, but the approximate translation is isang, meaning one. 
For example; a ball, isajig bola. 

VOCABULARY 



St, referring to person 
sina, plural of si 
ni, possessive of si 
nina\ plural of ni 
Kkiij, to or for 
kina, plural of kay 
any, the 

ting mga, plural of any 

na, possessive of ang 

ng mga, plural of ng 

sa mga, plural of .sa 

ang mga tao. the people 

ng mga tao, by the people 

para sa mga. tao, for the people 

ay) is, are 

mabuti, good 

magaiula, beautiful 

hari, king 

rzyva, queen 



heneral, general 
bantog, famous* 
kasaysayan, history 
aklat, book 
at, and 
ibon, bird 
himiUpad, flying 
kabayo, horse 
tumatakbo, running 
bulaklak, flower 
salita, word, speech 
nakatutuwa, pi easing 
clalaga, maiden 
sapatos, shoes 
nakatanghal, on displ 
bit u win, star 
liwanag, light 
nakikita natin, wg see 
b ihiru, seldom 



{To be confirmed) 



COLLEGIAN. 

BEAUTY SHOP \ 

'THE OLDEST PIONEER" 
10 U) BiUbid Viejo (Continuation of Rm>n. iu-«r 
San Sebastian Church). Manila 




DE LEON BROS. 

TAILORS 



M. M. DE LEON 



TecJt. Designer 



Gonzaga St. 



Baeolod City, P 



THS REPUBLIC 



UNITED PHILIPPINES ORGANIZATION 

("BUKLOD NG PILIPINAS," BRIEFLY "BUKLOD") 
FORMERLY: "FILIPINOS UNIDOS, INC." 



A BRIEF HISTORY 

On July 4, 1922, at the invitation of the then municipal pres. 
ident of Pasay, Rizal (now Rizal City), Miguel R. Cornejo, our 
managing editor, a general meeting of former revolutionary lead- 
ers, prominent businessmen, politicians, and leading residents was 
held at 198 Libertad, Pasay, which was attended by General # 
Daniel Tirona, General Tomas Mascardo, General Pio del Pilar, 
Colonel Teodoro Tolentino, Senator Emiliano T. Tirona, Gvcrnor 
Raymundo C. Jeeiel, Representative Pedro F. Espiritu, Governor 
Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr., Board Member Ruperto T. Martinez, Dr. 
Pedro Manalo, Councilors Primitivo Lovina, Ismacl S. Zapata, 
Cinlo Sico, Jose S. Milan, Santiago Masanga, Melchor Ongjoco, 
Mariano Sayo, David Aznar, and others, for the purpose of form- 
ing a national union, which was formally organized that same 
day under the name of "Filipinos' Unidos, Union Suprema Na- 
oional de Filipinos" (United Philippines, Supreme National 
nion of the Philippines), and incorporated under the laws of 
the country in 1924, with the following officers: 

RerT 3r EmiU0 A&uinaldo > Honorary President 

P- Miguel R. Cornejo, Supreme Head and President of the 
Sen Pr . CTne Cou ncil 
en. Emilio T. Tirona, Counselor and Head of the Civic 
Chamber 

ov Eulogio Rodriguez, Counselor and Head of Mercantile 
Chamber 

ov - Haymundo C. Jcciel, Counselor and Head of Agricul- 
Gen Cha mber 

Chambe Tirona, Counsd °r an <* Head of I ndustrial 

Kep. Pedro F. Espiritu, Counselor and Head of Labor 
Chamber 

GGT1 *J r i°! TlaS Mascar <io, Counselor and Head of Fraternal- 
Dr p ,htar V Chamber 

1 ' oi^ 1 , R ' Verzosa » Counselor and Head of Educational 
Chamber 

Atty. .Ruperto T. Martinez, Legal Adviser 

Mr *!T n ° L * Sant y^ Gen <*al Secretary 
M ' 5; steba » Eseanilla, General Treasurer 
J ' ™ cl ° Eugenie, General Auditor 
Mr y iC , e . nte Sac ramento, Assistant General Secretary 
i. Ladislao Dizon, Assistant General Treasurer and 
r< Fedro Manalo, Technical Adviser 
The association spread throughout the Islands to foster the 
Mmit of nationalism and existed for more than five years un- 
1 d,ssolv *d in 1928 by order of the Court of First lu- 

ll ance .. of Manila, because the majority of the members decided 
<> disband it and to join the so-called "Supreme National 
.ouncil (Conse.jo Supremo Nacional) whioh was organized by 
the two major parties, Nacionalista and Lemocrata, in the ear- 
7 ^l' 1 of 1926 under the leadership of Senate President Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon, Speaker Manuel A. Roxas, Senator Emiliano T. 
Jirona, and other political leaders who formed said political 
union for national unity. In other words, the "Filipinos Uni- 
dos' gave way to a more important national organization which 
We Ete0ple hud to support, for they had to rally behind the 
movement led by President Quezon in his fight for a more 
autonomous government and independence of the Philippines., 
although it was said to be a part of the scheme of the late 
president to keep his post as head of the senate by courting the 



friendship of Dcmocrata senators in order to support his re- 
election against his old colleague, Senator Sergio Osmena, who 
was his rival aspirant for the presidency of the senate during 
their controversy with the late Governor-General Leonard Wood. 
When Governor Wood died in the United States in 1927, and 
Governor-General Henry L. Stimson assumed the duties as Chief 
Executive of the Philippine Government in 1928, the "Supreme 
National Council" died a natural death and the two wings of 
the Nacionalista Party, the Colectivista then headed by Sen- 
ate President Quezon, and the UniperSonalista, headed by Sen- 
ator Osmena, fused together into the so-called ^artido Nacio- 
nalista Consolidado," and renewed their fight against the Dc- 
mocrata Party until the latter was dissolved in 1932 and later 
revived by Rep. Gregorio Perfecto only to be divided into so- 
called "Pro Hare-Hawes-Cutting Bill," headed by the "°* r ° x M 
(Osmena-Roxas) faction, and "Anti Hare-Hawes-Cutting BUI, 
headed by Quezon-Rodriguez team. When the issue was decid- 
ed in favor of the "Anti" by the rejection of said bill in 193J, 
the Democrata leaders who sided both wings of the Nacionalis- 
ta Party in 1935 joined the majority party Before the Common- 
wealth Government was inaugurated on November 15 that year. 

President Quezon, shortly before the national elections of 
November 11, 1941, advocated the abolition of all political par- 
ties in the Philippines with a view to forming only one party 
system of government which the opposition branded as dictatorial 
and did not materialize. 

During the Japanese occupation, a national association known 
as the "Kalibapi" was organized as a semi-political body and 
District and Neighborhood Associations were formed in Manila 
and various parts of the country as a means of unifying the 
Filipino people into a cooperative union. Said associations were 
identical in nature to the original organization of the "Filipinos 
Unidos" which was dissolved in 1928. The National Volunteers 
of the Philippines which the founder of the " Filipinos Unidos" 
organized in 1932 as a sequence of said civic-military asocia- 
tion could not openly work for the revival of the organization, 
and instead, underground resistance movement was organized 
under various leaders, but many of these guerrilla unit com- 
manders joined different guerrilla organizations, most of which 
have already been recognized, except the unit headed by the 
original founder and organizer of the National Volunteers, Maj. 
Gen. Miguel R. Cornejo, as commanding general of the Cornejo 
Brigade, which was reduced after liberation to a regimental unit 
known as the "25th Red Lion Regiment, NV, of the Hugh 
Straughn's Irregular Troops/' 

In August, 1945, Attorney Cornejo began to mobilize the 
remnants of the "Filipinos Unidos" and "National Volunteers" 
who were still loyal to him, and he then revived the association 
under the name "BUKLOD NG PILIPINAS" (United Philip- 
pines Organization), which Tagalog word, B-U-K-L-O-D, (mean- 
ing tie or bond), repi-esents "Builders of Unity, Kindness, Lo- 
yalty, Order and Discipline"; and after organizing some basic 
units or local committees in Manila, Rizal City, and other neigh- 
boring towns or provinces, he called a general meeting on April 
20, 1947, at 3460 Taft Avenue, for the purpose of forming the 
provisional Supreme Council as follows: 

Atty. Miguel R. Cornejo, acting Supreme Head and Pres- 
ident of the Supreme Council; 

Atty. Teodoro M. Llamanzares, acting Counselor and Head 
of Law and Government Chamber; 



THK REPUBLIC 



Col. Manuel Dikit, acting Counselor and Head of Mutual 
Aid and National Security Chamber; 

Dr. Jose Leveriza, acting Counselor and Head of Health 
and Education Chamber; 

Atty. Magdaleno M. Palacol, acting Counselor and Head 
of Economics and Finance Chamber; 

Atty. Enrique T. Manaloto. acting Counselor and Head of 
Labor and Industry Chamber; 

Atty. Moises O. Bontoc, acting Counselor and Head of Agri- 
culture and Commerce Chamber; 

Mr. Jose Escueta, acting Counselor and Head of Transpor- 
tation and Communications Chamber; 

Atty. Artemio Domingo, acting General Secretary; 

Mr. Domingo D. Pascuah acting General Treasurer; and 

Mr. Isaac Buenaflor, acting General Auditor. 

AIMS AND PURPOSES 

As a national organization its aims and pu rposes are brief- 
ly summarized as follows: 

1. Law and Government. — To aid the government in the 
maintenance of public peace and order; train its members to 
know and obey the laws; work for democratic freedoms; and 
improve present conditions by endeavoring to elect honest and 
efficient public officials by all peaceful and legal means. 

2. Mutual Aid and National Security. — To render assist- 
ance to its members, in particular, and to the public, in general, 
in every way possible, and to give such members military and 
vocational training and discipline according to their age, sex, 
and inclination, with a view to serving the country in cases of 
emergency or public calamities. 

3. Health and Education. — To foster good habits and build 
good character for decent enjoyment of life so essential in a 
civilized nation, and endeavor to increase Philippine population 
by employing all legal means to attain it through proper edu- 
cation" — cultural, physical, economic, moral and scientific. 

4. Economics and Finance. — To train the members in prac- 
ticing thrift and economy, contributing to common and special 
funds, as the constitution and by-laws shall provide, for the pur- 
pose of forming or organizing financing corporations, banking 
institutions, and other activities tending to stabilize the economic 
conditio)!; of the country. 

o. Labor and Industry. — To group different labor associa- 
tions and individual laborers together under the auspices of the 
BUKLOD and to improve the relations between labor and cap- 
ital, as well as to endeavor to give the laborers and their fa- 
milies all the help and protection they need through this orga- 
nization: to establish different kinds of industry which may 
accommodate unemployed or jobless members, and to increase 
local production of important commodities for economic self- 
sufficiency of the Philippines. 

6. Agriculture and Co iiimerce. — To acQiiire, either by pur- 
chase or by lease or concession, public and private agricultural 
lands, forests, mines, etc., for settlement and development pur- 
poses, including fishing and cattle raising, canning and pack- 
ing, and other commercial enterprises; and to open and operate a 
chain of stores or exchanges throughout the Islands, as well as 
to establish warehouses, business centers and agencies in im- 
portant strategic points of the Philippines and abroad, for im- 
port and export trade, < u 

7. Transportation and Communications. — To establish and 
operate transportation and communication companies by land, by 
water, and by air, by organizing different corporations under the 
laws of the Philippines. 

HOW TO ORGANIZE LOCAL COMMITTEES 
Any person, duly authorized by the Supreme Council of this 
organization, may form a local committee or unit, called "Ba- 

rangay," and give it the name: "BUKLOD NG » 

(name of place), which shall be composed of no less than ten 
(10) members, who shall elect from among themselves the pro- 
visional officers, namely, one acting president, one acting sec- 

THE RE^UBTJC 



THE COMPOSER OF THE "BUKLOD" MILITARY MARCH 




Dr. RODOLFO R. CORNEJO, Mus. B., Mus. M., Ph. D. 
Pianist, Composer, and Conductor 

retary, one acting treasurer, and seven acting executive com- 
mittee members, whose duty it is to recruit new members and 
submit their applications to the Supreme Council for approval. 
No fees shall be collected, pending advice of the approval of the 
application. Meanwhile, all the expenses incurred by the or- 
ganizer shall be borne by him or her until the corresponding 
permit shall have been granted to him by the Bank Commission- 
er for the establishment of his or her committee. 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 

The Constitution and By-Laws of this organization will be 
printed and distributed as soon as the Articles of Incorporation 
shall have been submitted to and approved by the Commissioner 
of Securities and Exchange Commission. 

For further particulars, please write to: JOSE ASTILLE- 
RO, Acting Publicity Officer, 3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City. 



COMPLIMENTS 



F. H. AQUINO & so** 

METAL ENGRAVER & MANUFACTURER 
1849 Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 



SPECIALTIES: 

Memorial Tablets 
Notarial Seals, Me- 
dals, Buckles, College 
Pins, Brass Signs and any- 
thing in Metal Works. 



SUPPLIERS of 
Insignias, Decorations 
and Awards to: 
U.S. Army, Philippine Sco- 
uts, Philippine Armv, Boy 
Scouts of the Philippines, 
Girl Scouts of the Philip- 
pines. 



The MEDICUS CLINIC 

8*28 Taft Avenue. Ri^.i City — Tols. 5*618 & 21666 
Physicians : Dr. EDUARDO R. SAN JUAN MI) 
Dr. A. B. JAVIER, M.D. 
Diseaw of Children and Gvnerul Medicbi* 
Clinic Hours: 24 Hours Con*ultnton« : 8-12 a.m. & *g pm 



PAGE 27 



PPOLOGUEL TeECITATlvE.) tofheMlLlTARy MAfccH: 

ID HJ IK EL (D D ^ tefr^ * 

TO BE SUNG BS1 A SOLOIST 2tf P BE PA RATION FOP A PA ? A DB MAfccnoe HIKE. 



Rscd Moesicso e c/rom ico 
& UK- LO D 
















** 




— 1 


4 


y 7 fl : 


• 


-* 


> 


• * 




f 

• 

, yy 




=±±±=£ 

-*£ — 1 


ft — 


• 


• 


- 




• 
























Dedicated to ihe+Founde r end Members of 

" B UK L □ D" 



Copurighl,1947U5A' 

bu ihe Composer. A ^ • 

Tpo r di Morcia 



Bu l?ODOLFoCoRN t JO 




rx" . * — v- 




— - * — - 










— 0 


■ ^ V ^ i 

^ f V V - 






1— i- 










- 




y 


u — — 


— • 




rrfir f~ 


9 






(3 

J 






€ 

* 


: ft ^ — 




■ 








i 




5 Svcfcdlib 




ibio Etut/d — crs of 



U- /y 




"•Wilis, 



UNITED NATIONS -NATIONS UNIES 

. Lake Success. New York. Fieldstone 7-1100 



A SCENE OF THE UNITED NATIONS' GENERAL ASSEMBLY IN ACTUAL SESSION 

The above photograph and all the pictures and brief biographies of the heads of Delegations and other ^legates to the United 
Nation? ^^n^^Usemtiy published in this magazine and directory have been furnished by the United Nations Photo (Depart- 
ment of Public Information) through the courtesy of Mrs. 
M Arakie, Reference Center, and Frances L. Orkm, Photo 
Distribution Officer, to our managing editor, Atty. MigueJ 
R. Comejo, editor and publisher of "Cornejo's Directory 
of the Philippine Republic". 

THE PRESIDENT AND SEVEN VICE PRESIDENTS OF 
THE UNITED NATIONS' GENERAL ASSEMBLY 

P resident 

Hon. PAUL-HENRI SPAAK, of Belgium 

Vice-Presidents 
Senator WARREN R. AUSTIN, of U. S. A. 

The Right Honourable ERNEST BEVIN, 
Britain's Foreign Minister 
Foreign Minister VIACHESLAV M. M0L0T0V, 
of the U.S.S.R. 
Dr. V. K. WELLINGTON K00, 
Chinese Ambassador to U. S. 
M. ALEXANDRE PARODI, of France 
Field Marshal JAN CHRISTIAAN SMUTS, 
of Union of South Africa 
Dr. CARLOS EDUARDO STOLK 
of Venezuela 





Hon. 



PAUL-HENRI SPAAK 
President 



Hon. TRYGVE LIE 
Secretary -General 



THE KEPUBLIC 



PAGE 31 



THe Chief Delegates To The United Nations' Gen. Assembly 



Afghanistan 



Argentina 



Australia 




Hon. ABDOL H. KAHN AZIZ 
States f A f0hani8tan to the United 



tr^iS, H ° Sayn ^ Envoy Ex- 

of 2tT ly Minister Plenipotentiary 

?943 ? amS K an *° the U * ited States since 

and Z*** ?* in Tehra ^ l ™"> 1896 
and educated at Habibiya College, Kabul, 

^T w ? n ;^ c thcn cntcred th « f °™^ 

heM 7 Afghani8t ** and subsequently 
held posts as: First Secretary and then 
Counselor to the Afghan Legation, Teh- 
an from 1919-1922; Director in the Min- 
istry of Foreign Affairs, 1922; Consul 
t:; 1 ^^ Af Shanistan In India, 1923- 
IMPj Envoy Extraordinary and Minister 
I J cm potential* y at Rome, 1929-1932; Am- 
bassador Extraordinary and Plenipoten- 

ic a Jo V *7 Af * haniBt ™ Moscow, 1932- 
1.W8; Minister of Public Works. 1938-1940: 
and Minister of P 08ts and Telegraph from 
LMO until he took over his present duties. 
Mr. Aziz w af? an observer for the Afghan 
government at the Narcotic Drugs Con- 
ference in Geneva in 1931 and Chairman 
of the Afghan delegatons to the Disarm- 
ament Conferenee in Geneva in 1932, the 
International Civil Aviation Conference at 
Chicago in 1944 and the PICAO Assembly 
at Montreal in 1946. 




Hon. JOSE ARCE 

Permanent Argentine Representative and 
Chairman of the Delegation from Argen- 
tina to the VN General Assembly. 

Dr. Jose Arce, appointed permanent re- 
presentative of Argentina to the United 
Nations last September, and Chairman of 
the Argentinian delegation to the General 
Assembly, is one of his country's leading 
physicians and has participated in practi- 
cally every international congress and con- 
ference in the field of medicine. He is tho 
author of a great number of scientific ami 
medical of a great number of scientific and 
Loberia, Province of Buenos Aires in 1881, 
he obtained his Doctorate of Medicine tn 
1903. Subsequently he has held the po- 
sitions, among others, of Dean of the Fac- 
ulty of Medical Sciences and Rector of 
the University of Bueno Aires; member 
of the Chamber of Deputies (1903 to 1913) ; 
President of the Chamber of Deputies 
(1912 to 1913); Deputy for Buenos Aires 
Province in the National Legislature 
(1924 to 1929); First Vice-President of 
the National Chamber of Deputies (1926 
to 1927); member of the Constituent Con- 
vention of tne Province of Buenos Ai- 
res in 1934; and Ambassador of Argentina 
to China from 1945 to 1946. 




Hon. NORMAN J. C. MAKIN 

Australian Ambassador to Washington 
and Chairman of his country's delegation 
to the first session of the UN General As- 
sembly. 

Leader of the Australian delegation to 
the General Assembly, Norman John Os- 
wald Makin was appointed first Aus- 
tralian Ambassador to the United States 
of America in August of this year. Born 
in 1889 in Petersham, New South Wales, 
he represented the South Australian Elec- 
torate of Hindmarsh in the House of R, - 
presentatives as a member of the Labour 
Party from 1919 to 1946, and in the La- 
bour Government of 1929 to 19SI, was 
Speaker of the House of Representative* 
of the Federal Government. In 1935 ha 
was selected by the Empire Parliamentary 
Association to attend the Silver Jubihv 
of king George V. and in 1937 represented 
the Labour Party at the Coronation (f 
King George VI. Appointed Minister of 
Navy and Munitions in October 1941, he 
was given the additional post of Minister 
for Aircraft Production in 1943 and In M 
both these portfolios until his recent ap 
pointment as Ambassador to the United 
States. He led the Australian delegation 
to the General Assembly and was the firs! 
1* resident of the Security Council. 



|"\T> T\T7t T% I^TfXWT YOUR COPY OF CORNEJO'S DIRECTORY OF THE PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC. 
" JrM\]LJM^MAt J^lVj W P&r 1948-1949. Pro-Publication Price P25.00 the copy (about 1,250 pages). 



TACK 32 



THE REPtJBT.lt: 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 



Belgium 

Hon. FERNAND Van LANGENHOVE 

Secretary-General of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade. 

Deputizing as leader of the Belgian del- 
egation for M. Spaak when his duties as 
President of the General Assembly pre- 
vent him from carrying out this function, 
M. Fernand Van Langenhove, Ambassador 

E x t r aordinary 
and Plenipoten- 
tiary, is Secre- 
tary-Ger.eral of 
the Ministry of 
Foreign Af- 
fairs and For- 
eign Trade. Born 
in Mouscron, Bel- 
gium, in 1889, he 
has been since 
1920 a Profes- 
sor of Sociology and Social Policy at the 
Univ. of Brussels, and is the author of se- 
veral books on economic and diplomatic 
questions. He was a member of the Belgian 
delegations to the Assemblies of the League 
of Nations between 1929 and 1938 and rep- 
resented his country at international re- 
parations conferences in London (1924), 
The Hague (1929 and 1930), and Ouchy 
(1932) ; the international economic con- 
ferences in Geneva (1926) and Stresa 
(1923) ; and the international conference 
on commerce in London (1933). He was 
a delegate to the San Francisco Confer- 
ence and an alternate to the Preparatory 
Committee and General Assembly in Lon- 
don. 



Kolivia 





Appointed permanent representative of 
Bolivia to the United Nations in August 
this year, Senor Adolf o Costa du Rels 
was born in Sucre, the constitutional cap- 
ital of Bolivia, in 1891. He was educated 
in Corsica and then studied at the L T niv- 
orsity of Paris, graduating in law and 
political science in 1910. On his return 
to Bolivia he spent some years prospc.ct- 
ing for oil and became well-known as a 
novelist and short story writer in French 
and Spanish, winning the literray prize 
Femina in Paris. In 1918 he entered the di- 
plomatic service and was appointed sec- 
ond secretary to the Bolivian Legation 
to Chile. He was Counselor to the Boli- 
vian Legation in Paris from 1921 to 1932 
after which he was appointed Minister 
Plenipotentiary to Geneva, was Bolivian de- 
legate to the League of Nations, and led 
the Bolivian delegation to the Chaco Peace 
Conference in 1936. In 1939 he was elect- 
ed chairman of the Council of the League 
of Nations. He was Ambassador to the 
Argentine from 1941 to 1944 and attended 
the Liquidation Board of the League ,>f 
Nations in 1946 before taking up his pres- 
ent duties. 



Brazil 




Hon. ADOLFO COSTA Du RELS 

Chairman of the Delegation to the UN 
General Assembly. 



Dr. PEDRO LEAO VELLOSO 

Chairman of the Delcgatioyi 
(Died 16 January 1947) 

A career diplomat for the past 39 years, 
and well-known in his country as a distin- 
guished columnist on a hading Rio do 
Janeiro newspaper, Ambassador Pedro Le- 
ao Velloso, permanent representative of 
Brazil to the Security Council, is leading 
the Brazilian delegation to the General 
Assembly. Born in the State of Sao 



Paulo, he graduated in law from the Rio 
de Janeiro Law School and began his ca- 
reer as an assistant to the Brazilian-Pe- 
ruvian Tribunal of Arbitration. As Em- 
bassy Secretary he served in Rome, Pa- 
ris, Berne, Copehan.uvn and attended the 
Versailles Peace Conference. In 1931 he 
became Minister Plenipotentiary and was 
appointed to China. Four years later he 
was made an Ambassador and served in 
Japan and Italy. In 1942 he became Sec- 
retary-General of the Brazilian Minis- 
try for External Relations, and in 1944, 
Minister of State for External Relations, 
relinquishing this post on taking up his 
present position. He died on 16 January 
1947. 



Byelorussian S.S.R* 




Hon. KUZMA V. KISELEV 

Chairman of the Byelorussian S.S.R. 
Delegation to the UN General Assembly 
before the opening of the second meeting 
of the Asscynbly in the United Stats. 
(Flushing Meadows, NY 24 October 1946) 

Kuzma Vcnedictovich Kiselev, Minist-r 
of Foreign Affairs for Byelorussian S.S.R., 
was born in 1903 in the Mogivlev Ob- 
last and graduated in medicine from the 
State University of Voronezh in 1928. Af- 
ter some years practising medicine he was 
appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs for 
Byelorussia. He led the delegation of the 
Byelorussian S.S.R. to the San Francisco 
Conference in 1945 and to the first part 
of the first session of the- General Assem- 
bly in London in 1946. He has come to 
the present session of the General Assem- 
bly from the Paris Conference where he 
was leading the Byelorussian delegation. 



THE REPUHUO 



PAGE 38 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nation*' General Assembly 
Chile Canada China 






Hon. FELIX NIETO DEL RIO Hon. LOUIS STEPHEN ST. LAURENT DR . V . K. WELLINGTON KOO 



Permanent Representative to the United 
nations nnd Chairman of the delegation 
10 the General Assembly. 

Senor Don Felix Nieto del Rio, who was 
appointed permanent representative of 
^nile to the United Nations last month, 
is Editor of El Mcrmrio and one of Chi- 
les most distinguished writers on foreign 
affairs. Born in Canguenes, Province of 
Maule, Chile, in 1888, he studied law and 
from 1917 to 1926 was secretary at the 
Embassies in ' Washington and Belgium 
and in 1920 was secretary to the Chilean 
delegation to the League of Nations. Sub- 
sequently he held various high offices in 
™« Political Department of the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs, was special Minister to 
Peru in 1929 and Under-Sccretarv of Fo- 
reign Affairs in 1920. He was Chilean Am- 
bassador to Brazil from 1086 to 1939 and 
was then Chilean representative on the 
Permanent Tutor- American Juridical Com- 
mittee. He played an important part at 
the Cfiaco Peace Conference, attended the 
.San pVanclaeo Conference and has repre- 
sented his eounlry at many inter- Amer- 
ican Conferences. 



Mrs. AMANDA P. LABARCA 

Dclryat,' of Chile to UN General 
Assembly. 

Mrs. Amanda Pinto do Labarca Hubert- 
SOTrt, a delegato of Chile to th.- present ses- 
sion of the General Assembly, is one of 
her counrty's best-known and most widciy 
(Travelled educationalists and the author of 
numerous educal ional works. Born in 
1886. she studied at the University of Chi- 
le, Santiago; Columbia University, New 
York; and the Sorbonne, Paris, obtaining 



Canadian Secretary of State for Exter- 
nai A ffair.-, Mhmter of Justice and Clwir- 
tnan of his country's delegation to UN 
General Assembly. 

Appointed Canadian Secretary of State 
for External Affairs in September " 1946, 
Louis Stephen St. Laurent is, in addi- 
tion, Minister of Justice and Attorney Gen- 
eral, having held this portfolio since De- 
cember 1941. Born in Compton, Quebec, 
in 1882, of French-Canadian and Irish- 
Canadian parents, he was educated at St. 
Charles College, Sherbrooke, Quebec, and 
at Laval University. Quebec City, grad- 
uating in law. Mr. St. Laurent has served 
as batonnier of the local Quebec City Bar, 
batonnier-renoral of Quebec Province Bar 
and president of the Canadian Bar Asso- 
eiation. He has pleaded manv important 
cases before the Supreme Court of Ca- 
nada and before the Judicial Committee of 
tK- Rtftaft Privv. Council. He was de- 
puty chairman of the Canadian delegation 
to the San Francisco Conference in 194K 
and chairman of the Canadian delegation to 
the General Assembly in London. During 
Mr. King's absence abroad this summer 
he served as acting Prime Minister. Mr. 
St. Laurent was made a member of the 
Imperial Privy Council in January of this 
year. 



Chinese Ambassador to the United States 
and Chairman of delegation to the Gren- 
efal Assembly. 

Dr. V. K. Wellington Koo, leader of the 
delegation of China to the present session 
of the General Assemhlv. has been the Chi- 
nese Ambassador to Great B^+* 7 " since 
10.11. Born in in "»S Q * Vo wa * 

odneat*'* fV.p>-o a*^ in the TT.fi. A., ob- 
to;pW Vos Ph.D. in Political fiance in 
1912. TT* then entered on a political ca- 
reer and dnrW the p*«t ™ vears has at- 
f, f u)M all important intern atonal con- 
f>renres as the representative of bis coun- 
try, including the Dumbarton Onks and 
Snu Franei^eo Conferences and the Pre- 
nnratow Commission and General Assem- 
bly of the United Nations in London. He 
has held various government offices in 
China, among them that of Minister of 
Foreign Affairs in 1922, 1024 and 1981: 
Minister of Finance in 1931 and Prime 
Minister in 1927. He has also served as 
Chinese Minister to Mexico, Cuba and the 
United States and from 1932 until his ap- 
pointment to his present position was Chi 
nese Ambassador to France. 



her Ph.B. She was from 1916 to 1923 
a school director; served as an extra Pro- 
fessor of Psychiatry at the Pedagogical 
Institute of the University of Chile from 
1922 to 1923; and from 1923 to 1928 was 
a Professor of Philosophy. From 1931 
to 1932 she was Director General of Se- 
condary School Education in Chile and 



in L9&4 was appointed government repres- 
entative on the Council to the University 
of Chile. In 1936 she was a member of 
the Press Executive Committee of the 
Chilean Commission on Intellectual Co- 
operation. Mrs. Labarca is now the Pres- 
ident of the Federation of Women of 
Chile. 



Paw 14 



THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 




Colombia 

Dr. EDUARDO ZULETA ANGEL 

Delegate to the United Nations' Gen- 
eral Assembly and Chairman of the Per- 
manent Headquarters Committee. 

Dr. Euuardo Zuleta Angel, a member 
of the Colombian delegation and Chairman 
of the Permanent Headquarters Commit- 
tee, attend -d the San Francisco Confer- 
ence in 1945, was 
President of the 
Preparatory Com- 
mission and a del- 
egate to the Gen- 
eral Assembly in 
London. He led 
the Colombian del- 
egation to the 
^ third session of the 
B Economic Confer- 
! ence in London in 
1933, and the 
Conference of Central Banks in Wash, 
ington. He graduated in law and 
political science in 1919 and later took his 
LL.D. at the Faculte de Droit in Paris. 
He was a professor of Civil Law at th« 
Universidad Nacional of Colombia, Dean 
of the Law Faculty of the Universidad Na- 
cional and Professor of the Universidad 
Javeriana, the Universidad Libre and Co- 
legio del Rosario, all located in Bogota. A 
Judge of the Supreme Court of Colombia, 
he was elected President of the Sala de 
Casacion Civil in 1935. From 1943 to 
1945 he was Ambassador to Peru. 



Dr. ALFONSO LOPEZ 

Former President of the Republic of 
Colombia. 

Active in politics for the past 40 years, 
Dr. Alfonso Lopez was born in Honda, 
Colombia, in 1886. He studied law and 
finance in Lon- 
don and the 
U.S.A. and la- 
ter was a 
founder and 
Vice - President 
of the Amer- 
ican Mercan- 
tile Bank of 
Colombia, be- 
coming its Pre- 
sident in 1918. 
He worked for the Liberal Party of Colons 
bia, and in 1915 was elected Liberal De* 
puty for the Tolima Department. In 1931 
he was appointed Colombian Minister to 
Great Britain and three years later, in 
1934, was elected President of the Repub- 
lic of Colombia, which office he retained 
until 1938. He was re-elected to this office 
in 1942, but resigned in 1945. In 1933 ho 
was a delegate to the Economic Confer- 



Costa Rica 



Cuba 





Hon. FRANCISCO De PAULA 
GUTIERREZ 

Ambassador of Costa Rica to the United 
States. 

Don Francisco de Paula Gutierrez R., 
Ambassador of Costa Rica to the United 
States since March 1944, was born in San 
Jose, Costa Rica, in 1880, where he took 
his early education. He then went to 
Columbia University, New York, to study 
economic sciences. A financial expert, he 
was Secretary of the Treasury from 1937 
to 1939, and again from 1943 to 1944, and 
led his country's delegation to the Mone- 
tary Conference at Bret ton Woods, of 
which he was Chairman. Scnor Paula Gu- 
tierrez R. has twice been elected to Con- 
gress, representing the Province of Li- 
mon, and was Vice-President of the Cham- 
ber of Deputies from 1932 to 1934. In 
1943, he was appointed Secretary of State 
for Industrial Development. He has re- 
presented his country at a number of in- 
ternational conferences, including the UN- 
RRA Conference in Atlantic City in 1944 
and the San Francisco Conference in 
1945. 




Dr. GUILLERMO BELT 

Cuban Ambassador to the United States 
and Permanent Delegate to the United Nm- 
tions. 

Dr. Guillermo Belt y Ramirez, Cuban Am- 
bassador to the United States since 1944, 
was appointed permanent delegate to tn« 
United Nations in March 1946. Born in 
Havana in 1905, he obtained his Doctorate 
of Civil Law from the University of Ha- 
vana in 1925. He practiced law until 193* 
when he became Secretary of Public Ins- 
truction and Fine Arts. Subsequently Dr. 
Belt held the offices of Secretary of th« 
Council of Stace, Secretary without Port- 
folio and in 1935 was elected Mayor of 
Havana. His association with the United 
Nations began as Chairman of the Cuban 
delegation to the San Francisco Conference, 
where he was Rapporteur of the Delega- 
tion Chairman on the organization of the 
Conference. Later he was Chairman of the 
Cuban delegation to the Preparatory Com- 
mission in London, where he was also Chair- 
man of the Committee on Trusteeship He 
attended the General Assembly in Lon- 
don, and in June of this year represented 
his country at the Emergency Food Con- 
ference in Washington. 



ence in London and Chairman of the Co- i s actively interested in ion,, r " 

lombian Delegation to the Pan-American a founder of J VI and is 

Conference at Montevideo. In addition or a^ 

to his long career in politics, Dr. Lopez P °' ° f El Dtari ° Nacional. 



LEARN THE 

TAGALOCr LANGUAGE 

thru correspondence by subscribing to 

The REPUBLIC— 3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City, Phil. 



THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 



Czechoslovakia 



Denmark 



? funeral Assembly 
Dominican Republic 




Hon. JAN MASARYK 

Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
™*7i of Czechoslovak delegation to UN Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

Jan Masaryk, Minister of Foreign Af- 
fairs for Czechoslovakia, and son of Tho- 
mas Garrigue Masaryk, founder of the 
Czechoslovak Republic, was born in 1886 
M agUc whc1 ^ he was also educated. 

Masaryk came to the United States, 
lor the first time, in 1007, and for a pe- 
riod worked as an ironworker. After World 
War I, he returned to the United States as 
Charge d'Affairs in Washington for the 
newly founded Republic of Czechoslovakia. 
From 1920 to 1922 and 1923 to 1925 he 
served in the Foreign Office in Prague, 
spending the year 1922 to 1923 as Coun- 
selor to the Czechoslovak Legation in Lon- 
don. Appointed Czechoslovak Minister to 
Great Britain in 1925 he resigned in 1938 
in protest over the Munich agreement. Af- 
ter a lecture tour in the United States he 
returned to England and started short- 
wave broadcasts to his country. In 1940 
he was appointed Foreign Minister of the 
Czechoslovak Government in London and 
from 1941 to 1945 was also Vice-Premier. 
He was Chairman of the Czechoslovak 
delegations to the UNRRA Conference in 
Atlantic City in 1943, the International La- 
bour Conference in Philadelphia in 1944, 
the San Francisco Conference in 1945, 
the General Assembly in London and the 
recent Conference in Paris. 




Hon. GUSTAV RASMUSSEN 

Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
man of delegation to the First Session of 
the UN General Assembly. 

Gustav Rasmussen, the Minister of Fo- 
reign Allans for Denmark, was bom ip 
1895, in Odense. He graduated in law 
in 1921 at the University of Copenhagen 
and was appointed a Secretary in the Mm- 
istry oi roreign Allans. Subsequently 
iic served as Unarge d/Atlaires in tterne 
(LWM to 1U31); assisted as deputy ad- 
vocate at the Permanent Court or inter- 
national Justiee at Tue riague during tne 
proceedings concerning the legal status 
ui r,ast Greenland; was Counselor to th« 
Danish Delegation to the League of Na- 
tions in Geneva (1934 to l^o> y Chiel 
of Section in the Foreign Oiiiee (193*8 
to 1939) ; and Counselor to the Danish 
Legation in London from 1939 until dis- 
missed from this post in March 1942 owing 
to German pressure. He was a member 
of the Danish Council and Military Mis- 
sion in London during World War II. In 
November 1945 he became Minister of Fo- 
reign Affairs. Mr. Rasmussen was chief 
delegate of his country to the General As- 
sembly in London. He is the author of 
numerous articles on subjects within the 
field of international law. 




t 1 

Hon. TCMILIO GARCIA GODOY 

Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipo- 
tentiary; Chairman of his country's deleg- 
ation to tlie second part of First Session 
of UN General Assembly. 

Emilio Garcia Godoy, Ambassador of 
the Dominican Republic to the United 
States of America since 1944, was bom 
in La Vega in 1894, and joined the diplo- 
matic service on completing his studies. In 
1927 he was appointed Consul General and 
Commercial Commissioner to Canada. Sub- 
sequently, he was Charge d'Affaires i* 
France (1929-1930); delegate to the ele- 
venth Assembly of the League of Nation;. 
(1930) ; delegate ^o the Chaco War Peace 
Conference (1936); Counselor to the Do- 
minican Legation in Washington, D. C. 
(1934 to 1938) ; Envoy Extraordinary and 
Minister Plenipotentiary to Haiti (1938 to 
1939), and to Cuba (1939 to 1942) ; Under 
Secretary of the Presidency of the Donv, 
nican Republic (J942 to 1944); and So 
eretary of Health and Public Assistance 
(1944) . He also sewed as delegato i n 
1945 to the Conference on Problems oi 
War and Peace in Mexico City and to tin 
San Francisco Conference. Ambassador 
Godoy has been editor of the newspaper 
El Progreso and the literary magazine San- 
gre Nueva. 



mi r^TVTT-rtT Ti-I will publish any article of interest to the public, especially any complaint or con- 

Ttie REP U BlilC sm,ctive criricism against any person ' m our governm 



THE BEPUBUC 



The ChM Dologa*** To Tho United Nation*' General Assembly 
Ecuador Egypt EI Salvador 




DR. FRANCISCO YLLESCAS 

Ambasasdor to the United United State* 
and Chairman of his country's delegation 
ta UN General Assembly. 

Francisco Yllescas, Chairman of the de- 
legation of Ecuador to the present session 
of the General Asembly, was born on April 
17, 1901, at Bahia dc Caraquez in Ecua- 
dor. He obtained the degrees of Master 
of Social Sciences and Doctor at Laws, 
and in 1928 and 1929 was elected a Re- 
presentative of the National Assembly of 
Ecuador, in which he served as Secret- 
ary. In July 1945 he was appointed Min- 
ister to Peru on Special Mission, and the 
following month Ecuadorian Ambassador 
to Argentina. He is at present Ecuado- 
rian Ambassador to the United States 
having been appointed to this position in 
September of this year. Ambassador Ylles- 
cas is also President of the Metropolis 
Oil Company, the Carolina Oil Company 
and the Compania Petrolera del Ecuador. 




DR. MOHAMED HUSSEIN HAEKAL 
PACHA 

President of the Egyptian Senate and 
Chairman of his country's delegation to 
UN General Assembly. 

Author, journalist, linguist and states- 
man, Dr. Mohamed Hussein Haekal Pa- 
cha, President of the Egyptian Senate, was 
born in Kafr Ghannam in 1888, and after 
studying law at the University of Cairo, 
spent several years in Paris where he 
obtained his Doctorate of Law. On his 
return to Egypt he practiced law and wab 
appointed a professor of public law at the 
University of Egypt. He also became 
distinguished in literary fields and became 
chief editor of the daily newspaper Assy- 
assa to which, for 20 years, he contribut- 
ed a daily article. His book, The Life of 
Mohammad, and a number of historical 
biographies of the Musulmans, which he 
published during this period, put him in 
the front rank of authors in the arabic 
language. Dr. Haekal has been Minister of 
Education several times and is President 
of the Liberal Constitutional Party. 




DR. JOSE ANTONIO QUIROS 

Minister of Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
man of his country's delegation to l T N Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

Don Jose Antonio Quiros, appointed Min- 
ister of Foreign Affairs for El Salvador 
in September of this year, was born in 
San Miguel, Republic of El Salvador, in 
1888. He studied at the National Univer- 
sity of El Salvador where he obtained his 
law degree and also at the University of 
Paris. After a period in Europe he re- 
turned to El Salvador and practiced law 
for a few years, after which he devoted 
himself almost entirely to his personal 
and business affairs. He travelled ex- 
tensively both privately and on behalf of 
his country and has represented El Salva- 
dor at a number of conferences. Though 
holding no official position in the gov- 
ernment of his country he was influential 
and highly thought of by his countrymen 
and in 1945 was selected to lead the Sal- 
vadorian delegation to the San Francisco 
Conference. 



^JJk Professional and Business Men and Women in any part of the Philippines are re- 
quested to send in their names, professions or businesses, and addresses for publica- 
tion in our coming issue of the Republic— 3460 Taft Avenue, Rizal City, Philippines. 



4THB BEPUBLIC 



P4flB tf 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Ethiopia France Greece 




HON. BLATTA EPRHEM T. MEDHEN 

Minister to the United Kingdom and 
Cnuinnan of the Delegation from Ethiopia 
to tfie UN General Assembly. 

Blatta Ephram Tewelde Medium, Ethio- 
pian Minister to the United Kingdom since 
1945 was born in Eritera in 1894, edu- 
cated at the American University of Bei- 
rut, and began his career teaching at the 
Tafar, Makonnen School in Addis Aba- 
ba. In 1029 he was appointed Consul 
General to France and in 1932, First Se- 
cretary and Charge d'Affaires ad interim 
m London. During the occupation of Ethio- 

£L L ^ * Xi,e and on h!s "turn in 
1942 became Secretary-General and later, 
Vice Minister, of the Ministry of Fo- 
reign Affairs. From 1943 until his pres- 
ent appointment he was Ethiopian Min- 

v ZSu Unitcd StatGS - Blatta Ephram 
T. Medhcn was a member of the Ethiopian 
delegation to the League of Nations du- 
ring the Italo-Ethiopian War. representa- 
tive of h,s country to the UNRRA Con- 
ference in Atlantic City in 1943, Chair- 
man of the Ethiopian delegation to the 
Monetary Conference at Bretton Woods 
and to the International Civil Aviation 
Conference in Chicago in 1944, a delegate 
to the San Francisco Conference in 1945 
and to the General Assembly in London in 



HON. ALEXANDRE PARODI 

Permanent French Representative to the 
United Nations and Chairman of his coun- 
try s Deleyatiou to UN General Assembly. 

Leader of the delegation of France to the 
present session of the General Assembly, 
AI. Alexandre Parodi is well known for 
his record in the French Resistance Move- 
ment during the German occupation. 
Known under the names of "Quartus", 
"Curat" and ( *Mr, X", M. Parodi played 
an important role in French underground 
activities. In 1943 he became President 
of the Underground Press Commission and 
in 11)44 was Delegate General of the 
French Committee of National Liberation. 
At the time of the liberation of Paris he 
was one of those who organized the po- 
lice strike which was the first step to- 
wards the complete liberation of the city. 
After the liberation when General de Gau- 
lle formed a government which included 
the resistance leaders, M. Parodi was ap- 
pointed Minister of Labor. In June 1946 
he was nominated permanent delegate to 
the Security Council, the Atomic Energy 
Commission and the Economic and Social 
Council. 




HON. CONST ANTINE TSALDARIS 

Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs for Greece and Chairman of his 
country's Delegation to UN General As. 
sembly. 

Constantinos Tsaldaris, the Prime Min- 
ister of Greece, was born in Alexandria, 
Egypt, in 1884. He graduated from tho 
Law School of the University of Athens 
and then spent some years studying po- 
litical science and law in various Euro- 
pean Universities. Upon his return to 
Greece he practiced law until his elec- 
tion in lV'Si to the Greek Parliament as a 
member of the Populist Party. He was up- 
pointed Under-S^crcary oi Communica- 
tions the same year and was elected a 
member of the Party's Administrative Com- 
mittee in 1945. He became Chairman oi 
the Party after the elections of March 
1946. The following month he becamo 
Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs. He retains both these portfolios 
in the present government which was'form- 
ed early this month. Mr Tsaldaris was 
Chariman of the Greek delegation to the 
recent Paris Conference. Thanassis Agh- 
nides, Greek Ambassador to Great Britain, 
is Acting Chairman of the Greek delega- 
tion pending Mr. Tsaldaris* arrival. 



WE NEED 



REPRESENTATIVES FOR THIS PUBLICATION IN ALL 
PARTS OF THE PHILIPPINES, U. S. AND OTHER FOREIGN 
COUNTRIES. 



PAH |f 



THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Guatemala Haiti Honduras 




DR. EUGENIO SILVA PEttA 

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
wan of his country's Delegation to the UN 
General Assembly* 



Dr EJuarenio S'iva Peua. Minister of Fo- 
reign Affairs for Guatemala since 1945, 
was bom in Guatemala City in 1897 and 
studied at the Natf^al Institute of Gua- 
fomr.ii ajid the Uruversitv of GiiateTti*l&'. 
In 19 9 0 no served a«? Secretary on Sd£* 
cinl Minion to the Guatemalan Legation 
in Washington and wn<? Guatemalan repres- 
entative to the ^federal Constituent Assotti- 
hlv of pentral America in J '921. He was! 
a iudge at Tromillo, Honduras, in 1922 
arid p. fioiorrnfn to the Coiieress'of Jour- 
nalists fit Mefida, Yucatan, in 1928. Sub- 
seaueultv he became Secretary of the Gua- 
temalan Legations in France and Spain : 
Minister Plenipotentiary on Special Mis- 
sion to Nicaragua in 1929; Minister with- 
out porftolio in 1944. In 1945 ho served 
as Guatemalan delegate to the Conference 
on Problems of War and Peace in Mexico 
City and to the San Frnacisco Conference. 




HON. JOSEPH CHARLES 

Haitian Ambassador to the United States 
and Chairman of his country's Delegation 
to UN General Assembly. 

Joseph D. Charles, Ambassador of Haiti 
to the United States, was born at Limbc, 
Haiti, in 1907. He studied at Notre-Dame 
dn Pcrp'fj'el Secours of Haitian Cape and 
graduated in law from the Law School of 
Haitian Cape in 1928. Subsequently h~ 
became a teacher at the National School 
of Haitian Cape and a professor of French 
at the Notre-Dame College; Assistant Se- 
cretary to the Haitian Cape Borough Hall; 
Secretary of the Court of Justice and 
of the Haitian Cape Prefecture; an alter- 
nate to the governmnet commissary; Judge 
at the Civilian Court of Justice; Secretary 
of State for Public Education; Peopled 
Deputy and Chairman of the External Af- 
fairs Committee; and President of the 
Order of Advocates. He was editor of the 
magazine Stella znd the literary and pol- 
itical paper La CitadeUc. He also published 
Graines aux Vents, a review of Haitian 

problems. 




Dr. TIBURCIO CARIAS, Jr. 

Chairman of the Delegation from. Hon- 
duras to the First Session of the UN Gen- 
eral Assembly. 



Dr. Tiburcio Carias, Jr., who was re- 
cently nominated Honduran Minister to 
Great Britain, has been Honduran Con- 
sul-General in Liverpool. England, since ( 
19H8. Bom in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, in 
1908, he graduated in law from the Univ- 
ersity of Mexico City in 1935 and then 
took post-graduate courses in economic and 
political sciences at Oxford and Liverpool 
Universities. At the same time he served 
as Inspector General of the Honduran 
Consulate in Liverpool. In 1938 he was 
the chief delegate of Honduras at the 
meetings in Evian and London of the In- 
tergovernmental Committee on Political 
Refugees. He represented his country 
at the UNRRA Conference held in Lon- 
don in 1945, and led the Honduran dele- 
gation to the meetings in London of the 
Preparatory Commission and General As- 
sembly of the United Nations. 



"BUKLOD" 



—THE UNITED PHILIPPINES ORGANIZATION 



invites all Filipinos to join the national movement for economic protection- 
ism, social secuHty and mutual cooperation. 



TH3 EEPUFLIC 



PAGE 80 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Iceland India Iran 




Hon. THOR THORS 

^nistcr Plenipotentiary and Envoy 

tl ^ fT y t0 tke United S****: Chairs 
*™ of his country's Delegation to UN 
General Assembly. 

J" 0 ; ™ 0rS ' bcCn Iceland>s »*in- 

born ln He ykjavik in ^ ^ 

2 I ^ th * ^-versity of 

*ey kj av* « 1026 and continued his stud- 
!T ? *** and economics at 

Sorbonne, P ar i s . He was a member of the 
Icelandic Parliament from 1933 until 1941. 
From 1940 until he received his present 
appointment he served as Consul General 
of Iceland in New York. During most of 
On. time Mr. Thors was also the Man- 
aging DSrctfo* of Kveldulfur Ltd., ship- 
owners and fishing f irm (1928 to m4) 
and Managing Director of the Union of 
Icelandic Fish Producers (1934 to 1940). 
He represented Iceland at the United Na- 
tions Conference on Food and Agriculture 
at Hot Springs, Virginia, in 1943; the In- 
ternational Aviation Conference in Chica- 
go in 1944, and the International Labour 
Conference in Montreal in 1946. 




WATCH 



for our next 
issue ... . 



Mrs. VIJAYA LAKSHMI PANDI* 7 " 

Only woman to head a delegation' to the 
second part of the First Session of the 
UN General Assembly. 

The first woman leader of a delegation 
to the General Assembly is Mrs. Vijaya- 
Lakshmi Pandit, the chief delegate of In- 
dia. Born in 1900 of one of the most pro- 
minent families in the country— her father 
was a former President of the Indian Na- 
tional Congress and her brother, Pandit 
Jawalharlal Nehru is now Vice-President 
of the Executive Council and Member for 
External Affairs — Mrs. Pandit was edu- 
cated by governesses and tutors. Mrs. 
Pandit has taken a leading part in . her 
country's politics and has served throe 
terms of imprisonment in connection with 
civil disobedience movements. In 1937 she 
waa- elected a member of the Legislative 
Assembly of the United Provinces and 
became Minister ' for Local Self-Govcrn- 
ment and Public Health, which position 
she held till her party resigned from of- 
fice in 1939. She was re-elected in 1946 
and again assumed the ministership of 
Loral Self-Government and Public Health 
in the provincial government. Mrs. Pan- 
dit was President of the All-India Wo- 
men's Conference from 1941 to 1943 and is 
the founder and President of the All-In- 
dia Save the Children Committee. 




Hon. NASROLLAH ENTEZAM 

Acting Chairman of tke delegation, fror: 
Iran to the United Nations' General As- 
sembly. 

Nasrollah Entezam has represented Iran 
regularly at the various meetings of the 
United Nations since the San Francisco 
Conference in 1945- Born in Tehran in 
1900 he graduated in law. and political 
sciences at the University of Tehran and 
Paris and entered the diplomatic service 
in 1918. During the next 11 years he held 
the positions of Secretary at the Iranian 
Legations in Paris, Warsaw and London 
From 1929 to 1938 he represented his coun- 
try at the League of Nations, attending 
the World Economic Conference in Londo* 
in 1933 and serving as Charge d* Affaires 
in Berne from 1934 to 1938. On his re- 
turn to Iran he was Director of the IV 
litical Department of the Ministry of 
reign Affairs, and subsequently held the 
posts of Minister of Public Health. Min 
istcr of Posts and Telegraph and MinifctK 
of Communications. In 1945 he be cam 
Minister of Foreign Affairai 



READ 



The Republic 
always .... 



l'AC.H 40 



THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Iraq Lebanon Liberia 




HON. ABDULLAH BAKR 

Consul General in New York and Act- 
ing Chairman erf the Delegation from 
Iraq .to the UN General Assembly. (FlusJi- 
ing Meadows, N. Y. f 25 Oct., 1946.) 

Abdullah Bakr, who is acting chairman 
of the Iraqi delegation in the absence of 
the chairman, H. E. Ali Jawdat, Iraqi Min- 
ister in Washington, recently came to the 
United States as the first Consul General 
of Iraq in New York. Born in Mosul in 
1907, he graduated in political science 
from the American University of Beirut 
in 1929 and joined the civil service of his 

country the same year. In 1931 he be- 
came private secretary to the Prime Min- 
ister and the following year joined th* 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs where he 
served until 1940. During this period ho 
attended a number- of meetings of the 
League of Nations, and the Palestine Con- 
ference in London in 1939, as Secretary 
to the Iraqi delegation. At the begin- 
ning of 1941 he was appointed Iraqi Con- 
sul to Kermanshah, Iran, returning to Iraq 
a year later as Director-General of the 
Agricultural and Industrial Bank. In 
1943 Mr. Bakr was appointed Consul Gen- 
oral to Bombay and remained in this posi- 
tion until he left to take up his present du- 
ties. 




HON. CAMILLE CHAMOUN 

Minister to the United Kingdom and 
Chairman of his country's Delegation to 
the UN General Asseynbly. 

Camile Chamoun, the Lebanese Minister 
Plenipotentiary and Envoy Extraordinary 
to the Court of St. James, London, since 
August 1944, was born in Lebanon in 
1900. After graduating in law from the 
University of Beirut in 1923, he prac-' 
ticed as a lawyer until he was elected to 
Parliament in 1934. Re-elected in 1937, 
he was appointed in 1938 as Minister of 
Finance and later as Minister of Finance 
and Public Works. In 1943 he was ap- 
pointed Minister of the Interior and re- 
tained this post until he left to take up 
his present duties. Mr. Chamoun led the 
delegation of his country to the Civil 
Aviation Conference in Chicago in 1944; 
the UNESCO Conference and the Prepa- 
ratory Commission of the United Na- 
tions in London in 1945; and the Palestine 
Conference in 1946. He was a delegate 
to the General Assembly of the United Na- 
tions in London. 




HON. C. ABAYOMI CASSEL 

Attorney General of Liberia and Chair- 
man of the Liberian Delegation to the UN 
General Assembly. 

C. Abayomi Cassel, Attorney General of 
Liberia since January 1944, was bora in 
the city of Monrovia in 1906. He re- 
ceived his Baccalaureate in the liberal arts 
in 1926 and was called to the Bar in 
1927. He entered the public service of 
his country in 1928 as Clerk of the Cir- 
cuit Court of the First Judicial Circuit, 
Montserrado County. Two years later, in 
1930, he resigned from this position and 
for the next nine years practiced law pri- 
vately, eventually rising to the rank of 
Counselor-at-Law and member of the Su- 
prome Court Bar. In 1939 Mr. Cassell 
re-entered public service as a Revenue so- 
licitor in the Department of Justice and 
at the same time acted as County Attorney 
for Montserrado County. He was ap- 
pointed Attorney General of Liberia on 
January 11, 1944> after the induction of 
William V. S. Tubman as President of the 
Republic. 



COMING 



The 1948-1949 Edition of Cornejo's DIRECTORY 
OF THE PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC will come off 
the press about July 1948. 



Til 15 fctfPUBLia 



PAGE 41 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Luxembourg Mexico Netherlands 




HON. JOSEPH BECH 

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
Wf» of his country's Delegation to the 
f irst Session of the UN General Assem- 
bly. 

Joseph- Bech, Minister of Foreign Af- 
fairs for Luxembourg, was born in Diekirch, 
Luxembourg, in 1887. After studying in 
J-ans, he graduated in Law in 1912 and 
was called to the Bar. He then began 
•Political career ami has been in the 

E3T#? ° f C0UntVy without i«t^ 
^pt,on for the past 25 years. Since 1014 

from moi Y me " lbpr of Parliament and 
trcm 1921 to 1925 he was Minister of 

the portfo l,o of ppwign Affair and baa 
«*> Position ever since, 
bung confirmed in this office bv an ovcr- 

iXJ? K ° V f ernmo,lt coUea^cs after the 

Grand Duchv. From 
to 1040 Tliv t> i * V5U 
countrv of * Cl1 ^"^PtBd hi s 

count.v at the Assemblies of the Leagu.- 
of Nations. Ho r.lso W the delegation 'of 
Lux-ombo„rg to the San Francisco Con 
forence n, 1MB and the General Assem- 
olv of the United Nations in London Tn 



WANTED; , 

Agents to represent 
this publication in the Territory of Ha. 
wait. United states of America, and other 
foreign countries for the purpose of soli- 
citing subscriptions and advertisements. 




- ! 



DR. FRANCISCO ^CASTILLO NAJERA 

Minister of Foreign Affairs for Mexico 
and Chairman of his country 1 s Delegation 
to the United Nations* General Assembly, 
photographed before recording a speech for 
broadcast to Latin America. (Lake Suc- 
cess, New York, 23 October 1946). 



DR. LUIS PADILLA NERVO 

Deputy Chairman of tit* Mexican Dele- 
gation in the absence of Dr. Castillo Na- 
jera, Minister of Foreign Affairs. 

Dr. Luis Padilla Nervo, deputy chairman 
)f the Mexican delegation in the absence 
Df Dr. Castillo Kaiera. MI^W** Fo- 
reign Affairs, 
has been a 
representative 
of his country 
at the various 
meetings of 
the United 
Nations since 
the San Fran- 
cisco Confer- 
ence in 1945. 
He was born 
in Zamora, Michoacan, Mexico, in 1898 
and after graduating in law entered the 
diplomatic service in 1920. He subsequent- 
ly served as Secretary of Embassy or 
Charge d'Affaires in Buenos Aires, Wa- 
shington, London and Madrid and, from 
1933, as Envoy Extraordinary and Minis- 
ter Plenipotentiary to the United States, 
El Salvador, Costa Rica, Panama, Uru- 
guay, Paraguay, Holland, Denmark and 
Cuba. In the Mexican Government he has 
held the offices of Under-Secretary of 
Education and Fine Arts and of Assist- 
ant Secretary of Labor and Social Pre- 
vision. Dr. Padilla Nervo represented his 





DR. BARON C. G. W. H. Van BOETZA 
LAER Van OOSTERHOUT 

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
man of his country's Delegation to I'S 
General Assembly. 

Carel Godfried Willem Hendrik, Baron 
van Boetzelacr van Oosterhout, Minister of 
Foreign Affairs for the Netherlands, has 
been in the diplomatic service of his coun- 
try for the past 23 years. He was born 
at Amersfoort in 1892 and obtained his 
degree of Doctor of Laws at the Municipal 
University of Amsterdam. Entering the 
diplomatic service '*n 1923 he subsequent 
lv sewed ns Att^he to th^ Netherlands 
Legation i" Cor>enVa£ren and as Sec^etart 
to the Netherlands Legations in Wash- 
ington, Mexico City and Brussels where he 
was promoted Counselor in 1935. The 
same year he was transferred as Coun- 
selor to the Legation in Berlin where ho 
remained until April 1940. Though ap- 
pointed Minister to Turkey, the events of 
World War II prevented him taking up 
this post and ho joined the Department of 
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands Gov- 
ernment, temporarily located in London. In 
August 1940 he was appointed Nether 
lands Minister to Washington. Return 
ing to The Hague in April 1946 he beennv 
Head of the Section of Political Affairs 
in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. He 
was appointed Foreign Minister in Jul) 
of this year. 

country at the ILO Conference, and the 
Assemblies of the League of Nations ir. 
Geneva in 1938 and 1946; the Food and 
Agricultural Conference at Hot Springs, 
Virginia, in 1943, and the Preparatory 
Commission and UNESCO Conference ; r 
London. 



PAGE 42 



THE REPtJI 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 



New Zealand 




SIR CARL AUGUST BERENDSEN 

Chairman, of the Delegation, from. New 
Zealand ami of Committee 3 {Social, Hu- 
manitarian and Cultural) of the UN Gen. 
era I Assembly. 

Sir Carl August Bercndsen, Chairman 
of the Third Committee (Social and Hu- 
manitarian), has been New Zealand Min- 
ister to the United States since 1944. He 
was born in Sydney, Australia, in 1890 
and went to New Zealand as a child. He 
studied at the Victoria University College, 
obtaining his Master of Laws degree at 
the University of New Zealand. He entered 
on a career in public service, interrupted 
during World War I for active service, 
and, in 1928, was appointed Secretary of 
External Affairs. In 1932 he was appoint- 
ed Permanent Head of the Prime Minis- 
ter's Department, a position he retained 
until 1943 when he was named first High 
Commissioner to represent New Zealand 
in Australia, He relinquished this post 
to take up his present duties. Since 1926, 
Sir Carl has represented his country at 
numerous imperial and international con- 
ferences, including Assemblies of the 
League of Nations, the Permanent Man- 
dates Commission and the San Francisco 
Conference. He is a member of the Coun- 
cil of UNRRA, and of the Far Eastern 
Commission. 



MRS. AGNES F. R. McINTOSH 

One of N. Z. delegates to the VN General 
Assembly. 

Mrs. Agnes Fitzgerald Rutherford Mc- 
intosh, one of New Zealand's delegates to 
the General Assembly, was born in Lon- 
don, England, and educated at Edinburgh 
University. She then proceeded to New 



Zealand and was for some years on the 
staff of the Teachers' Training Collocre in 
Christchurch. Her 
husband was & 
farmer, and she 
became actively 
interested in the 
Women's Division 
of the Farmers' 
Union, later be- 
coming a mem- 
ber of the Farm- 
ers' Union itself. 
For many years 
Mrs. Mcintosh 
was President of 
National Council of Women and in recent 
years she has often acted as liaison be- 
tween women's organizations and the Gov- 
ernment. Her advocacy has been of con- 
siderable effect in the adoption of many 
schemes to assist women generally. At 
the present session of the General Assem- 
bly she is serving on the Second Commit- 
tee (Economic and Financial), the Third 
Committee (Social, Humanitarian and Cul- 
tural) and the Fourth Committee (Trus- 
teeship). 




the New Zealand 



Nicaragua 




HON. MARIANO ARGUELLO-VARGAS 

President of the Senate, and. Chairman 
of his country's Delegation to the UN 
(hncral Assembly. 

Dr. Mariano Arguello Vargas, Pres- 
ident of the Senate of Nicaragua, was born 
in Granada in 1890 and received his equ- 
ation and degree of Doctor of Laws from 
the University of Granada. From 1917 
to 1943 he was a Professor of Civil Law 
and Commercial Law in the Universities 
of Granada and Managua. He also served 
between 1928 and 1930 as an attorney for 
the National Railroad, the National Bant 
and as an Attorney for the Government of 
Nicaragua before the Claims Commission. 



His public life has included membership 
in the Commission of Codification of Ni- 
caragua and in -the Commission which 
drafted the present Constitution. He was 
elected a Senator of the Republic in 
and from 19-10 until 1946 served as Min- 
ister of Foreign Affairs. . Dr. Arguello 
was chairman of the delegations of Nica- 
ragua to the second and third meetings 
of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the 
American Republics in Havana (1940) and 
in Rio de Janeiro (1942) ; the Inter- Amer- 
ican Conference on Problems of War and 
Peace in Mexico City and the San Fran- 
cisco Conference in 194o. 



Norway 




HON. HALVARP M. LANGE 

Minister of Foreign Affairs for Nor- 
way and. Chairman of his country's Dele- 
gation to the UN General Assembly. 

Halvard M. Lange, Minister of Foreign 
Af fails for Norway, was born in Oslo in 
1902. He obtained his Master of Arts de- 
gree at the University of Oslo in 1929 
and then continued his studies in Geneva 
and London. A lecturer in economic his- 
tory for a number of years, Mr. Lange 
has also published a number of books on 
Norwegian and international Trade Union 
and Labor History. He has served as 
Secretary of the Workers' Educational As- 
sociation and as Warden of the Central 
Labor College in Oslo. During World 
War II he took an active part in the Nor- 
wegian home front and spent three-and-a- 
half years in a gestapo prison and a Ger- 
man concentration camp. He was appointed 
Minister of Foreign Affairs for Norway 
in February of this year on the reg- 
istration of Trygve Lie to take up 
his duties as Secretary-General of the 
United Nations. Mr. Lange was the chief 
delegate of Norway to the Conference in 
Paris from July to October of this year. 



THE HRPUBLIO 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 
Panama Paraguay Pern 






DR. RICARDO J. ALFARO 

Former President of the Republic of 
Manama and Cliadrman of his country's 
Delegation to the UN General Assembly. 

Ricardo Joaquin Alfaro, Minister of Fo- 
reign Affairs for Panama since 1945 was 
born in the city of Panama in 1882 He 
Reived his Doctorate of Law from the 
National Faculty of Law, Panama, and 
held the positions of professor of history 
at the National Institute and of civil law 
at the National School of Law from 1910 
to 1922. He was founder member of the 
American Institute of International Law 
and has been its Secretary-General since 
1938. In 1905 L>r At***. 
Assistant q ° WaS a PP° m ^ d 

Assistant Sectary for Foreign Affairs 

and hi* subsequent appointments include : 
Premier of the cabinet of Panama (1918- 
1922) ; Panamanian Minister to the Uni- 
ted State* (19Z2-PJ30 and 1933-rj;iG) ; Vice- 
President ot the Republic of Panama 
U928-1930). he was President of the Re- 
public between January mi and October 
1932. Since 1929 JDr. Alfaro has been a 
member of the Permanent Court of Ar- 
bitration of The Hague. He was chairman 
of the Panamanian delegations to the 6th 
Pan-American Conference in Havana 
(1928) ; Chief of the UNRRA mission to 
the Caribbean and Central American Re- 
publics and a member of his country's de- 
legation to the San Francisco Conference 
in 1946. 

FACE 44 



DR. CESAR A. ACOSTA 

Charge d 1 Affaires of Embassy in Wash- 
ington and Cluiirman of his country's Dele- 
gation to the UN General Assembly. 

Cesar R. Acosta, Diplomatic Counselor to 
the Paraguayan Embassy in Washington, 
D. C, and chairman of the delegation of 
Paraguay to the second part of the first 
session of the General Assembly, was born 
in Humaita, Paraguay, in 1910. He studied 
in the city of Asuncion and obtained his 
degree of Doctor of Laws arid Social Scien- 
ces at the University of Asuncion in 1940. 
He has held the posts of Judge of the Low- 
er Court (Civil Court) and Judge in 
the Fiscal Court of Paraguay. He has 
also served as President of the National 
Department of Labor. He was the del- 
egate of his country to the 26th session of 
the International Labour Conference; to 
the Commission of Jurists to Washington 
and to the San Francisco Conference in 
1945. 



WE WILL PAY A GOOD 
PRICE FOR ANY ART- 
ICLE OF INTEREST ON 
ANY SUBJECT CON- 
CERNING THE PHILIP. 
PINES. 



DR. ALBERTO ULLOA 

Chairman of the Foreign Relations Com. 
mittee of the Senate and former Minister 
for Foreign Affairs for Peru, CJiairman 
of his country's Delegation to tfie C7A" 
General Assembly. 

Alberto Ulioa, Senator and Chairman of 
the Foreign Relations Committee of the Pe- 
ruvian Senate, was born in Lima in 1892. 
He received his law degree from the Univ- 
ersity of San Marcos in 1916 and his doc- 
torate of political and administrative 
science in 1919. He continued his studies 
In European Universities and then return- 
ed to his alma mater as professor of inter 
national public law. For many years ho 
served in an advisory capacity to the Min- 
istry of Foreign Affairs and in 1936 was 
appointed Minister of Foreign Affairs. In 
1939 he became Minister Plenipotentiary 
and Envoy Extraordinary to Holland. Ho 
was chairman of the Peruvian delegation 
to the League of Nations in 1937 and a 
member of the League of Nations' Coun- 
cil. He also led his country's delegation to 
the General Assembly of the United Na- 
tions in London in 1946. Mr. Ulloa is 
in addition a distinguished journalist and 
the author of many works, including In, 
Uional Public Law, The Monroe Boo 



ternai 
trine 



and Peru's International Position. 

THE RKPUBU* 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 



Philippines 




BRIG.-GEN. CARLOS P. ROMULO 



Ambassador Extraordinary and Plen- 
ipotentiary, Permanent Delegate to the 
UN, Representative on the Far Fastcm 
Commission and Chairman of the Delega- 
tion from the Philippines to the UN Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

Carlos P. Romulo, permanent delegate 
of the Republic of the Philippines to the 
United Nations, with the rank of Am- 
bassador Extraordinary and Plenipoten- 
tiary, since July of last year, was born in 
Manila on January 14, 1899; graduated 
from the University of the Philippines as 
A.B., in 1918; received his M.A. degree 
from Columbia University, New York, in 
1921. In 1935 he was conferred the degree 
of LL.D., honoris causa, by the Notre 
Dame University. Throughout his career 
he has been closely connected with the 
press and radio of his country as managing 
editor of the T-V-T publications, and later 
as managnig editor of the JJ-M-H-M pub- 
lications; was professor of English in 
the University of the Philippines; and in 
1941 won the Pulitzer Priz^e in journal- 
ism. He is also the author of several 
books on the Philippines and America. He 
was a member of the Philippine Indepen- 
dence Missions to the United States 
in 1921, 1924, 1928, 1929, 1923 and 
1937. In 1941 he joined the Uni- 
ted States Army, served as a pub- 
lic relations officer on General Mac- 
Arthur's staff and, in 1943, was Secretary 
of the War Cabinet of President Quezon's 
Government-in-exile. He became a Colonel 
in 1942 and was promoted to Brigadier 

THE BEPUJffLIC 



General in 1944. From 1945 until he took 

up his present duties he served as Res- 
ident Commissioner of the Philippines to 
the United States. He led the Philippine 
delegation to the San Francisco Confer- 
ence in 1945. 

* * * 



Poland 




HON. WINCENTY RZYMOWSKI 

Polish, Minister for Foreign Affairs and 
Chairman of his country's Delegation to 
the UN General Assembly. 

Wineenty Rzymowski, Minister of For- 
eign Affairs for Poland since May 1945, 
was born in Warsaw in 1883. He studied 
economics at the Universities of Geneva 
and Lausanne, Switzerland, and took his 
master's degree in law at the University 
of Odessa, Russia, During World War 1 
he participated actively in tne Polish move- 
ment tor independence. He then took up 
a Cttice i as a journalist ami lioui 
to Xdzt was loreign correspondent In Ita- 
ly. As a result ox nis vigorous anti-ias- 
cist articles he was imprisoned and later 
ueported. On ins return to Poland ne 
coiiiuined pontics wita journalism, inuring 
World War li he spent eight montns in a 
German prison and in 1 V J14, at the age of 
61, volunteered lor the Polish Army. On 
the formation of the Polish Committee of 
National Liberation he was appointed head 
of the Department of Arts and Culture and 
remained in this position under the Polish 
Provisional Government until he was as- 
signed his present duties. 

• * * 



DR. OSCAR LANGE 

Ambassador of Poland to the United 
States and Permanent Representative to 
the UN. 

Oscar Lange, Ambassador of Poland to 
the United States since 1945, and the per- 
manent representative of Poland to the 
United Nations was elected as Chairman 
of the Second Committee (Economic and 
Financial) owing to the absence through 
illness of Waclaw Konderski who was el- 
ected at the first part of the first session 
of the General Assembly in London. Dr. 
Lange, who was bora in Tomaszow in 1904 
has made his career chiefly in the field of 
economics. He received his LL.D. in -1928 
and began as a lecturer of statistics and 
economics at the University of Cracow 
(1931 to 1936), and subsequently lectured 
in economics at the University of Michi- 
gan, the Polish Free University Warsaw 
and the Universities of California and 
Stanford, U.S. AT From 1939 to 1945 he 
was a professor of economics at the Uni- 
versity of Chicago and, at the same time 
(1942 to 1943) served as a visiting profes- 
sor at Columbia University. 



♦ * * 



Russia (U.S.S.R.) 




HON. VIACHESLAV M. MOLOTOV 

Foreign Miyiister for t/ie U S S R 
and his country's Representative' to' tte 
* e ™rtWrtoftl w first session of thlvnit 
ed Natunte' General Assembly. (Flit*h?n„ 
Meadozos/New York, 29 October 1946). 

U C S h S l R™, Ik de, ^ ation of the 

u.b.i, R to the present session of the 
General Assembly, Viacheslav Mikhailo 
v«ch Molotov, Premier and Foreign £m 
oussar of the Union of Soviet Social^ 

(Continued on next page) 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 



RUSSIA— Continued 

Republics, has been a leading Russian 
spokesman on foreign affairs since 1939. 
Born in 1890 as Viacheslav Mikhailovich 
Skriabin, he changed his name to Molotov 
(the hammer) in 1906 on taking the oath 
of loyalty to the Communist Party. He 
rose to the post of Premier in 1921 and 
became Foreign Commissar in 1939 on the 
resignation of Maxim Litvinov. Other gov- 
ernment posts held by Mr. Molotov include 
those of President of the Council, Secret- 
ary of the Communist Party of the Ukraine 

r * «T L 921 ' Secretar y ^r the whole 
U.b.S.R He attended the Yalta Confer- 
ence m January, 1945, led the U.S.S.R. 

^ *° th * San Francisco Confer- 
ence, and has fi gured prominentl in ft 

discussions of the Council of Forefgn Min" ■ 
-ters and the Paris Peace Co5 f enc " 



Saudi Arabia 



Siain 





University of Upsala, and the same year 
became a member of the government as a 
legal expert. Three years later he \va3 
for a short period Minister of Justice and 
from 1924 to 1926 he served as Minister 
of Foreign Affairs. In 1929 Mr. Umh-n 
was elected President of the Upsala Univ- 
ersity and from 1932 to 1936 he served 
again as a legal expert in the government. 
In 1937 he was appointed Chancellor of 
the Universities, the highest administra- 
tive post of the world of learning in Swe- 
den. Since 1921 he has been a represen- 
tative of his country at most of the meet- 
ings of the League of Nations and has 
several times served on international com- 
mittees of mediation and arbitration. In 
1945 he again became Minister of Foreign 
Affairs. 



Syria 



His Royal Highness 
Prffiefi \VA N W A \ KHAYAKON 

Representative of Siam who signed the 
"instrument of adherence 1 ' which made 
his country the 5oth member of the United 
Nations on 16 December, 1946. 



Sweden 



v H J^ ROYAL HIGHNESS 
AMIR FAISAL AL SAUI) 

A?a£aT\ l i ° f rr f ^ horn Saudi 

Arabia to the UN Genial Assembly. 

His Royal Highness Prince Faisal Abd 
Cl-Az.z al Saud, chairman of the Saudi Ar- 
abian delegation to the present session of 
the General Assembly, also led his coun- 
try s delegations to the General Assem- 
bly in London at the beginning of this year, 
and the San Francisco Conference in 1945. 
He was born in 1905 in Riad where he was 
also educated. He headed political mis- 
sions to Europe in 1919, 1926 and 1932 
and was chairman of the Saudi Arabian 
delegation to the Palestine Conferences 
in London in 1939 and 1946. In 1926 he 
was appointed Viceroy of Hedjaz and in 
1934 became Minister of Foreign Affairs, 
a post he still holds along with his other 
responsibilities. 




HON. OESTEN UNDEN 

Minister for Foreign Affairs and Chair- 
man of his country's Delegation to tfie 
UN General Assembly. 



~r~ _ <•„ 



Oesten Unden, Sweden's Minister of Fo- 
reign Affairs, was born in 1886. He stu- 
died law at the University of Lund and 
won his doctor's degree with a thesis on 
collective labor agreements. In 1917 he 
was appointed professor of civil law at the 




HON. FARIS EL KHOU1M 

Chairman of the Delegation from Syria 
and of Committee 5 (Administrative and 
lindgetwry Quest inns) of the UN General 
Assembly. 

Faris el-Khouri, President of the Par- 
liament of Syria, and Chairman of the 
Fifth Committee (Administrative and Bud- 
getary) of the General Assembly, was 
born in Kfeir in 1879. He graduated f roni 
the University of Beirut in 1897, remained 
there to teach for the next two years and 
then practiced law in Damascus. He was 
appointed a professor of law at the Sy- 
rian University of Damascus in 1919, 
Mr. el-Khouri entered the diplomatic .ser- 
vice in 1914 and subsequently served for 
four years as deputy of Damascus to the 
Ottoman Parliament in Constantinople; 

(Continued on next page) 



PAGE 4* 



THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations 9 General Assembly 



SYRIA — Continued 

Counselor of State in 1918; Minister of 
Finance in 1020; Deputy of Damascus to 
the Syrian Federal Council in 1922; Min- 
ister of Public Instruction in 1926; De- 
puty of Damascus and President of Par- 
liament from 1930 to 1939 and from 194°. 
to 1944, and was re-appointed to this po- 
sition again in L945, From 1944 to 1945 
he was Prime Minister of Syria. He was 
chairman of the Syrian delegations to the 
Arab League Congress in Cairo and the 
San Francsico Conference in L945, and to 
the General Assembly in London in 1946. 



1921 he was appointed Counselor, and then 
Charge d'Aff aires to the first political 
mission of the National Government in Pa- 
ris. He subsequently served as Turkish 
Ambassador to Bucharest (1924 to 1929); 
Ambassador to Moscow (1929 to 1935 and 
1943 to 1945)j and Ambassador to Rome 
(1935 to 1943). He has been a delegate 
of his country to a number of interna- 
tional conferences including the San Fran- 
cisco Conference in 1945. 



Vkraiiiiau S.S.R. 



sidium of the Comintern. In 1944 he 
became Minister of Foreign Affairs and 
Deputy Chairman of the Council of Peo- 
ple's Commissars of the Ukrainian S.S.R. 
He was Chairman of the Ukrainian Dele- 
gation to the San Francisco Conference in 
1945 where he was Chairman of Commit- 
tee 1 (Preamble, Purposes and Principles) 
of Commission 1, to the Preparatory Com- 
mission of the United Nations, of which he 
was elected Vice-President, and to the 
General Assembly in London. He is a 
member of the Academy of Sciences of the 
U. S.S.R. and a Professor of Historical 
Sciences. 



Turkey 





Union of South Africa 





HON. HUSEYIN R. BAYDUIt 

A-mhassador id tJie United States wruL 
Chairwrrn of his country's Delegation to 
the I T N General Assembly. 



Huseyin Ragip Baydur, Chairman of the 
Turkish delegation to the General Assem- 
bly and Ambassador of Turkey to the 
United States since March 1946 was born 
in 1891 at Rhodes. He graduated from 
the Faculty of Law of the University of 
Istanbul in 1911 and from then until 1 01 f> 
was a professor at the Superior Normal 
School in Istanbul. From 191(5 to 1919 
ho served as Inspector of Turkish students 
in Europe and on his return to Istanbul 
became editor of the newspaper Jfham. 
During the next year he served as Direc- 
tor General of Press and Information and 
was at the same time editor of the news- 
paper Ulue, a government organ. In 




DR. DMITRY Z. MANUILSKY 

Minister of Foreign Affairs for tJie 
Ukrainian S.S.R. and Chairman of his 
country's Delegation to the UN General 
AssCf/ib!]/. 



Dmitry Zakharavich Manuilsky, Minis- 
ter of Foreign Affairs for the Ukrainian 
S.S.R. since 1944, and Chairman of the 
First Committee (Political and Security) 
of the General Assembly, was born in 
1883 and educated at the University of 
St. Petersburg (now Leningrad) and at 
the Sorbonne, Paris, specializing in his- 
tory. Exiled for having participated in 
the Kronstadt uprising in 1906 he lived 
abroad from 1907 to 1917. From 1920 to 
1921 ho served as a member of the Revo- 
lutionary Committee of the Ukraine and 
in 1924 was elected a member of the Pre- 




HON. JAN CHRISTIAAN SMUTS 

Prime Minister and Field Marshal; Chair- 
man of the Delegation of the Union of 
South Africa to the United Nations 9 Gen- 
eral Assembly. 

One of the world's "elder statesmen," 
Field Marshal Jan Christiaan Smuts (born 
1870), leader of the delegation of the 
Union of South Africa, played a prom- 
inent part in shaping the Covenant of tho 
League of Nations as well as the Charter 
of the United Nations. The first draft 
of the Preamble of the Charter was of 
his authorship. Field Marshal Smuts 
fought the British forces during the Boer 
War but subsequently worked untiringly 
for the unification of the English and 
Dutch-speaking peoples of South Africa. 
He became Minister of Defense in the 
first Union Parliament of 1910. During- 
World War I he was a member of the 

(Coutinvd on next page) 



THE RBPUBUC 



PAGE 47 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations' General Assembly 



UNION OF S. AFRICA-Con«« Med 

British War Cabinet. He became Prime 
Minister of the Union in 1919 , f 
of tfe South African Part^ From atl 
to 1933 he led the opposition ™ 
then became Deputy Prime M^r fn 
General Hertzog's coalition govern^ 
HI the outbreak of World WarT T" 
he was re-elected Prime Minfster of"^ 
Union. He was also Miatater of Vl 
and Commander-in-Chief ofVfc I f6nse 
rican Forces, and a Cr ^ °?. Af " 
War Cabinet. I n 1943 h the Britis " 
the Woodrow Wilson medal 7** aWarded 
ing service to democracy. out stand- 

♦ 

1 nited Ki,« gdom 

(GREAT BRITAIN) 



in Britain's war effort. Mr. Bevm be- 
came Foreign Minister when the Labour 
Government assumed office in July 1945, 
attended the first meetings of the General 
Assembly and the Security Council, and 
has been leading the British delegation to 
the Paris Conference. 



United States of America 




Secretary 0 f stnf r 
and Chairman 0 f „* n t Fotei ^ Affairs 
United KingdoZ £ /r0wl the 

sembly. W *° the UN General As- 

ed Kingdom stalf , * 0 " ° f the Uni+ - 

the JofVtiT^ rr L n 1891 at 

a page „ oy> sl^rT^ J? 
ductor and a truck !u st ^ et ^ &r «>n- 
before he Joined h e 

in mi ..came a i-SSLE?^ 
then on Mr. Bevin rose rapidly as a T- 
bour leader and organizer and Z 191R 
he amalgamated 45 unions into a single 
Transport and ^General WorW 
Um„„ wh,ch now has a membership of 
nearly one million. As general secretary 
of th lS Umon M) , B( . vin M4 a — • 
Bit,on in the British Labour Movement 
Assuming the office of Minister of La- 
bour in Winston Churchill's coalition gov- 
ernment, in 1940 he played a vital part 

PAGE 48 




SENATOR WARREN R. AUSTIN 

U. S. Representative on the United Na- 
tion Security Council and Climrman of 
U. S. Delegation to the second part of 
the First Session of the General Assembly. 

Senator Wan-en R. Austin, Chairman of 
the delegation of the U.S.A. to the pres- 
ent session of the General Assembly, was 
designated by President Truman in June 
1946 as permanent representative of the 
United States to the United Nations and 
United States representative on the Se- 
curity Council. This appointment, how- 
ever, cannot be made formally under the 
Constitution of the United States until the 
expiration of Senator Austin's term in 
the Senate in January 1947. Bom in Ver- 
mont in 1877, he studied law and was 
admitted to the Vermont Bar in 1902 and 
to practice before the Supreme Court of 
the United States in 1914. He was elect- 
ed United States Senator (Republican) 
from Vermont in a special election in 1931 
and re-elected in 1934 and 1940. For 
years active is international affairs, Sen- 
ator Austin served as adviser to the 
United States delegation to the Inter- 
American Conference on Problems of War 
and Peace held in Mexico City in 1945 and 
is credited with devising the plan which 
was unanimously adopted as the Act of 
Chapultepec. 




Mrs. FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT 
One of United States 9 delegates to the 
United Nations* General Assembly. 

Mrs. Franklin Delano Roosevelt was born 
on October 11, 1884. In 1905 she married 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and actively as- 
sisted her hus- 
band throughout 
his career. Dur- 
ing World War 
II she acted as 
his personal rep- 
resentative on 
tours to Great 
Britain, the Pa- 
cific area, includ- 
ing New Zealand, 
Australia, and 
the Carribbean 
area. She is a _ 
well-known journalist and radio broad, 
caster, and still continues her daily 
column which she began to write in 
193G. Mrs. Roosevelt has always taken 
a great interest in women's rights, par- 
ticularly in the League of Women Voter? 
and the Women's Trade Union League. As 
a member of the United States delegation 
to the General Assembly in London she 
served on the Third Committee (Social, 
Humanitarian and Cultural) and is now 
serving on the same Committee. She was 
elected Chairman of the nuclear Commis- 
sion on Human Rights which met in New 
York in May of last year, .and in this 
capacity served as an ex-officio member 
of the Sub-Commission on the Status of 
• Women. * * 

Uruguay 




Hon. JUAN CARLOS BLANCO 
\,,l>assador to the United States and 
chairman of his country*s delegation to 
the UN General Assembly. 

Juan Carlos Blanco, Uruguayan Ambas- 
sador to the United States since Septem- 
(Continued on next page) 

THE REPUBLIC 



The Chief Delegates To The United Nations* General Assembly 



URUGUAY — Continued 

ber 1941, has had a long and distinguished 
career in the government of his country 
Both at home and abroad. He was born 
in 1879 and obtained his law degree at 
the Faculty of Law of the University i I 
Montevideo. From 1007 to 1912 he served 
a ^Deputy and was t hen appointed Min- 
ister of Public Works. In 1916 he bacame 
Uruguayan Minister to Franco and was 
the representative of his country at the 
Versailles Peace Conference in 1919 and 
a delegate to the League of Nations in 1920. 
From 1924 to 192.", be served as Minister 
of Foreign Affairs and was reappointed 
to this position in 1931. In the interven- 
ing years, he held the posts of Actimr 
Minister of the Interior (1925) and Uru- 
uayan Ambassador to the Argentine 
(lV27,_to 1931). At the time- of his ap- 
pointment as Ambassador to the United 
States he was serving as Ambassador to 
Brazil. 



DR. ROBERTO E. MacEACHEN 

Chairman of the Fourth Committee 
(Trusteeship) of the UN General Assem- 
bly. 

Dr. Roberto Eduardo MacEachen, Uru- 
guayan Ambassador to the Court of St. 
James, is Chairman -\f the Fourth Com- 
mittee (Trusteeship) of the General As- 
sembly. Born in Montevideo in 1899 he 
graduated in law and social sciences at 
the University of Montevideo in 1924. 
He subsequenlty held positions as Second 
Secretary to the Legation of Uruguay in 
Washington (1926-1928) ; First Secretary, 
Counselor and Charge d'Affaires to the 
Uruguayan Legation in London (1928- 
1940) ; and Minister Plenipotentiary to 
Cuba (1940-1943). In 1943 he was ap- 
pointed Minister Plenipotentiary to Great 
Britain receiving his present appointment 
a year later. Dr. MacEachen was per- 
manent Secretary-General to the Urugua- 
yan delegations to the League of Nations 
and a member of the delegations of Uru- 
guay to the World Monetary and Econo- 
mic Conference in London in 1933; the 
Conference of Central Banks in Wash- 
ington in 1942; the Food and Agricultural 
Conference in Hot Springs in 1943; the 
San Francisco Conference in 1945; the 
Preparatory Commission where he served 
as Chairman of Committee Eight (Head- 
quarters) and the General Assembly in 
London. 



Venezuela 



Jugoslavia 




Dr. CARLOS ED. STOI.K 

Chairman of the delegation and one of 
the seven vice-J>reside7its of the United 
Nations General Assembly. 

Chief of the Venezuelan delegation to the 
present session of the General Assembly, 
Dr. Carlos Eduardo Stolk is the young- 
est of the seven vice-presidents. Rorn in 
1912, he obtained his doctorate of Polit- 
ical and Social Science at the Central 
University of Venezuela and was from 
1936 to 1939 Informing Magistrate of the 
Federal District High Court. Subseqiu n 
ly he was a professor ad interim of crim- 
inal procedure at the University of 
Venezuela; honorary delegate of Venezue- 
la in the Permanent Commission of Rio 
de Janeiro for the Codification of Pub- 
lic International Law; President of the 
Federal District Law Association to th^ 
Third Inter- American Conference of Law- 
yers; Venezuelan delegate to the Inter- 
American Neutrality Committee; Counsel- 
or of the Venezuelan delegation to the In- 
ter-American Conference on Problems of 
War and Peace and a delegate to tho 
meeting of the General Assembly in Lon- 
don. He has been Venezuelan represen- 
tative on the Inter- American Legal Com- 
mittee since 1942. 




Hon. STANOJE SIMIGH 

Ministr of Foreign Affairs far Yugos- 
lavia and Chairman of his country's de- 
legation to the UN General Assembly. 

Stanoje Simich, Minister of Foreign Af- 
fairs of the Federal People's Republic of 
Yugoslavia since March of this year, was 
born in Belgrade in 1893. He graduated 
from the Law Faculty of the University 
of Belgrade and has been in the diploma- 
tic service of Yugoslavia since 1919. H-2 
has served as Secretary in Yugoslav le- 
gations in Budapest, Brussels and Tira- 
na; as Consul in Korea, Albania and Za- 
dar; and as Counselor of the Yugoslav 
Legation in Paris. From 1942 to March 

1944 he was Ambassador of the Yugoslav 
Exile Government to Moscow, but resign- 
ed to join Marshal Tito who reappointed 
him to this post. In April 1945 he was 
appointed Yugoslav Ambassador to the 
United States and remained in this posi- 
tion until he was given his present portfo- 
lio. Mr. Simich was a delegate of his coun- 
try to the San Francisco Conference in 

1945 and vice-chairman of the Yugoslav 
delegation to the Paris Conference from 
July to October 1946. He is Vice-Pres- 
ident of the Presidium of the Republic 
of Serbia and President of the National 
Popular Front of Serbia. 



ATTENTION: 



Students of Foreign Service and Political Science will 
be. interested it. know that THE REPUBLIC Magazine and Directory will conti- 
nue to publish important neivs items and biographical sketches .of Diplomat* and 
other prominent people of the different nations of the \world. ]\'atch for mir 

nvct issue,. Subscribe NOW. The RE p UBLICf 3460 Taft Ave., Rizal Citv 
Philippines. ^ Ii .v, 



THE REPUBUC 



PAGE 49 



tin in Issues Facing 
General Assembly 

UNITED NATIONS HALL, Flushing, 
5t Y.. Sept. 15 (UP). — Here are the main 
issues confronting the 1947 session of the 
United Nations general assembly: 

1) Palestine— The 55 nations must de- 
cide whether to partition the Holy Land 
into Arab and Jewish states and terminate 
the Bntish mandate as recommended by the 
majority of the special UN Palestine com. 
mission. 

2) The BoJfaw^The United States is 
trymg to nulhfy R ussia . s Veto ^ 

unty owned and wants the assembly to 
teke actum to halt the alleged Balkan 
threat against Greece »ai*an 

-ted to the UN nut ft * ^ Pre? ' 
dications that ft tr 6 "** Stron * in " 
ask tho . at vi thc U "ite<i States would 

pliwt r mbly f ° r * commendation- 
election wW mtcrna «°nauy supervised 

-?rm^tr^: stawisha — ~» 
^^tik ts* p r: r ~? e vct ° fiKht ~ m 

western , Was last W, *>«t the 

Argentma and Australia will lead 



cil. 

possible is son,.. V« , 8t «»8«st result 

to turn wo5T 0 SST rCSOlUti0n Seekh ' R 
vetoes. pmMm a K ain *t Russia's 18 

western countries on world 
and a UN interna- 
: likely to provoVu- 



i'ce at 



atomic energy control 
tional police for< 
fireworks. 

2 ; S >*''''--Tru problem of UN 
rurnedTo 01 ;? di ^orship 

i report T J**** d ° Ck€t in th * *>™ of 
» icpoit on the outcome of last year's re- 
eomme ndation for m ^J^L of am- 
bassador and ministers from Madrid. 



Five Peace Pacts 
C ouie Into Force 

From Sylvain Mangeot 
Renter's Diplo ma tic Corresponden t 

LONDON, Sept. 16 (Reuter).— The pro- 
longed period .of stagnation in Europe end- 
today (Monday) by the coming into force 
of the peace treaties with Italy, Rumania, 
Hungary, Bulgaria and Finland. 

With the deposit of instruments of ra- 
tification today by the Great Powers con- 
cerned, in Paris for the Italian peace treaty 
and in Moscow for the other four coun- 
tries, a number of time limits will be 
set in motion within which the fighting 
forces of the former enemy countries must 
be scaled down, reparations must be pai 1, 
the future of the Italian empire must be 
settled, Allied troops must be withdrawn 
and nationality in ceded territories must be 
decided. 

Most important of all, the Italian peaee 
treaty brings to birth the free zone of 
Trieste, between Italy and Yugoslavia, 
whose future stability may make the dif- 
ference between peace and war in Europe. 

Because the Security Council failed to 
name a man, the Trieste free territory 
starts life without a governor and, under 
Article Seven of the Italian peace treaty, 
the provisional regime which operates at 
the Security Council's discretion until a po- 
pular assembly has been brought into be- 
ing, will be administered by Allied milit- 
ary government. Troops at the disposal 
of AMG will not exceed 5,000 British and 
o,000 United States soldiers who will im- 
mediately be joined by 5,000 troops from 
Yugoslavia. Italian sovereignty over 
Trieste ceases immediately. 

Time limits on nine points begin to 
operate from today. 



PJL Delegation At 
(jilted Meet 

lacaSan announced yesterday, the 
T-vr General assembly opens today, Sept. 16, 
. Mew York, that the Philippine represen- 
1T \ fo this epoch-making conference has 
2£ : complete, with Dr. Carlos P. «o 

head of the Philippine delegation. 
a8 T , ie other four members are Secretary 
Miguel Cuaderno, Secretary Emiho Abe- 
Uo Senator Vicente Sotto, and Senator To- 
'« Cabili. The last named delegate re- 
mas tan'"- Phil. 
presents the minority groups in tne rmi 

ippines. 

The Philippine Republic is entitled to five 
delegates to the UNO general assembly. 
Ail these men are already in New York 
for the inaugural ceremonies today, mey 
will be assigned to the various councils and 
Immrttecs. Assisting them -as technic* 
eonsu.tant is Teodoro Evangelist^ PoM>ca 
Sirs counsellor of the department of 

fo"e gn affairs who wcnt SecTC ^ 
Cuaderno and Abello. The 
egation will also avail of other Filip no 
technical men in the office of .^JSSj 
and in the Philippine embassy in Wasmng. 

ton. 

After the UNO general assembly, Cua. 
H f .rno and Ambassador Joaquin M. 
zalde. will negotiate with the US govern- 
ment for additional loans to the PhihPPmes. 
Cuaderno is coming back to the Philip- 
pines in time to prepare the 
the two-week conference of the * 
(Economic Commission for Asia and the 
Far East) which will be held in * a! ^ xn ' 
starting on or about November 24, 



relations 



Dr. Vicente A. Mayor 

PHYSICIAN 

Botica Gloria. 322 Libertad 
Rizal City Tel. 5-15-39 



Arturo M. Mendoza 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
In front of the Government Building 
509 Burgos, Rizal City 
TEL. 5-15-05 



STRONG-BILT Shoes & 
STRONG-BILT Tailoring 

^ 2( > Rizal Ave, Manila 
• V - CRl ^ Mmna&r Z. F. IRITO, Mwter Cuttei 



ACEDO STUDIO 

Photography. Commercial Advertising 
Developing, Printing and Enlarging 

615 Evangolista, Quiapo 
Manila 



EGGS SUPPLY 
and 

PLUMBING MATERIALS 

At reasonable prices 

at 

Seng Heng Eggs Store 
& Plumbing Supply 

414$ t. Alonso, Corner of Soler St. 
Santa Cruz, Manila 



PACK AO 



THE REPUBLIC! 




PRES. ROXAS AND HIS CABINET.—/^*/ 1 <>> right: Okie) of the Executive Office Emilio A hello, Secretaries Antonio Vi- 
ilaruma, Manuel V. Gdttego, Mariano Garchitorcnu, Speaker Ewgenjo Perez, Vice President and concurrently Secretary of For- 
eign Affairs Elpidio Quirino, President Manuel Rosas, Senate Present Jose Avelino, Secretaries Jose C. Zulueta, Roman Ozaetu, 
Ricardo Nepomnceno, Pedro Magsalin, and Rtiperto Kangleon. 

the piiksiiiknt 

THE biggest dream of Manuel Roxas as President of the Philippine Republic is to make this nation a land 
of opportunity. This is no idle talk. Right along, as he tightens each loose string from a tangled skein of 
a' war-destroj'ed country, his constant thought is for evej® Filipino citizen to have before- him •the opportunity 
to succeed. 

He works from early morning to late at night trying to 
Bolve the intricate and multifarious problems of a prostrate 
country demoralized by war. He has set his goal. He wants 
to establish an honest, prosperous government that can inspire 
awe and majesty not by force, but through the processes of 
democracy. He has an uphill fight because the country is d< - 
moralized — selfishness had become the primordial idea of a 
starved and tormented people, greed for grab, the rule rather 
than the exception after four years of Japanese occupation, 
and those who have a little honesty left, are now impatient and 
ready to cast blame and censure upon the rest of the popu- 
lation. 

Amid this tangled morass is one man who holds faith 



with himself and his God and thinks calmly, labors industrious 
ly and struggles toward his goal patiently. Many a time im- 
patience tests the mettle of Manuel Roxas, many a time K& 
becomes discouraged. Butf every time impatience and dis- 
eouragment get hold of him. he shakes them off as a duck 
shakes off the raindrops on its back and emerges more deter- 
mined, more understanding. 

The enemies of Manuel Roxas have never been kind to hiui 
The Vess in this Republic which is the freest in any country 
nevt-r spares him when he slips. Hut lie has never been uti- 
kind to the persons who write ag-ainst him. He- receives them 
with equal cordiality and warmth which task the patience of 
his closest friends and admirers. 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAt.K :,\ 



f Manuel p ov . 

Ir °versia] Puh \ dima **d 29 years of outstanding and con- 

Pln * s o n JL service on becoming President of the Philip- 

iy iay 28, 1946. 
v iewed f 

Xas ' Section t r ° m ^ P ° int of rtiC °g nition of achievement, Ro- 
°? the People ° presidcnc y was the greatest grant in the gift 
^eetcd o n An ^1 he had dcvot ed his life to serve. By being 
Co *Unon\vealth 23, 1946, he ^came tn€ last President of the 
p*bli c . The * and °n July 4, the first President of the Re- 
his present haS played and wil1 continue to play dur- 
^culabl^ sijr ?L adm inistration will be beyond question, of in- 
Co *ne the first p anC< ^ in the histor y of the Philippines. To bi - 
^ lrc uinstances , Sldent of the Philippine Republic under any 
°^come Presid W ° U - d * ndow him with historic potentialities. To 

^ord meant th* ^ th ° wakc of thc most devastatin £ war on 
p0I1 sibili ty c ^ he w ould have in his hands the heaviest res- 

ipin o people ld by apy sinj?lc man in the annals of the 

er ship whi^T}!^ of of ^ice, President Roxas has provided a lead- 
th * critical t aS r ^ tored the national vitality and safely bridged 
pu *>lic. He , ra * Sltion Period from Commonwealth status to Re- 
tion win tei^i down th * lines along which the Philippine na- 

^hateC t , ***** yearS " 
ld ^nt R 0 vo c , e s Pccifi c judgment of history may be, Pres 
our a >* , proerram — , .« i i 

a «nals. 



j „ 0 w w- j ^ — 

Program during the past year will loom large in 



ma chinery 6 a^H*' President Roxas reorganized the governmental 
° ut,> attack * * ormulat * d a legislative program for an "all- 
A mong the m ccono mic and scoial problems left by the war. 
as National a Gasures for which he secured congressional as well 
Ve terans; ( 2 J )pl ° Val Wcre U) a GI Bill of Rights for Filipino 
Oration;' (3> establi shment of a Rehabilitation Finance Cor- 
chinery; ' (4) ^ prov ision for streamlining the governmental ma- 
^Ues; (gj estaKi^ 10n ° f taX ,aws *° increase government rev- 
nd °rganizati Shment ° f a De Partment of Foreign Affairs 
n casure«, i ncl °j. ° f a for€ ign service; (6) agrarian reform 
prov ision for th Provision for a 70-30 crop division; (7) 
Bl0n ; (8) purch establishnwnt of a Surplus Property Commis- 
ple biscite of th^T^ Church states; and (9) the approval by 
Nation acts. ° ade Re lations, Reconstruction and Rcliabil- 

President R 0 

^otiated with th*^' togeth < ?r xvith Vice President Quirino, na- 
amit y. (2) a tl Unitcd States Government (1) a treaty of 
tance, ( 4) a tl . ea y 011 ba ses, (3) a treaty on military assis- 
fishencs, and (&\ ° U Consular Convention, (5) a treaty on 
aether thoy i aid , a treaty of Amity with China. Working to- 
close tics W j tll t , * a definitivc foreign policy based upon 
United Nations.^ Ln ^ed States and cooperation with the 
Ho 

Kxecutiv,- AL!Lm° n ^ ltSSi ° naI authorization for, and signed, an 
with the United 4 t Pl0Viding f ° r P 1(>fe ™tial trade relations 
surplus property U-^lt *° V 28 y< ' ars - He negotiated a vast 
Phili„p im . GoJ:~T \ ****** w ™<* made available to 
P»rty Plus P50.000000 in Pl ' 274,000 - 000 wo *« of surplus pro- 
the Philippic *° V ^ aSSUm ption by 

riUa currencies Z \ ?u h ° obli Kation to redeem guer- 

States Army! Wm ° " bli ^tions of the United 

V. S CoTJlLl T ^ aWe *° SeCUle etherization from the 
of a WaJTSLjS a P150 ' 00 °.000 loan and the establishment 
to ««i PhmSS? C r miSSi ° n to COnsidtl - other budgetary loans 

Phi Si, T V m,, J ' ,0,,S ° f do,la,ii W01th of equipment for the 
for thl aMd f ° r tht cont5n »^ s«PPly of essential needs 

ma*? ^ / CVS - H ° 1,eor *anized the Military Police Com- 
mand and placed it under the jurisdiction of the Interior De- 
f<»S! " end,,, K ^ eventual conversion into a civilian poffce 

% See ixw-* 31-40 

PACE M 




President MANUEL A. ROXAS 

-—By stressing an agrarian reform program and measures de. 
signed to improve the lot of the under-privileged, and by car^ 
rying on at the same time a vigorous pacification campaign, 
President Roxas was able to minimize the adverse effects of the 
Hukbalahap movement and to restore a major measure of peace 
to embattled Central Luzon. The authority of the Government 
was reestablished in that area and the supremacy of law, re- 
affirmed. 

By a vigorous attack on the problem of illegally held arms 
and other measures, considerable progress was made in the de, 
crease of lawlessness and banditry throughout the Philippines. 
A sweeping attack on graft and corruption was also carried out 
under President Roxas' direction; instances of malfeasance un~ 
covered during the past year were vigorously prosecuted. When 
he found it necessary to wield the big stick, he did so and 
cleaned his government of corrupt officials. 

The President placed every emphasis on thc role of educa- 
tion and of the schools and gavt every possible support to the 
increase of school facilities. 

A nation-wide food production campaign, urged by the 
President through the Department of Agriculture, helped to 
avert threatened famine and to assure a minimum food supply 
in the face of world-wide famine conditions. 

These are but a few of the almost numberless steps taken 
administratively and legislatively under President Roxas' lead- 
ersnip to bring order out of chaotic conditions prevailing* in 
April and May 1946. 

As a result of his leadership, the Philippines was recog^ 
nized by all nations of the world as a vigorous and growing de- 
mocratic republic. Above all, the President preached to the 
people a doctrine of courage and national dedication, at the 

THE REPUBLIC 



same time emphasizing his determination to uphold democratic 
forms of freedom, at whatever cost. 

Manuel Roxas is a dynamic political genius whose keen 
mind and electric imagination have placed him as the leader of 
his people. In training; and ability he has no peer; only the in- 
comparable Quezon, His master and benefactor, ever boat him 
in a political fight. 

As a lawyer, he showed on countless occasions his mastery 
of procedure and corporation law. He topped the bar examina- 
tions and held the record of having attained the highest mark. 

As economist, he has no master, his penetrating mind for, 
seeing what most students and observers miss. 

As orator he is without an equal in the Country. His sin- 
cerity, persuasiveness, and use of dramatic pauses which are 
natural with the man, capture the immediate interest of his au- 
dience. 

As a writer, he can take his reader to a realm of fancy on 
the wings of ecstacy, or load his pen with vitriol and make his 
subject a ridiculous Quasimodo. 

He is singular in that he shows an expert dexterity in al- 
most anything he touches — a versatile performer who unknow- 
ingly fills in the leading role. 

When the scintillant Manuel Luis Quezon picked out the 
Young Manuel Roxas as his teammate to fight Osmena, little did 
the cider Manuel think that it was this young protege of his 
that would challenge his leadership later on. 

Roxas proved to be everything Quezon expected, and more. 
When Quezon defeated his former mentor, Sergio Osmena, Ro- 
xas filled in a very creditable manner, the post of Speaker of 
the House, formerly occupied by Osmena, while Quezon ruled the 
legislature from the rostrum of the Senate. Osmena was forced 
to capitulate and join the party which had wrested the leader- 
ship away from him. 

When Roxas was snubbed by President Coolidge. in Wash- 
ington, he returned to the Philippines, organized the BagorLr 
Katipunan and met with fair success in indoctrinating the Fi - 
ipinos in the creed of nationalism. 

Not believing that much could be done in Washington to- 
ward the winning of Philippine independence, but continuing his 
labors to keep alive the ardour of his people, Quezon sent Os- 
mena and Roxas to Washington on a mission. This was called 
by the papers the Osrox mission. 

To Quezon's surprise the Osrox mission was able to per 
suadc the American Congress to approve the Hare-Hawes-Cuc- 
tirig Act granting independence to the Philippines. Quezon saw 
his mistake and feared that the Osivx team might Outmacth 
him. Quezon immediately discredited the Osrox mission, got the 
house organized before Roxas could return to the Philippines 
and arrayed the Senate for a good fight to defeat the indepen- 
dence law. 

The clever Quezon, one of the world's master politicians, 
started a campaign to defeat the Hare-Hawes-Cutting Law. He 
Succeeded in Washington to change a sentence of the law and its 
name to Tydings-McDuffic law. 

Meanwhile, in the Philippines, he discredited the Osrox 
mission. Despite Quezon's great strength, however, he could 
not defeat Roxas in the three provinces of the island of Panay, 
Roxas* own island. The young gallant showed Quezon that he 
was not master of all. The province of Antique that was pro- 
Roxas, continued to be anti-Quezon even to the last election when 
Quezon was presidential candidate. 

When Quezon emerged supreme, R_xas, like Achilles, sulked 
in his tent. The Constitutional Convention was formed, and 
Roxas found himself leading the minority. There was a big 
rhance to disrupt the convention and discredit its president, 
Quezon's man, Claro M. Recto. The success of any plan to dis- 
turb the work of the convention was almost assured when Vi- 



cente Lopez who held a bloc of almost 100 delegates offered his 
men to Roxas. 

At this point Roxas turned statesman. He told his followers 
that the drafting of the Constitution was not political and polit- 
ics must not interfere with the workings of the convention. So, 
it came to pass, that Roxas gained prominence in the convention 
as the leading spirit and inspiration of that body Those 
who wished to hate, admired him and even came to love him. 

Quezon, at this time, was willing to forgive Roxas, but the 
rebellious disciple preferred to stay away from the Quezon band- 
wagon. When Quezon ran for the presidency, he took along 
Osmena as his teammate. Roxas devoted his time to the prac- 
tice of law and, in a short time, recouped his fortune. 

Quezon, really, did not have a deep-seated antipathy to- 
ward Roxas, Quezon's love for Roxas was that of an older 
brother— it had the element of forgiveness and concern. He 
offered Roxas the secretaryship of finance and the latter ac- 
cepted, provided, he would be left alone to decide for his de- 
partment. This was too much for Quezon who loved power. 
Parleys followed until finally Quezon dropped Roxas at the last 
minute. 

To Roxas it was nothing, but to Quezon this was a great 
disappointment. Here was an excellent mind of which he was 
in dire need, but this mind refused to yield to the master po- 
litician of the Philippines. 

Quezon's persuasiveness however, came to the rescue, and 
finally Roxas was won back to the fold and the latter became 
secretary of finance and head of government corporations. 

Claro M. Recto, a great admirer and intimate friend of 
Roxas, started the ball rolling to boost him for President. Th<; 
Commonwealth Constitution did not provide for reelection and 
Roxas was Recto's man. The Constitution was amended, how- 
ever, and by arrangement with Washington, Quezon if reelect- 
ed, would serve two years more — he would serve no more than a 
total of eight years as President after which the Vice President 
would take over. Quezon chose Osmena again as his running 
mate. Roxas bided his time. 

Then the war came. Roxas who was a major in the re- 
serve force was commissioned lieutenant-colonel fn the USAFFE. 
He was brigadier-general when ho surrendered to the Japs at 
Malaybalay. 

Now came the hardest role to perform. To become Pres- 
ident in the puppet Jap republic, or to take a desperate chance 
with death by refusing. Roxas, the actor, succeeded. He play- 
ed sick. The Japs although not totally convinced could not ac- 
cuse him of feigning, much less kill him. All this time Roxas 
was the inspiration of the underground resistance and by ably 
playing his cards saved himself to serve the Philippine Repub- 
lic^ 

When Roxas launched his candidacy against Osmena, he 
had to fight an up-hill struggle. His enemies branded him 
collaborator. Then he was up against a machine turned by the 
government against him, reinforced by foodstuffs and clothing 
which a dishonest government gave to hungry and naked people 
in exchange of votes. 

But Roxas had faith in himself. Never for a minute did 
he doubt that he would win. This faith strengthened that of 
his leaders and it gained momentum until it finally swept ths 
country. 

Roxas' election brought fear and trembling to his enemies. 
They feared vengeance. They thought Roxas was to turn a 
vindictive plutocrat. 

His wisdom and understanding, however, his forgiving na- 
ture astounded his enemies. He did not make a move to oust 
honest officials even if they were against him. He became more 
kindly and more humble instead of getting intoxicated with 
power. 



rHK REPUBUC 



PACK 5t 



Today he rules his country with b • ^ 
5ty. xry * lth a wisdom based on humil- 

The first product of the A 
the Philippines to become P ™ erican system of education in 
born in Capiz. Capiz, on J an ^ * ° f the R€ P ublic > he was 
son of Gerardo Roxas', who dirT^ ll 1S ° 2 ' He is the youngest 
Civil, and of Rosario Acuna. m Hands of Spain's Guardia 

He received his early ed 
he was sent to Hongkong toflT ^ the public schooIs - Then 
one year and later to Manila t at St ' Jose P h ' s College for 
tended the Manila High Sch l C ° mplete his education. He at~ 
law, he entered the Law ePadu&ti n8T in 1910. Choosing 

he studied for six months aS ^ Pened by the Y.M.C.A. Here 
sity of the Philippines wher \ transferred to the Univer- 
high honors in 1913 I n thp 6 fl msbed the law course with 
Nation with the highest* rating^ he passed thc bar cxam " 

His first positions in th 
The records show tnat in w g0V * rnment service were modest. 
P"ter in the Court of Pi f ,S T stude ^ t days, he acted as inter- 
IhVtrict After topping th ; nStancc in th * Fifteenth Judicial 
tracted thc attention of th Vu** * xaminat ">n in 1913, he at- 
Ployed as law desk of th* Justice Arellano and was em- 

to enter politics. * reat J* uri st. He resigned in 1917 

the ^^oui^a^ ^V^?^ Came with an appointment to 
the province in his n vt P1Z ' Winn *ng the governorship of 
at thc polls This * move S av * him his first major victory 
ly to the national \Sv , mortov ^, brought him permanent- 
Convention in 1920 h SCe ^' Attendin £ the Governors' 

sonality and fluent sV™ ^ resSed cver y one wi th his magnetic per- 
He had become a national^ ™* mad€ the P residin S officer * 
mcnt was also outstandin J**™- H i s gubernatorial achieve- 
vince by roads and «t»Jrl 1 hnked the far ends of his P ro " 
stepped up public improvements. 
His legislative career * 
ative from the First IV f • m his election as Rcprcsent- 

elected Speaker 0 f the H ° f Capiz * Hc was ^mediately 
which he held for deve ° f ^^sentatives, a position 

Constitutional Convention ^T**' * n 1934, 35 a mcmber of 
loaders of that body and' i Wame one of the outstanding 
idual member influenced tl^T*^ m ° V0 than an y othcr indiv " 
last reward for his Wui \r draftin S of that instrument. The 
the Philippine Senate in uu-* SGrVi ° e was the Presidency of 
idency of the Philippines h i,' Wlth his elevation to the pres- 
tive office. ' 6 has set a record in Philippine elec- 

His work for Philimy 
distinguished as that of an"* lndo ^ ende »ce in Washington is aa 
a me mber of most of th* natioiial le ader. He has been 

United States to win *h * lnd <-P^ndence missions sent to the 
the country's freedom. He was on his 



t mission in 1923 and has since become well known as a pie*-" 
f thc cause in Washington. Jointly with Quezon, h< head 
th °Third Mission. In 1929, he was Chairman of the Spec* 1 
\V on sent by the Eighth Philippine Legislature Again 

Td the House delegation which formed part of the Indop* : 
} 7 Mission of 1931. The year 1933 marked thc climax of t»* 
t uztrle in Washington. Roxas, Osmena, and others &~ 
l0Ilg i the passage of the Harc-Hawes-Cuttintf Lav,. Qxxoz '] 
° ded Roxas for his brilliant work. "If any member 

commen ^ useful in the campa 

th c gaiss ^ nie|nber was Speaker Roxas." Tin resulting 
Am<?1,c ! gtrxl efflc is still vivid in the political memory of the 
a True Roxas lost the Speakership, but "he fell into th 
tl ° n * of the people." He had qualified as a natior.nl leader W 
jr^ckoned with in every affair of state. 

In the Commonwealth era he was in every national pin 
enterprise. He served in most of the agencies created t* 
*tudv different aspects of the national life. He was a menibe* 
fthe Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, ai> 1 
? , vas chairman of the following bodies: The National Econ 

• Council the Tax Commission, the Rural Progress Admitf** 
mlC fon the Board of Directors of the National Development 
Company and the Committee on Education,! Policy to reor 
^m~L the University of the Philippines. He was a mcmbi r ■ ■ 
SK government boards such as the National Rice and for' 
r " oration the Mindanao Land Settlement Project, thc Na- 
tional Relief Board and the Board of Regents of the University 
f the Philippines. In 1938, he was made Secretary of Finance, 
a position which he held until 1941 when ho resigned to run for 
the Senate. 

The war in the Pacific revealed fully the aoldier and 
triot in Manuel Roxas. In the Philippine Army, he rose t« 
the rank of Brigadier-General. As soon as Pearl Harbor was 
bombed he volunteered his services to the Army and was imme- 
diately appointed one of the aides of General MacArthur. He 
saw action on Bataan and Corregidor and Mindanao. His record 
during the three vcars of enemy occupation including his un- 
derground work, after he had refused to leave the country fo 
a haven of safety, is now well known. His election to the Pre 
idency makes him the leader of the Filipino people during thefi 
crucial times and the first President of the Philippine Repub 
lie. 

General Roxas is married to Trinidad de Leon of Bulaca] 
They have two children: Ruby, and Gcrardito, who is studying 
in the College of Law, University of the Philippines. 

He was inducted into office as the third and last Resident 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines on May 28, 1946 

On July 4, 1946, he became the first President of the Phil- 
ippine Republic. 



THE VICE PRESIDENT 



To play the role of 



- a prophet is often a risky propo sition— one may be found out. That is particularly true 
Tre those who ar? hw m ^^nced. What Fate Written remains a mystery to all. Possible exceptions 
SSike mam we»tW f h ^ e giit of divination. But even those who think themselves thus gifted are not 
tmW " ' weatnei forecaster who forecasts a fair and clear day even when rain is actually coming. 

Thirty two yoars ago, a young man 
w ho had just finished his law course at 
the University of the Philippines took it 
upon himself to play the part of a class 
prophet. He stalkr-d up to thc stage and 
boldly predicted what would become of 
his happy but unimpressed and incred- 
ulous classmates. Time, the ultimate 
judge, has strangely borne out some of 
vj fl predictions. In fact, many of the 
niches he assigned to his fellow-graduates 
tin y mm ' occu l > >*» some with pHde, th- 



rest with resignation. Provokingly si- 
lent about his own future, hc vaguely 
alluded to his becoming a world travel- 
ler, although he did not reveal what his 
mission would be. 

The class prophet then is now the 
Vice President of thc Philippines and, 
as modern political trends would have it, 
concurrently Secretary of Foreign Af- 
fairs in which, since he embarked on 
politics, he lias been juggly interested. 

Elpidio Quirino, the third child of a 



poor but happy family, was born in th 
warden's quarters adjoining the provin- 
cial jail of Vigan, Ilocos Sur, on No vein - 
ver 10, 1890. Thc warden was his own 
father — Mariano Quirino. From earl> 
childhood, he struggled with poverty an ! 
the environment that poverty produces 
His lot, however, did not depress or dis 
courage him. If at all, it helped him 
acquire and develop those sturdy ami 
sterling qualities that lead to self-reli- 
ance and self-confidence. They gave him 



THE REPUBLIC 



Strength of character and the will to suc- 
ceed no matter what the odds may be. 
I t |g no uncommon trait among the har- 
,lv people who are often as rugged as 
the rocky terrain in their place of abode 
in northern Luzon. 

Prom his fond mother, Grogoria Ri- 
vera, by whom Ins father had nine chil- 
dren, Elpidio or Pidiong as the neighbor- 
hood called him. received his first school- 
ing. ^ was the hard way, but both par- 
<. nts and teachers at the time agreed 
that it was the best and most effective 
way of learning. It was in Aringay, La 
Union, that he first entered he primary 
grades. There he finished h>s elemen- 
tary course. He moved to San Fernan- 
do the capital, to continue his studies 
at' the high school, but before he er.uld 
go far, nis parents decided it was m- 
cessary for them to return to their then 
native town. Caoayan, near the coast of 
Vigan. 

Resolved to share in the family up- 
keep, young Elpidio secured a teaching 
job in a barrio. For his pains he re- 
ceived the "princely salary" of P12 a 
month. At the same time, he enrolled at 
the Vigan High School. The distance 
from bis house to the school was not 
less than five kilometers, but he did not 
mind walking it, having read in one of 
his books that Abe Lincoln used to walk 
a longi'i* distance in order to attend 
school. 

His teaching gave Elpidio an idea. 
By working, Ik could support himself 
while studying and still be of help to the 
family- Accordingly, he saved part of 
his earnings. His plan was to pursue 
his studies in Manila where he could earn 
more and learn more. Besides, his eld- 
est brother. Ernesto, had just returned 
from the United States as a pensionado 
and was temporarily living in the city. 

At the capital Elpidio arrived in time 
to enroll at tlv Manila High School. 
Among his schooiffiates were brilliant ora- 
t(HS and debaters. He was both him- 
self. He headed the Cryptia Debating 
Club and his senior by one year, Manutl 
Roxas, led the Rizal Debating Club. The 
two captains oft>en clashed in friendly 
debates to the delight of the entire stu- 
(h nt body. One was eloquent and convin- 
cing; the other, witty and persuasive. 
0 n e bad the gift of Demosthenes; the 
other, a devastatingly keen sense of hu- 
mor. 

But Pidiong had one disadvantage; he 
bad to earn his livelihood. His time lie 
had to divide between study and work. 
Thus he joined the bureau of lands as 
junior computer. After a year of doubt- 
ful computing:, he resigned and accepted 
a clerical position in the office of the 
principal of his school. His new job af- 
forded him more time to study; it also 
gave him an opportunity to meet those 
dear delights*' who fill youth's dream- 
ing heart with poetry and romance. 



Fortunately, his studies exerted great- 
er fascination for him than the lure 
of beauty. His main concern was to be 
somebody some day. To insure economic 
stability, he took the first grade civil 
service examination. He passed. Called 
to public service, he became property 
clerk of Manila's police department. His 
new position not only permitted him to 
live comfortably, but also enabled him to 
help his family substantially. 

In 1911, he was graduated from the 
Manila High School. Four years later, 
he finished his law course and shortly 
thereafter became a full-fledged attorney 
at law. However, he did not practice 
law right away. Instead he accepted the 
position of law clerk in the Philippine 
Commision and later in the Philippine 
Senate. It was during this period that 
he caught the fancy of the fiery and im- 
petuous leader, Senate President Ma- 
nuel L. Quezon, who promptly asked him 
to be his secretary. When President 
Quezon left for the United States to 
offer one Filipino division to President 
Wilson for the Allies in World War I, 
he took along with him his studious and 
efficient secretary. 

Not long after his return from the 
United States, Quirino plunged into po- 
litics. In it he saw his real future. He 
launched bis candidacy for representa- 
tive in Ilocos Sx.r with the sanction, if 
not the blessing, of the Senate President. 
An excellent public speaker with a ready 
tongue and charming personality, he 
easily won two hearts: the heart of the 
electorate and the heart of a young and 
pretty girl, Alicia Syquia, whom he mar- 
ried two years later. One of his first 
Acts as the youngest member of th*> 
House of Representatives was to work 
for the extension of higher education 
throughout the Philippines. His object 
was to give the poor and the rich stu- 
dents the same opportunity of obtaining 
college or University training. As a first 
step, Tie sponsored a bill creating a branch 
of the University of the Philippines m 
Vigan. Charity, he believed, should be- 
gin at home, but it must never end their. 

With the natural rebelliousness and 
pugnacity of youth, hi defied the "uni- 
personalism" of the then Speaker Ser- 
gio Osmena, undisputed boss of the do- 
minant Nationalist Party, So when Pres- 
ident Quezon finally threw down the 
gauntlet and formed the Collect ivist Par- 
ty, Quirino Immediately sided with him. 
The Speaker tried to pacify him by send 
ing him to Peking, China, as a delegate 
to the International Bar Conference. But 
the young rebel refused to be pacified. 
Upon the expiration of his term, he ran 
for senator on the Collectivist ticket. 
However, he was defeated by Isabelo de 
los Reyes, then the idol of the Ilocanos. 
In the next election, he ran again. This 
time fortune favored him. He thus had 
the distinction . of being one of the first 
two UP graduates to be elevated to the 



Senate. Jose P. Laurel was the other. 
Quirino's old chief, Senate President Que- 
zon, made him chairman of the commit- 
tee on accounts and then chairman of the 
committee on public instruction. It was 
at this time that he renewed his efforts 
to establish the Vigan Junior College of 
the University of the Philippines. His 
next goal was to master the intricate 
problems of tariff, taxation, inter-island 
shipping, agriculture and finance. Even- 
tually he was appointed chairman of the 
Special Joint Committee on Taxation. 

He ran for re-election in 1931 on the 
strength of his previous record in the 
Senate. Again he won. He resumed his 
interest in tariff and taxation and was 
largely responsible for the passage of 
the first Tariff Act and the publication 
of a book, "Philippine Economic Prob- 
lems", which remains to this day as the 
most authoritative study on Philippine 
economic problem:: made by Filipino eco- 
nomists and financial experts. 

It was while serving his second sena- 
torial term that the country was sudden- 
ly split into Pros and Antis following 
the passage of the Harc-Hawes-Cutting 
Act which the then Sen. Sergio Osmena 
and" Speaker Manuel Roxas, composing 
the Os-Rox mission, brought home. Hav- 
ing induced the legislature to reject the 
act, Senate President Quezon left for 
Washington. With him was Senator Qui- 
rino who had become his trusted lieu- 
tenant. The result of the trip was th* 
unexpected enactment of the Tydings-Mc- 
Duffie law, a signal and unprecedented 
tribute to the genius and political strate- 
gy of Quezon and the able asssitance of 
his former secretary. The new act of 
the American Congress gave the Philip- 
pines her independence. 

In 1934 Quirino was appointed Secret- 
ary of Finance. He held the position 
without relinquishing his seat in the sen- 
ate. Meanwhile, his old district in Ilo- 
cos Sur elected him delegate to the Cons- 
titutional Convention which drafted the 
Constitution of the Philippines. Upon 
the inauguration of the Commonwealth, 
Senator Quirino was appointed Secret- 
ary of Finance and subsequently Secret- 
ary of the Interior, a position which he 
held from 1936 to 1938. As Secretary 
of the Interior, he headed the now de- 
funct National Information Board and 
sponsored the organization of the State 
Police. Sensing that he had aroused or 
incurred the displeasure of the powcrs- 
that-be because of his increasing popu- 
larity, he ran for the National Assem- 
bly. For the second time in his politic- 
al career he was defeated. He accepted 
his defeat with such grace, sportsman- 
ship, and dignity that even his powerful 
critics were disarmed and began to praise 
him. In 1941, he was elected senator-at- 
large. The now congress, however, never 
convened on account of the war until 
June, 1945, following the restoration of 
the Common wealth. 



, HE UK PUBLIC 



PAGE 55 



During the Japanese occupation, he 
was imprisoned in Fort Santiago. When 
the Japanese resorted to blood and fire 
purge, early in February, 1945, he lost 
his wife whom the Japs bayonetted to 
death together with three of his five 
children. 



Upon the liberation of the Philippines, 
Elpidio Quirino was chosen President pro 
tempore of the Senate. He ran for Vice- 
President of the Philippines on the ticket 
of the Liberal wing of the Nacionalista 
party and was elected. He assumed of- 
fice on May 28, 194G. On the same day, 



his running ma tc, President Manuel Ro- 
xas, appointed him Secretary of Pinar.c 
and later Secretary of Foreign Affair* 
a position which he still holds with cour- 
age and dignity and honor to his coun- 
try. 



Hon. EMII/IO ABEIXO 

Presidential Secretary and Chief of Executive Office 

Born in Isabela, Occidental Negros, on January I I. 1906, the youngest of the boys and the 1th of the 
cluldreii of Dr. JIanuel Abello and Rosario Montilla. His father was for sometime the justice of the peace and 
later on public health officer of his home town. 

Product of the public schools. He ob- 
tained his elementary education in his 
home town and graduated from the Oc- 
cidental Negros High School in 1923 as 
salutatorian. In the same year, he went 
to Manila and against the urgings of his 
lather, who had wanted him to take me- 
dicine, after his graduation from the Col- 
Wfirc of Liberal Arts of the state univer- 
sity m 1925, he enrolled in the college 
of law, and graduated as salutatorian of 
hls class w 1^29. In August of the same 
f* ar ' at the young age of 23, he took 
tne bar examinations, placing among the 
*m topnotchers with an average of 90 i 

EhT£ / n his sch001 days both in th * 

an o" C , 01 ^ in the ™*ersity, he was 
one If th debat€r and was al -*ys 
class m ° St lead ^ of his 

in^eX/T ***** Pass- 

one of The I T ^ ° f Jose ™°> 

WW corpoVC 7 ! ^ and hi * h <^ 
^oration lawyers. i n 1931 he 



resigned and practised law in Nueva Eci- 
ja for three years. In the same year, 
or on April 15, 1931 at Bacolor, Pam- 
panga, he married the former Elisa Gu- 
tierrez with whom he has now five chil- 
dren, all boys. 

In 1934, hi: was appointed Assistant 
Attorney, Bureau of Justice and was de- 
tailed in the Office of the Governor-Gen- 
eral as Legal Adviser, United States 
States Agricultural Adjustment Adminis- 
tration, Sugar Section. After the inau- 
guration of the Commonwealth in 1935, 
he continued in Malacanan, in the- Office 
of the President of the Philippines, as le- 
.'-ral adviser, assisting Secretary of Jus- 
tice, Jose Yulo. 

In 1937, he was appointed Assistant 
Solicitor-General and detailed in Malaca- 
nan as legal assistant to assist the Se- 
cretary of Justice go over opinions, over 
administration bills to be submitted to the 
National Assembly and over acts passed 
by the same body. 



On August 7, 1939, at the age of 32, 
by presidential appointment, he became 
the youngest Under-Secretary of Jus- 
tice, holding said position until the out- 
break of the war. 

On May 28, 194G, the same day when 
['resident Roxas assumed office as Pres- 
ident of the Republic, he was appointed 
as Chief of the Executive Office with 
the rank and emolument of a Department 
Secretary. The appointment was con- 
firmed on the same day by the Commis- 
sion on Appointments. 

Before the year, he was a professional 
lecturer on Administrative Law in the 
University of the Philippines and was 
also a professor of Evidence, Public In- 
ternational Law r Public Corporations, and 
Administrative Law in the Philippine Lav. 
School and in the University of Manila. 
Before his appointment to his present 
position, he was also a professor of Evid- 
ence, Corporation Law and Administra- 
tive Law in the Far Eastern University 
and the Philippine Law School. 



Hon. JOSE C. ZULUETA 

Secretary of the Interior 

lueta ax£. Atil^J^^ J ° Se ° Zulueta was born in lloiIo > IloiI °' on February 7, 1889; son of Evaristo Zu- 
gree of Bachelor of *A vf U Z T Iueta * He attended the Ateneo de Manila where he graduated in 1911 with the de- 
ippino bar the samp • 1914, he finished law at the Escuela de Derecho. He was admitted to the Phil- 

^ ^ year, immediately after passing the bar examinations. 



1025, v£ t retreat ^ V° * 
tional legislative )0 T y Se t " l ht the °* 
native terms until Mav mi« 1 C ° nSe - 



Secretary of the Inter 



His Excellency, President Manuel 



nor in the cabinet of 



xas. 



A. Ro- 



During his long tenure as legislator, 
Mr. Zulueta became majority floor leader 
in the house of representatives in 1933; 
Speaker Protempore, 1934, and Speaker 
of the House, 1945. 

He married the former Solcdad D. Ra- 
mos, of Sorsogon, in 1917. A son, Anto- 
nio, was killed by the Japanese during the 
liberation of Manila in February, 1945. 

Won. MIGUEL CUADERNO 

Secretary of Finance 



His pacification campaign policy to at- 
tract lawless elements to surrender their 
firearms to the constituted authorities and 
to restore peace and order is now bo 5 
carried out with tact and ability by the 
Department of the Interior which has di: 
ect control nad supervision over all pro\ 
incial, city and municipal government-. 



fni2 ? SS ° r ' lecturer ' Prolan, diplomat, wri 
Cuadeino was born on December 12, 1890, in the town of 
College in Hongkong in 1897 and finished his elementary 

^J*^ * the Philippines and enrolled at the Univ- 
VI ^ * ! PhlIlp P ines where ^ finished his pre-Medic course 
and the first two years of Medicine in that university. 

<w A™' he . pa6sed ^ th * ^nior stenographer and the 
fust grade examinations given by the civil service, and has dis- 

PAGE 56 



ter, and top flight economist, Secretary of Finance Miguel 
Balanga, Bataan. He began schooling at the St. Joseph 
education in 1905. 

tinction of being the very first Filipino to pass the, senior steno- 
grapher examinaiton in the Philippines. His pubic career began 
when he was appointed that same year as chief clerk of the Exe- 
cutive Office. He soon rose to become assistant secretary and 
later secretary to Governor-General Harrison and, before the 

THE REPUBUC 



departure of the latter, was appointed director of the Bureau 
of Supply. 

In the meantime, he resumed his studies switching to law and 
graduated at the head of his class in the Philippine Law School 
in 1919. He placed second in the bar examinations given that 
same year and began a career of steady progress that made him 
the top ranking economist of his time. 

In 1920, he was appointed a member of the Board of Directors 
of the Philippine National Bank and attended to the liquidation 
of several big companies that fell into the hands of the Philip- 
pine National Bank at the request of the then manager, Mr. E. 
\Y. Wilson. 

General Wood, recognizing his splendid record, appointed him 
assistant general manager of the Philippine National Bank in 
.1924, from which post he rose to become Executive Vice-President 
in 1931. 

The teaching profession also appealed to him and he gave 
lectures on banking and finance from 1920 to the present. He also 
delivered lectures in law but gave it up after three years when 
he found banking and finance more to his liking. 

In 1934, he campaigned and was elected to the Constitutional 
Convention by the Bataan electorate. His knowledge of the dif- 
ferent state constitutions was instrumental in putting him in the 
Committee of Seven which drafted the Constitution. Then, 
when the constitution was passed, he was selected, together with 
Claro M. Recto and Manuel Roxas, to form the Committee of 
Three to take the Constitution to the United States for approval. 

He wrote a book on "The Framing of the Philippine Constitu- 
tion." 

In 1936, he retired from the Philippine National Bank and 
organized an investment corporation in which the Jacintos and 
Cojuangcos were the principal stockholders. He was the first 
president of this corporation which later became the Philippine 
Bank of Commerce in 1938. 



s After the triumphal return of the liberation forces, he became 
the director of the CRSD, which was under the United States 
Military authorities. 

In November, 1946, he was appointed Secretary of Finance. 
The job of evolving a sound financial system out of the chaos 
left by war fell upon him. and as a member of the cabinet, he 
was instrumental in devising ways and means of running the 
government on borrowed money. He has expressed hopes of 
the Philippines having a balanced budget by 1948. 

At present, he is also chairman of the National Development 
Company; member of the boards of directors of the Insular Sugar 
Refining Corporation, People's Homesite Corporation, Cebu Port- 
land Cement Company, National Warehousing Corporation, and 
the Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation Administration. 

He was also chairman of the Philippine Section of the Joint 
Philippine-American Finance Commission appointed by President 
Truman and President Roxas. This commission submitted a 
study of the financial and economic aspects of Philippine repara- 
tions. 

In July, 1947, he represented the Philippines at the Shanghai 
meet of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East. 
He served his post with such distinction that he was elected vice- 
chairman of that body. 

Today, Secretary "Mike" Cuaderno, as his friends call him, 
is now in the United States on a far more important mission — to 
represent the Philippines at Lake Success — together with the other 
members of the Philippine delegation to the United Nations: 
General Carlos P. Romulo, Secretary Emilio Abello, and others. 

If the medical profession ever lost a specialist when he switched 
to law, the Philippines, assuredly gained in him a top ranking 
economist on whom its salvation in rehabilitating itself from the 
chaos of war rests. In a great measure, that task lies in the 
hands of able, jovial, easymingling "Mike" Cuaderno, who looks 
too young for his age (57 years). 



Hon. ROMAN OZAKTA 

Secretary of Justice 

Roman Ozaeta was born in San Jose, Batangas, on February 28, 1891, with all the disadvantages and han- 
dicaps of poverty. He was the first of nine children and as such was entitled to all the tender care and affection 
of his parents; but his father, Julian Ozaeta, was a poor hard-working man and could not afford the luxury of a 
physician. Anyway, the mother, Florencia Atienza, was strong and healthy and had no need of the fripperies of 
society. 



Young Roman studied and finished his 
primary course in his home town. Eager 
to continue his schooling despite obsta- 
cles, he proceeded to Batangas, Batangas, 
with poverty trailing behind him, to en- 
roll in the intermediate school. Schools 
then were not so abundant, nor colleges 
and universities either. He lived in a 
friend's house, and did his own marketing 
and cooking. In the school of hard knocks 
outside he was learning lessons that build 
up character and inspire one with self- 
confidence. 

Upon completion of his elementary 
course, he found he could not go any far- 
ther. "Chill penury ,, stood on the way. 
Necessity forced him to earn, so he made 
use of what he had studied and began to 
teach. He taught for a year. With his 
meagre savings ■ and his will to succeed, 
he came to Manila in August, 1910, to 
accept a job in the bureau of supply. In 
the city he made every minute count. He 
studied shorthand in the Philippine* Se! 
of Commerce after his office hours. La- 
ter, he got a job in the Gibbs & McDonough 



law office as stenographer. That placed 
him in direct contact with tegal talents. 
He worked in the afternoon and studied 
in the morning in the Manila High School 
until his graduation in 191*7« 

Attorney McDonough quickly not.e- d the 
aptitude of his amanuensis and helped 
him enroll in the UP college of law. Two 



years later, Ozaeta 1 > secretary 



to 



Justice Johnson of the Supreme Court. m 
was among the best in class, but he was 
told that he could not graduate as valedic- 
torian because he was only a special s tu- 
dent. That shocked him; it hurt his pride; 
it outraged his sense of justice. But that 
was the rule and rules should be fas. 
and rigid. He transferred to the Philip- 
pine Law School and was graduated with 
honors in 1921. In the same year he took 
the bar, passed it, and joined the Recto 
& Casal law firm as a partner. 

To the Gibbs & McDonough law firm he 
returned as an assistant. In time he won 
the distinction of being the first Filipino 
lawyer to become a partner in an Amer- 
ican law office. Filipinos then were like 



their country — still struggling for recog- 
nition which only America and the Amer- 
icans could and would give. 

Tall, erect, and handsome, with a 
broad forehead, Ozaeta was fast winning 
the reputation of being an expert in brief- 
writing. On November 7, 1936, he <w as 
appointed senior judge of the Nueva Eci- 
ja court of first instance. His fair and 
the thinking human dynamo benind them, 
trenchant decisions, which readily revealed 
soon drew the attention of Malacanan. Pres- 
ident Quezon had him called to his office 
and made him Malaeanan's legal adviser. 
Not long afterward, he was designated so- 
licitor general. As head of the bureau of 
justice, Judge Ozaeta won public acclaim 
as precedent buster and staunch defender 
of the public's welfare and interest He 
had the courage of his convictions and in a 
oriven issue the people always knew where 
he would stand. 

President Quezon came to like and ad- 
mire the self-made man from San Jose Ba- 
tangas. For one thing, he was no "yea- 
man;" for another, he was straight. From 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE 57 



the solicitor* general's office, President Que- 
zon elevated him to the Supreme Court. 
As associate justice, Judge Ozaeta distin- 
guished himself as a liberal. Law to him 



is no rigid and inflexible rule, but a liv- 
ing and flexible principle of equity and 
justice. He was the victim once of that 
rigidity. 



Recently, President Manuel Roxas ap- 
pointed Justice Ozaeta his legal adviser 
and the government's as well — Secretary 
of Justioe. 



Hon. MARIANO GARC1IITORENA 

Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
A courageous champion of Filipino farmers and small producers everywhere, MARIANO GARCHITORE- 
NA, model landowner, man of the masses, and friend of the poor is easily the outstanding authority on the abaca 
and copra industries in the Islands today. He has long been identified with the long and arduous fight to im- 
prove the lot of the people in the abaca ,and copra regions. 

Born February 12, 1898, son of a well- Produetores de Abaca, Inc." Carrying on 
known patriot, Ex-Governor Andres Gar- 
chitorena who was a friend of Rizal, Ma- 
riano Garchitorena has led a colorful life 
of his own. From the Ateneo de Manila, 
he went to the United States to complete 
his education and traveled abroad. Upon 
his return to the Philippines, he embraced 
farming, but from his life of obscurity, the 
late Senator Alegre insisted that he join, 
m 19 f > the Fiber Standardization Board 
as a Director. In 1934 he became Minagcr 
of the Fiber Inspection Service. In 1936 
he founded the "Asociacion Nacional dc 



the struggle for progress, he convinced the 
late President Quezon to form the Nation- 
al Abaca Corporation, a P30,000,000 firm 
which he joined also as a Director in 1939. 

The outbreak of the war in 1941 sus- 
pended his crusade for the welfare of the 
small planters and laborers. He did not 
serve under the Japanese. He supported 
the underground resistance movement. 
The Japanese destroyed his properties, 
killed his wife, the late Caridad Pamin- 
tuan of Angeles, Pampanga, and his eld- 
est son, Jose. Upon the liberation of tho 



Philippines, he became Governor of Cama- 
rines Sur, a job he held with distinction 
until he became candidate for Senator in 
the last elections. Upon the organization 
of the new administration he was ap- 
pointed Secretary of Agriculture and 
Commerce and immediately after assuming 
office he was entrusted with the direc- 
tion and management of the National Food 
Production campaign intended to avert fa- 
mine, which impends due to a shortage of 
foodstuffs. The Department 4ie heads has 
recently been organized into Department 
of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 



Hon. CORNEMO BALMACEDA 

Undersecretary (Acting Secretary) of Commerce and industry 

the ol J° r ! KnV De P ar *ment of Commerce and Industry has recently been created as a separate department from 
tor of th r ltmC,nt ° f A «« c ultiire and Commerce upon recommendation of Cornelio Balmaceda, former Direc- 
r « 0 Bureau of Commerce. The new department will have supervision and control over the Bureau of 

commerce and the Patents Office. 
in tlt rGta,T Baimaeeda was born 
800 T ° C0S N0rtG ' ° n September 15, 
Norte and t UCt i° f PUbHc * M of 
Waste/ j ^T la; ° btained degree of 
Maatei of Arts in Business Administra- 



tion from Harvard U 



niversity in 1922;' 



took special courses in journalism and 
business in Columbia University; and for 
a time during his sojourn in the United 
States, he worked with the U.S. Bureau 
of Foreign and Domestic Commerce at 
Washington, D.C. ; on his return to the 



Philippines in 1922 he resumed his duty 
with the Bureau of Commerce and Indus- 
try and was appointed its Director, 1936- 
37. He was appointed Acting Manager of 
the National Produce Exchange in Sep- 
tember, 1937. 



■Ion. 1IICARDO NEPOMIJCEIV© 

Secretary of Public Works and Communications 

wcmv S< K T la 7 v irARD0 NEPOMUCENO was born in Boac, Marinduque, on February 21 ? 1894. His parents 
uatcd in Too - YT 11 '''' 110 aml A P° loni " Lozauo. He attended the Boac Primary School, from where he grad- 
at fch t r ' a JJ tho P>oac Intermediate School from where he graduated in 1907. There being no high school 
1913 ' TilTl m nndlUjU( -' h(1 cathe to Manila and studied in the Manila High School where he graduated in 
from as x T i ;S t m ° he studied law m the College of Law, University of the Philippines, graduating there- 

the 1915 Class and obtaining the degree of Ll.B. with honors., He took and passed 



the Bar examination in the same year 

In November, K)1G, be was Private Sec- 
retary to Justice Adam C. Carson of the 
Supreme Court and, after the latter's re- 
signation, became Private Secretary to 
Justice Thomas A. Street until Decem- 
ber 31, 1921. 

In J 1)22 he was elected Representative 
for Marinduque. Hi: hold this position for 
three consecutive terras from 1922 to 1931. 
Hi was a Member of the Steering Com- 
mittee, Committee on Rules, Committee on 
Revision of Laws and Committee on Pub- 
lic Works. 



During the time that he was Represent- 
ative, lie actively practiced law and con- 
tinued in active practice until the year 
1936 . 

In 1934 he was elected Senior Del- 
egate of Marinduque to the Constitutional 
Convention where he held the positions of 
Chairman of the Committee on Public 
Instruction and Member of the powerful 
Committee on Style. In January, 1936* 
he was appointed Technical Assistant in 
the Office of the President and held said 
position until June of the same year, when 



he was appointed Senior Judge of tf*J 
Court of First Instance of Nueva Ecij3 . 
He stayed in the bench only five months, 
for in November, 1936, he was appointed 
Securities and Exchange Commissioner. 
This was a most difficult position at the 
tijne for it was the height of the mining 
boom and the stock exchanges, which were 
yet new, wore most active and had to bo 
controlled in order to protect the interests 
of the public. There was no one in the 
Philippines at that time who had any 
working knowledge of the functions of the 



PAGE ns 



THE REPUBLIC 



Commission and there was very little lit- 
erature on the subject. However, by dint 
of persistent and diligent study and work, 
which lasted until the early hours of the 
morning for almost every day and for a 
period of about four months, he and the 
men under him became sufficiently ac- 
quainted with the work they had to do, 
drafted rules and regulations governing 
stock exchanges and brokers and were able 
to protect the interests of traders during 
the declining years of that boom. He 
held this position when the war broke 
out and until the Japanese occupation of 
the City of Manila. 

During enemy occupation, he refused to 
hold any position in the puppet govern- 



ment either under Mr. Vargas of the 
Executive Commission or Mr. Laurel of 
the so-called Republic under the Japan- 
ese. He ignored instructions from Mr. 
Laurel to proceed to Marinduque for pro- 
Japanese propaganda and pacification cam- 
paign. He joine'd the resistance movement 
early in the war, being a member of the 
Free Philippines, one of the earliest resist- 
ance organizations in the country. He 
was an officer of Marking's Guerrilla Unit 
and was at the same time connected with 
the Blue Eagle. 

On January 10, 194"), he was appointed 
by the PCAU as Governor of Marinduque, 
which position he held until September 29, 
1945, when ho was re-appointed Securities 



and Exchange Commissioner and Associate 
Judge of the People's Court. He served 
in this Court until May 28, 1946, when he 
was appointed by His Excellency, Pres- 
ident Manuel Roxas, as Secretary of Pub- 
lic Works and Communications. He is now 
Chairman of the following Boards of Direc- 
tors and Commissions: (1) Cebu Port- 
land Cement Company, (2) National Pow- 
er Corporation, (3) Metropolitan Water 
District, (4) Commission on Planning, Prio- 
rities and Allocations, and (5) Civil Aero- 
nautics Commission. 

He is married to Eufrosina Guevara 
since December 16, 1922. He has four 
children, namely, Patria, Celia, Lina. and 
Ricardo, Jr. 



Hon. MANUEL V. GALLEGO 

Secretary of Instruction 

Versatile and prolific writer, Dr. Manuel V. Gallego finds himself a happy man in guiding the education of 
the youth of the country. Sec. Gallego does not smoke, does not gamble, but has one obsession, reading and 
writing. 

Lawyer, author, lecturer, economist, businessman, agriculturist, world traveller, political scientist he seems 
to cover much of life's calling and professional demands. 

A member of the bar of the Supreme They remember him as a man of arrest 



Court of tne Philippines as well as the 
bar of the Supreme Court of the United 
States, Dr. Gallego had been practising 
law tor twenty-nve years prior to his 
appointment to President Roxas' Cab- 
inet. His preparation for this profession 
had been truly enviable. He is the holder 
ox the following degrees: A.B., LL.B., 
and LL.M. from the University of the 
Philippines; Ldo. Jur. from the University 
of Santo Tomas; and J.D. from the North- 
western University Law School in Chica- 
go, United States. Moreover, he has to 
his credit post-graduate courses in law 
and other subjects taken at the Universi- 
dad Central de Madrid, Spain. Certainly 
this array /of academics titles must prove 
that he- had long ago realized "a man can 
never gallop, as it were, over the fields 
of law on Pegasus." 

Hut he had not been content with the 
mere acquisition of legal lore. It was no 
less important that he should impart it 
for the benefit of ambitious youth who, in 
their most vibrant dreams, would give any- 
thing to don the mantles of an Arellano, a 
Manresa, or a Marshall. And so, in be- 
tween his multifarious activities, he had 
taken upon himself the onerous duties of 
professor of law, dean of law schools, and 
president of various colleges. Likewise 
he had found time to write the following 
publications which have been well com- 
mended by his contemporaries in the bar: 
"A Critical Study of the Philippine Usury 
Act," "Law of Obligations" (co-author), 
"Bar Examination Questions and Answers 
on the Civil Code," "Philippine Law of 
Evidence," "Philippine Law of Waters and 
Water Rights," and "Philippine Election 
Law." Former students of his like to 
reminisce on his affable, democratic ways. 



ing personality, who is thoroughly honest 
in his views and indubitably sound in his 
basic attitudes. 

Nor had Dr. Gallego been content to 
move about in a purely academic atmos- 
phere. He was much too wise to overlook 
the fact that ours is all too often a brazen- 
ly competitive world, and that if one must 
make his mark in it he should perforce 
transmute his learning into constructive 
reality. He knew, too, that the welfare 
of his country demanded no less from its 
educated citizens. Thus he has all along 
taken an abiding interest in the eeonomic 
development of the Philippines. It has 
been his indomitable stand that bhc Fil- 
ipinos should not by their lassitude or in- 
action, let their rich natural patrimony 
slip away from their hands. And he 
himself set an example. Be it in agricul- 
ture or finance, in industries or trade, he 
had a contribution to make. For many 
years before the outbreak of the war h" 
had developed and managed various ha- 
ciendas in his province. He was member 
of the board of directors of the National 
Rice Growers Association of the Philip- 
pines; vice-president of the National Par- 
tners Assoeiation; manager of the "El Aho- 
rro Insular," a mutual building and loan 
^sociation; and president of the Manila 
Tobacco Association, which included busi- 
nessmen from many antionalities. All 
these activities inevitably led to many ob- 
servations on our national economy, some 
of which he wrote down in at least two 
volumes: "The Price of Philippine Inde- 
pendence" and "Economic Emancipation." 

It has been said that by birth and in- 
clination lawyers belong to the people. 
Especially so, indeed, if they possess ster- 
ling merits in other fields. Dr. Gallego 



found this out in 1931 when, upon the 
insistence ot friends, he presented him- 
self as a candidate for representative from 
tne first Uistnct of Nueva Ecija. It 
was not hard tor him to win. He was 
member oi the rmlippine .Legislature 
in 1931-.*54 and again as Congressman in 
1941-45. Luring his term he was chair- 
man of the powerful Ways and Means Com- 
mitter and of other committees, and for 
some time in 1945 was member of the 
Philippines Congressional Rehabilitation 
and Reconstruction Commission. Again, a3 
legislator he left a name synonymous 
with devotion to the interests of his con- 
stituency and to the larger interests of his 
country. Hardly a subject of moment 
escaped the scrutiny of his keen and dis- 
cerning mind — whether the topic was some- 
thing about linguistics or about ideology. 
As a matter of fact, he discussed such 
topics as those in his books "The Lan- 
guage Problems of the Philippines" and 
"Dictatorship under the Guise of Demo- 
cracy." 

Soon after liberation, when there seem- 
ed to be a dearth in the Philippines of 
stout men and true, the Commonwealth 
Government picked on Dr. Gallego to re- 
present his country in various internation- 
al conferences. Accordingly he became a 
member of the Filipino Rehabilitation Com- 
mission in Washington, D.C.; Philippine 
delegate to the First General Assembly of 
the United Nations Organization held in 
London, January and February, 1946; 
chairman of the Philippine delegation to 
the Conference of the American Political 
and Social Science held in Philadelphia, 
April, 194(>; and until very recently num- 
ber of the Far Eastern Commission Com- 
mittee on Reparations, which represented 
eleven countries. Membership in interna- 



THE HEPUBHC 



l*A(.»K ft 



tional bodies or participation in world con- 
ferences was nothing unusual to Dr. Ga- 
llego. Many years ago he had been around 
the world, visiting important places in 
Europe and America. In May, 1945, he 
was Philippine delegate to the First In- 
ternational Tourist Conference in Tokyo. 
Incidentally, he is a member of the Amer- 
ican Bar Association and the American 
Society of International Law and pres- 
ident of the Northwestern University 



Alumni Association in the Philippine*. 

This then is the stature of the man Wjo 
has been chosen Secretary of Instruction 
at a time when, faced with momentous 
problems, the Philippines is nc 
eager to welcome independence 



Once he 

wrote: '••The ■ Educational policy of a <?oun- 
try at any given per 



:iod is the product oi 



contemporary social economic, and polit- 
ical conditions." With a firm grasp on 
these conditions such as not very ma y 



men in our public and private life haw. 
Dr. Manuel V. Gallego should be able U 
adopt an educatinoal policy that in tin:: 
will give substance, not mere shadow an I 
sentiment to the aspirations of the Fil- 
ipino people. He has no illusions about 
the obstacles that he will meet. But he 
means to do his duties unafraid — wit 
unerring vision and steadfast faith. 



lion. IIIPEHTO K. KANGI-KOBT 

Secretary of National Defense 

RUPERTO K. KANGLEON was born in Macrohon, Leyte, on March 27, 1890, one of five sons and a daught 
of Brauho Kangleon and Flora Kadaba. , . , . . 0 . 

He studied up to sixth grade in Leyte and had to transfer and complete his elementary education in Sun- 
gao, because he refused to submit to what he considered was the over-bearing and oppressive conduct of some 
school authorities. Having graduated from the elementary grades he went to Cebu, where he completed his 
high school course. Here he distinguished himself as an athlete by being a member of the Philippine Olympic 
Team of 1912 and 1913. 

After graduation from the Ccbu High 
School, he went to Manila and enrolled 
« the College of Liberal Arts, Universi- 
ty of the Philippines. The lure of the 
mihtary service was great that he went 

wh», v PhlUppine Con stabulary Academy 
wnere he graduated in 1916. His first 

rV"" StCUring his """mission 
Wh? \ " 0t °" th * notorious P ^ay 

TWeIf tc : h r he subducd in *> Si 

ion to a W3S aSSigned frora one sta- 

XsWet t e v ° f C ° Untly ' bUt m ° re 
ThTw. y f S3yaS and Mindanao. 

fieer of * T"* h ' m the Commanding Of- 

mediatel v A' ^ lnfantry which ™ 

to mee y a n SPatChed by Gen " MacArthur 

panose on \r PCCted landing of the J ^ 
andfl. Samar - As the ^reat of the 
£nd,ng Asappeared, he was ordered to go 

by waTof T h h ! re A he -giment 
y way of the Agusan river. He enraged 

pu t , or the surrender of the 

*^ iiea to the hills and laid the 

S Si ? erm i n f tion a "d industry and 
w.th the help of his fricnds he was ab]e 

to put up a radio set that enabled him to 



establish contact in February 1042 with 
Gen. MacArthur who was then in Au^ 
tralia. He was designated commander ana 
ordered to organize the 92nd Military Area 
Command. Thereafter and until the libe- 
ration he maintained a main radio set ana 
an alternate radio set in Leyte . He ^re- 
established the civil government in F.ree 
Leyte, issued emergency notes which main- 
tained the government and which note* le- 
deemed upon the landing of the liberation 
forces. i 

He fought the Japanese everywhere in 
Leyte and in most towns he held them at 
bay and in some localities killed and cap- 
tured them more particularly immediately 
before the liberation. 

On October 16, 1944, an American des- 
troyer picked him up in one of the shores 
of Leyte and brought him to the heavy 
Cruiser Nashville, which was the command 
post of Gen. MacArthur in the Pacific 
Ocean. He conferred with the command- 
ers of the landing forces and he went 
ashore with the first assault wave on Ley- 
te on October 20, 1944. On October 23, 
1944, he was appointed Military Governor 
of Leyte and continued as civilian gover- 
nor upon the rc-establishment of the 



Commonwealth Government. On July 31, 
1945, he resigned as governor and report- 
edr-for duty with Inspector General's Of- 
fice, HPA. 

Upon the inauguration of President Ma- 
nuel A. Koxas, he was appointed Secret- 
ary of National Defense as the man who 
embodies the resistance movement. 

He holds the congressional Distinguished 
Service Cross, the Distinguished Conduct 
Star, the Distinguished Service Star, not 
to mention ten other decorations and Cam- 
paign ribbons. 

Paradoxical as it may seem, he is bet- 
ter known in the United States than In 
his own country. He has the distinction o! 
being the most featured guerrilla leader 
both in political, literary, and real adven- 
ture magazines in the United States. 

He is married to Valentina Tagle of 
Imus, Cavitc, with whom he has ten chil- 
dren. Two boys of his fought with hbn 
during the occupations. 

He likes reading, hiking, and a nice gain* 
of poker. 

He resides at 1263 Pennsylvania, Ma- 
late, Manila. 



iron. i»i:i»ito m agsalint 

Secretary of Labor 



Lawyer; Secretary of Labor 
A. B. — Ateneo de Manila 
LI. B. — Escuela de Derecho de Manila 
Passed the Bar examinations in 1915 



BIRTHPLACE 
DATE OF BIRTH 
FATHER : 
MOTHER: 
WIFE : 
CHILDREN: 



Taguig, Rizal 
February 22, 1890 
Fidel Magsalin 
Gregoria Garcia 
Felisa Sales 

Dr. Pedro Magsalin, Jr.; Atty. Francisco Magsalin; Leonardo; Mario; 
Alfonso; Felisa; and Monserrat 



PAGE «0 



POSITIONS HELD: 

1910 — Junior Examiner, Bureau of Civil Service 
. 1913-1916 — Assistant Cashier, Bureau of Public Works 
1916-1917 — Special Cadastral Clerk, General Land Registration Office 

1919 — Elected Member of the Provincial Board of the province of Rizal 
1931-1934 — Elected Representative for the First District of Rizal 

1934- 1935 — Re-elected Representative for the First District of Rizal 

1935- 1938 — Elected Member of the First National Assembly for the First District of Rizal 

1939 — Appointed Judge, Court of First Instanc for the provinces of Tayabas, Pampanga and Bulacan 
successively 

May 28, 1946 — Appointed Secretary of Labor. He is also Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Nation- 
al Cooperative Administration, and member of the Boards of Directors of the following: Me- 
tropolitan Water District, Rural Progress Administration, Philippine Relief and Rehabilitation 
Administration, Radio Permit Committee, and National Land Settlement Administration, 
President, Liwayway Tagig; Delegate to the Federation of Labor, province of Rizal; Vice-President, Rizal 
Bar Association; President, "Habag Kapatid", a fraternal association m Manila; President, Civil Service Em- 
ployees Association; member, Geographical Association of the United States of America; and member, Board 
of Directors, Lawyers' League. of the Philippine Islands; Philippine Columbian Association; and Club Filipino. 

Hon. ANTONIO V I LL All AM A 

Secretary of Health and Public Welfare 

Born at: Marungko, Angat, Bulacan ON: September 15: 1891 
Son of: Vicente Villarama and Rafaela Capistrano 

Graduated: Manila High School 1913 

College of Liberal Arts 1914 

College of Medicine, U. P 1919 

Married to: Donata Legaspi 

Children: Antonio Villarama, Jr., Vicente (deceased), Baldomero, Rafael Nicolas, Luisa, Norberto, Eduardo, Lour- 
des, and Carmen 

Accomplishments and Positions Held: 

Asst. Resident Physician, Obstetrics, Philippine General Hospital in 1920; Senior Resident Physician and Instruc- 
tor, Philippine General Plospital from 1923 to' 1926; Assistant Professor of the College of Medicine, U.P., from 191<> 
to 1935 when he resigned to enter politics; Member of the Constitutional Convention, 1934; Member of the Assembly 
and House of Representatives from L935 to 1946; President of the Manila Medical Society in 1931; President of 
the Philippine Medical Association in 1932; Councilor, Phil. Medical Association from 1932 up to the present; Repres- 
ented the Commonwealth Government at the First Congress on Obstetrics and Gynecology in Cleveland in 1939; Author 
of various scientific papers on obstetrics and gynecology; Author of various health legislations while in Congress 
among them the creation of the Department of Health and Public Welfare. 

Societies: Manila Medical Society; Philippine Islands M edical Association 

Social Clubs: Philippine Columbian Association 

Address: (City) — 465 Antipolo, Tondo, Manila 
(Province) — Angat, Bulacan 

lion. PIO 1'EMIOSA 

Budget Commissioner 

Budget Commissioner PIO PEDROSA was born at Palo, Leyte, on May 4, 1900. He was educated in the 
University of the Philippines, where he obtained the Degree of Master of Arts in 1926, majoring in Economics 
and Public Finance. On April 23, 1927, he married his townmate, the former Miss Luisa Noble Acebedo who 
was born June 25, 1904. From the happy union were born eight children: Ramon, 17 years; Lourdes Maria, 
15 years; Alberto, 13 years; Fernando, 12 years; Ana. Josef ina, 10 years; Augusto, 7 years; Leticia Victoria, 6 
years, and Carlos Ricardo, 2 years. 

After his graduation as Master of Arts, from 1939 to 1940; in 1940 was appointed Races; Member of the Government JSer 

he pursued the study of law in the College Deputy Commissioner of the Budget; and vice Insurance Board, etc, 

of Law in the same University until in 1941 was named Commissioner of the Prom lt)4o to 1946 was Financial Con- 

1929. He was Provincial Auditor for Budget. At the outbreak of the war, be- sultant of the Chamber of Commerce of 

the provinces of Camarines Norte, sides being Commissioner of the Budget, the Philippines and Managing Editor of 

Bataan, Isabela, Camarines Sur, and was Treasurer of the Civilian Emergency "COMMERCE", a monthly magazine on 

Laguna from 1930 to 1939; Assistant Administration; Chairman of the Board business, industry, and finance, official or- 

Comptroller of the National Development on Pensions for Veterans; Chairman A gan of the Chamber of Commerce of the 

Company in 1939; appointed Financial As- the Budget Commission; Member of the Philippines. Resigned connection with 

aistant to the President of the Philippines Salary Board; Auditor for the Board on the Chamber of Commerce of the Philip - 



THE REPUBI4C 



ft* 



pines upon nomination to become again 
Commissioner of the Budget. Aside from 
this position, he is a Member of the Board 
of Directors of the National Development 



Company; Chairman of the Budget Com- 
mission; Chairman of the Board of Pen- 
sions for Veterans; Chairman of the Gov- 
ernment Quarters Committee; Member of 



the Tax Commission ; Member of the Sa- 
lary Board, etc. 



-0O0- 



ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE ROXAS 

ADMINISTRATION 



An American old-timer returning to the Philippines 
Philippines is ugly. It is not the Philippines I knew, 
still in their eyes. The government coffers are empty, 

low ebb "and education is at least ten years behind the ti 

Then the elections came. A consider when analyzing the 

new man supplanted the Pres- Roxas administration. Roxas 

ident of the Commonwealth who is not alone. The people are 

had replaced the great Pres- solidly behind him; and although 

ident Quezon when thai, great his detractors may censure him 

leader breathed his last at Sa- for political pecadilloes, they 

ranak Lake. The newly elect- find him completely blameless 

ed President looked famished, when his honesty and earnest- 

>lear-,.yed. The three years of ness are placed in the balance, 

tnenvy occupation seemed indel- No one has risen to question 

Jbly written on his face. But his motive. 

unW P Str ° ng ' hiS SOul Under his inspiration and 

Thi* ™ H,S gait Steady * guidance, the floundering Ship 

weathTr 1 T He had of State has steadied and 

W> w u , gUSt ° f misfor - Placed on even keel. He has 

side w th H? SUffered side b * called for all hands on deck 

soldier 1 w common Filipino and the nation has responded 

vation ^ was a victim of pri- enthusiastically regardless of 

that o in, aH discomforts political creed and doctrine, 
fliet u y Ja Panese could in- Together, the people of the 

One P ° n a COnquered People. Philippines in the first year 

sumed T*A ***** he had as ' of tho Roxas administration, 

tioii.theTarS^ 01 ./ 1158 na " have rolkd UP thcir slceVeS 

longer so 1 lla was 110 and started to rebuild the. 

sessinir as > I unnre P°s- wrecked House Beautiful of 

? 1 U had been on V-J Philippine hopes and dreams. 

begun to hIaT Th' ™ *"* ^ are thG ^ *f 

brut -i l n.„fi'T scars of standing achievements of the 

. u.n.hc w<r , st;utin) ,. fc ,, oxas administration so far: 
put on new flesh tu u 

of th,- Phr ' hl: hcart Education 
and ,h, > !" n< "' S h!ul ,ovhv l Sl * Hundred private schools 

; »- -Peopte no te W ger wan- and colleges of all levels were 

dered aimlessly from town to reopened 

town as typ ica , bacUwash of g — ^ hflg 

D nvno . , been allocated for the recon- 
t ; ta ™ a ^ian whose struction and rehabilitation of 
; " T Q C °" ^, with a touch, the University of the Philip- 
efface destruction and "build pines 

"asT" ' STt manSiOU tHan * e tamm pesos 
r t ? 8 18 a man ° f WaS set aside f °* M P«bHc el- 
sailing character. His captiv- ementary and high schools, 
atmg kindness to his enemies This sum constituted 19.4 per 
is matched only by his adam- cent of the total expenditures 
ant firmness in the face of of the Republic of the Philip- 
rank dishonesty and greed. He pines. 

is of indomitable spirit and his Vocational education was 

patriotism has been tried and given post-war impetus by the 

tested not only in the crucible opening of three national 

of war but in the vitiated air schools of arts and trade, two 

of war's aftermath. vocational high schools, and 22 

And thene is one important provincial trade schools and 23 

factor that the observer must agricultural and rural high 



shortly after V-J Day remarked, "Manila is ugly. The 
The people are dazed, frightened, with a look of panic 

and the heart of the nation is broken. Morality is at a 

mes. Verily, Manila is like a clock that has stopped." 

schools. . licensed holders upon the cail 

A radio station has been ac- issued by Secretary Jose C. 

quired from the United States Zulueta of the Department of 

Information Service for the Interior. Dissident elements 

dissemination of cultural and all over Luzon were routed and 

educational information. dispersed so that at the prcs- 

Nor is this all. Government ent writing they no longer 

has started the educational sys- are an organized menace to the 

tern on a new road— the road peace and security and happi- 

toward efficient training in ness of the people which these 

citizenship in an independent dissident groups had held un- 

democracy and the formation of der their sway for so many 

character months. 

Agriculture and Commerce Criminality in the Philip- 

A* food production campaign pines was reduced. Criminal- 

was launched shortly after Rn- ity had reached its highest 

xas became President, which peak in August, 1946. 

contributed immensely to the Peace and order had been 

production of food in all re- restored to all regions of tho 

gions of the country, thus en- Philippines with the exception 

abling the people to buy crit- of isolated localities in Central 

ical foodstuffs at lower prices. Luzon. 

Eighteen experimental sta- Realizing that the root cause 
tions covering 3,295 hectares of disaffection among the mas- 
were started to distribute seeds ses was absentee landlordism 
and plants. and the centuries old tenancy 
'Experiments on the utiliza- system of the Philippines, the 
tion of milk soy as a substitute government of the Republic 
for imported wheat were under Roxas has made possi- 



ble the purchase of big landed 
Five stock farms, 14 breed- estates such as the haciendas 
ing stations, and four breeding of the Tabacalora, Malabon, 
centers were stocked with cat- and other places, for redistn- 
tle, horses, buffaloes, pigs, bution at cost to legitimate ten- 
goats, chickens, and pigeons to ants. 

multiply the present production The guerrillas were givep 

of animals for food. priority in the distribution of 

The lumber industry was re- lands formerly occupied by tlft* 

habilitated to such degree that Japanese, 

the President made it possible Pubhc Works 

for lumber dealers in the Phil- Two million pesos was - 

* ,w«^,f 5ftm p of tributed for the rehabilitation 

ipppines to export some o^ , 

$2t production. of hosp-tals dispensary ahd 

The nationalization of re- maternity btuldmgs m all p** 

tail trade, fiber inspection, and vinces. 

development of mining projects National buildings were re- 
vere intensified. . constructed altered or mam- 
Pervee and Ord<, taincd in the City of Manila. 
Two hundred thousand unli- Construction and repairs 
censed firearms together with were carried out on porta and 
3.000,000 rounds of ainmuni- harbors m the City of Manila- 
tion were surrendered by un Btfdjjea were completed in Ma- 



FAliE at 



THE REPaW^f 



nila, Marinduque, Morong, and 
Batangas. 

Irrigation systems were re- 
paired in Rizal, Nueva Ecija, 
and Bulacan. 

One thousand forty-two post 
offices have been reopened 
throughout the country. 

Forty-five radio stations and 
133 telegraph offices were re- 
established. 

Twenty-two thousand five 
hundred sixty-four postal sav- 
ings bank accounts with a to- 
tal balance of P3,620,607.4o 
have been reconstructed. 

Two main arteries of traffic 
in Manila, the Santa Mesa 
Boulevard and Espana, have 
almost reached completion. 

Three thousand two hundred 
eighty new water services were 
installed; 779 water service 
connections were reopened; 522. 
services were legalized. Two 
hundred eighty-two sanitary se- 
wer connections were install- 
ed. 36,230 lineal meters of 
sanitary sewer connections 
have been cleaned, and 59 
stoppages removed. Four hun- 
dred eighty-three fire hydrants 
were reactivated and 4,022 
water meters repaired. One 
hundred thirty-three projects 
with an estimated cost of 
P4,464,958 have been started. 
National Defense 
For the adequate defense of 
the territory and the people 
of the Philippines, the newly 
established Republic has set 
aside 33 per cent of its an- 
nual expenditures for the arm- 
ed forces of this country. 

The Philippine Nautical 
School, the Philippine Milita- 
ry Academy, and the Reserve 
Officers Service School were 
reestablished. 

The ten pre-war military dis- 
tricts were reorganized. "With 
the acquisition of 83 ships 
from the United States Navy, 
the Off Shore Patrol has start- 
ed efficient patrol service in 
Philippine waters. The Coast 
and Geodetic Survey has ga- 
thered valuable data on rivers 
and bays of the Philippines. 
The Bureau of Aeronautics has 
established a strict supervision 
over all commercial air lines. 
Finance 
To enable the vast majority 
of Filipinos who had lost their 
property during the war years, 
to reestablish their homes and 
their business, the Rehabilita- 
tion Finance Corporation was 
established. 

The collection of taxes was 



intensified." ^ 

The tax system was revised 
in order to increase the rev- 
enues of the government. 

The illegal entry of dutiable 
goods has been prevented by 
watchful customs personnel. 

A budgetary loan of $75,- 
000,000 has been secured from 
the United States. 

With the cooperation of Am- 
erican financial experts, the 
Filipino members of the Philip- 
pine-American Finance Com- 
mission contributed immensely 
to the Joint Report which has 
set the blueprint of the finan- 
cial rehabilitation of the Phil- 
ippines. 

Treasury warrants issued 
before January, 1942, were re- 
deemed. 

Labor 

Of the 48 strikes in the early 
part of 1946. 22 were settled 
amicably, 16 were endorsed to 
the Court of Industrial Rela- 
tions, three were brought by 
the parties concerned to the. 
said court, and seven are still 
pending settlement. 

The 8-hour Labor Law and 
the Woman and Child Lahtir 
Law were strictly enforced. 

Industrial hygienic activities 
were undertaken. 

Unemployment relief was 
given to deserving unemployed 
persons. 

Undesirable aliens who had 
entered the country illegally 
were deported. 

Health and Sanitation 
General sanitation and im- 
munization were improved. 

Charity -clinics were increas- 
ed and dental services revived, 
A more extensive campaign 
against tuberculosis, malaria, 
leprosy, and venereal diseases 
was started. Special studies 
on typhoid, dysentery, and 
other intestinal diseases wore 
undertaken. 

Prevention of dangerous 
communicable diseases from 
abroad such as cholera, plague, 
and smallpox was successfully 
carried out. 

The War 'Relief Office for 
war widows and orphans, til** 
guerrillas, and indigent war 
victims was set up. 

All incoming vessels and 
aircraft were rigidly inspected 
by the Bureau of Quarantine. 

Seven national hospitals, 14 
hospitals in special provinces, 
34 provincial hospitals. and 
nine leprosaria and leper treat- 
ment stations, and 18 private 
hospitals in Manila were su- 



pervised by the Bureau of 
Health. 

Justice + 

Thousands of men charged 
with political collaboration 
with the enemy were housed 
and accommodated by the Bu- 
reau of Prisons. 

The Anti-Usury Board con- 
ducted anti-usury campaigns 
and issued educational propa- 
ganda against -usurers. 

The Public Service Commis- 
sion disposed of 12,929 appli- 
cations for certificates of pub- 
lic convenience. 

Six hundred fourteen crim- 
inal cases, 303 land registration 
cases, 179 cadastral cases, 41 
civil, and 22 citizenship, and 37 
habeas corpus cases were dis- 
posed of. Out of 1,391 writs 
of execution, 1,041 were acted 
upon. 

Five hundred eighty-nine 
stock corporations were regis- 
tered by the Securities and Ex- 
change Commission. 

The Court of Industrial Re- 
lations satisfactorily solved all 
strikes brought within its juris- 
diction. 

Foreign Relations 
During the first year :>f 
President Roxas' administra- 
tion, the following treaties, 
agreements, and conventions 
were concluded: 

h Treaty of General Rela- 
tions with the United States; 

2. The Agreement for the 
sale of certain Surplus War 
Properties under which the 
United States transferred to 
the Philippines over $600,000,- 
000 worth of surplus properties 
from the American Arm?d 
Forces in the Islands; 

3. The Agreement between 
the Philippines and the British 
Governments under which the 
Turtle and Mangsoe Island 
group will be taken over by 
the Republic on October ] . 
1947; 

4. The Philippine Alien Pro- 
perty Agreement; 

5. The Agreement between 
the Philippines and the United 
States Information Service, 
transferring Radio Station 
KZFM to the Philippine Gov- 
ernment ; 

6. The Military Assistance 
Pact with the United States 
and the Consular Convention 
and the Fisheries Agreement; 

7. The Ad Interim Agreement, 
between the Philippines and 
Switzerland; 

8. The Agreement between 
the Republic of the Philippines 



and the United States regard- 
ing Meteorological facilities 
and training program; 

9. The Agreement between 
the Republic of the Philippines 
and the United States regard- 
ing air navigation facilities and 
training program; 

10. The Agreement between 
the Republic of the Philippines 
and the United States regard- 
ing Coast and Geodetic Survey 
Work and Training Program; 

11. The Agreement between 
the Republic of the Philippines 
and the United States concern- 
ing Military Bases; 

12. The Treaty of Amity be- 
tween the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines and China; 

13. The Treaty of Friendship 
between the Republic of the 
Philippines and France; and 

14. The Treaty of Amity be- 
tween the Republic of the Phi- 
lippines and Italy. 

To take charge of reparations 
material from Japan, the De- 
partment of Foreign Affairs 
has sent Bernardo Abrera and 
Eduardo Quisumbing to that 
country. As a result of the 
efforts of these men, live per 
cent of interim reparations has 
been set aside for the Philip- 
pines. 

During the last tour of the 
Vice President, the Philippines 
was brought closer to the 
countries of Europe and Asia 
so that it is reasonable to ex- 
pect that amicable relations 
and goodwill will soon be es- 
tablished between these coun- 
tries and the Philippines. 

In the course of the present 
year, new legations will be es- 
tablished by the Republic of 
the Philippines in Seattle, Chi- 
cago, New Orleans, Paris, and 
Rome. 

(Continued on next page) 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The foregoing biographical 
sketches of the President and 
members of the cabinet, as well 
as the list of achievements of 
the present administration, were 
furnished to our managing ed- 
itor thru kindness of the Mala- 
canan Press Secretary, Mr. 
Juan C. Orendain, to whom we 
owe a debt of gratitude for the - 
acquisition of such information 
which we have published here- 
inabove for the perusal of our 
readers. 

—The Editorial Staff 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE C3 



Conclusion 



These facts are verifiable data on record. They can stand as they have stood the scrutiny of the most 
fault-finding critic of the Roxas administration. 

In one year, much has been achieved. The average Filipino finds life almost completely normal. Trans- 
portation has become cheaper and easier to procure. Food costs are lower than a year ago. Building materials 
are entering the country in bigger quantities. Clothing material is much lower than it was fifteen months ago. 
Through the Surplus Commission, a great many of the citizens have been able to rebuild their homes and indus- 
trial plants. Commerce is picking up, and such vital industries as tobacco, hemp, and gold are coming into 
their own. 

The outlook is not dark. With determination, all obstacles to future progress will be removed. 



A PHILIPPINE PROBLEM 



COMMUNISM AND THE PKM 



Considering my civic dutv 
as Filipino, allow me to sug- 
gest in this article the practic- 
al solution, which in my hum- 
ble opmion is the only one leas- 
ee to solve the critical prob- 
lem of unrest and widespread 
terrorism prevailing today in 
central Luzon, particularly in 
he Prince of Nueva Ecija. 

From facts I have gathered 
concerning the well known or- 
ganization «P K M'\ which 
means "Pambansang Kapisa- 
nan ng Magbubukid" (National 
Association of Peasants), is 
nothing but the Communist 
Party esatblishcd here in the 
Philippines under an assumed 
name. The PKM, in conjunction 
with the "Hukbalahaps," is run 
under purely communistic prin- 
ciples of government and has 
been organized under the po- 
litical doctrine of Karl Marx, 
whose theory is to spread dis- 
content among the proletariat 
by promoting the division of 
classes between the poor and 
the moneyed, and by causing 
rot only dissension but also 
hatred between the employees 
and the employers. 

The directing mind and re- 
cognized supremo of commun- 
ism all over the world is non^ 
other than the most powerful 
and biggest dictator still in ex- 
istence. Generalissimo Josef 
Stalin. 

The solution T propose is the 
following: 

PACE 64 



By DR. JOSE CAJUCOM 

Cabana tv an, Nueva Ecija 



Give the Hukbalahaps an 
amnesty of three or four weeks 
within which to surrender their 
unlicensed firearms. Should 
they choose to defy duly con- 
stituted authority and persist in 
not recognizing our government, 
then a state of siege should im- 
mediately, be proclaimed by the 
President of the Philippines in 
all the provinces of Central Lu- 
zon. Simultaneously, a law 
should be passed by the Con- 
gress of the Philippines, out- 
lawing the Communist Politic- 
al Party in the Philippines. 

I suggest that all recognized 
local leaders of communism be 
confined in some remote , is- 
land or somewhere in Minda- 
nao. Their families will be 
allowed to join them, on the 
condition that they will till the 
land given them. Likewise, all 
avowed members of the Com- 
munist Party who arc dissatis- 
fied with their present condi- 
tion, should be segregated and 
sent to fanns in Mindanao with 
their families at government's 
expend. They should be given 
public land free, say 20 hec- 
tares per family, and furnish- 
ed freo work animals, imple- 
ments and seeds, in order that 
they may start a new indepen- 
dent life and be happy and 



contented. With such a nu- 
cleus, the Philippines can start 
several agricultural colony pro- 
jects similar to the Koronadal 
Valley Reservation. 

In the meantime, I propose 
that the government begin 
ir.. mediately a counter propa- 
ganda to inform our masses of 
the true doctrines of commun- 
ism. They (particularly those 
with avid communistic lean- 
ings) should be told of the 
true conditions obtaining in 
Soviet Russia. American au- 
thors like Joseph Davis (Mis- 
sion to Moscow...) and Wil- 
liam Allen White (Report On 
Russia) tell us that there is no 
individual liberty whatsoever 
in Russia. 

In this connection, let me cite 
a few facts on the historic back- 
mound nf communism and its 
development. Some two decades 
ago, on the death of Nicolai Le- 
nin, the Apostle of commun- 
ism and the founder of Soviet 
Russia, Josef Stalin proclaim- 
ed himself dictator of the Com- 
munist Republic with the aid of 
the Red Army. He ousted 
Leon Trotsky, collaborator of 
Lenin and cofounder of Com- 
munist Government of Russia 
in 1020, after tho fall of the 



provisional, socalled White Rus- 
sian Republican Government of 
Kerensky. Gradually, Stalin 
crushed all oppositions. He or- 
ganized that drcadrd Russian 
secret police infamously known 
as the "OGPU" w h i c h 
was used in eliminating oppo- 
sition, such as the Trotskytes 
party. 

In 1930 certain people inhab- 
iting one of the big provinces 
of European Russia, known as 
"Koiaks", numbering around se- 
ven million and mostly small, 
independent farmers, were 
ejected from their land and 
their properties confiscated. 
Later, those people were mas- 
sacred in cold blood. 

As a closing warning, I c° n ~ 
scientiously appeal to brother 
Filipinos, the communists and 
extremist radicals, to mend 
their ways of action, and not 
to be deceived any further by 
communism which they false- 
ly believe as the "Utopia". Let 
us all be united again, to safe- 
guard the welfare of our coun- 
try, to achieve the well-being 
and happiness of the Philip- 
pine Republic. 



The 

SUNDAY I»OST 
Manila 



THE REPURI'I*' 



LABOR AND CAPITAL 



By Justice JOSE 
Former Presiding 
Industrial 



MA. PAREDES 
Judge, Court of 
Relations 



Promotion of the welfare of 
the employees or workers is no- 
thing but the granting on earth 
what the workingmen seek in 
heaven. What do the workers 
ask that could be dispensed with 
by their employers? They are 
the good things of life — those 
things which in the aggregate 
determine the socalled standard 
of living of the nation. These 
are precisely most of the things 
which Labor and Capital in 
their disputes bring to the 
Court of Industrial Relations 
for arbitration. These are also 
the things which some of the 
employers give to their work- 
ra on their own initiative 
The workers should be given 
just compensation for their 
labor and an adequate income 
to meet the essential necessities 
of civilized life; and the em- 
ployers, in turn, should allow 
themselves a fair return on 
their investments. We have 
observed that the rapid suc- 
cession of events that have 
taken place in our country have 
unfortunately brought about 
an artificial meeting ground 
between labor and capital, 
hence, the adjustment of the 
pre-war compensation of la- 
bor to the circumstances ob- 
taining at present. 

The industrial problems and 
high cost of living from the ad- 
vent of liberation to the pres- 
ent and a few more months to 
come, are the aftermath of the 
latest world conflagration. They 
are bound to subside and set* 
tl<- down to their normal le- 
vels <is soon as our industries 
shall have been reconstructed 
and rehabilitated. In the mean- 
time that the employers are 
formulating plans for the wel- 
fare of their workers, it is 
earnestly hoped that the grad- 
ual readjustment in their pre- 
sent relationship shall be 
ant and cordial. 

In this connection, it may be 
added that the human element 
Is a decisive factor in bringing 
the representatives of labor and 
capital to a mutual understand- 
ing. Personal contact between 
employers and workers, if car- 



ried with an amiable attitude, 
and with the spirit of coopera- 
tion, will help eliminate tri- 
vial differences which are of- 
ten magnified and taken ad- 
vantage of by certain elements. 
The milk of human kindness 
should be poured unstingily in- 
to the cup of the unfortunate 
and needy workers, that they 
may be able to feel the heart- 
ening touch of the much need- 
ed help which is not a portion 
of their wages. 

A great number of employ- 
ers believe that the demands 
of some workers are insatiable. 
But this is more apparent than 
real. In truth in bargaining 
for the adjustment of their 
wages to keep body and soul 
together, the workers are able 
to gain only a foothold. The 
minimum wage generally pre- 
vailing at present docs not yet 
include an adequate income to 
enable the workers to N meet the 
essential necessities of civil- 
ized life. In common parlance, 
the workers at present are 
only striving to live from hand 
to mouth. 

The role of the employer in 
the laying out of plans for the 
promotion of the welfare of the 
employees, should be directed 
toward that small item to be 
included in the minimum wage 
which would enable the work 
ers not only to enjoy three 
meals a day, but also to allow 
them an adequate income for 
their recreation, education of 
their children, hospital and me- 
dical care of their families. In 
the dispute between the Phil- 
ippine Refining Company and 
its laborers, the CIR said: 

'The determination of a 
proper, fair, and just wage 
for the striking petitioners is 
the major issue raised in the 
case. Fundamentally the root 
cause of the strike is economic; 
and incidentally, social. If, as 
disclosed the pre-war wages 
(1939) were between P1.25 and 
P4.00 for laborers of different 



categories in the respondent 
company, even a strong imagin- 
ation could not justify, after 
the war, especially at the time 
this decision was being penn- 
ed, the maintenance of the same 
scale of wages. 

i 

"It is gratifying to note, 
however, that the respondent 
company is not adhering to the 
ranis anachronism of insisting 
on and clinging to the old wage 
scales, when the actual cost 
of vital commodities are being 
placed at five or seven times 
hicrher than that obtaining dur- 
ing 1941 and post-war econo- 
mic and social conditions have 
greatly changed. We should 
face the actual economic and 
social premises and on them 
base our adjustment of the v»- 
ry apparent wage dislocation. 

"The minimum of 'health and 
decency standard' demands: (a) 
food of sufficient calorie, vi- 
tamin and mineral content to 
permit the developmnet and 
maintenance of healthy, di- 
sease-resisting bodies and 
minds; (b) attire or clothing 
sufficient for the maintenance 
of health and social esteem; 
(c) shelter or housing adequate 
for the same purposes; (d) 
miscellaneous goods and ser- 
vices necessary for health, 
safety, recreation, education and 
normal social intercourse; and 
(e) savings to help workers 
families meet the hazards of 
home and industrial life. 11 

One should not worry at all 
about the granting of these 
small concessions, for the gov- 
ernment has a way of knowing 
whether the employer is able 
to grant such concessions or 
not, besides allowing capital a 
fair return on its investments. 
There are always means to de- 
termine when a given conces- 
sion will "kill the goose that 
lays the golden egg/' In those 
cases where the granting of 
the demands of the workers 
badly hurts the employers, the 
Spanish adage: Centra el wcio 



de pedir hay la virtud de no 
dar" operates most fittingly. 

We should not, however, fo- 
cus our eyes on a uniform min- 
imum wage. The minimum 
wage varies with the kind of 
industry one operates. It also 
depends upon the locality. Its 
determining factors are inva- 
riably the cost of living, risk 
in the performance of duties, 
the degree of skill required and 
the nature of the business. In 
view of this, we, therefore, ex- 
pect to find, different minim- 
um wages for various indus- 
tries in different provinces and 
cities. 

Collective bargaining is sim- 
ply the method of attempting 
to settle the terms of employ- 
ment through united action, and 
as such is considered as an es- 
sential in industrial democra- 
cy. During the conference, the 
employer might be able to ag- 
ree on some of the demands, 
offering his counter-proposi- 
tion on the others, and give his 
views on the arbitrariness of 
the rest. 

By this process, he may be 
able to reduce the issue that 
can not be agreed upon the con- 
ference, thereby submitting the 
same to the proper government 
agencies for arbitration and 
decision without the laborers 
going on a strike. 

This will enable him to ope- 
rate his business continuously 
without causing loss to both 
parties. Should certain de- 
mands appear to be not provid- 
ed for by law, which are not, 
however, unlawful and detrim- 
ental to the employer's inter- 
est, the same could be granted 
by him if his business has the 
ability to grant them to the 
workers; thereby proving fur- 
ther his initiative in promoting 
the welfare of his employees. 

The leave of absence with 
pay is similar to the sick leave 
and leave of absence being 
granted to government emplo- 
yees. Is the employer i*eady to 
grant this privilege to bis 
workers? 

With respect to compensa- 
(Cm^fifiued o n page 70) 



THE :i rIC 



PAGE 66 



Who Is Who In The Philippines 



The Commoner 



lulucaior ami Statesman 




Pr KULOGIO RODRIGUEZ. St. 

- °f th * Nacionalista Party and Chairman of the Coalesced 

mmorVM*. President of the Luzon Surety Co., Inc. 

Businessman, agriculturist, political leader, champion of clean 
honest government, friend and advocate of the masses. 
1909 ^ i RodriKU( ' z ^gen his political career way back in 
tow V>aS firSt elected municipal president of his home- 

his"' \ allx ' n ' Uizal » "P to the present time when, despite 
iAmS* ° a l multifari ous duties as head of the coalesced oppo- 
s ition parties * the Philippines, he can still attend dailv to the 
njcult problem of thousands of people who come to him for 
to W \ hiS ° ffice with satisfaction, assuring him 

em£r mtmm^ whoKh " arhd su ^t m the coming Nov- 

hi* S IS ] l° rn in on January 21, 1883, be- 

botl/'nl ° f Pf ^ nil » Rodriguez and Monica Adona, 

S tjffir^i^ 1 ^ H ° **** his **** Wucation in 

the public school of his town; was later tutored by Don Benedic- 
to Luna of Manila; studied law for two years but gave it up to 
engage , n ****** and agriculture b,fore k* entered local polit- 
ies as candidate for municipal president of Montalban in 1009 
when he was elected and detected to said office, wWli he dis- 
charged continuously up to 1916, when he ran for governorship 
of Rizai pmvnice and won it as a Progresista candidate against 
his Nacionalista opponents. He served as governor until 1919. 

In Juno, 1922, he was again elected Governor of Rizal af- 
ter working with the Philippine V< s table Oil Company for three 
years during the oil boom. In the middle part of 1923 he re- 
signed as Governor of Rizal to become City Mayor of Manila, 
(Contin##d on page 07) 



i 





(Prom the Congressional Directory, Congress of the United SUM,, 
sZenty-thdd Congress, Second Session, January, 1034) 

t&Zi£&Y*tf~ of the bureau 
president of the Natinal University; formerly senator t rom 
the second senatorial district, Comprising the Provinces of La 
Union, PangaBinan, and Zambales; was born in Ba lao.«, 
Union P.I., March 23, 1889; studied m his town in Jigan^to 
cos Sur, in San Fernando (La Union), and continued in Am 
[ca, being appointed government student to the Un 'ted Stat* 
in 306; was graduated from the Western Illinois S ate Teae — 
Collet Macomb, 111., in 1908; attended the University of Chicaj 
for two summer sessions; resided in the city of New Yor* 
1908-1910, and obtained his bachelor of science m education f « 
Columbia University and his professional diploma m educate ; 
administration and supervision from the Teachers College 
New York City; on his return from America, via Europe, he 
was assigned as teacher in the high school, San Fernando, La 
Union, in 1910; supervising teacher, Bacnotan, San Juan, and 
(Continued on page 69) 

THE EBPUBl.lv 



Biciivciiido A. Tan. U.M.. D.CX. 

Judge of the Court of First Instance &f Rizal, Jti.zal City 



( 



Judge Tan was born in Bacolor, Pampanga, on March 22, 
1891. A product of public and private schools, holder of LL.B., 
LL.M., and D.C.L. degrees, who distinguished himself when he 
passed the bar examinations with a grade Df 
1007r in Criminal Procedure and 98% in Civil 
Procedure in 1 1 > 1 ~> , and has since been a member 
■ of the Philippine Bar, practicing his law pro- 
^fc^^^H fession in the city of Manila, where he was 
H elected City Councilor in 1922 and became 
President of the Municipal Hoard of Manila 
^dfl before he quit politics in 1925. 

| He was president of the Philippine Golum- 
i bian Association; president of the Pampango 
Association in Manila; Grand Knight, Manila 
^/^~* * ^Council No. 1000; and president, Philippine 

B A Tan Welfare League. At present he is the treas- 
urer and director of the Philippine Bar Asso- 
ciation, and Judge of the Court of First Instance of Rizal at 
Rizal City (formerly Pasay). 

Kulogio Rodriguez. Sr. . . • 

\C 'on tinned from page 66) 

and later represented Nucva Vizcaya in the House of Represent- 
atives from February, 1924, to May, 1925. 

EKcted representative from the second district of Rizal in 
June, 1925; organized the Philippine Trading Co. in 1926; the 
Luzon Surety Co. and the Luzon Investment Co. in 1928; or- 
ganized the National Life Insurance Co. in 1932; reelected repres- 
entative from Rizal in 1931, and again in 1934; appointed by 
Governor General Murphy secretary of agriculture and commerce 
on July 26, 1934; member of the board of directors and later 
acting vice president of the National Development Co.; reappoint- 
ed secretary of agriculture and commerce on November 15, 193j 
by President Quezon; named acting president of National Dev- 
elopment Co. and director of its subsidiary companies; appointed 
in 1936 member of the board of directors of the Philippine Na- 
tional Bank, Cebu Portland Cement Co. and National Economic 
Council; after resigning as secretary of agriculture and commerce 
on December 1, 1938, was appointed president and general man- 
ager of the Cebu Portland Cement Co.; appointed Mayor of 
Manila on January 16, 1940; resigned as mayor of Manila on 
Aug. 28, 1941, to run for the Senate; and was national campaign 
manager of the Nacionalista Party for ID 1 1 national elections. 

lie was incarcerated in dreaded Fort Santiago for seven 
months during the enemy occupation for aiding the guerrillas 
and ordering the general cancellation of illegal lease holdings of 
Jap subjects in Davao when secretary of agriculture in 1936. He- 
was chosen running mate of President Sergio Osmeiia in April 
1946 presidential elections and could have been elected to the vice 
presidency by a shift of 60,000 votes, and is now minority leader in 
the Senate. 

Here are some of the comments on Mr. Rodriguez' public 
service: 

44 You have rendered the Government a most valuable, effi- 
cient and loyal service, and it will be very hard to fill your 
place... our association both personal and official, I shall al- 
ways cherish as long as I live. You have been a model public of- 
ficial, a true friend and loyal collaborator/' — President Manuel 
L. Quezon, Nov. 23, 1938. 

"...Mayor Rodriguez brought with him to the City Hail 
three virtues which he imparted to his colleagues: Loyalty, Ho- 
nesty and Efficiency. Manila never had a greater crusader 
against vice .and corruption. " — The Herald Mid-U'eck Magazine, 
Jan. 15, 1941. 

'If the past record of a public official and the respect of the 
electorate which he serves mean anything, the appointment of 
Eulogio Rodriguez as mayor of Manila augurs well for an effi- 
cient and successful administration of the city government. — 
Philippines Free Press. 




Lueio M. Tianco 

Judge, Municipal Court of Rizal City 

Born in Malabon, Rizal, on May 6, 1909; attended the Semi- 
nario de San Carlos, Mandaluyong, Rizal, where he finished the 
primary course in 1920, and the San Vicente de Paul College at 
San Marcelino, Manila, where he finished his 
intermediate course in 1923 and the high school 
in 1927; entered the University of Sto. Tomas 
to keep up his law course, where he obtained H 
his A. A. in 1929 and his LL.B. degree in ( 
1933, having passed the bar examinations in 
the same year of his graduation; and passrd 
the Civil Service examination as Probation 
Officer in 1935. He speaks and writes Eng- 
lish, Spanish and Tagalog. From 1933 he g 
has been practicing law as partner of Sev.Ula B 
& Tianco, 1933-38; assistant attorney, Cavanna I 
Law Offices, 1938-39; partner, Cavanna, Jaz- 
minez & Tianco, 1939-40; partner, Cavanna, £. M m Tianco 
and Tianco, 1941-44; partner, Caravana, 
Tianco & Faustino, 1945-46; associated with Congressman Ignacio 
Santos Diaz and Atty. Apolinario E. Sugueco, 1946; assistant 
attorney, Lichauco, Picazo & Mejia; later, Roxas, Picazo & Me- 
jfa, 1946; and partner, Tianco & Gamboa law offices, from De- 
cember, 1946, to date. 

Prior to his appointment as Justice of the Peace of Pasay, 
Rizal, in August, 1946, he was a clerk and assistant to the Reg- 
istrar of the University of Sto. Tomas, 1928-33; secretary, College 
of Law, Ateneo de Manila, 1937-41; and clerk, Military Police 
Command, AFWESPAC, 1945. Appointed Judge of the Munich 
pal Court of Rizal City on August 8, 1947, and took his oath 
of office on August 19, 1947. 

Dr. Eduardo V. Caiiisiosa 

City Health Officer of Rizal City 

Born in Calamba, Laguna, on October 13, 1901; son of Tomas 
B. Canicosa and Juana Vera; educated in public and private 
schools, having obtained his A. A. in 1926 from the University 
of Sto. Tomas and his M.D. degree from the 
same university in 1931 ; appointed president of 
the sanitary division of Mariquina, San Mateo 
and Montalban, Rizal, June 1, 1933, and was 
transferred to Pasay, Rizal, on December 1, 
1933, having served as president of the sanitary 
division up to September 5, 1947, when he was 
appointed City Health Officer of Rizal City, 

r which position he still holds. Married to Ce- 
■>§^ cilia Goukeko > of Malabon, Rizal, with whom 
•^jhe has four children, Marieta, Tomas, Maximi- 
no, and Ofelia. 




E. V. Canicosa 



JUDGE POMPEYO IHAX 

Judge Pompeyo Diaz, of the People's Court, has recently re 
signed from the bench to join the law firm now known as Pare- 
dez, Diaz & Poblador, located at the Consolidated Investments 
Bldg., Plaza Goiti, Manila, Tel. 2-<Ki-81 ; and to continue teach- 
ing law in the University of Sto. Tomas, where he is now one of 
the leading professors of law. He is a holder of A.B. degree 
from Ateneo de Manila, LL.B. from the Univeisity of the Phil- 
ippines, and LL.M. and D.C.L. degrees from the Uniivcrsity of 
Santo Tomas, the oldest I'niversity of the Philippines, 

Prior to his appointment as judge of the People's Court, Dr. 
Diaz held successively the following positions: assistant attorney) 
Bureau of Justice; acting provincial fiscal of Batangas; judge - 
at-large; and judge of the Court of First Instance of ManUa. 
He is the son of the late Justice Anacleto Diaz of the Supreme 
Court. 



THK KBPUBLiO 



PAGE *7 



Demetrio Andres 

Director of Mines 



J .Mohan It. Abatla 

Philippine Educator 




When DE.AIETPwIO ANDRES was appointed Direc- 
tor of Mines on April 24, 1947, the consensus of opin- 
ion in and outside the Government is that the right 
man has been placed to the right position. For Direc- 
tor Andres is a surveyor, a lawyer, 
and a mining engineeer, callings 
which cover all the activities of the 
Bureau of Mines. He has' been in 
charge of the administration and dis- 
position of the mineral resources of 
the Philippines since 1924. He was 
the one who prepared the bill, now 
Commonwealth Act No. 136, the law 
creating the Bureu of Mines, and 
the one who practically organized 
the said Office. It was* also he 
who prepared the bill which be- 
came Commonwealth Act No. 137, otherwise known as 
the "Mining Act". In preparation and experience, there- 
fore, it can really be said that he fits the position of Di- 
rector of Mines to a T. 




Dir. D. Andres 



The life of Director Andres 
is the story of the life of a civ- 
il service man. He is one who 
came from the rank of the low- 
salaried government employees 
but who, by dint of hard work, 
continuous study and prepara- 
tion, and unselfish service to 
the public, has risen to his pres 
ent position of honor and res- 
ponsibility. His recent appoint- 
ment, therefore, will serve as 
an inspiration for all civil ser- 
vice career men, to work hard- 
er with faith and devotion to 
the service, for they can look 
forward to the time when they, 
too, can rise to the top through 
merit. 

He was b6rn of poor parents 
m the town of Marikina, Ri za l, 
on August 14, 1889. Bereft 
of parents at a young age, he 
was forced to face life early 
and to fight his battles alone. 
Seeing that his only hope of 
over rising above the rung of 
ordinary laborers is by study- 
ing, he left his hometown after 
finishing the primary grad-s 
and enrolled in the Sampaloc 
Intermediate School where he- 
graduated as valedictorian. He 
later enrolled in the Manila 
High School where he graduat- 
ed in 1011 as salutatorian in 
the Regular and Surveying 
Courses and served as editor of 
their annual. 

From 1911 to 1933, he was 
connected with the Bureau of 



Lands in various capacities. 
Starting as Apprentice Surve- 
yor with a monthly salary of 
F20.00, he steadily rose to 
Junior Surveyor, Senior Sur- 
veyor, Chief of Cadastral Sur- 
vey Parties, Division Inspector, 
and Chief of the Mineral Lands 
Administration Division. At 
one time, he was made Act- 
ing Chief of the Friar Lands 
Division, to straighten out its 
af faiis after the discovery of 
several anomalies in that div- 
ision, including the famous Es- 
tefania Serrano case, and still 
at another time, he was made 
Acting Chief Surveyor of the 
same Bureau. 

In 1933, when the new Div- 
ision of Mineral Resources un- 
der the Department of Agric- 
ulture and Commerce was or- 
ganized, he was made 2nd 
Assistant Chief thereof with 
the late Director Quirico Aba- 
dilla as its 1st Assistant Chief. 
In 1936, when the Bureau of 
Mines was created under Com. 
Act No. 13G, Mr. Andres was 
appointed Chief of the Min- 
eral Lands Administration and 
Survey Division of the new Bu- 
reau. In addition, he was de- 
signated Assistant to the Di- 
rector to assist the latter in the 
administration of the Bureau 
and in the formulation of po- 
licies. He was often consulted 
by the Director not only on le- 
gal questions but also on tech- 
nical matters. He had been act- 




E. R. Abada 



Under his control and supervision as of July, 1946. are 11 
normal and technical schools, 188 secondary schools (including 
general, secondary trade, secondary agricultural, and rural), 
and 11,904 elementary schools, with their force of 56,851 teach- 
ers and their enrolment of 3,257,868 pupils. 

He was born in the town of Saravia, 
Negros Occidental, on March 15, 1896, or 
about two years before Commodore Dewey 
battered the Spanish fleet at Manila Bay. 
He received his early schooling at the 
public school of Kabankalan, Negros Occi- 
dental. Later he came to Manila to en- 
roll as a student pensionado at the Phil- 
ippine Normal School. He was president 
of his class. 

He became an elementary classroom 
teacher soon after graduation from the 
normal school in 1915. A little over a year 
afterwards he was promoted as an elem- 
entary school principal, and in still an- Director of Education 
other year rose to be a supervising teacher. 

He arrived in the United States in the fall of 1919 as a per. 
sionado of the Philippine Government. Hfe obtained a Teacher s 
Life Certificate besides an academic degree (A.B. with distinc- 
tion, University of Michigan), and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. 
Like many others of his countrymen who have been to America, 
he developed a genuine faith in democracy and an abiding ad- 
miration for the American way of life. 

After his return to the Philippines in 1922, he was assigned 
as a secondary school teacher. Two years later he became a 
high school principal, in 1927 a division superintendent of schools, 
and in 1939 the administrative officer of the Bureau of Educa- 
tion. By this time he had seen service in various parts of his 
country. During much of the Japanese occupation he stayed on 
his farm in Mindoro. 

He is a member of the National Council of Education, the 
Board of Regents of the University of the Philippines, and th 
Government Radio Broadcasting Committee. He> has likewise 
something to do with the preparation of regulations governing 
the selection of Filipino pensionados for the United States and 
other foreign countries. 

In his book, A Decade of American Government in the PhU 
i/, pines, Dr. David P. Barrows of the University of California 
said: "American claims of contributing to the world's experience 
in the governance of empire lie in the personal and poliitcal lib- 
erty guaranteed to the Filipinos and in the success of popular 
education." Unfortunately, because of the war, the cause of pop 
ular education in the Philippines suffered a tremendous setback. 
At the time of liberation approximately 85 per cent of the school 
buildings in the country were found to have been destroyed or 
damaged. In many places school equipment, materials and sup- 
plies, let alone textbooks and supplementary readers, had vir 
tually disappeared. And on top of all these difficulties, school 
children by the thousands sought despcratey to gain admission 
in the public schools. 

These were among the problems that faced Esteban R. Aba 
da when he assumed office as Director of Education on June J 
1946. They are his problems still. 



ing as such when the last 
world war broke out. 

Soon after liberation, he was 
asked to reorganize the Bureau 
of Mines and was appointed its 
Officer-in-Charge. The dutise 
he had been discharging as 
such are the same and identical 
to those of the Director of 
Mines. Consequently, it may 



be said that when Director A 
dres assumed his new posit k 
the functions and responsibi 
itics attendant thereto weiv n . 
new to him. 

He has been a member of the 
Board of Examiners for Sui 
veyors, lecturer on Minu . 
Laws in the University of th • 
(Continued i<n 9*9* 



THIS BEPUBLK 



Dr. Sixto Antonio 

Physician 

A native of Pasig, Rizal. Former 
municipal president of his hometown; 
elected member of the provincial board of 
Rizal before the outbreak of the last world 
war; was campaign manager for the Lib- 
eral Tarty in the national elections of 
April 23, 11)16; and appointed provincial 
governor of Rizal in June, 1946. He is 
now the official candidate of the Liberal 
Party for provincial governor of Rizal, 
and his opponent is Atty. Francisco Se- 
villa, twice elected governor of Rizal prov- 
ince (1931-37), official candidate of the 
coalesced minorities under the banner of 
the Nacionalista Party. 



Irineo Itanjo 

Judge, Court of First Instance, Fifst District 





Judge Ranjo was bom in Pasuquin, 
llocos Norte, on September 18, 1882; grad- 
uated from the Philippine Normal School 
in 1903; worked as clerk and later as 
teacher, 1903-11; appointed Clerk of Court 
of First Instance of llocos Norte, L911-19j 
elected Representative, 1922-25; Delegate 
to the Constitutional Convention, 1934-35; 
appointed Provincial Governor; of llocos 
Norte after liberation; and Judge of the 
Court of First Instance at present. Mar- 
ried to Gorgonia Agullana (now deceas- 
ed), with whom he has a son, Irineo Ran- 
jo, Jr. A Liberal by party affiliation and 
a Catholic by religion. 



Cainilo Osias 

(Continued from page GO) 

San Fernando, 1910-1914; academic, supervisor of city scdools, 
Manila, 1914-1915; first Filipino superintendent of schools, as- 
signed to Bataan and later to Mindoro, 1915-1916; as- 
sistant chief, academic division, bureau of education in 1916; 
superintendent of schools for Tayabas in 1917; second assistant 
director of education, 1917-1919; first assistant director of educa- 
tion, 1920-21; member of the first Philippine mission to the 
United States, 1919-20; secretary-treasurer and first vice-pres- 
ident, Philippine Amateur Athletic Federation, 1918-1929; head 
of Philippine Delegation, once to Japan, and twice to China; 
professorial lecturer, University of the Philippines, 1919-1921; 
president National University, December 1, 1921, to the present 
time; doctor of laws; was awarded the Columbia University medal 
for service, October, 1929; author of the series of eight Philippine 
readers used in the Philippine public schools: Education in the 
Philippines Under the Spanish Regime, Rizal and Education, Bar- 
rio Life and Barrio Education, Our Education and Dynamic 
Filipinism, Evangelical Christianity in the Philippines (in colla- 
boration), Ti Filipinas Ditoy Lubong, The Philippine Charter of 
Liberty (in collaboration), Rizal and Regaining Our Eden Lost 
(in collaboration), etc.; senator from the second senatorial dis- 
trict, June, 1925, to February 7, 1929, being credited with the 
largest majority ever obtained by a Filipino elective official; 
elected Resident Commissioner from the Philippines to the United 
States Congress from March 4, 1929, to March 3, 1932; re-elected 
to March 3, 1935. 

Additional: Member of the Constitutional Convention and 
signer of the Constitution; member, first National Assembly; 
occupied different educational positions from the lowest to the 
highest. 




Dr. Guillermo C. Torres 

Born in Malate, Manila, on February 10, 1901; son of Ale- 
jandro Torres (of Malabon, Rizal) and Oliva Castillo (of Ma- 
late, Manila) ; attended the Zamboanga High School, 1918-22, 
where he finished his secondary course; studied 
nursing in the Zamboanga General Hospital 
School of Nursing, where he graduated in 1924, 
took postgraduate course with the School of 
Public Health Nursing in 1924, and passed 
the Board of Examiners for Nurses the same 
year. He then studied dentistry with the Col. 
lege of Dentistry, National University, where 
he obtained his D.D.S. degree in 1930 and 
passed the examinations given by the Board of 
Dental Examiners in- June, 1930. 

Dr. Torres married the former Miss Petro- 
niia Cabantog, a registered nurse, native of 
Pagsaujan, Laguna, on December 31, 1932, 
and the latter died at Baclaran, Paranaque, Rizal, on June 15, 
1943, leaving three orphans, Guillermo, Jr., Patricia and Ge- 
ronimo, who are now under the care of their father, Dr. Torres. 
Three years later, or on May 12, 1946, Dr. Torres married his 
second wife, the former Miss Hilaria Protacio, a registered mid- 
wife, with whom he now has one child, Herminia, born ^February 
18, 1947. 

Before he became a dentist, Dr. Torres held important posi- 
tions with the government as district nurse in Zamboanga, from 
November 20, 1924, to December 20, 1924; acting President of 
the Sanitary Division of Isabela, Basilan, Zamboanga, from 
December 21, 1924, to September 30, 1925; promoted in October, 
1925, to Administrative Officer, hospital superintendent and 
cashier with special appointment by the provincial treasurer of 
Misamis as his deputy in the collection of Hospital funds up to 
January, 192G; transferred to Occidental Negros Provincail 
Hospital in the same capacity with promotion in grade, from 
January, 1926, to January, 1927; engaged in private nursing 
in Manila from January, 1927, to December, 1927; worked as 
ward nurse from December, 1927, in Santol Tuberculosis Sana- 
torium, under the Phil. Is. Antituberculosis Society, up to Decem- 
ber, 1931, during which period he was taking up dentistry in the 
College of Dentistry of the National University. 

In March, 1932, he engaged in dental practice in the city of 
Manila and conducted a dental clinic in Baclaran, Paranaque. 
Rizal, until 1945. During the early part of liberation, he served 
as Dentist under the PCAU-27 in Santa Ana, Manila, from Feb- 
ruary 18, 1945, to April 15, 1945. On May 16. 1945, he transferred 
to the City Health Department as dispensary dentist with station 
in lasay Rizal, up to July, 1945. On August, 1945, he was 
appointed a Municipal Dentist of Pasay; and on August 10, 
194, he was appointed City Dentist of Rizal City, which position 
he still holds. Residence address: 763 Leveriza, Rizal City. 

Bonifacio Ferrcras 

From his humble position as roadroller mechanic and fore- 
man m the municipality of Pasay, Rizal, from 1929 to 1942, Mr. 

Ferrcras rose to his present position as con- 
tractor and president of the Pacific Con*» 
^^^^^ tnution and Sawmill, Inc., operating lum- 
L j 1)er concessions and sawmills in the island 
I 01 1>olill °. Quezon province, with head of- 
fice at Rizal Cily. 

Mr. Ferrcras was horn in Pililta, Rizal, 
on May 4, 19Q3j son of Candido Ferrcras 
and Justina Masarap; a product ot the Phil- 
ippine School of Arts and Trades, and a pro- 
gressive businessman who rose from the 
, bottom to the top of his ambition as con- 
tractor and head of a corporation. He anar- 
rild thv tortuer Miss Consolacion Cuneta 
ot lasay. with whom he has three children, Kodolfo Teresita 
and Rcnato. He belongs to no political party, and is' « Roman 
Catholic by religion. 



JiEPUBUC 



POLITICS 



SENATORIAL CANDIDATES of the TWO 
CONTENDING MAJOR POLITICAL PARTIES 



LIBERAL PARTY 

LORENZO TASADA 
PRIMITIVO LOVINA 
PABLO ANGELES DAVID 
EMILIANO T. TIRONA 
VICENTE MADRIGAL 
CARLOS S. TAN 
GERONIMA PECSON 

LORENZO TAftADA, Lawyer.— Born in Gumaca, Quezon, 
August 10, 1898. Graduate of Dc La Salle College, University 
of the Philippines, Harvard Law School. Conferred doctorate of 
civil law by Santo Tomas University. Formerly Judge of the 
Court of First Instance, presently Solicitor-General. 
Fearless investigator and public prosecutor. 
PRIMITIVO LOVINA, Banker.— Bom in Pasay, Rizal, Nov- 
ember 27, 1896. Philippine School of Commerce graduate. Start- 
n* as stenographer in the Philippine National Bank, he rose 
ciali I Untl1 he became vice-president of that institution. Spe- 
Suret m H banking: in the Uni ^ States. Organized the Manila 
acr*v ^M.f ldelity Com Pany; named chairman and general ma- 
of NAFCO in 1946, then chairman of the RFC. 
campions the cause of the laboring class. 

pan^ AI ! L0 ANGELK « PAYID, Lawyer.— Bo*n in Bacolor, Pum- 
: ud ^^ U ^ 17 ' ^ Graduate of Liceo de Manila and Es- 
, ^chu. \\ as provincial fiscal of Pampanga, provincial 

Labor And Capital . . . 

(Continued from page 60) 

'.'on in ease ot injury or death ; 
Suppose the employer is un- 
tier obligation to ' give the in- 
jured or the beneficiary of the 
deceased worker the corres- 
ponding compensation in this 
case. During the period, how- 
ever, the business is suffering 
from losses. Should he discon- 
tinue or continue such compen- 
sation? 

Tlie price of commodities arc 
reportedly on the downward 
trend now although itfowly and 
gradually, while the workers 
ar<* asking for ioncessions that 
are the eonsecjuences of high 
price.;. Is it advisable to sus- 
pend the granting of high cost 
of labor until things reach their 
normal levels? 

May the employer discharge 
or lay off certain laborers who, 
upon report of compete n med- 
ical authority, are found un- 



fit fur work or are physically 
unfit to continue the perform- 
ance of their work because of 
their ailment? 

The law allows the employ- 
er to realize a fair return on 
his capital invested in busi- 
ness. How much per centum 
per annum is a fair return? 

These are provocative ques- 
tions. I have given a brief 
glimpse of an incomplete but 
wide panorama of what I con- 
sider the "employer's initiative 
in promoting welfare plans for 
employes." The realization of 
these plans will be a long step 
toward the dignification of la- 
bor by capital itself and tho 
incarnation of those principlec 
which make democracy the 
most potent factor in shaping 
the destinies of free men 
free countries. — Sunday Post 



in 



NACIONALISTA PARTY 

COALESCED MINORITIES 

EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ, SR. 

CAMILO OSIAS 

SOTERO B. CABAHUG 

FELIXBERTO M. SERRANO 

JOSE M. VELOSO 

EMILIO M. JAVIER 

JOSE F. IMPERIAL 

JESUS BARRERA 
EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ, Sr., Agriculturist, Businessman, 
Political Leader, President of Vie Nacionalista Party and Chair- 
man of Coalesced Minorities.— (See cut and biographical sketch 
on page t!(i.) 

CAMILO OSIAS, Educator, Author, and Statesman.— -For- 
mer President of the National University, Senator from the Se- 
cond Senatorial District, Resident Commissioner to the United 
States Congress, Delegate to the Constitutional Convention and 
Member of the First National Assembly. (See cut and biograpn- 
ical sketch on page 06.) 

SOTERO B. CABAHUG, Laivyer.— Former Secretary of 1 ub- 
lic Works and Communications under the Osmena regime; As- 
semblyman from Cebu for three terms; Judge of the Court o 
SZnee until the outbreak of the War; elected Proving 
Governor of Cebu who defeated Mariano Cuenco (now benatO^ 
Author of the idea of soliciting voluntary contributions from tin. 
inhabitants of the Province of Cebu for the purchase of an Air- 
plane called the "Spirit of Cebu," which was donated by tin 
province of Cebu to the Philippine Army months immediately 
before the outbreak of the last World War. Kefined and unassum- 
ing, honest, intelligent, and hard-working public official. 

FELIXBERTO M. SERRANO, Lawyer, Author, Orator, and 
Professor of Law.— Congressman from the First District of B%- 
tangas; President of the Philippine Youth Party; Vice-Preside^ 
of the Philippine Lawyers' Guild; Director, Philippine Lawyers 
Association; Adjudged by the metropolitan press the most out- 
standing parliamentarian of the First Congress of the Republic 
of the Philippines; one of the few Filipinos accorded the honor 
of inclusion in the Biographical Encyclopedia of the World, a 
staunch defender of Democracy and friend of the laboring class. 

JOSE M VELOSO, Laivyer, Businessman, and Statesman— 
Born in San'lsidro, Leyte, April 30, 1886; son of Isidro VelOSO 
and Casiana Morte; attended the seminary college of Cebu, 1803, 
and the University of Sto. Tomas, Manila, where he graduated as 
• l.icenciado en Derccho" (Master of Laws) in 1909, and passed 
the bar examinations the same year; practiced law for several 
years, before entering politics; twice elected Provincial Governor 
of Lcyte; Member of the House of Representatives for four 
terms; thix-e times elected Senator from Samar- Leyte Distr.ct; 
and Member of the Independence Mission to the United States 
headed by the late President Manuel L. Quezon. 

EMILIO M. JAVIER, Doctor of Juridical Science, Lawyer, 
Autlior, and Professor of Law.— Born in the city of Iloilo, Sep- 
tember 13, 1893, but was raised in Sagay, Occidental Negros, of 



PAliK 70 



THE REPUBtAC 



LIBERAL PARTY — Continued 

ooard member, Representative to the Philippine Legislature from 
the first district of his province, elected Governor of Pampanga 
in 1931. appointed Judge of the Court of First Instance, and now 
provincial governor of Pampanga. 

Campaigned successfully for the restoration of peace and 
order in his home province. 

EMILIANO T. TIRONA, Lawyer.— Bom in Kawit, tiavitc; 
graduated from Atenco de Manila. First elected to represent his 
province in the Philippine Assembly, he has ably served his 
province as a political leader for many years as member of the 
House of Representatives for several terms and as Senator from 
the Fourth District. He was also a judge of the court of first 
Instance for several years, and was a member of the Laurel 
Cabinet during the Japanese occupation. Elected Senator in 
1941, which position he still holds. 



NACIONALISTA PARTY — Continued 

Ilocano and Visayan parentage; graduated as A.B. (Magna 
cum Laude) from the Silliman University in 1915, and LL.B. 
from the University of the Philippines; one of the Bar Topnot- 
chcrs in 1919, and took his postgraduate course in the Law 
School of the University of Michigan where he obtained his 
Doctor of Juridical Science degree in 1932; appointed for two 
consecutive school years as Fellow of the Michigan Law School 
and came back to the Philippines in 1932 in a trip around the 
world; appointed Head of the Political Science department of 
the Silliman University, and later founded and became the first 
Pean of the College of Law of same University. Author of 
Philippine Law on Partnerships and the Philippine Law on Agen- 
cy, etc. Founder and President of the Democrata Party in Ne- 
gros Oriental for many years, and was candidate for Vice Pres- 
ident wiht the late Juan Sumulong in the 1941 national elections. 



JOSE F. IMPERIAL, Civil Engineer. — Former Provincial 
Governor of Albay and Technical Adviser to the late President, 
His Excellency, Manuel L. Quezon. Born in Legaspi, Albay, 
March 14, 1893; graduated from the elementary school of the 
College of San Vicente Ferrer at Guinobatan, Albay; obtainei 
his A.B. degree from the Let ran College, and graduated as 
Civil Engineer from the University of Sto. Tomas. where he also 
studied Law. He was Assistant District Engineer of Albay, su- 
pervising engineer of the then Subprovince of Catanduanes, and 
later, District Engineer of Sorsogon. After seven years of ser- 
vice in the government, he engaged in agricultural, industrial 
and commercial pursuits; began his political career in 1925 and 
was elected Provincial Governor of Albay in 1935. As a recog- 
nition of his meritorious services. President Quezon appointed 
him a Technical Adviser on public works and political matters. 
During the Japanese occupation he took part in the underground 
resistance movement until the liberation of the Philippines by 
the American armed forces. During the last elections, he was 
CpnmaiVn Manaper for t lie Liberal Party, but joined the N'acio- 
nalista Party recently to save Democracy from grave abuses 
committed by the party in power. 

JESUS BARRERA, Lawyer.— President of the Democratic 
Alliance. Fearless champion of the cause of the common man. 
Born in Concepcion, Tarlac, December 18, 1896. Graduate, Ma- 
nila High School; A.B. and LL.B., University of the Philippines; 
LL.M. and D.C.L., University of Sto .Tomas. Co-founder and 
ex-chairman, Civil Liberties Union of the Philippines and Free 
Philippines. Formerly judge of court of first instance. 

INDEPENDENT CANDIDATES FOR SENATORS 

HILARIO C. MONCADO, founder and supreme president 



VICENTE MADRIGAL, Financier.— Born in Ligao, Albay, 
Albay 7, 1880. Graduate of Letran College and Sto. Tomas Uni- 
versity. From a humble employee, Madrigal rose steadily to his 
present preeminence in industrial and social world. He is also 
an agriculturist, publisher, industrial manufacturer, and ship- 
ping magnate. Elected Senator in 1941. 

FERNANDO LOPEZ, Lawyer and Business man. —Bom in 
Jaro, Iloilo, April 13, 1904. Obtained his LL.B. from the Univ- 
ersity of Sto. Tomas in 1925; admitted to bar same year. Pres- 
ently Mayor of Iloilo City, Lopez is also a publisher, philanthrop- 
ist, and a social worker. He is respected and admired by the rich 
and the poor alike. 

CARLOS S. TAN, Lawyer. — Born in Ormoc, Leyte, Novem- 
ber 4, 1895. A.B., San Juan de Letran; LL.B., University of 
the Philippines. Admitted to bar in 1915. Elected Represent- 
ative from Leyte in 1922, a position he still holds, having been re- 
elected five times. 

GERONIMA T. PECSON, Educator and Social Welfare 
Worker. — Born in Lingayen, Pangasinas, 1899. Graduate of the 
University of the Philippines with A.B. and H.T.C. degrees. A 
veteran educator and indefatigable social welfare worker. She 
Is chairman of the Junior Red Cross, Manila-Rizal chapter, and 
presently social secretary of Malacanan. 



of the Filipino Crusaders World Army, Inc., with the title of 
"Five-Star General"; holder of A.M., LL.M., D.C.L., and LL.D. 
degrees; alumnus of various colleges and universities; founder 
and president of the Filipino Federation of America; former 
senior delegate from Cebu to the Constitutional Convention, and 
member of Philippine Bar Association. 



MANUEL DIKIT, Colonel. Guerrilla Unit, Fil-American Ir- 
regular Troops; graduate of the Philippine Normal School, and 
holder of LL.B. degree; member, Philippine Veterans Board; 
champions the cause of unrecognized but deserving guerrillas. 

PERFECTO ABORDO. lawyer; graduate of the Philippine 
Normal School; holder of LL.B.. LL.M., and D.C.L. degrees; for- 
mer provincial governor of Palawan, and one of the officers of 
the Philippine Charity Sweepstakes Office. 



NOTICE 

We will publish a SPECIAL NUMBER of the REPUBLIC for the coming CHRISTMAS, fcaiu,)n<i the pic 
tures and biographical sketches of the triumphant candidates for Senators, Governors and Members of the 
Provincial Boards, together with a list of elected Municipal Mayors, Vice Mayors and Councilors, and Members 
of City Councils or Municipal Boards in the November 11, 19 41 -general elections, 

We will also publish the continuation of the Important Events and Historic Documents tending to the es- 
tablishment of the Commonwealth of the Philippines and the Inauguration of the Philippine Republic, with a 
Dircetorij of Leading officials, professional and business men of the Philippines, Etc. 

THE REPUBLIC 
3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGS 71 



The NACIONALISTA Candidates 
For Councilors Of Rizal City 



f. JOSE ESGUETA (Reformista) 

2. GODOFREDO DEL ROSARIO (Nacionalista) 

3. FLORENTINO ORCA (Nacionalista) 

4. ALIPIO PESTANAS (Reformista) 

5. ARTEMIO REYES (Nacionalista) 
"6. ILDEFONSO K. ROMEY (Obrerista) 

7. ADOLFO C. SANTOS (Obrerista) 

The above-named candidates were officially nomin- 
ated by a steering committee composed of nine members, 
viz., Ricardo Medina, chairman, and Bias Garcia, Ci- 
riaco Gregorio, Pedro Celestial, Alejandro Mendoza, Ca- 
simiro D. Anastacio, Eligio Villanueva, Jacinto Domingo, 
and Jacinto Manuel, members, who were appointed by 
the Nacionalista Convention held July 20, 1947, in which 
Attorneys Segundo Mastrili, Policarpo G. Almeda, and 
Enrique T. Manaloto, former vice-president Jose S. Mi- 
lan, former councilors Macario Vasquez, Miguel Gutie- 
rrez, and other prominent Obrerista leaders took part. 
I he convention approved the coalition with the Reformist 
f arty, headed by former Representative Miguel R. Cor- 
tXZ f° - n ° minated two of his Escueta and Cap- 
v ,ft T S ; aS Standar ^^ of the Reformist par- 
Z*7J* t : t0 nm f ° r any offi <* «* time. For 

hi v fT I 0 " ° f the Public ' we are herein- 
belo v the cuts and biographical sketches of the official 
candKlates of the coalesced minorities for Councilors of 
Rizal City, in alphabetical order: 

Godofr«do del Rosario 



Businessman; 
nicipal committoe 
brilliant record a 




upai secrafa 
ornejo, 1928*30; 



labor leader; organizer, and president of mu- 
of the Nacionalsta Party n Rizal Cty, with a 
a member of the municipal council of Pasay, 
as follows: Elected municipal councilor, oc- 
cupying first place, in the elections of 
June, 1919; for his loyalty to President 
Miguel Pv. Cornejo, the latter recommended 
him for appointment, to Vice Presidency 
to Succeed Bias Garcia, resigned, in 1921; 
was acting Municipal President during 
Wie absence of Pres. Cornejo while the lat- 
ter was campaigning as candidate for Gov- 
ernor of Rizal in 1922; re-elected munici- 
pal councilor, 1922-25; elected Vice-Pres- 
ident of Pasay during the administration 
of Pres. Carlos 0. Cruz, 1925-28; appointed 
ry during the second adminisi ration of Pres. 
elected Mun. Vice-Mayor of Pasav with Mavor 



Rufino F. Mateo, 1937-40; and acting Mun. Mayor for sometime 
in Oct., 1940. After liberation, he was appointed Municipal Coun- 
cilor during the administration of Acting Mayor Adolfo C. San- 
tos 1945-46. As business executive he was salesman of El 
Centre de Mo 1 19il-23j business manager, 1923-31; storo 
manager, L. R Affuinaldp, 1931-35; store manager, Anp: Tibay, 
1936-58; and store manager, National Footwear Corporation, 
1938-46. Born in Sta. Cruz, Manila, November 8, 1888; son of 
Ignacio del Rosario and Marta Almario; a graduate of San Beda 
College (High School), 1908; married to former Miss Manueje 
Ta, with whom he has five children, viz., Marta, Natividad, 
Jose Patrocinio, and Angelita; a Nacionalista by party affilia- 
tion. 

♦lose Escueta 

Businessman; president, Pasay Market Vendors' Association; 
acting counselor and head of Transportation and Communications 
Chamber of the United Philippines Organization ( BUkLODy 
appointed municipal councilor of Pasay, 1945- 
4o\ Born in Alaminos, Laguna, March 13, 
1903; son of Felipe Escueta and Eufemia Bui- 
^^jftlW ce i' de Escueta; a graduate <><' the Institute 
Burgos, holder of A. A. title, and 4th-Yoar 
W. Law, University of Manila; ex-supply officer, 
R.O.T.C. Camagdn (Guerrilla) Unit; mar- 
ried to the former Miss Eleuteria Magsaril<\ 
with whom he has ten children — Buenaventura, 
Felisa, Aurora, Nenita, Jose Jr., Ismael, Te- 
{ J ^ resita, Carmen, Baby, and Arturo. He cam- 

paigned for President Roxas with Atty. Miguel 
R. Cornejo, who was then a candidate for con- 
gressman in the first district of Rizal in .the last national elec- 
tions, and made a good display of his ability as a Tagalog orator. 
He made himself famous in his controversy with Mayor Rufino 
F. Mateo. Mr. Escueta is a Reformist by party affiliation. 

Flo rend i no Orea 

An experienced Philippine National Bank employee and later 
accountant, from 1916 to 1943; at present with the Stock Con- 
trol, Supply Division of the 4th Air Depot, U. S. Army, Mr. 
Orca has been chosen from among 21 aspirants 
for nomination as candidate for Councilor of 
Ki/al City where he can be of service as member 
of the Finance and Budget Committee. Born 
in Pasay, Rizal, on October 16, 1896; son of 
Hugo Orca and Fiancisca Vito Cruz; a grad- 
uate of Pasay Primary School, Tondo Inter- 
mediate School. Philippine School of Arts and 
Trades, and Far Eastern College (now Far 
Eastern Universtiy) ; starting as a typist of 
the Phil. National Bank in 1916 he rose to the 

position of Accountant of one of its depart- 

ments where he served until 1043; elected 
Municipal Councilor of Pasay, 1037-40; and active member of 
various associations, Pasay Club, Lakas Kabataan, etc. Married 
to former Miss Joaquira Granados in October, 1923; a Nacio- 
nalista by party affiliation. 



m 



THE REPUBLIC 




Alipio Pestanas 

A guerilla leader with the rank of Captain, commanding the 
XTamagon Unit of the R.O.T.C. (Hunters) in Pasay during the 
Japanese occupation and liberation of Pasay, Mr. Pastanas was 
appointed acting Municipal Mayor of Pasay 
during the first days of the reorganization >f warn 
the municipal government of Pasay from Feb- | ^ 
rnary to May, 1945. Formerly a construction " 
foreman, being a graduate of the Philippine 
School of Arts and Trades in 1027, he was ap- 
pointed In-Charge of the Anti-Vice Squad of 
the Police Force of Pasay during the adminis- 
tration of President Comejo, 1919-22 and 
1928-31 ; supervised the construction of the Pa- 
say Carnival and Fair in 1919 and 1928; and g 
engaged in business as merchant, and now asBB 
manager of the Taft Theatre. Born in Pa- 
say, Rizal. on August 15, 1889; son of Tomas F. Pestanas and 
Rosenda R. Santos; married to Guadalupe Villena, with whom 
•he has seven children, Florentina, Beatrix, Josef a. Lily, Ange- 
lica, Aida, and Alipio Jr. He is a Reformist a by party affi- 
liation. 

Arteitiio Reyes 

Pharmacist, Proprietor, and Agriculturist; elected munici- 
pal councilor of Pasay, 1925-28. and appointed Vice-Mayor, 
(945-46; bom in the barrio of San Rafael, Pasay. Rizal on March 
23, 1885; son of former Municipal Cap- 
tain and President Mauro Reyes and Se- 
vere Jimenez de Reyes; A. B. from Liceo 
de Manila, 1902; and graduated from the 
Rizat] College of Pharmacy. 1905, having 
passed the pharmaceutical examinations in 
1908; married to Adelaida Manalo of Pa- 
teros, Rizal, iir* 1917, and has two chil- 
dren, David and Teresita. A NacionalisU 
by party affiliation. 





Adolfo C. Santos > 

Newspaperman, Politician, and Intellectual Leader, with an 
enviable record of having occupied first place as Municipal Coun- 
cilor of Pasay in the three successive elections, 1931, 1934, and 
1937, during the past admin- 
istrations of Municipal Pres- 
ident Moises San Juan (1931- 
37) and Municipal Mayor Ru- 
fino F. Mateo (1937-40); 
elected Municipal Vice Mayor 
of Pasay in 1940-41; appoint- 
ed Acting Municipal Mayor 
of Pasay, August 1, 1945. 
which office he discharged | 
until June, 1946, when Pres- 
ident Roxas appointed Mr. 
Mateo Municipal Mayor of 
Pasay to succeed him because 
he was an Osmena appointee. 
Born in Pasay, Rizal (now 
Rizal City), on June 21, 1903; 
son of Rufino Santos and Mi- 
caela C. de Santos; studied in 

the Pasay Primary School, ! ^ » 

Ermita Elementary School, 
Mapa (East) High School, University of the Philippines, 
and Arellano Law College, holder of A. A. title, and law student 
at present. Member of Club Civico de Pasay, Newspaper Guild, 
Lakas Kabataan Athletic Association, etc. Married to former 
Miss Florencia Flores, December 21, 1929, with whom he has two 
children, Conrado and Alicia; a Nacionalista (Obrerista) by 
party affiliation. 




Ildefonso K. Homey 

A labor leader, a vernacular orator and writer, and elected 
municipal councilor of Pasay for several terms from 1928 to 
1940 having been the floor leader during the second term of of- 
fice of former municipal president Miguel R. 
Gornejo, with whom he co-operated in improv- 
ing the market, roads, sanitation, school, and 
cen \etery of Pasay. He served during the 
terms of Pres. Moises San Juan and Mayor 
jj u fino Mateo. He was a member of the Na- 
tional Commission of Labor and Federacion 
Obrera de la Industria Tabaquera de Filipinas 
(FIJITAF) and one of the labor leaders who 
fought for the improvement of labor condi* 
Hons of the cigarmakers and other industrial 
1;, borers and employees. Born in Rinondo, Ma-(j^ 
,,ila, on January 23, 1891; son of Jose Romey 
and' Pantaleona Kayco; a product of Colegio San Jose, 
Rinondo; an industrialist by occupation. Married to Ro- 
salia de Guia, September 4, 1920; and has six chil- 

£ ren Eva, Venicio, Jose, Ildefoivso, Jr., Adelaida. and Norma. Ho 

was private secretary to former Sen. Lope K. Santos in 1921-28. 
\ Nacionalista Obrerista by party affiliation. 

NACIONALISTA PARTY (CO ALE 

STEERING COMMITTEE: Ricardo Medina, chairman; 
Bjgg Gareia, Jacinto Villanueva, Jacinto Domingo, Pedro Geles. 
tial, Casimiro Anastacid, Eligio Villanueva, Alejandro Mendoza; 
an d Ciriaco Gregorio, members. 

LEGAL STAFF: Attorneys Enrique T. Manaloto, Lorenzo 
g, Ramos, and Magdaleno M. Palacol. 



our Ai3ts axh rrwosES 

V To seek the amendment 0 f the Rizal City Charter 
with a view to making the positions of Mayor and Vice 
Mayor elective, and the Municipal Board to be presided 
over by a President to be chosen from among its elected 
members; and to preserve the name of "Pasay." 

2. To have the Heads of City Departments appoint- 
ed by the President of the Philippines upon recommenda- 
tion of the City Mayor with the consent of the City Council. 

3. To restore nublic street lights; reconstruct or re- 
pair the roads and open new streets; introduce drainage 
and sower system; urbanize and beautify the town; im- 
prove the sanitary conditions; establish public parks, play- 
grounds, and public libraries; open more elementary schools; 
and conduct a City High School; reorganize the Police Force 
and the iFire Department; etc. 

4. To standardize the salaries of officers and employ- 
ees, teachers, policemen, firemen, sanitary inspectors, 
street laborers, market collectors, etc., to effect social jus- 
tice; and 

!>. To maintain public peace and order, and to render 
honest, efficient and faithful service to the public. 

NACIONALISTA PARTY 
Coalesced Minorities of Rizal City 



M ■<:■> MINORITIES)- RIZAL « ITV 

CAMPAIGN MANAGERS: Atty. Miguel R. Comejo, chief 
campaign manager, and Ildefotso K. Romey. Antonio Gamulo, 
Ciriaco Gregorio, Casimiro Anastacio, Cirilo Castro, Pablo Celle, 
Lazaro de Leon, Pantaleon Evangelista, Alfredo Ballesteros, Le- 
oncio Serafico, "United 11," and others, assistants. 



7 1 [ K REPUBLIC 



PAGE 73 



The 2V aeionalista Delegate In 
Charge Of Election Affairs In Pasay 
Enrique T. Maiialolo 

Born in Pasay, Rizal, on July 15, 1901; son of Cesario A. 
Manaloto and Andrea Tenorio; attended the Pasay Central School, 
the Philippine Normal School, and the National Law College, 

University of Manila, where 



he obtained his LL.B. degree, 
and passed the Bar examina- 
tions in 1927; appointed Justice 
of the Peace of Mati, Davao, 
1926-27; First Public Defen- 
der, Dept of Labor, 1935-41; 
appointed Mayor of Pasay, 
then City of Greater Manila, 
October 12, 1942, and served 
until March 15, 1945, be- 
ing an officer of R.O.T.C. 
Guerrilla; and appointed Pub- 
lic Defender, 1945-46; and is 
now practicing attorney and 
notary public. Married to for- 
mer Miss Cecilia Sauler, with 
whom he has two daughters, 
Fe and Elvira. Member of 
the Club Civico de Pasay and 
other associations; a Nacio- 
ualista by party affiliation, 




E. T. MANALOTO 



dependent Church ^ hv ™r • . and an A ^ H Payan (Phil. In 
"lor and Head of the iTh , Manaloto is Coun- 

PHilippines Oj^^^^ ****** of the United 
legal adviser of the Nacior°i n0W " as "Buklod"; chief 

the provincial cammittS «f J*fj ***** in Pasay > and me ™ ber » f 
cupation, he had done a lot 4 Sa, ?, party in Bering the oc- 

™V under his ^ 1 1 ^ the 72 '° s 00 People who lived peace- 



wi'sp li>„A ,_• people wh( 

,SC lea *»*I»P and aaministration. 



so » of Luciano S 2 M J 1 * 1 ?' 08 ' Bul ^n. on October 25, 1910; 
-unicipanty; .raduaS f ;rr d) 13 and Elisa Cruz of same 
Bu1a catl at Malolo, i„ ^ P «»*>cial High School of 

"20, and from the Univ Bfl fe * ' : '■ ,^iV^ 

of Sto, To mas 

MD. „, 1988; fel, 0 ' w * | 

1939-41 ; fellow ■ 
n Radiologry at P.G.H., 

1941; appointed phy sic ia„ ■ 

; r -R- Specialist and R a . ■ 
gdOgist at the Pampanga 

.w,naal Hospital before I 

and thon at the Riaal Pro P 

vncia! Hospital after li" L 

beration. He resigned from »- 
g£»»»etit service in 

iJ4(> to engage in private 

S^iSt^r.^^f 1 J"* of the Philip- 

the underground ™ * occupation he took to active part in 

oipa, R i~ yjsrat xn* Mi r • ^ = 

J-asi*, Kizal, (now deceased), with whom he 

PAGE 74 




DR. SANTIAGO 



La ABSOLUCION 

(Andal & Sons) 

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND TRANS- 
PORTATION 

OFFICES: 
212 F. B. Harrison Street 
3855 Taft Avenue, Rizal City 

REALTY AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS 

OFFICES: 
Room 301, Guison Building 
775 Rizal Avenue, Maoiila 




AGAPITO B. ANDAL, founder and general manager 
of the above-mentioned firm, is one of the most successful 
businessmen of i^asay, now Rizal City, who, on August 17 > 
1915, was held and beaten up in the barrio of Sta. Clara, 
Aplaya, in Batangas, Batangas, his hometown, by approx- 
imately twenty men, most of whom were fishermen resid- 
; ng fa t hat place known as "Aplaya'' 
(correct word, "Playa," meaning 
shore or beach), as a result of a dis- 
cussion he had previous to that in- 
cident with a barrio folk. In his 
self-defense, he killed one of his ad- 
versaries on that occasion, and was 
then accused of homicide before the 
Court of First Instance of Batangas, 
where he was convicted and sentenced 
Y 0 a prison term of 14,, years, eight 
months and twenty-one days, and to , 
pay an indemnity to the heir of the C 
deceased in the sum of one thousand I 
pesos, plus the costs. From that de- 
cisiori of the Court of First Instance 
of Batangas, he appealed to the Su- 
preme Court thru his defense coun- 
sl Attorney Claro M. Recto, and was acquit** 
by' the high tribunal. Since that time ; he 
own business under the firm name, "ABSOLUCION , 
meaning acquittal. He likes this name because it re- 
m nd him of his fight for truth and justice which he 
won after many years ctf sacrifice, and he is now making a 
success through honest and efficient service to his coun- 
trvmen, supplying their construction materials, transporta- 
tion, and realty, especially during these days of rehabil- 
itation. 



A. B. ANDAL 



has one daughter, Prisciila Leovina. A Roman Catholic by rel- 
igion. . . 

At present he is the physician and surgeon of his own clinic 
known as the "Santiago Chest and X-Ray Clinic" at Pasig, Rizal ; 
and Chief Medical Officer of the United Philippines Organization 
(Buklod). 

. 0O0 

Deitietrio Andres . • . 

{Continued from page 72) 
Philippines (School of Survey- 
ing) ; and instructor on Mining 
Laws and Surveying in the Ma- 
pua Institute of Technology. 

He is married to the former 
Miss Maria Mesa of Mandu- 
riao, Iloilo, and from this hap- 



py union, ten children were 
born, two of whom are minimr 
engineers, one, a pharmacist, 
and another, a B.S.E. grad- 
uate. 

Manila, August 12, 1947. 

THE REPUBLIC 



DIRECTORY 



of the 



REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 



FOR 1947 



★ ★ ★ 



His Excellency MANUEL A. ROXAS, of Capiz, President of the Philippines 
Hon. ELPIDIO QUIPJNO, of Ilocos Sur, Vice-President of the Philippines 



THE CABINET 



THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES, Head of the Cabinet 
THE VICE-PRESIDENT, Concurrently Secretary of Foreign Affairs 
Hon. EMILIO ABELLO, Chief of the Executive Office 
Hon. JOSE C. ZULUETA, Secretary of the Interior 
Hon. MJ.GUEL CUADERNO, Sr., Secretary of Finance 
Hon. ROMAN OZAETA, Secretary of Justice 

Hon. MARIANO GARCHITORENA, Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources 

Hon. RICARDO NEPOMUCENO, Secretary of Public Works and Communications 

Hon. MANUEL V. GALLEGO, Secretary of Instruction 

Hon. PEDRO MAGSALIN, Secretary of Labor 

Hon. RUPERTO K. KANGLEON, Secretary of National Defense 

Hon. ANTONIO VILLARAMA, Secretary of Health and Public Welfare 

Hon. CORNELIO BALMACEDA, Acting Secre tary of Commerce and Industry 



EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 



N 



OFFICE OF TOE PRESIDENT 



Malacanan Palace, Aviles St., San Miguel, Manila 
Telephone 2-69-71 

HIS EXCELLENCY 



MANUEL A. ROXAS 

President of the Philippines 



THE PRESIDENT'S PRIVATE OFFICES: 
Federico Mangahas, Private Secretary 
Juan C. Orendain, Press Secretary 
Mariano Ezpeleta, Legislative Secretary 



ADVISORY STAFF: 



AIDES-DE-CAMP OF THE PRESIDENT: 
Lt. Col. Jacobo Zobel 
Major H. J. C. Corvera 
Captain J. B. Hidalgo 



Hon. Richard P. Butrick, Foreign Affairs 

Dr. Luther B. Bewley, Education 

Col. Angel M. Tuason, Police Matters 

Louis P. Croft, Land Planning 

Major C L. Glazer, U. S. Army Liaison Officer 



IKOVOST OFFICE: 

Lt. Col. Jose Tando, Provost Officer and Commandant 
Captain Salvador V. Babista, Executive Officer 



TECHNICAL STAFF: 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa, Technical Assistant to the President 
Hans Menzi, Technical Assistant 
Col. Marking Agustin, Special Agent 



TBS kri'ublic 



page- n 



EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

EXECUTIVE BUILDING, AVILES ST., SAN MIGUEL, 

MANILA 

Hon. EMILIO ABELLO 
Chief of Executive Office 
Tel 2-69-71; Local 213 

Hon. NICANOR ROXAS, Assistant Secretary 
Hon. JOSE P. • DE LEON, Assistant Secretary 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION: 

Manuel Agudo, Administrative Assistant 

FINANCE DIVISION: 

Gregorio S. Licaros, Financial Assistant 
Faustino Borja, Property Custodian 

Nicolas M. Lachica, Disbursing and Collecting Officer 
Sotero H. Bay, Accounting Officer 

LAW DIVISION: 

Salvador V. Esguerra, Law Officer 

GENERAL AFFAIRS DIVISION: 

Vicente Lontok, Technical Assistant and Chief of Division 

PROTOCOL DIVISION: 

Manuel G. Zamora, Protocol Officer 

BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS DIVISION: 
Arturo M. Gonzales, Superintendent 

RECORDS DIVISION: 

Emiliano Punzai, Chief of Division 
OFFICE AUDITOR: 

Mariano Reyno 
MALACAN A N CLINIC: 

Dr. Wigberto P. Clavecilla, Medical Officer 
MALACAN AN LIBRARY: 

Mauro Garcia, Librarian 
MALACANAN GARAGE : 

Leon Clemente, Garage Assistant 



Public notations Office 

Executive Building 
Tel. (Malacanan) 246 and 26G 
PRESS DELATIONS OFFICE STAFF* 

Juan C. Oixmdain, Public Relations Secretary 
Jose M Hernandez, Press Relations Assistant 
Pedro Padilla, Assistant 

vZt/T hQri ° M " Veran °' ***^<S on detail 
Vicente Guzman-Rivas, Editor, Official Gazette 

ADMINISTRATIVE SECTION: 

I^edro Z. Aguilar, Public Relations Assisantt 

GENERAL SERVICE SECTION- 

Alfredo I. Pascua, Assistant 
RESEARCH AND TRANSLATION SECTION- 

Leopo^ y. Yabes, Historical Compiler ■ 
-ueiiin Gumban, Translator 
PHOTO SECTION: 

Emilio Maglalang, Chief Photographer 

Modesto Bantoia, Photographer 



Bureau Of Civil Service 

Comer Aviles and San Rafael, San Miguel 

HON JOSE GIL, Commissioner; res., 20 Roxaa Road, San Juan, 
Rizal ' 

AM A DO DEL ROSARIO, Deputy Commisioner; res., 114 Sy~ 
quia, Sta. Ana, Manila 

PAGE 76 ^ 



ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION: 

Mariano Gonzales, Chief of Division; res., 13 San Mi'guej 
Privado, Manila 

Juan Ramos, Asst. Chief of Division; res. 824 Mayhaligue, 
Sta. Cruz, Manila 

EXAMINING DIVISION: 

Ruben Ledesma, Chief Examiner; res. 180-C Trabajo, Sam- 
paloc, Manila 

Alipio Buenaventura, Asst. Chief Examiner; res., 15-W 

Tecson, Tondo, Manila 
INVESTIGATION AND LAW DIVISION: 

Gregorio Rasalan, Chief of Division; res., 1105 Craig, Sam- 

paloc, Manila 

Guillermo de Jesus, Asst. Chief of Division; res., R« Aquino 
St., Mandaluyong, Rizal 
PERSONNEL CLASSIFICATION AND APPOINTMENTS 
DIVISION: 

Ladislao Yap, Chief of Division; res., 2423 Yangco, Gaga- 

galangin, Manila 
Antonio E. Mata, Asst. Chief of Division; res., 2231 Int., 

Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

BOARDS OF EXAMINERS: 

Gonzalo Robles, Secretary; res, 1GG4 M. Natividad, Sta. 
Cruz, Manila 

Eduvigis D. Madrid, Assistant Secretary; res., 10* K-dra 
Kamuning, Quezon City 



Budget Commission 

Malacanan Annex 
Hon PIO PEDROSA, Commissioner; Tel. (Malacanan) 222 
Faustino Sy-Changco, Administrative Officer of the Budget 
Office and Secretary of the Budget Commission 
CASHIER AND PROPERTY OFFICER: 

Ernesto L. Malay 
CHIEF OF RECORDS: 
Nicanor Sevilla 

BUDGET DIVISION: 

Fernando Dizon, Chief of Division 
EXPENSE CONTROL DIVISION: 

Eugenio Tadle, Chief of Division 
SERVICE INSPECTION DIVISION: 

Josefin Velasco, Chief of Division 

Quirino E. Austria, Chief Administration Researcher 

DIVISION OF ACCOUNTS: 

Gregorio de la Torre, Chief of Division 



Institute Of National Language 

Ayala Boulevard, Manila 

JULIAN C. BALMACEDA, Director (Deceased) 
Leonardo A. Dianzon, Secretary and Executive Officer 



Philippine Sugar Administration 

Aviles St., San Miguel, Manila 

VICENTE G. BUNUAN, Technical Assistant and Officer; 

Tel. (Malacanan) 286. 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION: 

Emilio Achacoso, Chief 

DOMESTIC DIVISION: 

Manuel Villano, Chief (Continued on next page) 

THE REPUBLIC 



FIELD SERVICE DIVISION: 

J. A. Whitaker, Chief 
LUZON DIVISION: 

Remigio Abello, Supervisor 
VISA VAN DIVISION: 

Teodoro Borronieo, Supervisor 



Bureau Off TKe Census And 
Statistics 

Watson BU1k*.> Aviles St., San Miguel, Manila 
Atty. LEON Ma. (U>NZALES. Director; Tel, 2 S3-76 
PROPERTY AND DISBURSEMENT SECTION: 

Juan Agcaoili, Chief 
MACHINE TABULATION SECTION : 

Eeoncio Gonzalo, Chief 
DIVISION OF DEMOGRAPHY: v 

Rosendo Regalado, Chief 
DIVISION OF AGRICl LTURAL STATISTICS: 

Ricardo Andaca, Chief 
DIVISION OF LABOR STATISTICS : 

Ferfecto Rivera, Chief 
DIVISION OF BUSINESS STATISTICS^ 

Domingo lgnacio, Chief 
DIVISION OF FOREIGN TRADE STATISTICS: 
Juan Suniugui, Chief 



PUiUppine General Hospital 

laft Ave., Erniita, Manila 
Tel. 6-10~i;> 

Dr. ANTONIO G. SISON, director 
Dr. Augusto P. Villalqn, Superintendent 
Dr. Carmelo Reyes, Chief of Clinics 
DEPARTMENT OF MEDICINE: 

Dr. Antonio G. Sison, Chief; res., Phil. Gen. Hospital 

DEPARTMENT OF SURGERY: 

Dr. Antonio Vazquez, Chief; res., 815 Wright St., Malate, 
Manila 

DEPARTMENT OF GYNECOLOGY: 

Dr. Carmelo Reyes, Chief; res., 1207 Agno St., Malate, Manila 

DEPARTMENT OF OBSTETRICS: 

Dr. Honoria Acosta-Sison, Chief; res., Phil. Gen. Hospital 

DEPARTMENT OF PEDIATRICS : 

Dr. Alberto Tupaz, Chief; res., 101G Arlegui, Quiapo, Manila 
DEPARTMENT OF EYE, EAR, NOSE AND THROAT: 

Dr. Aristeo R. Ubaldo, Chhif; res.. 256 Uli-Uii, San Miguel, 
Manila 

DEPARTMENT OF LABORATORIES : 

Dr. Walfrido de Leon, Chief; res., Pennsylvania St., Malate, 
Manila 

DEPARTMENT OF PHYSICAL THERAPY: 

Dr. Paterno S. Chikiamco, Chief; res., Malabon, Rizal 

DIVISION OF PHARMACY: 

Dr. Felix Hocson, Chief; res., 4S) H. Lozada, San Juan, Rizal 

DENTAL CLINIC: 

Dr. Rufino Mendoza, Chief; res., 192 La Join, Sta, Ana, 
Manila 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION: 

Domingo G. Yabut, Chief; res., Phil. Gen. Hospital 

PERSONNEL SECTION: 
Marcelino Santiago, Chief 

THE REPUBLIC* 



CASH AND DISBURSING SECTION: 

Vicente N. Lim, Chief 
PROPERTY AND SUPPLY SECTION: 

Filomeno Pumaren, Chief 
GENERAL SERVICE SECTION: 

Hugo Yonzon, Chief 
ACHINERY, REPAIRING AND TRANSPORTATION SEC- 
TION: 

Lino Santiago, Acting Chief 

RECORDS AND STATISTICS SECTION: 
Carlos Santos, Chief 

DIVISION OF NURSES: 

Mrs. Enriqueta Macaraig-Adriano, Chief of Division and 
Superintendent of Nurses; res., Phil. Gen. Hospital 

SCHOOL OF NURSING: 

Miss Julita V. Sotejo, Principal; res., Phil. Gen. Hospital 



Xatioual Council Of Education 

Former Foreign Office Building, Malacanan 
Tel. No. 2-69-71, Local 282 - 

Dr. GABRIEL R. MAftALAC, Chairman 
Dr. Encarnacion Alzona, Excueitvc Ollcie 
Dr. Pedro T. Grata, Researcher 

MEMBERS: 

Mr. IJsteban R. Abada, Director of Education 

Miss Concepeion Aguila, Executive Directress, Centro Es- 
colar University 

Dean Francisco Beiiitez, Dean, College of Education, Univ- 
ersity of the Philippines 

Dr. Manuel L. Caneou, Director, Bureau of Private Educa- 
tion 

Dr. Bienvcnido M. Gonzales, President, University of the 
Philippines 

Hon. Prudencio Langcauon, Undersecretary of Instruction 
Dean Gabriel La O, Dean, College of Law, University of 
Sto. Tomas 

Dr. Cecilio Lopez, Professor, University of the Philippines 
Dr. Mariano V. de los Santos, President, University of Manila 
Dr. Enrique C. Sobrepena, President, Union College of 
Manila 



National Urban Planning 
Commission 

Malacanan Annex, Tel. (Malacanan) 260 
Hon. RAMON FERNANDEZ, Chairman 
MEMBERS: 

Hon. Jose Paez, Member Mr. Vicente Fragante 
Hon. Eustaquio Balagtas Hon. Bienvcnido M. Gonzalez 
Mr. Ramon Roces 

CHIEF PLANNER: 
Antonio Kayanan 

ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: 
Marciai Esguerra 

SECRETARY: 

Benedicto Espiritu 

PRESS RELATIONS OFFICER: 
C. V. Pedroche 



Agrarian I 'oiuiuissioii 

Malacanan Annex; Tel. (Mai.) 214 

Hon. FAUSTINO AGUILA R, Chairman 

(Continued on next pane) 

PAGE 77 



MEMBERS: 

Eduardo Cojuangco 
Quirino Abad-Santos 
Buenaventura C. Lopez 
Deogracias E. Lerma 
Fausto F. Gonzales-Sioco 
SECRETARY AXD ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER; 
Francisco B. Juliano 



Norberto Maniquis 
Felipe E. Jose 
Jose B. Santos 
Guillermo E. Espino 



Civil Service Board Of Appeals 

Tel. (Malacanan) 314 

Hon. Roman Ozaeto. Chairman 

Hon. Emilio Abello Member 

Dr. Rufino Luna Member 

Vicente Lontok Secretary 



Board On Pensions To Veterans Of 
Past Philippine Revolutions 

Tel. (Malacanan) 225 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa Chairman 

Hon. Manuel Agregado Member 

Hon. Jose Gil Member 

Col. Honorio Lopez Member 

Col. Raymundo Jeciel Member 

Mario Balmaceda Secretary 



Reparations Advisory Commission 

Malacanan Grounds 
Tel. (Malacanan) 312 

Hon. Pio Pedrosa Chairman 

Eduardo Taylor Member 

Arturo V. Tanco Member 

Procopio Eleazar Member 

Dr. Amando M. DalLsay Executive Secretary 



Shipping Commission 

Tel. 2-83-95 



Hon. Vicente de la Cruz, Chairman 
MEMBERS: 

Alfredo de Leon 
Capt Enrique Razon 



Felipe Cuaderno 
Vicente Manalo 



Government Procurement 
Commission 

JOSE MORENO, Manager 

Filemon Lavina, Assistant Manger 

Silverio P. Aimiranez, Administrative Officer 



Surplus Property Commission 

City Hall, Tel. 045 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS: 

Hon. Placido L. Mapa Chairman 

Hon. Arsenio N. Luz Member 

Hon. Gabriel K. Hernandez Member 

Hon. Jose E. Romero Member 



National Advisory Health Council 

Tel. 2-79-51 
Hon. ANTONIO VILLARAMA. Chairman 
MEMBERS: 

Chairman, Board of Medical Examiners 
1 resident, Philippic Medical Association 
Uean, College of Medicine, U.ST 

Dr* An?" 0 A ^ i01 ' » **™«> 

* niomo <*• «i»on jj r# Antonio Fernando 

Di. *lorentmo Herrera Dl , Quillermo Rustia 

Dr. Pedro Velasco Dr. Agustin Liboro , 

National Ilousing I oimiii^ioii 

Metropolitan Water District Building 
176 Arroceros. Tel. 2-71-82 



Hon. Bienvenido M. Gonzalez, Chairman 
MEMBERS: 

Hon. Faustina Aguilar 

Mr. C. M. Hoskins 



Reparations And llestitution 
Committee 

Malacanan, Tel. Mo. 225 

CHAIRMAN: 

Arturo M. Gonzales (Office of the President) 
MEMBERS: 

A. M. Daiisay (Department of Foreign Affairs) 
Casiano Anunciacion (Department of tfte Interior) 
Julio Calvo (Department of Finance) 
Eusebio Cacnero (Department of Justice) 
canuto G. Manuel (Department of Agriculture and Natural 
Resources ) 

Eladio M. Santos (Department of Public Works and Com- 
munications) 

Eulogio B. Rodriguez (Department of Instruction) 
Cesario do Leon (Department of Labor) 
Generoso S. Maceda (Department of National Defense) 
Bienvenido Caro (Department of Health and Public Wel- 
fare) 



Mr. Tomas Mapua 
Mr. Vicente Fragante 



Ol 1 It i: OF THE VICE IHtJtiSllltiNT 

EXECUTIVE BUILDING 
Malacanan, Tel. 2-69-71, Local 239 

Hon. ELPIDIO QUIRINO 

Vice-President of the Philimrines 

Juan Colias, Secretary to the Vice-President; Tel. 2-69-71, Lo- 
cal 223 

Lazaro A. Marquez, Private Secretary and Technical Assistant 

Victorino Jimenez, Private Secretary 

Mrs. R. Corrales-Torres, Assistant Private Secretary 



PACE 7« 



THE HEPUBLIC 



LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT 



CONGRESS OF THE PHILIPPINES 



SENATE 

City Hall, Manila. Tel. 4-98-06 

Hon. JOSE AVELINO 

President 



Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 



Hon. MELECIO ARRANZ 
President Pro-Tempore 

Senators: 

ALAUYA ALONTO 
MELECIO ARRANZ 
JOSE AVELINO 
NICOLAS BUENDIA 
TOMAS CABILI 
OLEGARIO CLARIN 
TOMAS CONFESOR 
MARIANO JESUS CUENCO 
RAMON DIOKNO 
VICENTE J. FRANCISCO 
CARLOS P. GARCIA 
PEDRO C. HERNAEZ 
DOMINGO IMPERIAL 
ALEJO MABANAG 
ENRIQUE MAGALONA 
SALIPADA PENDTUN 
VICENTE RAMA 
EULOGIO RODRIGUEZ, Sr. 
PROSPERO SANIDAD 
PROCESO SEBASTIAN 
VICENTE SOTTO 
EMILIANO T. TIRONA 
RAMON TORRES 
JOSE O. VERA 



Hon. VICENTE J. FRANCISCO 
Floor Leader 

Officers Of The Senate: 

ANTONIO ZACARIAS 
Secretary of the Senate 

MANUEL ELORIAGA 
Serp cant -at -Arms 
Assistant Secretary and Chief Clerk: 

Cesar de Larrazabal 
Secretary to the Senate President: 

Manuel Alzate 
Chief, Legislative Reference Division: 

Jose D. Ingles 
Chief, Press Relations Office: 

Rodolfo Nazareno 
Chief, Journal Division: 

Simeon del Rosario 
Chief, Accounting Division: 

Rosendo Reynoso 
Chief. Disbursing and Property Division 

Antonio K. Abad 
Chief, Bill Division: 

Feliciano Dominguez 
Chief, Minutes Division: 

Joaquin do San Agustin: 
Chief, Records and Mailing Division: 

Catalino Villas 



HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 

949 Lepanto St., Sampaloc, Manila 
Tel. 4-98-01 



Hon. EUGENIO PEREZ 

Speaker 



Hon. FRANCISCO ORTEGA 

Speaker Pro-Tempore 



Hon. RAUL T. LEUTERIO 
Floor Leader 



Hon. ANASTACIO AGAN, 

Batanes, only District 
Hon. JUAN S. ALANO, 

Zamboanga, only District 
Hon. PEDRO G. ALBANO, 

Ilocos Norte, 2nd District 
Hon. JOVENAL ALMENDRAS, 

Ccbu, 1st District 
Hon. PAULINO ALONZO, 

Cagayan, 2nd District 
Hon. CIPRIANO ALLAS, 

Pangasinan, 5th District 
Hon. OMBRA AMILBANGSA 
Sulu, 1st District 



Representatives 

(Arranged in Alphabetical Order) 

Hon. RAMON A. ARNALDO, 

Capiz, 1st District 
Hon. HERMENEGILDO B. ATIENZA, 

Manila, South Distrcit 
Hon. PEDRO Sa. BACULIO, 

Oriental Mi sain is, only District 
Hon. EDUARDO A. BARRETTO, 

Laguna, 1st District 
Hon. PASCUAL BELTRAN 

Pangasinan, 3rd District 
Hon. JUAN V. BORRA, 

Iloilo, 5th District 
Hon. LEON CABARROGUIS, 
Nueva Vizcaya, only District 



Hon. APOLINARIO CABIGON, 

Davao, only District 
Hon. MARCOS M. CALO. 

Agusan, only District 
Hon. BONIFACIO B. CAMACHO, 

Bataan, only District 
Hon. JOSE CANDO, 

Nueva Ecija, 1st District 
Hon. MANUEL T. CASES 

La Union, 2nd District 
Hon. ATILANO R. CINCO, 

Leyte. 5th District 
Hon. LUIS T. CLARIN 
Bohol, 1st District 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE 19 



Hon. TOMAS S. CLEMENTE, 

Sorsogon, 2nd District 
Hon. FLORO CRISOLOGO, 

Ilocso Sur, 1st District 
Hon. GABRIEL DUNTJAN, 

Mt. Province, 3rd District 
Hon. ESMERALDO ECO, 

Camarines Norte, only Disrtict 
Hon. AGRIPINO P. ESCARREAL, 

Samar, 1st District 
Hon. SOFRONIO ESPAffOLA, 

Palawan, only District 
Hon. EMILIO B. ESPINOSA 

Masbate, only district 
Hon. ESTANISLAO A. FERNANDEZ, 

Laguna, 2nd District 
Hon. MODESTO FORMILLEZA, 

Romblon, only District 
Hon. REMEDIOS 0. FORTICH, 

Bukidnon, only District 
Hon. COSME P. GARCIA, 

Bohol, 3rd District 
Hon. VICENTE F. GUSTILO, 

Occidental Necrros, 1st District 
Hon. CARLOS HILADO, 

Occidental Negros, 2nd District 
Hon. AGUSTIN Y. KINTANAR, 

C«bu, 4th District 
Hon. JOSE B. LAUREL, Jr., 

Bataneas. 3rd District 
Hon. JESUS iv LAVA. 

Bulacan. 1st District 
Hon. FULOGIO V. LAWENKO, 

Alhav. 1st District 
Kon ORr AK LFDESMA, 

%*ta. 2nd District 
Hnn^R AT T L T LETTTERIO, 

Mindoro. only District 
Hon. PACTFICO F LIM, 

Sorsocron. 1st District 
Hm, RLTSEO P. TJMSTACO. 

Occidental No*ros. 3rd District 
Hon. VICENTE LOGARTA, 

Cehu. 2nd District 
Hon. ADRIANO D. LOMTJNTAD 

Samar, 3rd District 
Hon. TIBURCIO LUTERO 

Iloilo, 3rd District 
Hon. RAMON MAGSAYSAY, 

Zambalcs, only Distrct 
Hon. ENRIQUE MEDINA, 

Oriental Ncgros, 2nd District 



Hon. JOSE MENCIO, 

Mt. Province, 2nd District 
Hon. MANALO MINDELANO, 

Lanao, only District 
Hon. JUAN Q. MIRANDA, 

Camarines Sur, 1st District 
Hon. SEBASTIAN C. MOLL, Jr., 

Camarines Sur, 2nd District 
Hon. JUSTINIANO S. MONTANO, 

Cavite, only District 
Hon. TOMAS MORATO 
Quezon, 2nd District 
Hon. PEDRO P. MUtfOZ, 

Batangas, 2nd District 
Hon. RICARDO NAVARRO, 

Surigao, only Disrtict 
Hon. EMIGDIO NIETES, 

Antique, only District 
Hon. MAXIMINO NOEL, 

Cebu, 3rd District 
Hon. MATEO NONATO, 

Iloilo, 1st District 
Hon. FRANCISCO ORTEGA, 

La Union, 1st District 
Hoii. CONSTANCIO PADILLA, 

* Nueva Eci.ia, 2nd District 
Hon. DOMINGO PAGUIRIGAN, 

Tsabela, only District 
Hfon. FRANdlSCO M. PAJAO. 

Leyte. 3rd District 
Hon. OUINTIN PA PEDES, 

Abrn, onlv District 

Hon MARIANO PFttAFTOTUDA, 
Iloilo. 4th District 

Hon. EUGENIC PEREZ. 

Pandas in an, 2nd District 
Hon. JUAN R. PEREZ, 

Lrvte. 4th District 
Ron. TOPIPIO P PEREZ, 

Albay, 2nd District 
Hon. FRANCISCO A. PERFFCTO, 

Catanduan^s, only District 
Hon. GUMPAY PIANG. 

Cotabato. only District 
Hon. CIPRIANO P. PRIMICIAS, 

Pangasinan, 4th District 
Hon. NICOLAS RAFOLS (deceased) 

Cebu, 6th District 
Hon. MARCIAL RAtfOLA, 

Albay, 3rd District 
Hon. JOSE M. REYES, 

Capiz, 3rd District 



Hon. TIMOTEO RICOHERMOSO, 

Marinduquc, only District 
Hon. JOSE V. RODRIGUEZ, 

Cebu, 7th District 
Hon. JUAN DE G. RODRIGUEZ, 

Pangasinan, 1st District 
Hon. JOSE J. ROY, 

Tarlac, 1st District 
Hon. DAMASO T. S A MONTE, 

Ilocos Norte, 1st District 
Hon. ALEJO S. SANTOS, 

Bulacan, 1st District 
Hon. IGNACIO SANTOS DIAZ, 
Rizal, 1st District 
Hon. FELIXBERTO SERRANO, 

Batangas, 1st District 
Hon. ALEJANDRO SIMPAOCO, 

Tarlac, 2nd District 
Hon. CONRADO SIN,GSON, 

Cagayan, 1st District 
Hon. FORTUNATO N. SUAREZ, 

Quezon, 1st District 
Hon. LORENZO SUMULONG, 

Rizal, 2nd District 
Hon. GEORGE K. TAIT, 

Mt, Province, 1st District 
Hon. CARLOS S. TAN, 

Leyte, 1st District 
Hon. LUIS TARUC, 

Pnmpanga, 2nd District 
Hon. LORENZO TEVES, 

Oriental Necrros, 1st District 
Hon. TTTO V. TIZON. 

Samar, 2nd District 
Hon. LEANDRO A. TO JONG, 

Cebu, 5th District 
Hon. JOSE TOPACIO NUENO, 

Manila, North District 
Hon. SIMEON G. TORIBIO, 

Bohol, 2nd District 
Hon. DOMINGO VELOSO, 

Leyte. 2nd District 
Hon. FIDEL VILLANUEVA. 

Ilocos Sur, 2nd District 
Hon. CORNELIO T. VILLAREAL. 
Capiz, 2nd District 
Hon. PORFIRIO G. VILLARIN, 

Occidental Misamis, only District 
Hon. AMADO M. YUZON. 
Pampanga, 1st District 



Officers of the If onac of Representatives 



Chief Clerk and Assistant Secretary: 

Julian La 0 
Chief, Legislative Reference Division: 

Luis Zabatcr 
Chief, Bills and Index Division: 

Jose del Rosario 
Chief, Journal Division: 

Jose de Sequera 
Chief Accountant: 

Ignacio Reyes 



NARCISO PIMENTEL 
Secretary 



Chief, Translating: Division: 
Jose Garcia 
Chief, Records Division: 

Jose V. Marino 
Chief, Committee Stenography Division 

Jose Ramirez Rojo 
Chief, Property Division: 
Jorge Salud 



NARCISO DIOKNO 
Sergeant-at-Arms 

Chief, Disbursement Division: 

Sabas de la Rosa 
Custodian of the Building: 

Jose D. Ilagan 
Chief, Mailing Section: 

Angel Magno 
Chief, Personnel Section: 
Bartolome E. Briones 



THE REPUBLIC 



JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT 



SUPREME COURT 

Malacanan Annex, Avius St., Manila 
Tel. 2-69-71* Local 328 and 329 



Hon. MANUEL V. MOKAN 
Chief Jtisticc 

Hon. RICARDO PARAS, Associate Justice 
Hon. FELICISIMO R. FER1A, Associate Justice 
Hon. GUILLERMO F. PABLO, Associate Justice 
Hon. GREGORIO PERFECTO, Associate Justice 
Hon. EMILIO Y. HILADO, Associate Justicc- 
Hon. CESAR BENGZON, Associate Justice 
Hon. MANUEL BRIONES, Associate Justice 
Hon. JOSE M'. HONTIVEROS, Associate Justice 
Hon. PEDRO TUASON, Associate Justice 
Edilberto Soriano, Clerk of Court 



COURT OF APPEALS 

Manila Port Terminal Bldg., Intramuros 
Manila 

Hon. MARCELIANO R. MONTEMAYOR 
Presiding Justice 

Hon. ALEX REYES, Associate Justiec 

Hon. LUIS P. TORRES. Associate Justice 

Hon. FERNANDO JUGO, Associate Justice 

Hon. ALE JO LABRADOR, Associate Justice 

Hon. ROBERTO CONCEPCION, Associate Justice 

Hon. JOSE B. L. REYES, Associate Justice 

Hon. PASTOR M. ENDENCIA, Associate Justice 

Hon. ALFONSO FELIX, Associate Justice 

Hon. JOSE GUTIERREZ DAVID, Associate Justice 

Hon. MARIANO DE LA ROSA, Associate Justice 

Hon JOSE Ma. PAREDES, Associate Justice 

Hon SALVADOR ABAD SANTOS, Associate Justice 

Hon. ARSENIO P. DIZON, Associate Justice 

(Vacant) 

Juan 0. Reyes, Clerk of Court 



-oOo- 



Hon. FRANCISCO ENAGE 

Member 
(Res., 762 Singalong, Manila) 



COMMISSION ON EJECTIONS 

General Solano St., San Miguel 

Hon. VICENTE DE VEEA 
Chairman 
(Res., tylanga Ave., Sta. Mesa) 

Hon. LEOPOLDO ROVIRA 

Member 

(Res., 47 Broadway, Quezon City) 



GENERAL OFFICE PERSONNEL 

Rodrigo D. Perez, Jr Secretary "Jlf^r.'S *S» 

Dominador D. Dayot Asst. Secretary 2! ' 2 ' * n \ Na . 4 ? IZal 

Francisco M. Ramos Cashier & Prop. Officer Constancy Sampaloc 

Josue Panogot Chief of Records Vr0 *°«* Bldg ' PG ' H ' 

LEGAL STAFF „ _ . 

Emilio AguiTa Chief Attorney K, < 2 N S' S«n Juan 

Belen H. Abreu Attorney ..... 007 * ^hmgton ! Samp. do c 

Vicente D. Muyco Attorney 2 , 27 I.t. No._4 R.zal Ave. Ext. 

Nieves Acosta . Attorney 



27 Cruzada, Quiapo 
502 Isabel, Sampaloc 



IH^±^ M ****** ::: Z «^ <E5« 



Gil Severino Election Supervisor 

Laurente J. Lopez Election Supervisor 

Joaquin de Leon Election Supervisor 

Florentino Penaranda Jr Electic 



924 Honradez, Sampaloc 
28 Broadway, Quezon City 
845 Sta. Mesa, Manila 



K r 4 1 . c Supervisor ' •//. 1050-A M. Hizon, Sta. Cruz 

Tomas A. Catubig Statistician 



ACCOUNTING SECTION 

Leonardo N. Tufbig- Accounting Insp 

Paciencio Balbon Accounting Officer 



1870 M. Hizon, Sta. Cruz 
1227 Sta. Mesa, Manila 



M It Al AUDITING OFWCK 

LOCATION: BILIBID COMPOUND, OROQUIETA, MANILA 
Tel. Nos.: Auditor General — 2-72-2* 
Deputy Auditor General —2-80-27 

DIRECTORY OF RANKING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 

(As of August 8, 1947) 
Name Designation • Address 

MANUEL AGREGADO Auditor General 623 ^ Cn,z ' Ma " na 

PIO JOVEN Deputy Auditor General ,! 3721 Fcl,x Huertas, Manila 

BENIGNO ALDANA Researcher 1711 Trabajo, Sampaloc, Manila 

EMILIO AGREGADO Secretary to the Auditor General 623 Cavite, Sta. Cruz, Manila 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE 81 



ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENT 



Nicolas Z. Yabut Administrative Officer 

Quirino Villavicencio Supervising Auditor 

Juan M. Matutina Chief, Administrative Division 

Nazario Nadurata Chief, Records Division 

Flaviano Bautista Accounting Officer 

Delfin E. Silvcrio Chief, Reports Division 

Aloises F. Dalisay Disbursing, Collecting & Prop. Officer 

LAW DEPARTMENT 



1821 Apitong, Manila " 
88-A Humildad, Rizal City 
515-517 Isabel, Sampaloc Manila 
455 A. Mabini, Caloocan, Rizal 
H. Santos St., Makati, Rizal 
126 P. Villanueva, Rizal City 
140 Sanchez, Barcaestegui, Manila 



Jose Erestain Chief Law Officer 513 P. Paredes, Manila 

Mariano Vasquez Senior Attorney 31 K-3rd, Kamuning, Quezon City 

Agapito Cobacha Attorney (Chief, Central Division) 

Arturo M. Sanchez Attorney (Chief, Provincial Division) 

Maria E. Mendoza 



7G Int. 5, Sta. Ana, Manila 
1319 V. Concepcion, Sta. Cruz, Manila 



Chief of Division 711 P. Leoncio, Sampaloc, Manila 

PUBLIC SERVICE AND FIELD EXAMINATION DEPARTMENT 



Pedro Gimenez Chief Supervising -Auditor 

Pedro V. Aguilar Supervising Auditor 

Cirilo Miran Chief of Division 

Serafin Castillo Chief of Division 



Bacoor, Cavite 

1623 Andalucia, Manila 

72 Main St., Sampaloc, Manila 

3rd St., New Manila 



PROVINCIAL AUDIT DEPARTMENT 



Severe de Ungria Chief Supervising Auditor 449 Dart, Paco, Manila 



Benito Guia Supervising Auditor 

Roman T. del Bando Division Auditor .... 

Bartolome Fernandez Division Auditor 

Pelagio Sison Division Auditor .... 

Roman F. Tuazon Division Auditor .... 

Alfonso de Castro Special Auditor .... 

Florencio Asuncion Special Auditor 



2395 B. Herran, Paco, Manila 

Dipolog, Zamboanga 

931 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 

429 Cavite, Tondo, Manila 

528 Cataluna, Sampaloc, Manifa 

Plardiel, Bulacan 

31 A. Luna, Pasig, Rizal 



City Auditors 

Lorenzo Araneta, Bacolod City 
Rafael Uson, Baguio City 

Macario Juinio, Cavite City and Tagaytay, City; also auditor- 

for Cavite province 
Jesus Iriarte, Cebu City 

^ortunato Alagaban, Davao City and Davao province 

Rafael Parcon, Iloilo City 

Felipe Jimenez, Manila 

Petronilo I. Vallejo, Quezon City 

Jose Ambrosio, San Pablo City 

Saturnino Alvarez, Zamboanga City 

Provincial Auditors 

Aniceto Belisario, Bangued, Abra 

Miguel Burdeos, Butuan, Agusan 

Ceferino Ramos, Legaspi, Albay 

Alipio Alda, San Jose, Antique 

Vicente Argente, Balanga, Bataan 

Leoncio Aldana, Basco, Batanes 

Liberato Evangelista, Batangas, Batangas 

Catalino Balili, Tagbilaran, Bohol 

Silvestre Figalan. Malaybalay, Bukidnon 

Jose Desa, Malolos, Buiacan 

Mauro Rosario, Tuguegarao, Cagayan 

Gorgonio Valledor, Daet, Camarines Norte 

Gerardo Aseneta, Naga, Camarines Sur 
frineo Barbasa, Capiz, Capiz 
Jose de Guzman, Virac, Catanduanes 
Ramon E. Fernandez, Cebu City, Cebu 

Patrocinio Rebueno, Cotabato, Cotabato 
Cirilo Torralba, Laoag, Ilocos Norte 
Agapito Floras, Vigan. Ilocos Sur 
Nicanor Saimiento, Iloilo City, Iloilo 
Santiago Leafio, Ilagan, Isabela 
Pedro Palafox, Sta. Cruz, Laguna 
Ceferino Lorefia, Dansalan City, Lanao 
Nicasio Marin, San Fernando, La Union 



Nicolas Ybanez, Tacloban, Leyfe 
Jose Malantic, Boac, Marinduque 

EL Navarro, Masbate, Masbate 
Marcelino Escobar, Calapan, Mindoro 
Nazario Froilan, Oroquieta, . Misamis Occidental 
Lorenzo Almazan, Cagayan, Misamis Oriental 
Zosimo Rosal, Bontoc, Mountain Province 
Atty Ladislao Palma, Bacolod City, Negros Occidental 
Angel Paguia, Dumaguete, Negros Oriental 
Amadeo R. Quintos, Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija 
*Jorentir.o Herrera, Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya 
Amando Butalid, Puerto Princesa, Palawan 
\enancio Madrid, San Fernando, Pampanga 
betulio F. Ramos, Lingayen, Pangasinan 
Dalmacio Ramos, Lucena, Quezon 

Mauricio Salvador, Pasig, Rizal ' > 

Simeon Damian, Catbalogan, Samar 

Doroteo Belmonte, Sorsogon, Sorsogon 

Mamerto Cabarroguis, Jolo, Sulu 

Enrique Potente, Surigao, Surigao 

1 ablo de Ungria, Tarlac, Tarlac 

Angel Gonzales, Iba, Zambales 

Fernando Ordonez, Dipolog, Zamboanga 

National Audit Department **A" 

Modesto A. Ferrera.. Chief Supv. Auditor; res., 1650 Oroquieta 
Manila 

Casimiro L. Dacanay, Supervising Auditor; res., 1020 Don Qui- 

jote, Sampaloc, Manila 
Nicanor Reyes, Supervising Auditor; res., 4 Blumentritt, San 

Juan, Rizal 

BUREAU AUDITORS 
« Y. Navarro, Gen. Aud. Office, etc.; res., 1461 Estrada St., 
Singalong Subdivision, Manila 
Martin Arabejo, Bu. of Printing, etc.; res., 2731 Rizal Ave. Ext.. 
Manila 

Enrique Zapanta, People's Court, etc.; res., Taytay, Rizal 



THE REPUBLIC 



Antonio G. Olympia, Dept. of Justice, etc.; res., 1G32 P. Leoncio, 

Sampaloc, Manila 
Toribio M. San Juan, House of Rep., etc.; res., 9SS P. Leoncio, 

Sampaloc, Manila 
Jose R. Amoyo, Bu. of Int. Revenue, etc.; res., 2292 Juan Luna, 

Manila 

Puterno M. Mendoza, Budget Commission, etc.; res., 46 K-3rd 

Kamuning, Quezon City 
Ar.acleto Caces, Supv. Auditor, Phil. Army, etc.; res., 138 Me. 

trica, Sampaloc, Manila * 
Isaac Gellidon, Dept. of Agr. & Com., etc.; res., 165 Sanchez, 

San Miguel, Manila 
Jose Velasco, Bu. of Coast & Geod. Survey, etc.; res., 636 Gov. 

Forbes, Sampaloc, Manila 
Angelo Angeles, Dept. of Health & Pub. Welfare, etc.; res., 

535 Leroy, Paco, Manila 

Rational Audit Department W B*? 

Andres Francia, Chief Supervising Auditor; res., 121 Karapatan 
St., Sta. Cruz, Manila 

Ciriaco David, Supervising Auditor; res., 756 Espana, Sampa- 
loc, Manila 

BUREAU AUDITORS 

Mariano Reyno, Office, of the President, etc.; res., 132 K 2nd 

St., Kamuning, Quezon City 
Antonio V. Abinoja, Offi ce G l Sec. of Foreign Affairs, etc.; 

res., 10U Alabastro, San Andres Subdivision, Manila 
l^ureano A. Ferrer, Bu. of Pub. Works, etc.; res., 39 K-4 Dili- 

man, Quezon City 

Hrigido 1 Navarro, Bu. of Posts, etc.; res., 1542 Felix Huertas, 
Manila 1 

<.nlo Dimaguila Phil. Senate, etc.; res., 849 Espana, Manila 
Tna Man"; ^ ° f FlM ^ ^ 2626 **• 

Bernard/no Abesaiais, Bu. of Education, etc.; res., 1447 Da- 
gupan St., Tondo, Manila 

Singalong Subdivision, Manila 
1-man T. Frias^ P hil . Vet , fio ?26 
Sampaloc. Manila 

U ° P Rizal City n8:kik0 ' Btt " ° f Cust ™ S ' *•* 49 P -tacio, 

Angel Abdon, Bu. of Prisons; res., 75 A. Luna, San Juan, Rizal 

Property Inspection Department 

Pederico S Romero, Act*. Chief Supv. Auditor; res., 646 Vito 

^ruz, Singaiong, Manila 
Pedro P. Torneros, Chief of Division; res. New Bilibid, Rese* 

vation, Muntinlupa, Ri 2a i 

GOVERNMENT OWNED ANDJOR CONTROLLED 
CORPORATIONS 

Reconstruction Finance Corporation 
Gregorio S. Licaros, Auditor; res., Meycawayan, Bulacan 

Agricultural Machinery and l.'qnipment Corporation 
Rufo Fabregas, Auditor; res., 1808 Rizal Avenue, Manila 

Sa rplus Property Co m m iss io u 
Alberto Sta. Cruz, Superviisng Auditor; res., Tacloban, Leyte 
Juan P. Granados, Auditor; res., 32 C. Francisco, Sta. Ana, 
Manila 

Ediltrudo V. Lagman, Senior Examiner; res., 850 Basilio, Sam- 
paloc, Manila 



Government Service Insurance System 
Santiago Ramos, Auditor; res., 1538 Felix Huertas, Manila 
Eliseo S. Yanga, Asistant Auditor; res., Malabon, Rizal 

Manila Railroad Company and Manila Hotel 
Marciano del Rosario, Auditor; res., 2119 Misericordia, Manila 
Daniel O. Victoria, Asst. Auditor (Manila Hotel) ; res., 1001 
Tayabas, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

Metropolitan Transportation Service 
Rosendo Reinoso, Auditor; res., 282-C Decena, Rizal City 

Metropolitan Water District 
Daniel Laurel, Comptroller; res., 8 Paterno, San Juan, Rizal 
Alfredo Liboro, Ast. Comptroller; res., 1227 Lealtad, Sampaloc, 
Manila 

1 National Abaca and Other Fibers Corporation 
Marcelino G. Torres, Auditor; res., 156 T. Bugallon St., Manila 
Leocadio Gozum, Ast. Auditor; res., Davao City 

National Coconut and Tobacco Corporations 
Juan Concon, Comptroller; res, 918 Don Quijote, Sampaloc, 
Manila 

Adolfo Bengson, Asst. Auditor (NACOCO) ; res, 39 Mariveles, 
Quezon City 

National Development Company and its Subsidiaries 
Kumeriano Rojas, Comptroller; res, (i8 Aranga, Sampaloe Manila 
Inocencio Dumpit, Asst. Comptroller; res, 68 Riverside San 
Juan, Rizal h 9 

Natioiwl Power Corporation 
Maximo E. Fernandez, Auditor; res, 2919 Misericordia, Manila 
Rafael Dizon, Asst. Auditor; res, 82 Pinagtipunan, Mandalu- 
yong, Rizal 

National Land Settlement Administration 
Eugenio de Vera, Comptroller; res, 1105 Zurbaran, Sta. Cruz, 
Manila 

National Trading Corporation and National Cooperatives 
Administration 

Hilarion Beronilla, Auditor; res, 210 Elias St, Sampaloc, Manila 
Apolonio Ramos, Chief Examiner; res, 110 Miguelin, Sampaloc, 
Manila 

Irineo Blanco, Chief Examiner (Nat. Coop. Administration), 
res, 302 Visita, Int. 11, Paco, Manila 

Philippine Charity Sweepstakes 
Roman J. Andal, Auditor; res, 41 Revillen, Sta Ana Manila 
Jaime O. Valera, Asst. Auditor; res., 2098 Anacleto, San Lazaro, 
Manila 

Philippine Nationul Dank 
Conrado Sevilla, Auditor; res., 1681 Arellano Ave, Sinealons 

Subdivision, Manila *> v * 

Marcial S. de Ocampo, Asst. Audtor; res, 2537 M. Natividad, 

Manila 

Philippic Relief and Rehabilitation Administration 
Montano O. Iligan, Auditor; res, 1717-B Int. Felix Huertas, 
Manila 

Rufo Caspellan, Ast. Auditor; res, 202 Reten, Sampaloc, Manila 

Rural Progress Administration and National Housing Commission 
Aurelio Pena, Comptroller; res, Cavite City *"»*"»»*on 

University of the Philippines 
Luis O. Yap, Comptroller; res, 2447 O'Donnell, Manila 
Anastacio Bolisay, Ast. Comptroller; res, 1333 Rizal Avenue 
Manila 

De la Rama Steamship Company 
Delfin Diangco, Auditor; res, 813 Bulacan St, Manila 



TflK OKVUULdQ 



DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL RESOURCES 

Brimo Building, Plaza Binondo, Manila 

Hon. MARIANO GARCHITORENA 

Secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 
(Tel. 2-17-84) 

Hon. JOSE S. CAMUS 
Under secretary of Agriculture and Commerce 
(Tel. 2-17-83) 



OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Francisco D. Marquez, Administrative Officer 
Vicente G. Ramos, Chief, Administrative Division 
Donato S. Conti, Chief Attorney 
Coraelio V. Crucillo, Chief, Technical Division 
Deogracias G. Dayao, Assistant Chief, Administrative Division 
Norberto A. Ferrera, Assistant Chief Attorney 
Jose M. Trinidad, Assistant Chief, Technical Division 
Jose Pacheco, Senior Clerk 

DIVISION OF PUBLICATIONS 
Tel. 2-71-85 

Eduardo R. Alvarado, Chief 
Arturo Bengzon, Assistant Chief 

JUureau of Lands 

Oriente Building, Binondo, Manila 
JOSE P. DANS, Director of Lands; Tel. 2-81-04; res, 

163 Blumentritt, San Juan, Rizal 
Zoilo Castrillo, Administrative Officer; Tel. 2-81-01; res., 

181 JN. Domingo, San Juan, Rizai 

Angel P. Miguel, Chief, Administrative Division; res., Plaza, 
Caloocan, Rizal 

Vicente Torciesiilas, Chief, Public Lands Division; res., 2423 

Yangco St., Juan Luna Subdivision, Manila 
Teodosio Trinidad, Chief, Law Division; Tel. 2-81-03; res., 146 

M. Roxas, Sta. Ana, Manila 
Elias Ibahez, Chief, Division oi Surveys; res., 78 Blumentritt, 

Mandaluyong, Rizal 
Julian Sogueco, Actg. Chief, Records and Documents Division; 

res., 133(5 Makata, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Andres Urrutia, Asst. Chief, Public Lands Division; res., 1476 

M. Hizon, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Valentin Laureano, Asst. Unet, Adm. Division; res., 2207 Rizal 

Ave., sta. Cruz, Manila 
Sisenando Palarca, Asst. Chief, Law Division; res., 1519 Ipil, 

Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Jose Suguitan, Asst. Chief, Div. of Surveys; ivs., 275 Syquia, 

Sta. Ana, Manila 
Eugenio Nabong, Accounting Officer; res., 419 Isabel, Sampa- 

loc, Manila 

Alejo Manaiang, Special Investigator; 10*24 Int. Rizal Ave., 
Sta. Cruz, Manila 

DIVISION INSPECTORS 
Nicolas E. de Guzman; res., 1665 Uroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Pedro R. Almonte; res., 99 Eloriaga, Sta. Ana Junction, Manila 
Mamcrto Jacinto; res., zuua Juan r,una, Manila 
Conrado Santillan; res., 1208 Cavite St., Manila 

LAND ATTORNEYS 
Clodoaldo Garcia; res., 1645 Dominga, Malate, Manila 
Agaton Fiel; res., 214 Syquia, Sta. Ana, Manila 

SUPERVISING SURVEYORS 
Severino Nice; res., 516 Tayabas, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Ceferino Alinsod; res., 28 San Anton, Sampaloc, Manila 

DISTRICT LAND OFFICERS 
Domingo Alcaraz, Dist. 1, Tuguegarao, Cagayati 
Alfredo Zerrudo, Dist. 2, Laoag, Ilocos Norte 
Gaudoncio Fantony, Dist. 3, City of Baguio 
Agustin Navarro, Dist. 4, Iiagan, Isabela 



Amando D. Singson, Associate Editor 
Kelicidad H. Rectra, Assistant Editor 
Angel S. Huertas, Assistant Editor 
Juanita C. Ramos, Junior Editor 
Anastacio A. Canciller, Junior Editor 
Gelestina F. Pacheco, Librarian 

NATURAL HISTORY MUSEUM DIVISION 
Tel. 2-71-85 

Eduardo Quisumbing, Chief of Division 

Canuto G. Manuel, Scientist (Zoologist) 

Antonio D. Alvir, Scientist (Geology-Palaeontology) 

Ricardo E. Galang, Scientist (Anthropologist) 

Mamerto D. Sulit, Scientist (Economic Botany). • 

BUREAU OF LANDS— DIST. LAND OFFICERS 

Demetrio Pita, Dist. 5, Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija 
Gregorio Alcaraz, Dist. 6, Dagupan, Pangasinan 
Fortunato N. Vicente, Dist. 7, Manila 
Pedro Yu Asensi, Dist. 8, Lucena, Quezon 
Primo A. Arizabal, Dist. 9, Calapan, Mindoro 
Escolastico Escarraga, Dist. 10, Naga, Camarines Sut 
Agapito Tagarao, Dist. 11, Sorsogon, Sorsogou 
Demetrio Resurreccion, Surveyor-in-Charge, Dist. 12, Tacloban, 
Leyte 

Sixto Dancel, Dist. 13, City of Cebu 
Moises B. Aleta, Dist. 14, City of Bacolod 
Gregorio Abellera, Dist. 15, Butuan, Agusan 
Victoriano ltchon, Dist. 16, Cagayan, Misamis Oriental 
Vicente Corcuera, Dist. 17, Iligan, Lanao 
Jaime O'Hara, Dist. 18, City of Zamboanga 
Liberato Vilamarzo, Dist. 19, Cotabato, Cotabato 
Marcelo Belandres, Dist. 20, City of Davao . 

PROVINCIAL LAND OFFICERS 
Pedro B. Flores, San Fernando, La Union 

Conrado Q. de la Cruz, Inspector-in-Charge, Bayombong, Nueva 

Vizca\a 
Pedro Rico, Tarlac, Tarlac 
Feliciano Sanchez, Balanga, Bataan 
David G. Calina, Pto. Princesa, Palawan 
Rodolfo Azanza, Daet, Camarines Ncrte 
Jose B. Sarc, Legaspi, Albay 
Simeon Mendoza, Catbalogan, Samar 
Juan Antonio, Tagbilaran, Bohol 
Jose Ma. Paredes, City of Iloilo 

Pedro Panajon, Surveyor-in-Charge, Dumaguete, Or. Negroe 

Carlos Gavino, Capiz, Capiz 

Dalmacio <le la Cruz, Masbate, Masbate 

Jose Espino, Surigao, Surigao 

Carlos Fernandez, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 

Gorgonio D. Itaas, Misamis, Occ. Misamis 

FRIAR LANDS AGENTS 
Macario Supan, Bigaa, Bulacan 
Celso Rico, Sta. Rosa, Laguna 
Victorino Bacungan, Rosario, Cavite 
Jose V. Sison, City of Cebu 
Timoteo Aricayos, Aurora, Isabela 

CHIEFS OF SURVEY PARTIES 
Pedro Salvado, Aparri, Cagayan 
ftomulo Anastacio, Gonzaga, Cagayan 



VAGE W 



Bonifacio Cruz, Piat, Cagayan 

Antonio Pizarro, Lay a, Kalinga, Mt. Prov. 

Escolastico Oca, Baler, Quezon 

Andres Tolentino, Caramoan, Camarinea Sur 

Frederick Legare, Ragay, Camarines Sur 

Filemon Ordoiia, Naga, Camarines Sur 

Pedro Gobuyan, Bais, Or. Negros 

Sulpicio Panelo, Butuan, Agusan 

Escolastico Eviota, Butuan, Agusan 

Ciriaco Mabunga, Talakag, Bukidnon 

Mariano Leones, Maramag, Bukidnon 

Pedro Liwanag, Maranding, Tubod, Lanao 

VYenceslao Manuel, Dapitan, Zamboanga 

Rufo Ibarra, Bacolod, Uigan, Lanao 

Policarpio Fabian, Aurora, Zamboanga 

Geronimo Ferraris, Kabasalan, Zamboanga 

Nicanor Villanueva, Pagadian, Zamboanga 

Buenaventura Antonio, Kid ap a wan; Cotabato 

Paulino Apostol, Buluan, Cotabato 

Jose Romero, Midsayap, Cotabato 

Silvestre Ela, Carmen, Cotabato 

Macario Sevalla, Buayan, Cotabato 

Vicente Ramos, Cateel, Davao 

Ignacio Lazaro, Manay, Davao 

Angel Sogueco, Baganga, Davao 

Primitivo Pai>a, Mati, Davao 

IBureau of Forestry 

> 244 Juan Luna, Manila — Tel. 2-81*81 

FLORENCIO TAME SIS, Director of Forestry 
(Res., 604 Quiricada, Sta. Cruz, Manila) 

Porfirio San Buenaventura, .Chief, Administrative Division 
(Res., (>04 Quiricada. Sta. Cruz, Manila) 

Juan Acogido, Asst. Chief, Adnw. Div.; res., 34 Baco, Sta. 

Mesa Heights, Quezon City 
Eugenio de la Cruz, Actg. Chief, Div. of Forest Investigation; 

res., College, Laguna 
Calixto Mabesa, Wood Technologist ; res., College, Laguna 
Felix Franco, Forester-Silviculturist ; ,vs., 10I9-B Tennessee, 

Malate, Manila 

Jose F. Nano, Actg. Chief, Div. of Forest Management; res., 
1288-1290 Washington Ave., Manila 

Placido Dacanay, Chief, Div. of Reclamation and Reforestation;' 
res., 716 Gov. Forbes, Manila 

Evaristo Tabat, Ast. Chief, Div. of Reclamation and Reforesta- 
tion; res., 20 Gen. San Luis, San Juan, Rizal 

Carlos Sulit, Chief, Div. of Forest Concessions (On special de- 
tail) ; res., corner of Havana and Mendoza, Sta. Ana, Manila 

Felipe R. Amos, Actg. Chief, Div. of Forest Concessions; res., 
1334 Pennsylvania Ave., Manila 

Agapito L. Cenabre, Asst. Chief, Div. of Forest Concessions 
(Detailed as Div. Forest Inspector) ; res., City of Davao 

Doroteo Soriano, Div. Forest Inspector, Manila; res., 1214 Mi- 
guelin, Sampaloc, Manila 

Sixto Laraya, Div. Forest Inspector, Baguio; res., City of Baguio 



Isabelo Achacoso, Div. Forest Inspector; res., Zamboanga City 

Vicente Castillo, Forester (On detail with the National Develop- 
ment Co.) ; res., 136 Blumentritt, San Juan, Rizal. 

(NOTE. — OUier names and designations ot Officials of this Bureau 
will be published later.) 

Bureau of Mines 

Herran Street, Manila 
Tel. No. 5-14-36 
DEMETRIO ANDRES, Director; res., Pasig, Rizal 
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY DIVISION 
Ramon Abarqucz, Chief of Division; res., 1416 Herran, Paco 
Juan S. Teves, Geologist; res., 488 Astunas, Manila 
Jose Quema, geologist,; res., 1050 K. Hidalgo, Manila 
Jose B. Barcelon, Geologist; res., 1312 Oroquieta, Manila 
xMateo H. Tupas, Geologist; res., (On scholarship leave in the 
United States) 

Elpidio C. Vera, Geologist; res., 1050 Maria Cristina, Sampaloc 
MINERAL LANDS ADMINISTRATION AND 
SURVEY DIVISION 
Benjamin Gozon, Chief of Division; res., Malabon Rizal 
Unisimo R. Solisa, Chief of Section; res., 40 Riverside, San 

Juan, Rizal ^ . 

Roque E. Hebron, Chief of Section; res., o8 Dominga, Pasay 
Pascual Bautista, Attorney; res., Navotas Rizal 
Mauricio Garanchon, Attorney; res. 83 K-2nd, Xamunmg, Que- 

2011 5 lty a*. ^ r o^ 820 G. Tuazon, Sampaloc 
Arturo Santos, Attorney, ies., s~u u. * > 
, . w\o*v\n\ Officer. Mineral Distnct JNo. I, ctiy 

Julian Lagman, District umcei, ^ 

un^^^S^* **** * 

Camarinea Nirt*} res., Daet, Camarines ^ 
Victorir.o Gonzales, District Officer, M.neral D.stnct No. 4, 

City of Cebu; res., City of Cebu 

MINING TECHNOLOGY ^VISION 
Nestorio N. Lim, Chief of Division; res., 446 Fuentes, S.ngal « 

Subdivision, Manila x V auia Santa Ana, 

Leopoldo Abad, Mining Engineer; res., -oj oyM . 

Manila r> 7 Fernandez, 

Nemesio C. Gamatert,, Mining Eng.neer; res., 67 

Singalong Subdivision Svson, Paco. 

Maximo P. Garcia, Mining Engineer; res., 1684 fcys 

Manila 

ADMINISTRATIVE VISION 
Eduardo San Pascual, Chief of Division; res.. 145 N. Dommgo, 

San Juan, Rizal Navotas, Rizal 

^Isabelo Gabriel, Chief o Sect o i « ; * fa ^ ^ 
Olegario G. Ignacio, Clnef of becuon, 

Ton.a^B.'naTa:: 1 Acetg. Officer; res., Sevila Tennis Court, San 

FernandtviUaflo!" Collecting A Disbursing Officer; res., No- 

veleta, Cavite , 
Lorenzo Pereira, Property Custodian; res., 155 Loreto, Sampa- 

loc, Manila 



MPAU1MENT OF INSTttfJCWO^ 

PHILIPPINE NORMAL SCHOOL BUILDING 
Taft Avenue and Ayala Boulevard, Manila 
Tel. 8-64-22 

Hon. MANUEL V. GALLEGO 
Secretary of Instruction 

Hon. PRUDENCIO LANGCAUON 

Undersecretary of Inskructwn 
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Mr. D. Williams 
Administrative Officer 



THJE REPUBLIC 



Bureau of Education 

PHILIPPINE NORMAL SCHOOL BUILDING 
Taft Avenue and Ayala Boulevard, Manila 

THE DIRECTORATE 
ESTEBAN R. ABA DA, Director of Education 
Cecilio Putong, Assistant Director of Education 
Benito Pangilinan, Administrative Officer 

THE GENERAL OFFICE 
Martin Aguilar, Jr., Chief, Instruction Division _ 
Dalmacio Martin, Chief, Curriculum Division 
Tito Clemente, Chief, Measurement and Research Division 
Juan B. Gonzaga, Chief, Personnel Division ( 
Albert? Dalusung, Chief, Property and School Plant Division 
«Jose Enriquez, Chief, Publications and Publicity Division 
Benito Santaromana, Chief, Records Division 
Gilbert S. Perez, Chief, Vocational Division 
Jose A. de Kastro, Chief, School Finance (On leave) 
Marceliano P. Samson, Chief, School Finance (In charge) 
v Marcelino Bautista, Superintendent, Elementary Education and 

Teacher Training 
Jesus Martinez, Superintendent, Normal Schools 
Serafin Aquino, Chief, Physical Education 
Isabelo Tupas, Superintendent on Special Detail, Curriculum 

Division 

Ricardo Castro, Acting Superintendent on Sgecfeft Detail, Curri- 
culum Division 
Elvessa A. Stewart, Superintendent of Home Economics 
Ines P. Gatmaitan, Administrative Officer, Medicarand Dental 
Service 

Nicolas de Guzman, Chief Medical Officer 
Felix Angeles, Chief Dental Officer 

DIVISION SUPERINTENDENTS 0? SCHOOLS 
Santiago Dumlao, Bangued, Abra 
Mariano Manaligod, (Actg.), Butuan, Agusan 
Manuel Escarrilla, (Actg.), Legaspi, Albay 
u T? Raynald0 > (Actg.), San Jose, Antique 
"abelo Manalo, (Actg.), Balanga, Bataan 
victor de Padua, (Actg.), Basco, Batanes 
egorio Lardizabal, Batangas, Batangas 

Josr J 10 "*' (Actfir ->» Ta »bilaran, Bohol 

J U Fehciano, (Actg.), Malaybalay, Bukidnon 
Antonio A . Maceda, Malolos, Bulacan 

fltT' * Gaffud » Tu guegarao, Cagayan 
^atununo Abes, (Actg.), Daet, Camarines Norte 

GW n Sant ° S ' Na * a > Camarines Sur 
Ghcerio C. Tayco, Capiz, Capis 

llummado G. de Castro, (Actg.), Virac, Catanduanes 
Roman Lorenzo, Cavity, Cavite 
Pedro G. Guiang, Cebu, Cebu 

Albeit Haynes, Davao, Davao 

Jose T Cortez, (Actg.), Laoag, Ilocos Norte 

Florentine Kapili, (Actg.), Vigan, Ilocos Sur 

Jose V. Aguilar, Iloilo, Iloilo 

Augusto Plores, Ilagan, Isabela 

Jose C. Aguila, Sta. Cruz, Laguna 

Tomas de Castro, (Actg.), Dansalan, Lanao 

Gregorio Dimaano, (Actg.), San Fernando, *La Union 

Benito Saavedra, (In charge), (Academical Supervisor), Taclo- 

ban, Leyte 
Vitaliano Bernardino, Boac, Marinduque 
Julian Meliton, (Actg.), Masbate, Masbate 
Elias M. Caray, (Actg.), Calapan, Mindoro 
Santiago Dizon, (Actg.), Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental 
Victor M. de Leon, (Actg.), Cagayan, Misamis Oriental 
Tiburcio Edafio, (In charge), Baguio, Mountain Province 
Fernando S. Fuentes^ ( Actg.) , Uacolod, Negros Occidental 
Leon Gatmaytan (Actg.), Dumaguete, Negros Oriental 
Estanislao K. Lopez, Cabanatuan, Nueva Ecija 



Arcadio Alarcon, (Actg.), Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya 

Domingo Soriano, (Actg.), Puerto Princesa, Palawan 

Macario Naval, San Fernando, Pampanga 

Federico Piedad, Lingayen, Pangasinan 

Abdon Javier, Lucena, Quezon (Tayabas) 

Vicente Garcia, Pasig, Rizal 

Fructuoso liar, (Actg.), Romblon, Romblon 

Jose R. Suarez, Catbalogan, Samar 

Aurelio P. Arguelles, (Actg.), Sorsogon, Sorsogon 

Juan S. Paguio, (Actg.), Jolo, Sulu 

Lorenzo C. Alcantara, (Actg.), Surigao, Surigao 

Venancio Nera, Tarlac, Tarlac 

Emiliano C. Ramirez, (Actg.), Iba, Zambales 

Sancho Paulino, (Actg.), Zamboanga, Zamboanga 

Venancio Trinidad, Manila City 

Demetrio Andres, (Assistant), Manila City 

SUPERINTENDENTS OF NATIONAL SCHOOLS 
Macario Naval, (Actg.), Philippine Normal School, Manila 
Pantaieon Regala, (Actg.), Philippine School of Arst and Trades, 
Manila 

Gregorio Sevilla, (Actg.), Cebu School of Arts and Trades, Cebu 
City 

Jose S. Roldan, (Actg.), Iloilo School of Arts and Trades, Iloilo 
City 

Miguel Guerrero, (On leave) 

Fred Warner, (Actg.), Baybay National Agricultural School, 
Baybay, Leyte 

Zosimo Montemayor, (Actg.), Bukidnon National Agricultural 

School, Musuan, Bukidnon 
Jose C. Saddul, Principal In-charge, Central Luzon Agricultural 

School, Nueva Ecija 

Office of Private Education 

PHILIPPINE NORMAL SCHOOL BUILDING 
Taft Avenue and Ayala Boulevard, "Manila 
Tel. 8-64-24 

Dr. MANUEL L. CARKEON, Director of Private Education 
ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION 

Daniel M. Salcedo, Superintendent 
Clemencia Aseneta, Superintendent 
Teofilo C. Gallardo, Supervisor 
Josefina Carmona, Supervisor 
Mauricio V. Batoon, Accounting Officer 
Geronimo Aguilar, Accountant 

DIVISION OF SUPERVISION 
Isaac Decena, Superintendent 
Bartolome R. Cruz, Superintendent 



Jose Z. Linan 
Diego C. Quiachon 
Tomas Baltazar 
Mauricio V. Batoon 
Ramon J. Bueno 
Rosario de la Fuente 
Isabel Herfeia 



SUPERVISORS: 

Enrique Santos 
Petronila I. Ignacio 
DemetrTa Pujante 
Mariano 0. Garcia 
Pilar Gramonte 
Virgilio D. Royo 



Office of Adult Education 

NORMAL HALL BUILDING 
Cur. Taft Ave. and Ayala Blvd., Manila 

SKIUJNDO M. INFANTADO, Director 

Crispin V. Venal, Chief, Administrative Division 
Angeles S. Santos, Chief, Div. of Research and Publications 
Amado L. Ago rr ilia, Chief, Div. of Promotion and Supervision 
Remigio B. Ronquillo, Asst. Chief, Div. of Promotion and 
Supervision 



pauk tie 



THJS REPUBLIC 



PROVINCIAL ORGANIZERS AND SUPERVISORS 

Estanislao Corpus, Supervisor-at-Large, Isabela 
I'ominsro Anioay, Abra and Mountain Province 
Sabas Cacanando, La Union 
Valentin Caragan, Panjrasinan 
Bartolome Evangolista, Pangasinan 
Pcrmin Venturina, Bulacan and Nueva Ecija 
Manuel L. Agorrilla, Cavite and Batangas 
Josefa G. Gloria, Laguna and Quezon (Tayabas) 
Damaso David, Camarines Sur and Camarines Norte 
Lorenzo P. Oliver, Albay and Sorsogon 
Quintin Ortega, Romblon, Capiz, and Antique 
Teresa Moncada Soriano, Negros Occidental and Iloilo 
Macaandug Balangue, Lanao 

Antonio D. Quifianola, Zamboanga, Sulu and Davao 

National Library 

Bilibid Compound, 852 Oroquieta, Manila 
Tel. 4170.46 

EULOGIO B. RODRIGUEZ, Director; res., 150 Sierra Madre 

St., Sta. Mesa Heights, Quezon City 
Luis Montilla, Assistant Director; res., 8 Florentine-, Quezon City 
Severino I. Velasco, Administrative Officer; res., 2438 Ipil, 

Tondo, Manila 

Tiburcio Tumanong, Chief, Filipiniana Division; res., 1093 
O'Donnell, Manila 



Jose Lopez del Castillo, Chief, Research & Bibliography Division; 

res., 51 J. Perez, San Juan, Rizal 
Fascual Buenaventura, Chief, Library Extension & Registration 

of Priests and Ministers Division; res., 2476 Andrade St., 

Manila 

Orencio Aligada, Chief, Archives Division; res., 204 Coral, San 

Andres Subdivision, Manila 
Jesusa G. Fargas, Chief, Circulation Division; res., 1730 Kalim- 

bas, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Paula A. Hizon, Chief, Catalog & Copyright Division; res., 516 

Rubi. San Andres Subdiv., Manila 
Alfredo F. Reyes, Chief of Section; res., 67 Calavite, La Loma, 

Quezon City 

Felix Santos. Chief of Section; res., 201 Pilapil, Tondo. Manila 
Leor.cio F. Cruz, Chief of Section; res., 1954 O'Donnell, Sta. 
Cruz, Manila 

Carlos Gonzalez, Chief of Section; res., 201 Simon, Tondo, Manila 
Rafael de Lara, Chief of Section; res., 166 Doroteo Jose, Sta. 
Cruz, Manila 

Buenaventura Mirafuente, Chief of Section; res., 184 Dandan 
St, Tondo. Manila , 

Office of the National Physical 
Director 

Rizal Memorial Stadium 
Vito Cruz, Malate, Manila 
Dr. REGINO R. YLANAN, Director 



DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 

FINANCE BUILDING, TAFT AVENUE 
Tel. 5-15-45 

Hon. MIGUEL CUADERNO, Sr. 
Secretary of Finance 

Hon. CRISPIN LLAMADO 

Undersecretary of Finance 



Office of the Secretary 

Benjamin Zialcita, Private Secretary to the Secretary 
Julio Calvo, Chief, Administrative Division; Tel. 2-76-14 
Andres V. Castillo, Chief, Administrative Division; Tel. 2-76-14 
Ciriaco N. Cinco, Division of Prow and Mun. Finance 
Angel Llanes, Sup-erising Treasurer 
Leon Miraflores, Supervising Treasurer 
Sabino de Leon, Chief, Secret Service Unit 
Montano A. Tejam, Special Agent 
Amado R. Brinas, Special Agent 

Division of Purchase and Supply 

BILIBID COMPOUND, OROQUIETA, MANILA 
Tel. 4-70-12 

Guillermo Arcebol, Purchasing Agent ; res., 10 F. Roxas St., 

San Juan, Rizal 
Roman Amor, Administrative Officer; res., 24 Tahgib St., 

Quezon City 

Eugenio Manuel, Chief, Records Section; res., 101 Lemery St., 
San Andres Subdivision, Manila 

Pablo M. Dimapilis, Chief, Re-Packing Section, Secretary, 
Standardization Committee; res., 1097 Enrique St., Sinpra- 
long Subdivision, Manila 

Melecio Orpiano, Chief, Circular Proposal Section; res, 10f>8 F. 
Tobera, Bambang Subdivision, Tondo, Manila 

Crispulo Tolentino, Chief, Div. of Supplies; res., 152 N. Do- 
mingo, San Juan, Rizal 

Jose E. Racela, Asst. Chief Buyer; res., 506 Callejon "J", T. 
Earnshaw, Tondo, Manila 



BUYERS 

Felipe Lazareto; res., 2130 Int., Misericordia, ^^^S 

Feliciano Lapus; res., 1269 Taal, Singalon* SuMrv., Manila 

Nemesio Cueto; res., 524 Gelinos, Sampaloc ManUa 

Lorenzo E. Silverio; res., 812 Mayhahgue Sta^ Ciuz, 

Primitive A. Concepcion; res., 2356 Juan Luna, Int. 10, Mamla 

Felimon Gemil; res., Binan, Laguna 

Aguedo L. Hilario; res., 211 Mabim, Caloocan, Rizal 

Melchor Tuason; res., N. Domingo, San Juan, * izal 

Tv/r ,„ *ii A M Arenas, Sampaloc, Manila 

Marciano Moso: res., 31-A M. Aienab, i 

Magdaleno G. Minoso: 305 Sulucan, Sampaloc Manila 
~ • ^ i rnr 1 Tnt T ahores Ext., Pandacan, Manila 
Gervasio Oculam; 506-1 Int., l^aooies ^ Xl » Av>Artiits cs/Miv 
Felipe Ilagan; res., 18 Del Monte Ave., San Andres Subdiv., 

Manila 

Bureau of KanUiMjS 

Former Senate Building 
Ix^garda, St., Sampaloc, Manila 
FELIX DE LA COSTA, Bank and Insurance Commissioner; 

res., 4 Tuberias, San Juan, Rizal 
Honorato R. de Leon, Asst. Bank Commissioner and First. Deputy 
Insurance Commissioner; res.. 266 San Anton, Sampaloc, 

Manila c «. 
Jose Ignacio, Chief, Div. of Examination; res., 156 Syquia, M-a. 

Ana, Manila 

Nicolas L. Lucido, Chief Clerk; res., Imus, Cavite 

Juan Canizares, Chief, Inspection Division and Second Deputy 

Insurance Commissioner; res., South Ave., Makati, Rizal 
Cefcrino Villar, Asst. Chief, Inspection Division; res., 67 Agus- 
tin de la Rosa St., Sta. Ana, Manila 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGK 87 



Bureau of Customs 

Customs House, Port Area 
Manila 

ALFREDO DE LEON 
Insular Collector of Customs 
(Res., 912 Belen, Paco, Manila) 

ISAAC SAYOC 
Administrative Division and Concurrently Special Deputy 
Collector of Customs 
(Res., 1263 Pennsylvania, Manila) 
MANILA OFFICK 
Haximiano Aguilar, Acting Chief, Marine Inspection and Nav- 

igation Division; res., Lukban St., Rizal City 
Timoteo Y. Aseron, Chief, Division of Protests and Appeals; 

res., 1240 Misericordia, Sta, Cruz, Manila 
Vicente Asuncion, Acting Chief Appraiser; res., 608 Paz, Paco 
Luis Buenaventura, Chief, Liquidation Division; res., Malabon, 
Rizal 

Bernardo Bumatay, Accounting Officer; res., 2286-8 Azcarraga, 

Sampaloc, Manila 
Edilterto Y David, Arrastre Superintendent; res., 87 K 1st 

btreet, Kamuning, Quezon City 
James H. Keefe, Chief, Secret Service Division; res., No. 4 

Baldwin— (Antipolo) 
Pedro C. Medalla, Chief, Harbor Police Division; res., 835 Kun- 

drnian, Sampaloc, Manila 

SimplWo Mb,. Chief, Marine DM.ic; „ s „ 242 01tonn.1l 



(Ext.), Manila 

Captain Juan M. Panopio, Officer in Charge, Revenue Cutter 
Service; res., No. 243 Zurbaran, Sta. Cruz. Manila 

Emilio Velez, Surveyor of the Port; res., 19 Vesta, Santa Ana, 
Manila 

Jose Gatchalian, Assistant Chief, Administrative Division; res., 

5th Street, Espana Extension, No. 55, Manila 
Hilario Girori, Assistant Chief, Cash Division; res., 1951 Inf. 6 

Juan Luna, Tondo, Manila 
Victoriano Lozano, Acting Ast. Chief, Appraisers Division; res., 

2531 Pedro Guevara, Manila 
Primitivo Mercado, Chief, Inspectors Section; res., 3218 Rizal 

Avenue Extension, Manila 
Jose Ojeda, Lighthouse Inspector; res., 37 Aurora Ave., San 

Juan, Rizal 

Nazario Soto, Asst. Chief, Secret Service Division; res., 1761 

Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Dr. Domingo B. Ticzon, Medical Inspector; res., 186 Castafios, 

Sampaloc, Manila 

SUB-PORTS 

Gallofin, Collector of Customs, Cebu 
Eliezer A. Manikan, Collector of Customs, Iloilo 
Eleuterio Capapas, Collector of Customs, Tacloban 
Miguel Enriqucz, Collector of Customs, Aparri 
Fulgencio Jainga, Collector of Customs, Zamboanga 
Venancio Gatchalian, Collector of Customs, Jose Panganiban 
•Rufino Macalinao, Collector of Customs, Jolo 
Emigdio G. Dakanay, Deputy Collector of Customs, Cebu, and 

presently Acting Collector of Customs of Davao 
Alejandro Galano, Acting Collector of Customs, Tabaco 
Elorencio M. Espino, Deputy Collector of Customs, Iloilo 



«KPAHTMEIVT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND iOMMIJNWATIONS 

Post Office Building, Plaza Lawton, Manila 

Hop, RICARDO fIEP0M0CBNO, Secretary of Public Works, 

and Communications; Office Tel. 2-86-17; res., 136 Mendoza 

St., Quiapo, Manila 
Hon. SERGIO BAY AN, Undersecretary of Public Works and 

Coinntunitatians; Office' Tel. 2-85-70; res., 26 Kanlaon St., 

Quezon City 



Offioo of ti lo Secretary 

Rafa 9 1 », M ^ C0nt^e^as, Tech ™al Assistant to tbe Secretary; Tel. 
2-84-64; res., 2036 Bizal Ave., Manila 

i« « * 7™' Admin5 strative Officer; Tel. 2-85-69; res. 

Pi A I I GUGVara St " Sta - Cruz ' Manila 
h-iadio M Santos, Engineering Consultant; res., 1030 Rizal Ave, 
Manila „ * * 

Podro Olympia, Engineering Consultant; Tel. 2-84-64; res., 752 

Espana, Sampaloc, Manila 
Jose Paras Assistant Administrative Officer; Tel. 2-85-69; res, 

8 San Luis St, San Juan, Bizal 
Arturo A. Soriano, Attorney, Chief, Law Section; Tel. 2-35-69: 

res., 8 Ligaya, Sta. Ana. Manila 
(Miss) Norma Runag, Private Secretary to the Secretary: Tel. 

2-86-17; res., 1815 Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Toopisto Jamolin, Special Agent; Tel. 2-85-69; res, 616 Tra- 

•bajo, Sampaloc, ManiU 
Donato B. Villarama, Cashier and Property Officer; Tel 

2-85-69; res., 12 Norte St, Manila 
Felipe Salonga, Private Secretary to the Undersecretary ; Tel 

2^85-69: res., 1205 North Bay Blvd., Manila 
Prudeneio Sablaya, Chief, Records Section; Tel. 2-85-69; res., 

12-H Bayani, Galas, Quezon City 
Eduardo M. Peralta, Chief Clerk, War Dajnage Public Claims 

Division; res., 430 Verdad St, Manila 



Bureau of Public Works 

344 CALLE R. PAPA, SAMPALOC, MANILA 
Telephone 2-86-20 
ISAJAS FERNANDO, Director; r Avenida 10, Balintawak, Ca- 
loocan, Rizal x , 

Severing Fernandez, Chief Constructing Engineer ; r o22-D A vi- 
lest Manila 

Antonifl Toledo Consulting Architect; r 1135 Oroquieta, Manila 
Eliodoro Segui, Actg. Chief designing Engineer; r 07 Arturo 

Dancel St, Rizal City 
Hilario S. Clemente, Chief Hydraulic Engineer; r 1340 Maria 

Cristina, Manila 

Quirico Camus, Chief, Administrative Division; r 29 Coroncl 

San Miguel, San Juan, Rizal 
Alfonso Perefc; Accounting Officer; r 53 Leogardo St, Rizal City 

(Pasay) ; 
Vicente Oroaa, Highway Engineer; r 430 Aviles; Manila 
Arturo Nitorrcda. Division Engineer; r 893- A O'Donnell St, Sta. 

Cruz, Manila 

Dalmacio Urtula, Division Engineer; r 729-K F. F. Harrison 

St., Rizal City (Pasay) 
R. M. Contreras, Division Engineer; r 2036 Rizal Ave, SSanta 

Cruz, Manila 

Jose Lozada, Division Engineer; 70 Lamayan, Sta. Ana. Manila 
Ciriaco Coronel, Supv. Mech. & Elec. Engineer; r 52 Syquia, Sta. 
Ana, Manila . 

Antonio Villnueva, Sup. Project Engineer; r 1289 G. del Pilar, 



THE REPUBLIC 



Singalonpr, Manila 
Teodato Macabulos, Sup. Designing Engineer; r 182 Blumentritt, 
Manila 

Cosme Ventura, Electrical Engineer; r 1H18 Int. D.. Domiinga 

St., Malate, Manila 
Alejandro Villanueva, Designing Engineer; r 1926 Esguerra St., 

Manila 

SOvestre Tan Chauco, District Engineer. Manila; r 52 Syquia, 
Sta. Ana, Manila 

(NOTE. - The vnntes of District Engineers wnd other officers and 
employees of the Bureau of Public Works will be published later) 

Riireau of Posts 

POST OFFICE BUILDING, PLAZA LAW TON 
Tel. %-7S-56 

JUAN RUIZ, Director; r 13 Shaw Boulevard, Mandaluyong, 
Rizal 

Felipe Cuaderno, Asst. Director; r 833 Tayuman, Sta. Cruz, 
Manila 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION 
Eufino Tolentino, Superintendent; r 8603 Taft Ave., Rizal City 
Pastor Samonte, Ast. Superintendent; r 1124 CVDonncl, Sta. 
Cruz, Manila 

Buenaventura Pasetes, Chief, Provincial Personnel Section; r 

22G9 Azcarraga, Manila 
Pablo Velasco, Chief, Appointment Section r 72 Plaza Guipit, 

Sampaloc, Manila 
Aurora S. Negado (Mrs.), Chief. Leave and Insurance Section; 

r 591 Morct, Sampaloc, Manila 
Prnacsico Villa, Chief General Service Section r 1021 Carola, 

Sampaloc. Manila 
Arsenio Celestino, Caretaker of Building; r 1928 Ipfl, Sta. Cruz, 

Manila 

ACCOUNTING DIVISION 
Zacarias Miravite, Accounting Officer; r 247 Elias, Sampaloc, 
Manila 

ELECTRICAL COMMUNICATIONS DIVISION 
Arcadio Angustia, Superintendent 
Ouillermo Rodil. Assistant Superintendent 
Sejrundo Quebral. Chief Operator, Manila Operating Section 
Rafael Salazar. Chief, Message Delivery Section 
Oavino Antivola, Chief, Message Receiving Section 
Seguhdo Teano, Chief. Manila Central Radio Section 

INSPECTION DIVISION 
Bonifacio Ortega, Superintendent 

Andres A. Revilla, Acting Assistant Superintendent 

Sorvando Aguilar, Acting Chief, Investigation Section 

Monico Bumanglag, Acting Chief, Mail Permits and Complaint 

and Claim Sections; r 1039 Anacleto. Manila" 
Manuel J. Romero, Acting: Chief, Postal Section; r 310 P. Leon- 

cio, Samp., Manila 
Catalino Garcia, Acting Chief, Dead Letter Office; r 63 Park 

• Ave., Rizal City 
Candido A. Talosig, Acting Chief, General Service Section 

MAIL TRANSPORTATION AND DELIVERY DIVISION 
Jovencio Villarin, Acting Superintendent 
Juan Rarela. Traffic Inspector 
Julian Dimalanta, Assistant Superintendent 
^ferino Castro, Chief, Provincial Mail Delivery Section 
gWPino Reyes, Chief, Railway Mail Service Section 
SUvestre Santos, Acting Mail Supervisor 

MANILA POST OFFICE 
•Jesus Alvarez, Superintendent 
Enrico Palomar, Assistant Superintend, nt 
Apolonio T. Dizon, Chief, General Service Section 
Jesus Garcia, Chief, City Delivery Section 
Pedro O. Principe, Chief, Mailing Seeth 
< Kmente de Leon, Chief. Registry Secti 
Anastacio Morales, Mail Supervisor 
Jose F. Alcuaz, Mail Supervisor 

THE REPUBLIC 



Pablo N. de la Cruz, Mail Supervisor 
Eulalio Prudencio, Mail Supervisor 
Eulalio Prudencio, Mail Supervisor 
Eugenio Mallarc, Mail Supervisor 
Donato Rigonan, Mail Supervisor 
Anastacio Abalos, Mail Supervisor 

MONEY ORDER DIVISION 
Pedro Diinaguila, Superintendent; r 1191 Lepanto, Manila 
Benito Mendoza, Assistant Superintendent; r 2521 Angat, Ton- 
do, Manila 

Tomas Eusebio, Cashier; r 160 Cinco de Junio, Rizal City 
Lorenzo C. Torres, Paymaster; r 1850 Diamante, San Andres 

Subdivision, Manila 
Fidel Bundoc, Chie fof Gen. Service Section; r 1117 Castillejos, 

Sampaloc, Manila 
Jose Timbol. Chife of Stamp Section; r 2237 Makata, Sta. Cruz, 

Manila 

Basilia J. Sanchez, Chief of Section 
Manuel Collas, Jr.. Chief of Section 
Dionisio Valdres, Chief of Section 

POSTAL SAVINGS BANK 
Pedro N. Moncayo, Actg. Superintendent; r 45 Paco Roman, Sta. 

Ana, Manila ^ . . . _ „t\ 

Aureliano Buenaventura, Acting Assistant Superintendent r 70 

Pasip Car Line, Sta. Ana, Manila 
P. P. Seraana, Accountant. Postal Savings Ma 
Antonio Du. Acting Supervisor; r 547 Scvilla ^""tJln r 
Francisco V. Lonez. Acting Chief, General Serv.ce Section, r 

314 Perla, Tondo Withdrawal Section A; 

Anf?el Lanuz. Actinp Chief, Deposit & TUthaiavva 

r 2632 del Rosario. Gajralangin. Manila 
Rafaela del Rosario. Acting Chief. Deposit and WtfraW* 

tion B: r 748 Paz. Paco, Manila Spct;o n C; 

Joaquin Gavcia, Actiner Chief, Deposit & Widia^a. 

r 509 Alvarez. Sta. Cruz. Manila Rafael, 
Alfonso Orensc. Chief, Records Division: r 

Manila _ . Tfirnl 

Emilio Bernahc. Acting Chief Teller: T Taguig, KM* 

PROPERTY DIVISION Quiap0> 
Constancio Navaro, Superintendent, r 

Manila . ^ San Anton, Sam- 

Ciriaco D. Reyes, Asst. Superintendent; 

paloc. Manila „ . inn . r 812 Laonjr Laan. 

Carmelo H. Lafue, Chief. Requhnfaon Sccuo . 

Caloocan, Rizal , ghippinjr Section; r 

Juan B. de Guzman. Chief. Pacing «' ld b 

Navotas, Rizal A„„ m „itinff Section; r 1236 Le- 

Felix V. Iban. Chief Property Accounting 

veriza. Malate, Manila vm-ms Section; r 697 Ro- 

Maximo G. Pedro, Chief- Accountable FotnH 

seas. Sta. Ana, Manila i' 
Antonio la. Araos Chief of Section 

Jose C. Calma. Chief of Section Supplies Sec 

Rafael S Valencia. Chief. Tele«rap* 

tion: r 7 C. Arellano. Mnlnhon. W«d 
Avelino J. Pancraniban. Chief of Sect.on 

RECORDS DIVISION 

Elpidin Clemente. Acting S" reri, f ^"f,,. Superintendent 
TTcrmenrtrildo Tibavan. Assistant Seetfan 
Manuel Comagon, Chief J^*"*^ a , ul «Hng Section 
Pastor David. Assistant Chief. > I f su,n - Mailin( , Section 

P-udencio ^v^J^S^iivfng and Mailing Sec- 
Maxirnino Penaranda, Asst. inui, 

Gene™! Cahrcva. Chief. Minicncccaphin* **** N 

TELEGRAPH, RADIO AND OABW< 

AND MAINTENANCE DIVI^OW 



ion 
tion 




PAGE 89 



Vicente Buhain, Act*. Asst. Chief, U. S. Mail Section 

UK MAIL DIVISION 
Topisto C. Batun*bacal, Superintendent; r 39 Reb Hi n Sia. 

Ana, Manila . , 

Belarmino P. Navarro, Asst. Supermte.idenf 
fed* 0. Principe, Air Mail Supervisor 

™ i ! IOn ^ i t? cvin Chief of Local Air Mail Service Section 
Mehton del Rosano, uniei 



Arscnio F. Alvendia. "Radio Engineer; r 207 Requesens, Manila 
Bartolome Tuason, Radio Engineer 

-Ernesto N. Singson, Chief Mechanical Engineer; r 1718 M. Hi- 
zno, Manila 

DIVISION OF INTERNATIONAL POSTAL SERVICE 
Florentine B. Bautista. Acting Superintendent; r 2848 T. p:am- 

shaw, Gagalangin, Manila 
Pablo Bunag, Acting Chief, Foreign Mail Section; r 906 Ravra, 

Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Benito Dungo, Chief, U. S. Mail Section; r 288 Dizon, Sta. Cmz, 

Manila 

Aurelio Mogol, Acting Supervisor 
Rufino Bartolome, Actg. Chief, Foreign Mail Section 

* 

IIEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 1MJB1 AC WKI FAKK 

ADMINISTRATION BLDG., SAN LAZARO HOSPITAL 
Rizal Avenue, Manila 

Hon. ANTONIO VILLARAMA 
Secret or u 
Telephone 2-79-52 

Hon. REGINO G. PADUA 
"* Undersecretary 
Telephone 2-79-51 

Off tee of tlie Seeretary 

Dr. T. Elicaiio, Administrative Officer (Now, Director of Hospi- 
tals) 

Dr. Paulino M. Taningco, Chief Pharmacy Inspector 
Board of Medical Examiners: 

Dr. Cesareo Sta. Ana. Chairman 
Dr. Francisco R. Pascual, Member 
Dr. Fernando D. Manalo, Member 
Board of Pharmaceutical Examiners: 

Dr Paulino M. Taningco. Chairman 
Antonio E. Soriano, Member 
Rafael Hizon, Member 



Board of Dental Examiners: 

Dr. Miguel D. Arevalo, Chairman 

Dr. Pedro R. Diaz, Member 
Dr. Leonila M. Tanada, Member 
Board of Optical Examiner*: 

Aurelio P. Reyes, Chairman 

Cipriano Lara, Member 

Nemesio G. Garcia, Member 
Board of Examiner* for Nurses: 

Miss Maria Tinawin, Chairman 

Miss Agapita Murillo, Member 

Mrs. Magdalena C. Valenzuela, Member 



Hurean of Health 

SAN LAZARO HOSPITAL, RIZAL AVENLE 
FFITPP a t> Tel. 2-94-39 

Dili,/ ' KVVS ' director of Health; r 19 Sierra Madrc, say, Rizal City 

uniman, Quezon City 

fi™!^ E ^ an ^ 8 ' CWrfi Administrative Division; r 846 Da- 

Sato ° Tnn R r m °^ A f St * Chk ' f ' Administrative Division: r 226 
^oiis, Tondo, Manila 



Dr 



Dr 



352 



mp6 ^t, &2f* Personnel ^ tion: * 423 * campa - 

T ° m C S ruz;Mriia ASSt - ^ * ™ O^.ta, Sta. 

Max int° i£SZ&&* Rccords s,ction: * 321 

Jose Villacorta, Chief, Property Section r 2051 Huatfe Manila 
M, 83 Marccla Cabatin, Asst. Chief, Section of S^iT^ 
United Church. Lopanto, Manila 1 

Atty Adolfo Ramos (by designation), Accounting Officer: r (see 
above) 

Dr. Alfonso Raquel, Chief, of Section, Division of Sanitation and 
Preventable Diseases; v 1604 Bautista, Sin^lon* Subdiv., 
Manila 

Dr. Manual Ma. Aycardo. Assistant Chief of Section. Div. of 

San. & Preventable Diseases; r 746 Don Pedro, Singalong, 

Subdiv., Manila 
Ambrosio Diaz, Chief of Section, Div. ol 

r 32 Valenzuela, Sta. Mesa, Manila 
Dr. Gregorio D. Dizon, Chief, Section of Factory Sanitation; r 

1841 Azcarraga, Manila 
Dr. Paulino K. Navarro, Chief, Food Inspection Service; r. Pa- 



Sanitary Engineering; 



Dr. Braulio dc Castro. Chief, Section of Immunization, r 

Mayhaligue, Sta. Cruz, Manila p-demio- 
Dr. Amadco H. Cruz, Chief, Section of Biostatistics & Lp.aem 

oloerv: r Navotas, Rizal 
Dr Jose P. Bantu*, Chief, Div. of Health Education & Infoima 

Hon- r 337 P. Paredes, Sampaloc, Manila 
ht V& SvSa, Sayo, Chief of Sectino, Div. of Research L 

' Investigation; r 392 F. B^ Harrison, Rizal City j 
Dr. Julian Pilares, District Health Inspector; r 615 Consuei , 
Sin^alon^ Subdiv., Manila Fc «X 
Dr. Ismacl Villarica, District Health Inspector; r L>39 re 

Ilmrtas, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Dr Jose A. Vidal, District Health Officer, Section of I«vesti|B 
tion of Anomalies & Complaints; r 1903 V. Esquerra, ba 

Andres, Manila „ e t,va- 
Dr. Eufemio Jara, District Health Inspector Seciton of 

tion of Prevalence of Diseases; r 107 Isa^elo de los Reyes St., 
Sampaloc, Manila r 
Dr. Anatolio Dasmarinas, District Health Inspector, Section * 
Instruction to Field Regional ; r 1211 Casafias St, Sampa 
loc, Manila , . r 

Dr. Sixlo A. Francis Phief of Section, Tuberculosis Control, 

Batangas, Batangas 
Dr. Antonio Ejercito, Chief, Section of Malaria Control; r 

Juan, Rizal 0 
Dr. Sulpicio Chiyuto, Chief of Section, Div. of Hospitals; r ^ u 

Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Dr. Jose M. Raymundo, Chief of Culion Leper Colony; r 
Rizal Ave., Manila (On leave) 



1919 



THE HEPUBllC 



Casimiro Lara, Acting: Chief, ulion Leper" Colony; r * Pasaje 
Buencamino, Zacarraga, Manila 

Catalino Gavino, Chief, San Lazaro Hospital; r 722 rayuman, 
Manila 

'-•l^er.io Viana, Superintendent, San Lazaro Hospital; v 632 

Tayuman, Manila 
*ir. .lose M. A\onzo, Medical Officer, Cenrial Luzon Lentosarium 
a t Ta\a, R'rzal; r 933 Bambang, Sta. Cruz. Manila 
^>t. Jose Tolcntino, Eversley Child's Treatment Station; r 

Mandaue, Cebu 

l) k - t Jesus Puno, Medical Officer (Spec), Western Visuyas Treat- 
vmnt Stations; r Uoilo City 
1 , Leandro Uyguanco, Medical Officer (Spec). Cubtt Skin 

Dispensary; r Guagua, Pampanga 
!>.. Domingo Disini, Medical Officer (Spec), Bicol Treatment 

Station & Albay Skin Clinic; r Legaspi, Albay 
Di'. Demetrio Lacuna, Chief, National Psychopathic Hospital; v 
N.P.H.. Psy. Rd., Mandaluyong, Rizal 

X . P . H . , 



San 



Dr. Jose Fernandez, Natl. Psychopathic Hospital; 

Psy. Rd., Mandaluyong, Rizal 
Dr. Jose V. Agustines, Chief, Southern Islands Hospital- r SIH, 
Cebu City 

Dr. Facundo Esquivcl, Chief, Baguio General Hospital; r li.G.H , 
Baguio City 

Dr. Fe S. Horilleno, Chief, Maternity and Children'- Hospital; 

r M. & C. H., Oroquieta St., Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Dr. Manuel V. Fernando, Medical Officer, Sibul Springs Sana- 

torium. Bulacan; r San Miguel, Bulacan 
Di-. Enrique F. Ochoa, Chief of Division, Puerieultu iv Centers; 

r 1808- A Rizal Ave, Manila 
Dr. Jose V. de los Santos, Chief, Mandaluyong Emergency Hos- 
pital; r M.E.H., Mandaluyong, Rizal 
Dr. Fe del Mundo, Chief, North General Hospital, K-iKMla St., 

Manila; (On leave) 
Dr. Jose R. Cruz, Acting Chief, North General Hospital ; r 1116 
Kundiman, Sampaloc, Manila 

CITY HEALTH OFFICERS 
Dr. Andres Angara, Baguio City 
Dr. Angel Sanchez, Cavito City 
Dr. Sabas E. Yap, Cebu City 
Dr. Alfonso Soberano. Davao City 
Dr. Manuel P. artagena, Iloilo City 
Dr. Manuel Icasiano, Manila 
Dr. Pctronio C. Monsod, Quezon City 
Dr. Luis B. Gomez, Tagaytay City 
Dr. Cirilo Cauyan, San Pablo City 
Dr. Ricardo Climaco, Zamboanga City 

(NOTE. — The names of District Halt it Officers and other offfr 
rials and employees of the Bureau of Health will ob pUblishe'd 
later) 



■Bureau o£ Publiv Welfare 

389 SAN RAFAEL ST., MANILA 
Mrs. ASUNCION A. PEREZ. Director; r 9 Wilson 
Juan, Rizal 

Dr. Victoriano A. Benitez, Chief, Div. of Administration ; r 37i 

F. Fernando, (Pasay) Rizal City 
Sixto Maceda, Cash & Property Officer; r 2115 UusL*e, Sta. 

Cruz, Manila 

Valentin Tuaiio. Accounting Officer; r 1024 *Ii\a£To^ San La- 
zaro, Manila 

Laus Vcrgara, Chief, Records Section; r 207 Argncii- s, Sta. 
Cruz, Manila 

Osmundo S. Fernandez, In- Charge of Solicitation Peumi; r 12f- 

Biumentritt, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Jose D. Abarquez, Asst. Cashier & Prop. Officer; r Welfareville 

Mandaluyong, Rizal 

Mrs. Gertrudis R. Cabangon, Chief, Div. of Child Welfare; r 14 

M. Arenas, Sampaloc. Manila 
Miss Natividad Casals, Chief, Probation Section; r 35'.> Antipolo 

Tondo, Manila 

Elpidio Laiz, Asst. Chief, Probation Section; r Naeot^s, Ri z «] 
Miss Sofia C. Arganosa, In-Charge, Parole and Placrmtait Sec 
tion; r 815 Canonigo, Paco, Manila 

\Y E I - F A BEVILUS INSTITUTIO NS 
Mandaluyong, Rizal 

Dr. Jose J. Vergara. Chief, Welfarcville Institutions; r VVelfare- 

ville, Mandaluyong, Rizal 
Sesenio Rivera, Chief Clerk r Welfarcville 
Dr. Alfonso Pedroche, Medical Supervisor; r WeJfarevSlIe 
Mrs. Marcela A. Perez, Supervising Dentisi ; r 132 Biumentritt 

San Juan 

Maximo C. Songco, Supervising Principal; r Welfarevu'e 
Ignacio F. Lim, Recreation & Physical Di lector; r IVY ha re vi He 

INDIGENT CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL 
Dr. Peregrino H. Paulino. Chief of Section; r 530 i\ Paredes 
Dr. Maria Lazo, Junior Medical Officer; r G71 Gastambide, Sam- 
paloc, Manila 
Dr. Emilio Reyes, Junior Medical Officer 
Sampaloc, Manila 

DIVISION OF PUBLIC ASSISTANCE 



* $7S Gastambide, 



Uvk Virginia A. Pena, Caso Work Superintendent In-charge- T 

149 Gastambide, Sampaloc, Manila 
D- Maeario V. Cruz, Acting Case Work Superintendent I n , 

cha ~e; r 1056 Juan Luna, Manila 
Miss Remedies S. Lopez, In-charge of Transportation; r 2286 
Juan Luna, Manila 



DEPARTMENT Ol « OM MRU* E AND INDITSTIIV 

Cor. Genera] Solano and Tanduay, Mam 

Hon. COUNRUO BAI^MACEDA^ 
Undersecretary of Commerce ">'" 
Acting Secretary 

Taft Ave., Manila 

PROVINCIAL BRANCH OFFICES 



Bureau of Gommeree 

Syquia Building, Plaza Binondo, Manila 
Tel. 2-73-32 

S. R. MENDINUETO, Dhvctor; red., 8 Galamba, Quezon City 
Simeon M. Recio, Chief, Administrative Division; res., 15i)r> gs- 

guerra, Singalong Subdivision, Manila 
Miguel G. Luna, Chief, Commercial Intelligence Division; res.. 

Noveleta, Cavite _ 
Pedro R. Romero. Chief, Industrial Promotion Division; res 

S. Fernando, Rizal City » 
Bonifacio A. Quiaoit, Chief, Markets Pivision; res., 117 Len 

Singalong Subdivision, Manila 
Oledonio Agrava, Chief, Trade Regulation Division; res. 
S. Juan, Rizal City (Now, Director of Patents) 

THE BFPUBLIC 



123 Gen. 
356 



res 



[. Fajatin, District Commercial Agent, 



Felipe M 

S Sotelo, Provincial Commercial Agent, H oilo ( 



vca, c 



Hies 



38 



51 



lose Soteio, * . • - i «■••"> *iu no {j\t XT 

AliDio de la Qtm ProvH 1C .al Commercial Agent, r * . 
tlo khiO, r-vincial Commerc.al Agent, k^^TS^ U yte 
Rosendo Ganaden, Provincial Commercial Agent, S i y 

La Union ' ' p «»-najuj 0 

David Alva.e,. Proyn.cml Comnn-cal A gent, 
Leoncio Martin, Prov.nc.al Commercial Ag<;n r Sp '' Al bay 

' Ball «ste r0St 



Cagayan 

Pio S. Mata, Provincial Commercial Agent, Davao City 
Maximino Sarceda, Provincial Commercial Agent, Batangas, 
Batangas 

Benjamin Balayan, Provincial Commercial Agent, Ilagan, Isabela 
Benedicto C. Evangelista, Provincial Commercial Agent, Iba, 
Zambales 

Jose N. Barcenas, Provincial Commercial Agent, Zamboanga City 
Martino Ch. Guitarte, Provincial Commercial Agent, Cagayan, 

Misamis Oriental 
Leon C. Echaves, Provincial Commercial Agent, Dumaguete, 

Negros Oriental 

Antonio P. Trinidad, Acting Provincial Commercial Agent, Cebu 
City 

Filemon T. Maisog, Provincial Commercial Agent, Oroquieta, 
Misamis Occ. 

Leon C. Viajar, Provincial Commercial Agent, Surigao, Surigao 
Mensuarih D. Antey, Provincial Commercial Agent, Jolo, Sulu 
Miguel Samonte, Acting Provincial Commercial Agent, Laoag, 
Ilocos Norte 

MANILA TRADING CENTER 

S. R. MENDINUETO, General Manager, 8 Calamba, Quezon 
City 

Pedro R. Romero, Assistant General Manager, res., 38 S. Fer- 
nando, Rizal City 



Weather Bureau 

136 Lipa St., Sampaloc, Manila 
Tel. 8-64-25 

CASIMIRO DEL ROSARIO, Director; res., 126 Beata St.. 
Pandacan, Manila 

Joaquin Gallego, Chief, Meteorological Division; res., 1632 
Bautista, Singalong, Manila 

Arturo Alcaraz, Chief, Seismic and Magnetic Division; res., 
295 Hernandez St., Singalong, Manila 

Ruben de Castro, Chief, Administrative Division; res., 57 Gen- 
eral Luna, Caloocan, Manila 

Leoncio Santos, Asst. Chief, Meteorological Division; res., 37 
Pasig Line, Sta. Ana, Manila 

Edilberto Parulan, Chief, Forecasting Section; res., 1206 Cavit* 
St., Manila 

Jose B. Cortes, Meteorologist; res., 126 Beata, Pandacan, Manila 
Carlos Francisco, Chief, Statistics & Publications Section; res., 

168 Suter, Sta. Ana, Manila 
Lorenzo Goli, Chief Observer; res., 97 Hernandez, Singalong, 

Manila 

Jose R. Obien, Actg. Chief, Personnel and Records Section; res.. 

221 Maria Clara, Sampaloc, Manila 
Jose M. Reyes, Actg. Asst. Property Clerk; res., 227 Int. 28 

(Tambacan) Zamora, Pandacan, Manila 
Segundo C. Alejo, Actg. Cashier and Disbursing: Officer; res., 

1718 Tioco, Tondo, Manila 
Rafael Ortiz, Accountant; res., 182 Trabajo, Sampaloc, Manila 



DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 

Department of Justice Building 
Aduana St., Intramuros, Manila 
Tel. 2-70-88 

Hon. ROMAN OZAETA Hon. FELIX BAUTISTA ANGELO 

Secretary of Justice Undersecretary of Justice 



r^»A ™ T 9 FFICE OF THE SECRETARY 
Conrado M. Vasquez, Attorney 

Eusebio Cachero, Judicial Officer 

Juan de Leon, Administrative Officer 

Jose L. Moya, Chief, Law Division 

Eulalio D. Pichay, Assistant, Law Division 

Leon G. Jayme, Chief, Cash and Property Division 

Carmelino Senada, Chief Records Division 

PAROLE OFFICE 
Department of Justice Building 
Intramuros, Manila 
BOARD OF INDETERMINATE CENTENCE 
(BOARD OF PARDONS) 
Hon. Roman Ozaeta, Seretary of Justice, Chairman 
Mrs. Sofia R. de Veyra, Member 
Hon. Manuel Camus, Member 
Prof. Serafin E. Macaraig, Member 
Dr. Leopoldo Pardo, Member 

Mr. Honorato B. Masakayan, Executive Secretary of the Board 

PAROLE OFFICE 
Honorato B. Masakayan, Executive Officer 
Hilario Bernardo, Assistant Executive Officer 

ANTI-USURY BOARD 

Adolfo N. Feliciano, Executive Officer; 79 San Rafael 
Alfredo D. San Miguel, Chief, Enforcement Division 

Agents, Enforcement Division 
Emilio L. Siongco Herminio E. Sauco 

Jose Carrion Jose H. Santos 

Jose S. Manansala Mariano Mendoza 

Ranulfo L. Pura Gil E. Gonzalez 

Elpidio Milanes Jose G. Zaplan 



Melanio A. Valdellon, Jr., Agent, Enforcement Division 
Tomas Q. Quetulio, Attorney, Legal Division 
Justo I. Ibay, Attorney, Legal Division 
Sotero Alon, Cashier and Property Custodian 
Domingo Orito, Record and Docket Clerk 

TENANCY LAW ENFORCEMENT DIVISION 

Dtogracias E. Lerma, Chief Attorney 
Jose R. Cabatuando, Attorney 
Miguel T. Valera, Attorney 
Pedro de Guzman, Jr., Attorney 
Tirso B. Jamora, Attorney 

LEGAL AID OFFICE 

Major Federico Aranas, Executive Officer 
Serafin Salvador, Assistant and Attorney 
Florencio D. Dino, Chief, Claims Section 

NATIONAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION 

J. Pardo de Tavera, Drector 

Natividad Z. de Castro, Assistant Director 

llitreau of Justice 

BILIBID COMPOUND, AZCARRAGA, MANILA 
Hon. MANUEL LIM, Solicitor General; r 563 Tanduay, Quiapo, 
Manila 

Hon. Roberto A. Gianzon, First Asst. Solicitor General; r 1230 

G. del Pilar, Singalong Subdiv.,., Manila 
lion. Ruperto Kapunan, Jr., Asst. Solicitor General; r 1688 

Washington, Sampaloc, Manila 
Hon. Carmelino G. Alvendia, Asst. Solicitor General; r 2002 

Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 



PAGE 38 



THE REPUBLIC 



Hon. Manuel P. Barcelona, Asst. Solicitor General; r 1007 Ver- 

gara, Quiapo, Manila 
Atty. Inoeencio Rosal, Solicitor; r 1572 Craig, Sampaloc, Manila 
Atty. Guillermo E. Torres, Solicitor; r 101 Shaw Blvd., Manda- 

luyong, Rizal 

Atty. Francisco G. Carreon, Solicitor; r 425-A Asturias, Sampa- 
loc, Manila 

Atty. Lucas Lacson, Solicitor; 226 Elizondo, Quiapo, Manila 
Atty. Ramon L. Avancena, Solicitor; 61 Hai<r, Mandaluvomr, 
Rizal 

Atty. Augusto M. Luciano, Solicitor; r 710 Pennsylvania Aw., 
Malate, Manila 

Atty Luis R. Feria, Solicitor; r L065 Dos Castillas, Sampaloc, 
Manila 

Atty. Jesus A. Avancena, Solicitor; r 52 Dominga, Rizal City 
Atty. Jaime dc los Angeles, Solicitor; r 21 J. Ruiz, San* Juan 
Rizal 

Atty. Jose G. Bautista, Solicitor; r Imus, Cavite 
Atty. Esmeraldo Umali, Solicitor; r 114 Teresa, Sta. Mesa 
Manila 

Atty. Estrella Abad Santos. Solicitor; r 407 Sto. Sepulcro, Paco 
Manila 

Atty. Manuel Tomacruz, Solicitor; r 1032 Rizal Ave, Sta Cruz 
Manila 

Atty ManUr nCi ° Vi,lam01 ' Solicit01 -; '• 1030 Vergara, Quiapo, 

Atty M!n , iia F<>liX " MakaSia,% SO,icit °'- ; r 222 %^loc, 

Atty. Adolfo C. Brillantes, Solicitor; r Makati, Rizal 
Atty. Martiniano P. Vivo Solinitvr*. * roo r» 

Mani l a ' ^ ollcltlo > * C2D Requesens, Sta. Cruz, 



OFFICE OF SPECIAL PROSECUTORS 

HON. MANUEL D. LIM, Head 



Atty^Antonio A. Torres, Solicitor; r G40 F. B. Harri 



ison, Rizal 



Atty." Foderico V. Sian, Solicitor- r 2ft7 t- o 

nila »citoi, i _o, Ligao, San Miguel, Ma- 



Atty. Isidro C. Borromeo, Solicitor- ,• aiR T> ^ , „ 

Manila ' 1 038 P - Noyal, Sampaloc, 

Atty. Honorio Romero. Solicitor- 10 

sSiXsz ssrsz sy,vi "- * a » - 

KWN s„ b dC„ ».l D,TU " m; ' 21 st, 

Manila " C '* lk; * m ***> Sdlis, Tondo, 

Cecilio K. Domingo, Chief twl- * r*- • * 

City f ' D ° Ckct D >VMionj r 101 Ibarra, Rizal 

Silvino Aguila, Chief, Accounting Section- r ittt » 

Tondo, Manila a UUon ' 1 123 Francisco St., 

Juan G. Santos, i>ishii>-air>«. j- .. 

nlw Paco, ZSST* " " ' «. ''»"»- 

"t*: S'S, SIM °"»""' ■ «■ , 

' ^ loiaua ", r 418 Adeliha, Sampaloc, Manila 

People's Court 

Lope de Vega, Tel. 2-88.;i!) 
Hon. FORT UNA TO V. BORROMEO, h*sM«g J«dg* 

Assii. ititc Judges: 

Hon. Plorentino Saguin Hon. Jose Bernabe 

Hon. Angel S. Gamboa Hon. Jose S. Bautista 

Hon. Emilio Rilloraza Hon. Jose P. Veluz 

Hon. Tiburcio Tancinco Hon. Vicente Varela 

Hon. JEusebio N. Lopez Hon. Manuel Escudero 

Hon. Ramon San Jose Hon. Manuel S. Calleja 



Ramon Sunico 
Juan R. Liwag 
Arsenio Solidum 
Victorio D. Carpio 
Ignacio Debuque 
Magno Gatmaitan 
Jose N. Leuterio 
Nicolas Villaruz 
Isidro L. Vejunco 
Juan M. Ladaw 
Jose P. de la Cruz 



Spccia I Prosecu tois ; 

Agapito B. Concnu 
Pedro C. Quinto 
Jesus Y. Perez 
Godofredo Escalona 
Benjamin R. Goro3pe 
Filemon Consolacion 
Felix Magdales 
Pedro Ibailez ^ 
Filemon Saavedra 
Jose T. Cajulis 
Victor C. Santillan 



JUDGES OF FIRST INSTANCE 
Hon. lnneo Ran jo, Cagayan 
Hon. Manuel Arranz, isabela 
Hon. Euiogio de Guzman, JNueva Vizcaya 
Hon. Simeon Ramos, Uocos Norte 
Hon. Zoilo Hilario, llocos Sur 
Hon. Hermogene Concepcion, La Union 
Hon. Bernabe Aquino, Mountain Province 
Hon. Anatolio Manalac, Pangasinan, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Ceterino de ios Santos, Pangasinan, 3rd Br. 
Hon. Francisco Jose, Tarlac 
Hon. Rafael Amparo, Nueva Ecija, 1st Br. 
Hon. Mariano C. Melendres, Nueva Ecija, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Emilio Rilloraza, Pampanga, 1st Br. 
Hon. Basilio Bautista, Pampanga, 2nd Br. (Deceased) 
Hon. Bonifacio Ysip, Bulacan, Lst Br. 
Hon. Potenciano Pecson, Bulacan, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Jose Bernabe, Cavite, 1st Br. 
Hon. Francisco Alfonso, Cavite, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Conrado Barrios, Manila, ,1st Br. 
Hon. Dionisio de Leon, Manila, 4th Br ' 
Hon. Buenaventura Ocampo, Manila, 5th Br. 
Hon. Sotero Rodas, Manila, 6th Br. 
Hon. Conrado V. Sanchez, Manila, 7th Br. 
Hon. Emilio Pena, Manila, 8th Br. 
Hon. Felipe Natividad, Manila, 9th Br. 
Hon. Bienvenido A. Tan, Risal, Lsi Br. 
Hon. Ambrosio Santos, Uizal, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Nicasio Yatco, Laguna, lst Br. 
Hon. Fidel ibahez, Laguna, 2nd Kr. 
Hon. Eugenio Angeles, Batangas 
Hon. Maynardo Farol, Mindoro 
Hon. Antonio Cariizares, Quezon, 1st Br. 
Hon. Ramon San Jose, Quezon, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Jose P. Veluz, Camarines Suv, 1st Kr. 
Hon. Jose Suitida, Camarines Sur, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Catalino Buenaventura, Camarines None 
Hon. Hermogenes Caluag, Albay 
Hon. Vicente Varela, Sorsogon 
Hon. Fernando Hernandez, Capiz 
Hon. Querube C. Mukalintal, Iloilo, 1st Br. 
Hon. Manuel Blanco, Iloilo, 2nd Br. 
Hon. F. Imperial Reyes, Iloilo, 3rd Br. 
Hon. Francisco Arellano, Occidental Negros, lst Br. 
Hon. Gregorio Narvasa, Oriental Negros and Siquijor 
Hon. Fidel Fernandez, Samar (Catbalogan) 
Hon. Emilio Benitez, Samar (Borongan) 
Hon. Edmundo Piccio, Leyte (Tacloban) 
Hon. Clementine V. Diez, Leyte (Maasin) 
Hon. Higinio Macadaeg, Cebu, 1st Br. 
Hon. Felix Martinez, Cebu, 2nd Br. 
Hon. Florentine Saguin, Cebu, 3rd Br 
Hon. F. Borromeo Veloso, Bohol 
Hon. Froilan Bayona, Surigao 



THJE Ki*. PUBLIC 



Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 
Hon. 

Hon. 
Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 

Hon. 



Antonio Belmonte, Oriental Misamis 

Angel S. Gamboa, Zamboanga 

Enrique Fernandez, Davao 

Juan A. Sarenas, Cotabato 

Rafael Dinglasan, Judge-at-large 

Eduardo D. Enriquez, Judge-at-large , 

Vicente Santiago, Judge-at-large 

Segundo Moscoso, Judge-at-large 

Angel H. Mojica, Judge-at-large 

Oscar Castelo, Judge-at-large ' 

Patricio Ceniza, Judge-at-large 

Pedro, Villamor, Judge-at-large 

Buenaventura Cordova, Judge-at-large 

Pablo Villalobos, Judge-at-large 

Jose R. de Venecia, Judge-at-large 

Pascual Santos, Judge-at-large 

Juan P. Enriquez, Judge-at-large 

Bernardino Quitoriano, Judge-at-large 

Gustavo Victoriano, Judge-at-large 

Mariano Nable, Judge-at-large 
Perfecto Palacio, Judge-at-large 

Anionic G. Lucero, Judge-at-large 

Jose C. Rodriguez, Cadastral Judge 

Primitivo Gonzales, Cadastral Judge 

Edilberto Barot, Cadastral Judge 

Rodolfo Baltazar, Cadastral Judge 
Manuel Laserna, Cadastral Judge 
Luis Ortega, Cadastral Judge 
Demetrio B. Encarnacion, Cadastral Judge 
Viceni^e A. Arguelles, Cadastral Judge 
Cirilo G. Maceren, Cadastral Judge 
Enrique Maglanoc, Cadastral Judge 
Segundo Martinez, Cadastral Judge 
Felicisimo Ocampo, Cadastral Judge 



PROVINCIAL FISCALS 



Felix Antonio, Abra 

Leonardo Kiores, Albay 

L>*vid P. Aviia, Agusan 

Jose L. Lagrimas, Antique 

Eleno L. Kahayon, Bataan 

Juan Castillo, Batanes 

Mateo L. Alcasid, Batangas 

Kehx Marfori, Bohol 

Lorenzo Coloso, Bukidnon and Lanao 

Fernando Cruz, Bulacan (Acting) 

Eduardo E . Palma, Cagayan 

Valentin Reyes, Camannes Norte 

Manuel Estipona, Camarines Sur 

Demetrio Vinzon, Capiz 

Juan Salazar, Catanduanes 

Loremzo GarliU)s, Cavite 

Jose C. Borromeo, Cebu 

Vicente N . Cusi, Jr., Cotabato 

Bernardo Teves, Davao 

Jose M. Mendoza, llocos Norte 

Jose F. Letargo, llocos Sur 

Roman Ibanez, Iloilo 

Rosalio T. Valenzu^ia, Isabela 

Jacinto Callanta, La Union 

Emmanuel M. Munoz, Laguna 

Gregorio Abogado, Leyite 

Gabriel Valero, Marinduque 

Candido Franzuela, Masbate 

Jose Quizon, Mindoro 

Keliciano Belmonte, Mountain Province 

Amado S. Santiago, Nueva Ecija 

Albino L. Figueroa, Nueva Vizcaya 

Diosdado Bacolod, Occidental Misamis 

Damaso S. Tengco, Oriental Misamia 



Jesus S. Rodriguez, Occidental Negros 

Antonio Lacson, Oriental Negros 

Jose 0. Lardizabal, Palawan 

Pedro Cenzon, Pampanga (Acting) 

Jose Bonto, Pangasinan 

Emilio U. Mayo, Quezon 

Quintin Paredes, Jr., Rizal 

Jose Olgado, Romblon 

Simeon Ylagan, Samar 

Temistocles Mella, Sorsogon (Acting) 

Natalio P. Amarga, Sulu 

Roque Andaya, Surigao 

Jose C. Zulueta, Tarlac 

Wcnceslao Ortega, Zambah s 

Mariano V. Benedicto, Zamboanga 



Itureau of Prisons 

MUNTINLUPA, RIZAL 

Manila Office, 842 ' Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz 
Tel . 2-82-50 
ERIBERTO B. MISA 
Director of Prison* 

Pablo J. Norona, Assistant Director 

Generoso Casitaneda, Executive Officer 

Alfredo M. Bunye, Superintendent, New Bilibid 1 rison 

Roman Deang, Commander of the Guards, NBP 

Vidal Diaz, Chief Overseer, NBP 

Mariar.o Dimanlig, Chief, Medical Division 

Nazario Salamatin, Pharmacist 

Jose Manlapaz, Dentist 

Alfredo Cruz, Chief Nurse 

Manuel Ignacio, Financial Officer 

UociwUo Cabanatan, Cashier and Disbursing Officer 

Valentin Castelo, Property Officer 

Rafael Carating, Manager, Industrial Division 

Lupicinio L. Campos, Mess Officer and Acting Chief, Manila 

Zosimo Tabajonda, Assistant Mess Officer 

Patrocino M. Garcia, Supt., Correctional Institution for Women 
J nana F. Adamos, Asst. Supt., Correctional Institution for Women 
Miguel R. Nadres, Acg. Supt., Iwahig Penal Colony 
Pascual Andres, Actg. Asst. Supt. Iwahig Penal Colony 
Policarpo Dellosa, Actg. Supt. San Ramon Prison and Penal Farm 
Pascual Robin, Actg. Supt., Davao Penal Colony 

General Land Registration Office 

BILIBID COMPOUND, MANILA 

ENRIQUE ALTAVAS 
Chief of the Office 

Juan Altavas, Chief, Administrative Division 
Francisco Alsua, Chief, Land Titles Division 
Justino S. Ocampo, Chief, Judicial Division 
Luii Paz, Chief, Docket Division 
Mariano Tuason, Chief, Property Division 



REGISTERS OF DEEDS 



Sergio Mexia, Abra 

Teodulo R. Ricaforte, Agusan 

Ramon O. Balana, Albay 

Sixto Villavert, Antique 

Pedro Fuentes, Baguio and Benguet 

Cesar Pa^uio, Bataan 

Quinltin L. Magsino, Batangas 

Carlos Ramas, Bohol 

Hipolito Buendia, Bulacan 

Alfonso Reyno, Cagayan 



THE REPUHUC 



Britfido Temperartte. Capiz 

Mrs. Martina Amoco, Cebu 

Zacarias Antonio, Cotabato 

Mrs. Patrocinio Vega-Quitain, Davao 

Juan M. Barba, Ilocos Norte 

Sofronio Flo res, Iloilo 

Vicente Capellan, Isabela 1 i 

Juan Calutas, Laguna 

I'isomendip: Dionolan, Lanao 

Crisogono Balagot, La Union 

Bonifacio Piczon, Ley ho 

Jose Z. de la Rosa, Masbate 

Vicente Leido, Mindoro 

Fausto C. Cuizon, Nueva Ecija 

Simplicio Apao, Occidental Misamis 

Fernando Pacana, Oriental Misamis 

Cirilo Abrasia, Occidental Nojrros and Bacolod City 

Geroncio Pinili, Oriental Negros 

Rodolfo Dimzon, Pampanpra 

Antonio Bengzon, Pangasinan 

Jose L. Valderas, Quezon 

Gregorio Velasquez, Rizal 

Jose C. Olgado, Roinblon 

Pilomeno Sinjrzon, Samar 

Hermenegildo Encinas, Sorsogon 

Vedasto Niere, Surigao 

Timoteo D. Agustin, Tarlac 

Jose Azcarraga, Zamboantfa 

Mariano Villanueva, Manila 

Securities and Exchange Commission 

852 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo — Tel. 2-78-88 

Hon. FILEMON COSIO, Commissioner 

Mariano G. Pineda, Assistant 

Arcadio E. Yabyabin, Chief, Legal Counsel 



Enrique L. Nepomuccno, Supt., Brokers and Exchange Division 
Ner C. Reodica, Chief Examiner 
Guillcrmo Diamitas. Administrative* Officer 

Court of Industrial Relations 

840 Oroquieta, Manila— Tel. 2-74-37 

Hon. ARSENIO C. ROLDAN, Actins: Presiding Judge 

Hon. VICENTjS DE LA CRUZ, Associate Judge 

Hon*. JUAN L. LANTING, Associate Judge 

Manuel Eseudero, Attorney 

Vicente J. Yamsori, Attorney 

Luis de la Vega, Chief, Administrative Division 

Juan O. Reyes, Chief Examiner 

Emilio Lopez, Chief, Division of Invest i prat ion 

Pastor R. Reyes, Special Agent 

Wcnceslao Eusebio, Special Agent 

Jose R. Fernandez, Chief, Stenographers' Section 

Public Service Commission 

Port Terminal Bide., fntramuros 
Tel. 2-73-58 

Judge FELTCIANO OCAMPO, Commissioner; res., 443 Merced. 

Paco, Manila Commissioner; res., 1300 V. 

Hon. Gabriel P. Prieto, Associate Lornim* 

Concepcion, Manila Tavtav St., Caloocan, Rizal 

Felipe. R. Hipolito, Secetary; res., 21 l _ Division; res., 

Vicente G. Manalo, Chief Enirireer. Ttanspoua 

113 Blumentritt, San Juan, Rizal Q5 M Hizon, 

Antonfo H. AspiHera, Chief, Legaf Division , res., 

Sta. Cruz, Manila . . i^lS Miseri- 

Pedro S. Talavera, Chief, Industrial Division, res., 

cordia, Sta. Cruz, Manila # 12 19 Maria 

Tomas Canchela, Asst. to the Commissioner, r ., 

Oristina, Sampaloc, Manila miavco R^ al Cit - V 

Amhrosio del Mundo, Cashier; res., 95 Int. M. Coia>c , 



OFFICE OF THE ADVISER 
Hon. Richard P. Butrick, Advisor 
Malacanan 267 



DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 

1520 Arlegui, Quiapo, Manila 

Hon. ELPIDIO QUIRINO 

Vice President and concurrently Secretary of Foreign Aff.M™ 
Malacanan 239, Res. 5-13-11 
Hon. BERNABE AFRICA 

Undersecretary . A . 

tin* and Cultural Affairs: 
Division of Intentional Information 
Carlos Quirino, Chief 
Galo B. Ocampo, Senior Assistant 

r irrAI AFFAIRS, TREATIES, 
"'SwEmSSS AND RESEARCH 
Ll ,cas V. Madamha, Law Officer 
Diosdado Macapagal, Assistant I*# Off.cci 



Private Secretary to the Secretary: 

Rizal G. Adoraiblc < Malacanan 218) 
Mil. Aide, and Press Officer: 

Maj. Carlos Quirino 
Division of Protocol: 

Reynaldo Lardizabal, Asst. Protocol and Ceremonial Officer 



OFFICE OF THE COUNSELOR ON POLITICAL AND 
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS 
T^odoro Evangclista, Counselor 
Division o f American Affairs: 

Bartolomc A. Umayan, Chk-f 
Juan J. Hormillosa, Assistant Chief 
Division of European ayid African Affairs: 
Jacinto C. Borja, Chief 
Maximino G. Bueno, Assistant Chief 
Division of Assian and Pacific Affairs: 
Vicente L. Pastrana. Chief 
Felipe Mabilangan, Assistant Chief 



nmrMCFT OR ON ADMINISTRATION, 

oeeice or ?g3S£gg«$& WM 

Felix h. Lazo, Counselor 
Bcnigno A. Pidlaoan, Special Assists,- 



to the Counselor 



Division of Administration and f 
Manuel R. Cumagun, Acting Assistant Chief 

Division of D< voice, Shipping and Miscellaneous Services: 
Amando M. Dalisay, Chief 
Marcelino V. Bernardo, Assistant Chiet 
Jose Ma. Espino, Special Assistant 

Division of Visas, Passports and Dnmiyration: 
Mauro Calingo, Chief 



THE REPUBLIC 



jw<;e 9n 



DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

City Hall, Manila 
Tcls. 8-74-04 and 8-70-54 
Hon. JOSE C. ZULUETA 

Secretary 
Hon. MARCIANO ROQUE 
Undersecretary 

off the Secretary 



Reyes, Administrative Officer 



Office 

Abelardo J 
Delegates. 

Gaudencio Dimaisip Manuel O. Soriano 

Jesus O. Serrano Mario Guarina 

Rafael C. Londr*s, Private Secretary 
Domingo Flores, Assistant 

ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION ■ 
Abelardo J. Reyes, Chief of Division 

Emiliano Anonas, Investigator ' 
Filemon Poblador, Assistant ' 
Amando Adriano, Assistant , 
Rafael Asprer, Assistant and Researcher , 
Isidoro Gonzales, Assistant 

Miscellaneous Section 
Severino F. Ganalon. Chief of Section 

Modesto P. Soriano, Assistant Chief and Property Officer 

Records Section 
Kamon Natino, Chief of Section 

^ ... LAW DIVISION 

Emibano Cortcz, Chief of Division 
Clemente R. Sioson, Investigator 

T „ L, w PROVINCIAL DIVISION 

Juar. F. Rivera, Chief of Division 

Jose Laserna, Assistant Chief of Division 



Via nte Tagle, Special Agent 
Antonio Llanes, Special Agent 
Leon Paz, Law Clerk 

PUBLIC ORDER DIVISION 

ninnuino, Chief of Division 
Lieutenant Coltfr.el Elias Dioqum , 
Captain Francisco Rabc, Execute Officer 

Captain Jose Barton, P c ^"L im0> Administrative Officer, and 
1st Lieutenant Gabriel Ilustusim , 

Chief, Research Section . and Operations Officer 

Lieutenant Vicente L. Verzosa, *> 
Casiano Anunciacion, Inspector 
Vicente Custodio, Assistant 

DIVISION FOR MINDANAO AND SULU 
Juan ipac, Chief of Division^ 

Leocadio Dioso, Law Officer 

Pedro Gorospe, Law c,crlc T a GENTS 

SPE fn FiMno Special Agent in Sulu 
Alma S. Rasul, Mohammedan Spccial AK cnt in L»nao 

Ismael Sani, Mohammedan MILITARY ADVISER 
OFFICE OF THE 

Captain Federico L. Salc p cd ;' 7 inaW an, Chief Liaison Officer 
1st Lieutenant Severino rat? < A( j m inistrative Assistant 
1st Lieutenant Antonio Malava, 



Provincial Governors And Members Of The Y™™"™*} c^t?™ ^ 

(Each province followed by the estimated population as of 1947, an ' capital, Malaybalay) 

ion, 6o f uuuj f 



ABRA: (Population about 95,000; capital, Bangued) 
Hon. Juan C. Brillantes, Governor 
Hon. Prisco Batoon, Member, Provincial Board , 

ArT7Q°Ax Juan AriaS, Member > Provincial Board 

AGUSAN: (Population, 121,000; capital, Butuan) 
Hon. Apolonio D. Curato, Governor 
Hon. Jorge P. Satorre, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Fabian Monteroso, Member, Provincial Board 

ALBAY: (Popiilation 365,000; capital, Legaspi) 
Hon. Venancio P. Ziga, Governor 
Hon. Silvino Samson, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Isaac Bordonado, Member, Provincial Board 

ANTIQUE: (Population 22 0 ,000; capital, San Jose) 
Hon. Alberto A. Villavert, Governor 
Hon. Rafael* Silva, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Bernabe O. Tordesillas, Member, Provincial Board 

BATAAN: (Population, 98,000; capital, Balanga) 
Hon. Joaquin J. Linao, Governor 

Hon. Lorenzo S. de la Fuente, Jr., Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Emilio V. Reyes, Member, Provincial Board 

BATANES: (Population, 12,000: capital, Basco) 
Hon. Bugenio Agudo, Governor 
Hon. Jose Apad, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Casiano Cantor, Member, Provincial Board 

BATANGAS: (Population, J t $J f ,000; capital, Batxingas) 
Hon. Modesto Castillo, Governor 
Hon. Clemente Silva, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Francisco Perez, Member, Provincial Board 

BOHOL: (Population, 54,5,000; capital, Tagbilaran) 
Hon. Perfecto Balili, Governor 

Hon. Galicano T. Gatal, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Maximo Castrodes, Member, Provincial Board 



BUKIDNON: (Popukitw 

Hon. Lope Damasco Gov *}* h Provincial Board 
Hon. Mclccio Alqmtela, Mem '^.^ Board 
Hon. Amado Santiago, Mem ^ 
BULACAN: (^^J f'™^ £ n leave) 
Hon. Fortunato Halih, Go GoyerMT 
Hon. Nazario Trillana, AC * ber> Provincial Board 
Hon. Fortunato fW 1 "^ Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. 'Francisco ^ fean ' capital, Tiignegarao) 

CAGAYAN : (Population, ***^ o ' r 

Hon, Servando Liban, Provincia i Board 

Hon. Jose de la ClUZ ' Member, Provincial BoBard 

; Hon. Regino Z. ^Jb^ Provincial Board 
Hon. Pedro Barbm Member ^ ^ 

Hon. Eugemo Dasco » } 

CAMARINES SUR: (Population, *» , v ... 

Hon. Gabriel Pvieto Governor 

Hon. Anastacio Pr,ela Membe , ^ d 

Hon. Cesario ™"^'™Z p ital, Capiz) 
CAPIZ: (Population, US, 000, capua , , 
Hon. Ludovico Hidrosollo, Governoi 
Hon. Eduardo Abalo, Member, Provincial Boaid 
_ _ „ , Tv/Tpmber. Provincial Hoard 

^s&sasjrfcSL -m* ^ V*«> 

Hon. Remigio Zocito, Governor . _ 

Hon. Severino Talion, Member Prov.nc.al Board 
Hon. Sebaetia n QUlntana, Member Prov.ncial Board 
CAVITE: (PopubtiUrth m>O0°) ea P^ al > Cavtte Ctt V> 
Hon. Dominador M. Camerino, Governor 
l[.,n. Au K usto de la Rosa, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Mariano Villanu«va, Member, Provincial Board 



PAGE 96 



THE REPUBLIC 



r tBU: (Population, 1,160,000; capita!, Cebu City) 
Ron. Mai ae\ Cuenco, Governor 

Hon. M\pue\ Bafiinan, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Placido Villacarlos, Member, Provincial Board 
COTABATO: (Population, $49,OVO; capital, Cotabato) 
Hon. Datu TJdtup: Matalam, Governor 
Hon. Angeles Arabiran, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Fcli no Abalos, Member, Provincial Board 
DAVAO: {Population, 865,000; capital Davao City) 
Hon. Antonio C. Lanzar, Governor 
Hon. Flamin Dianco, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Rafael Santos, Member, Provincial Board 
ILOCOS NORTE: (Population, 2*5,000; capital Laoag) 
Hon. Primo "Lazaro, Governor 

Hon. Jose E. Evangelista, Member, Provincial Board 
(Vacant), Member, Provincial Board 
ILOCOS SXJR: (Population, 282,000; capital. Vigan) 
Hor. T\ rfecto Faypon, Governor 
Hon. Pablo C. Sanidad, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Felix Vergara, Member, Provincial Board 
IL011X): (Population, 888,000; capital Iloilo City) 
Hon. Tomas Vargas, Governor 
Hon. Jose C. Celo, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Pedro Margarico, Member, Provincial Board 
ISABELA: (Population. JtJO,000; capital Ilagan) 
Hon. Silvino Gumpal, Governor 
Hon. ^Felipe Padua, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Belfin Albano, Member, Provincial" Board 
LACUNA: (Population, SlSfiOO; capital Santa Cruz) 
Hon. Juan G. Pambuan, Governor 
Hon. Agustin Gana, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Jose Alinsod, Member, Provincial Board 
LANAO: (Population, 802,000; capital Ddnsdkm City) 
Hon. Louis R. Marobombsar, Governor 
Hon. Datu Muti Amai Kurut. Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Tagoranao Benito, Member, Provincial Board 
L A UNION: (Population, 220.000: capital San Fernando) 
Hon. Agapito Yaranon, Governor 
Hon. Norberto Guray, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Joaquin Ortega, Member, Provincial Board 
LEYTE: (Population, 1,050,000: capital, Taclohan) 
Hon. Mamerto Ribo, Governor 
Hon. Emilio Monzon, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Rufo Lr. Raga, Member, Provincial Board 
MARINDUQUE: (Population, 95,000; capital, Foac) 
Hon. Cesar Nepomuceno, Governor 
Hon. Teodoro R^iano, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Francisco Gonzales, Member, Provincial Board 
MASBATE: (Population, 230,000: capital, Mashtte) 
Hon. Rafael Lctada. Governor 
Hon. Juan Celera, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Jovillano Aguilar, Member, Provincial Board 
MlNDORO: (Population, 150,000; capital. Calapan) 
Hon. Conrado M. Morente, Governor 
Hon. Porfirio Comia. Member, Provincial Board 
(Vacant), ... n ,. n 

MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL: (Population. 261,000; capital, Ofo 

'(in eta) 

Hon. Gedeon G. Quijano, Governor 
Hon. Basilio Binaoro, Member. Provincial Board 
Hon. tfdUberto Luinasas, MemVr, Porvmcal Board 
MISAMIS ORIENTAL: (Population. MS, 000: capita!. Ca^n/an) 
Hon. Ipjnacio Cruz, Governor • . 

Hon. Emilio D. Veles, MfemWr, Provincial Board 
iron. Pedro A. ftuMM, Member, Provincial Board 
MOUNTAIN PROVINCE: {Populations, SS8.000; capital, Boutor) 
Hon. Dennis Molintas. Governor . . ' 

Hon. (Vf.rino 1!. Kanuro/.. Me.nl, r. Provincial Board 
Hon. Antonio S. Alumit, Member, Provincial Board 



NEGROS OCCIDENTAL: (Pop,«Ia(io.., mfiOO; capital, Bocolod 
City) 

Hon. TUiae\ Lacson. Governor 
Hon. Yraivcswo Yerrw. WW**, Provincial Boaxu 
Hon. Agustin B. Mantilla, 3 v., Mem\*r ? Yrov^cvaV T^w. 
NEGROS ORIENTAL: (Population. 445.000; captal, DumagueU) 
Hon. Praxedes Villaiineva, Governor 
Hon. Telesforo Delloso, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Manuel Diaz. Member, Provincial Board 
, Hon. Uuminado Jumawan, Lieutenant Governor of Siquijor 
Subprovince 

Mr. Marcial Pal-eng, Special Member, Siquijor 
NUEVA ECIJA: (Population, 450 fiOO ; capital, Cabanatuan) 
Hon. Gabriel Belmonte, Governor 

Hon. Estanislao Gotangko. Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Alfonso Fa igal, Btember, Provincial Board 
NUEVA VIZCAYA: (Population, 96,000; capital Bayombong) 
Hon. Jose A. Madarang, Governor 

Hon. Macario G. Dadupalsa, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Gabriel Paringit, Member, Provincial Board 

PALAWAN: (Population, 105p00; capital, Puerto Princcsa) 
Hon. Alfredo Abu eg, Governor 
Hon. Jacinto Alii. Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Francisco Lagan, Member, Provincial Board 

PAMPANGA: (Population, 400,000: capital, San Fernando) 
Hon. Pablo Angeles David, Governor 

Hon. Ricardo Nepomuceno. Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Urbano Dizon, Member, Provincial Board 

PANGASINAN: (Papulation 812,000; capital Linyaycn) 
Hon. Enrique Braganza, Governor 
Hon. Vicente Soliven, Member. Provincial Board 
Hon. Emiliano Abalos. Member, Provincial Board 

QUEZON (T AY ABAS) : (Population. 4*0,000; capital, Lucc?ia) 
Hon. Hilarion R. Yanza, Governor 
Hon. Ramon Soler, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. Ramon Ingente, Member, Provincial Board 

RIZAL: (Population, 4(>0 f 000; capital Pastg) 
Hon. Sixto Antonio, Governor ~ • 
Hon. Enrique Reyes, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon Felicisimo Guerrero, Member. Provincial Board 

ROMBLON: (Population, 115,000; capital, Romblon) 
Hon. Jose Firmalo, Governor , 
Hon Nestor Minto, Member. Provincial Board 
Hon' Matias S. Martinez, Member, Prvomcial Board 

SAMAR: (Population, C """" W) 

H ° n - f alta X Board 
Hon. W^XSimbcr, Provincial Board 

sorsogo^ ra,yitaL Sor ° oaon) 

SORSOOUis. , , Governor 

^jRSSrfE Member, Provincial Board 
Hon. B«gf5^ M cm ber. Provincial Board 

SULU. Tulawe, Governor 

u' Gulamii Rasul, Member. Provincial Board 

Hon" Sultan Jainal Abirin II, Member, Provincial Board 

oripVrAO- (Pop«l«ti»n, 260,000; capital, Surigao) ^ 
ion Vicente U Pimentel. Governor 
Hon' Canute Scrvillas, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon Guillormo Arpellida, Member, Provincial Board 

TARIAC- (Population, 301.000; capital Tarluc) 
Hon. Antonio Lopez, Governor 
Hon Arsenio Lugay, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon Uicardo Navarro, Member, Provincial Board 

ZAMBALES: (Population. 118,000: capital 
Hon. Francisco Anonas, Governor 



Hon. Felipe n. /iwwua, \*vvmiiyr 
Hon. Romulo Garrovillo. Member, Pmvinrial 
Hon. Braulio F. Villasis, Member, Ptovitfcitf 



I rov.nHa! 



THE REPUBLIC 



97 



City Mav«rs. Vice-Mayors. Aud Cou 

Or Muniei 

BACOLOD CITY: 

Hon. Nicolasa de la Pena, Mayor 

City Councilors 
Vicetne T. Remitio Santiago Ochoa 

Dionisio Gonzagn Mario S. Villanueva 

Manuel del Rosario Tnblo D. Makilan 

BAGUIO CITY: 

Hon. Jose M. Carino, Mayor 

Hon. Virginia Oteyza de Guta. Vice Mayor 

City Councilors 
Hon. Sixto Domondon 
Hon. Honorio B. Millora 
Hon. Teodoro C. Arvisu 

CAVITE CITY: 

Hon. Manuel S. Rojas, Mayor 

City Councilors 



Sancho Rillo 
Eladio Enriquez 
Antonio R. Jose 



Artemio Barron 
Zr' -imo Rojas 



CEBU CITY: 

Hon. Vicente del Rosario Llamas, Mayor 

City Councilors 
Magno Paez PacienteS. Villa 

Juan Seno Filemon Zapanta 

Cresencio Tumakin Catalina S. Ibafies 

(Vacant) 

DAGUPAN CITY (Will be published later) 
DAN.SA.LAN CITY (Will be published later) 
DAVAO CITY: 

Hon. Leon A. Garcia, Mayor 

City Councilors 
Pedro C. Quitain Arsenio Villarosa 

Leopoldo Abellera Catalino Savon 

Jose Yap 

ILOILO CITY: 

Hon. Fernando Lopez, Mayor 



ncilors Or Members Of City Councils 
pal Boards 

City Councilors 
Artorio San Agustin . Fortunato Ybiernas 
Rfanuel Hechanova Joaquin Abanilla 

^ispin Molncoton RfaximKo Jalandoni (deceased) 

^enunador T % Jover 

LIPA CITY 

Hon. Esteban Mayo, Mayor 

City CounciU*rs 
Jose T. Lantin Baldomero Reyes 

Jose M. Kalaw Dr. Jos* Segismundo 

Francisco Reyes 

MANILA CITY (See list below) 

ORMOC CITY 

QUEZON CITY: 

Hon. Po.iciano Bernardo, Mayor 
Hon. Matfas C. Defensor, Vice-Mayor 

City Councilors 
Hon. Gregorio Roxas 
Hon. Leon C. Malubay 
RIZAL CITY: (Inaugurated Aug. 16. 1047) 
Hon. Rufino F. Mateo, Mayor 
Hon. Nicanor V. Santos, Vice-Mayor 

City Councilors 
SegundG Acosta Augusto Bautista 

initfeo Gallegos Delfin Sanchez 

Pedro Reynaldo Flaviano Pangilinan 

Dr. Cecilio Chuapoco 
SAN PABLO CITY: 

Hon. Fernando A. Bautista, Mayor 

City Councilors 
Irineo R. Lozada Leon Fule Castillo 

Antonio Rono Ricardo P. Ticzon 

Restituto Brifias 
TAGAYTAY CITY: 

Hon. Miguel P. Tana, Acting Mayor 

City Councilors 
Bienvenido Reyes Jose Kiamzon 

Joaquin S. Parcero 



Hon. Leon Lopez 



-0O0- 



THE MUNICIPAL BOARD 
2nd Floor, City Hall 
Hon. Segundo Agustin, President 
Hon. Eustaquio C. Balagtas, Member 
Hon. Andres Santamaria, Member 
Hon. Pedro R. Arena, Member 
Hon. Gregorio M. Bautista, Member 
Hon. Gregorio N. Garcia, Member 
Hon. Isauro M. Santiago, Member 
Hon. Arcadio D Santiago, Member 
Hon. Agripino D. Bautista, Member 
Hon. Guillermo Ronquillo, Member 

HEADS OF DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS 
AU-.io Aquino, City Engineer; 3rd Floor City Hall 
Marcelino Sarmiento, City Treasurer; Ground Floor, City Hall 
Jose P. Bengzon, City Fiscal; Tels. 8-62-76 and 8-62-88, City Hall 
l)r. Mariano C. Icasiano, City Health Officer; Ground Floor. 



City of Manila 

CITY HALL, P. BURGOS, MANILA 
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR 
2nd Floor, City Hall 
TT- n. VALERIANO E. FUGOSO, City Mayor 
Hon. CESAR MIRAFLOR, Vice Mayor 



Julio Francia, City Assessor; 2nd Floor, City Hall 

Felipe Jimenez, City Auditor; 2nd Floor, City Hall 

Venancio Trinidad, Superintendent of City Schools, 4th Floor, 

City Hall 

Isabel E. de Santos, Superintendent of City Libraries, 2nd Floor, 
City Hall 

Col. Marut-l <fe i a Fuente, Chief of Police, Bilibid Compound, Tel. 
' 4-69-41 

Cipriano Cruz, Chief, Fire Department, Ground Floor, City Hall, 
Tel. 2-70-73 

Hop. Guillermo Cabrera, Executive Judge, Municipal Court, Bi- 
libid Compound, Azcarraga 

Hon. Crisanto Aragon, Judge, Municipal Court, 3rd Floor, City 
Hall 

Hon. Natividad Almeda-Lopez, Judge, Municipal Court, 2nd Floor, 
City Hall 



PAGE 08 



THE REPUBLIC 



Hem. Ramon A. Ycasiano, Judge, Municipal Court, Bitibid Com- Joaquin Garcia, Sheriff of Manila, Port Terminal Building, In- 

1 pound, Azcarraga tvamuvos, Ma. la 

Hon. Francisco Ger6rdrno, Judge, Municipal Court, Bihbid Com- Pedro Car\\p\o, Cter% of Court, Municipal Court ot Manila 
pound, Azcarraga 



Provincial Section 



PROVINCES, CITIES, AN II MUNICIPALITIES 

NOTK: Wo will publish every nnnuh, in this section, the nanu s, desig nations, and resioVnot' addressed of fcove ^ of each 




names will be published in our Annual Directory (Cornejo*a Directory of the Philippine Republic) for 1948. We are now compiling new data for said An- 
Directory and any nuti-.-e of changes or corrections in your list of names, designations and residence addressee that you mi JS for 194b will be 

n »8hly appreciated. 



Province Of Agusan 

COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE 

24TH JUDICIAL DISTRICT 
OFFICE OF THE CLERK OF COURT 
BUTUAN 

Hon. FROILAN BAYONA, Judge, Court of First Instant; Vicente C. Fernandez, Court Interpret; res., Butuan, Agusan 

res., Butuan, Agusan Alfonso Raganas, Temp. Docket Clerk; res., Butuan, Agusan 

Maeario C. Conde, Clerk of Court; res., Butuan, Agusan Ernesto R. TriUo, Provincial Sheriff; res., Butuan, Agusan 

Claro Leuterio, Court Stenographer; res., Butuan, Agusan Buenaventura S. Nielo, Deputy Sheriff; res., Butuan, Agusan 



Province Of Albay 

(Partial List of Officials Only; Other Name* will be published later.) 



PROVINCIAL AND INSULAR OFFICIALS 
bioii. VKINAlNCJiU 1'. ZltiA, I'lovinciai ooviinor; k% Legaspi, 
Albay 

Jaaac isordonada, Member, Provincial Board; tea., Malilipot, Al- 
bay 

Siivino Samson, Member, Provincial Board; res., Libon, Albay 
Serui'm Rodriguez, Secretary, Provincial board j res., Legaspi, 
Albay 

Victorio n. Perez, Provincial Treasurer; res. Legaspi, Albay 
Ceierino Ramos, Provincial Auditor; res., Legaspi, Albay 
Santiago Magbuhat, district Engineer; res., Legaspi, Albay 
^feinuel Escarilla, Div. Superinwnaem iiJ rtenoouj re»„ Legaspi, 
Albay 

b t\ Martin Santiago, Disti Health Officer; res., Legaspi, Albay 
Dtf. Pablo del Villar, Ch**f, Provincial Hospital; res., Legaspi, 
Albay 

JJa ". Cesar Ingles, Chief, Bicol Treatment Siation; res., Legaspi, 
Albay 

Leonardo Fibres, Provincial Fiscal; res., Legaspi, Albay 
Doroteo Serrano, Public Defender; res., Legasjri, Albay 
Esteban T. Villar, Provincial Sheriff; res., Legaspi, Albay 



First Instance; res., 



Hon. Hermogenes Caluag, Judge, Couit 
Ho„ L ?eSoT y MaHi„e,, Cadasl.al Judge; Legaspi. Al- 

bay 

Justmo Calde, Clork of Court; res., Lcgasj) 
Ramon O. Balana, Register oi Deeds; i 



Albay 
es., L,igao, Albay 
P*** Commander; res., Legaspi, Albay 
~ . . .... i^,^ Agricultural Su] 



Supervisor; res., Legaspi, 
res. ? Legas]ii, 



Celestino Reaniaso, Piov. Agricultu 

Alb . y t>w,v Internal Revenue Agent; 

Daniel Jimenez, Prqv. lHteru»i 

Alb *?r «■ , anll Acts Piov. Land Officer; 
Debate N. Tiongson, Aug. 

Albay , 
David Alvarez, Commercial Ag^nt, 

Francisco Cerdon, Prov. Manage, 

Dr. Aiaton Ursua, Phil. Red Cross Administrator; res., Legaspi, 



Legaspi, 
PRRA ; 



res., Legaspi, 
Albay 

res., Legaspi, 



Albay 



4Jeiandro Gelano, Collector of Customs; res., Tabaco, Albay 
Major Melecio Orba*. Manager, Phil. Veterans Board; res., 
Guinobatan, Albay 

MUNICIPAL MAYORS AND TREASURERS OF ALBAY ^ ^ ^ 



Municipality 



Municipal Mayor 



Treasurer 



Elcuterio Magayanes 



BACACAY Temistochs Kaguero Nata lio Grageda 

CAM»AL1G »*** e1 Grageda 

BARAGA JuaM MarbL ' iu 

GUINOBATAN Tirso 0. de los Reyes 

JOVELLAR Joso Ortega 

LEGASPI (Capital) Francisco de Leoz 

LIBOG * Migiu 'I Bustamante 

LIBON Bernardo Ceguerra 

LIGAO Jose Q uia P on 

MALILIPOT Jovito Binaday 

MiALINAO Catalino Kallos 

MANITO Agustin del Castillo 

OAS 4 Jose Lauendo 



Ricardo Villanuev* 
Jose Thomas 
Rufo Alfertz 
Francisco Armena 
Aguedo M. Mvnoz 
Fausto jreraita 
Sofio P. Servino 
Numeriano Atun 
Francisco Molo 
Olarte 
Fidel Burgos 



THE RbPVBIAG 



PAQR W 



POLANGUI Jesus SaWima 

RAPU-RAPU Mariano Aguilar ... 

TABACO Tomas Cabiks 

TIWI Melecio Madrilejos . . 

OFFICE OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS 
Legaspi, Albay 

Ramon O. Balana, Register of Deeds and Mining Recorder; 
see above 

Daniel Martinez, Senior Clerk; res., Legaspi, Albay " ~ " — 
Antonio R. Arboieda, Actg. Clerk; res., Legaspi, Albay 
Dionisio R. Valera, Clerk; res., Libog, Albay 
Walfredo Martinez, Janitor; res., Legaspi, Albay 
Adolfo M. Arevalo, Mining Clerk; res., Camalig, Albay 



Province Of Antique 

Capital: San Jose 

Hon. ALBEKTO A. VILLA VEKT, Provincial Governor: 

res., JSan Jose, Antique 
Hon. Bernaoe O. Torciesiilas, Member, Prov. Board; res., 

San Jose, Antique 
Hon. Kafael B. Suva, Member, Provincial Board; res., 

Hamtik, San Jose, Antique 
MUNICIPAL MAYOKS AND TREASURERS OF ANTIQUE 
MuMcipality Municipal Mayor Municipal Treasurer 

Barbaza Antonio Inocentes ..Antonio Romero 

Bugasong Candido Arangote . Pablo Varona 

Calu y a Jove n Janairo Juan Acleto 

Culasi Aquilino Xavier . . . Pedro Lagunday 

Dao Vicente Laurezo . . . Mateo Orquez 

Laua-an Baltazar Necesito . Nicolas Fiores 

Patnongon Ruperto Abellon ... Simeon Abiera 

^ andan Juan S. Dioso C. Ambubuyog 

San Remigio Nemesio Rubino . . . Roque Varona 

f lbalom Pedro M. Morales .Gerardo Gravante 

ban Jose (Capital) .. Silverio V. Nietes .Higino Loza 
V L - A - Importante ..Pablo Orcajada 

Valderrama Adriano Castillon . .E. Baldestamon 

( ° th ,^i 1 1,r l ov , inc . ial municipal officials of Antique province will be 

published iater)- 



Province Of liutaaii 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
Balanga, Bataan 

VICENTE T. ARGENTE, Provincial Auditor; res, Balanga, 
Bataan 

Victorino Fiores, Actg. Chief Clerk; res, Balanga Bataan 
Hermogenes A. Sanchez, Clerk, Prov. Section; res, Balanga, 
Bataan . 

Demetrio Velasco, Clerk, Mun. Section; res, Balanga, Bataan 
Alfonsa A. Lopez, Correspondence and Records Clerk; res, 

Balanga, Bataan 
Isabelo Banzon, Janitor-Mesenger ; res, Balanga, Bataan 
Marciano Mendoza, Inspector- Checker; res, Balanga, Bataan 



Province Of Bukidnoii 

Capital: Malaybalay 

Hon. LOPjE DAMASCO, Provincial Governor; res, Malaybalay, 
Bukidnon 

Vicente Hipona, Provincial Treasurer; res, Malaybalay, Bukid- 
non 

Silvestre Figalan, Provincial Auditor; res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 
Dr. Apoionio L. Perez, District Health Officer; res, Malaybalay, 
Bukidnon 

Antonio Ignacio, District Engineer; re*u, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 



Conrado Bootan 
J uan Bolaiioz 
Juan Ajero 
Marcial N. Sanchez 



Jose Feliciano, Division Superintendent of Schools; res, Ma- 
laybalay, Bukidnon 

Capt. Ceferino Galvez, Prov. Provost Marshal; ivs, Malay- 
balay, Bukidnon 

Dr. David P. Evangelista, Chief, Bukidnon Public Hospital; 

res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 
Zosimo Montemayor, Superintendent, Agricultural High School; 
res, Maranag, Bukidnon 
MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS UNDER THE BUREAU 
OF HEALTH 

Dr. Manuel Montenegro, Maternity Physician; res, Impasugong 
Bukidnon 

Dr. Emilio Dayrit, Maternity Physician; res, Talakag, Bukidnon 
Dr. Jaime Mercado, Maternity Physician; res, Maranag, Bu- 
kidnon 

PERSONNEL UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE 

Jesus Murillo, Justice of the Peace of Malaybalay, Bukidnon; 
res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 

Graciano Damasco, Deputy Clerk of Court, Court of First 
Instance of Bukidnon; res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 

Agustin Toledo, Clerk, Court of First Instance of Bukidnon; 
res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 

Agustin W. Beja, Deputy Prov. Sheriff of Bukidnon; res, Ma- 
laybalay, Bukidnon 

Casiano Litanon, Clerk, Office of the Register of Deeds of 
Bukidnon; res, Malaybalay, Bukidnon 



Province Of llagayan 

Capital: Tuguegarao 

Hon. SERVANDO LIBAN, Provincial Governor 

Jose Q. de la Cruz, Member, Provincial Board 

Atty. Alejandro Sebastian, Member, Provincial Board 

Segundino Purugganan, Secretary, Provincial Board 

Siscnando Silvestre, Provincial Treasurer 

Mauro- Rosario, Prov. Auditor - 

Daniel Aison, Actg. District Engineer 

Eduardo Palma, Provincial Fiscal 

Nicasio Arranz, Asst. Provincial Fiscal 

Hon. Irineo Ranjo, Judge, Court of First Instance 

Hon. Bernardino Quitoriano, Judge, Court of First Instance 

Guillermo Galvez, Clerk of Court, Court of First Instance 

Atty. Remigio Ma. Butacan, Provincial Sheriff 

Capt. Pedro Sumulong, Provincial Provost Marshal, MP 

Dr. Justo Avila, Actg. Dist. Health Officer 

Dr. Gregorio Reyes, Diiector, Provincial Hospital 

Miguel Gaffud, Div. Superintendent of Schools 

Eulalio B. Alfonso, Academic Supervisor 

Alfonso Ponce, Industrial Supervisor 

(Mrs.) Adelaida Rosete Reyno, Home Economics Supervisor 

Vito Diaz, Natl. Language Supervisor 

Salvador Pasion, Provincial Agricultural Supervisor 

Dr. B. B. Belendres, Manager, Food Prod. Campaign for 

Northern Luzon 
Vicente Paras, Dist. Forester 
Domingo Arcalaz, District Land Officer 

OFFICE OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS 
Atty. Alfonso U. Reyno (B.S.E., LL.B.), Register of Deeds 
Juan S v Dayag, Chief Clerk 
Arturo L. Annang, Clerk 
Nicanor Nadal, Clerk 

(NOTE. — The list of municipal officials of Caj?ayan province will b* 
published later) 



THE KEFUBUC 



Province Of Camariiios IVorte 

Capital: Daet 

Hon. REGINO Z. GTJINTO, Provincial Governor 

Pedro Barbin, Member, Provincial Board 

Eugenio Dasco, Member, Provincial Board 

Alberto Sacriz, Secretary, Provincial Board 

Ceferino R. Dino, Provincial Treasurer 

Antero Oida, Asst. Provincial Treasurer 

Gorgonio Valledor, Provincial Auditor 

Marciano Tondo, Chief Clerk, Auditor's Office 

Antonio Soriano, Dist. Engineer 

Saturnino Abes, Div. Superintendent of Schools 

Dr. Florencio Arreola, Dist. Health Officer 

Hon. Catalino Buenaventura, Judge, Court of First Instance 

Emmanuel Siguenza, Clerk of Court, Court of First Instance 

Valentin Reyes, Provincial Fiscal 

Atty. Delfin Sunga, Special Counsel 

Atty. Anacleto de Guzman, Public Defender 

Atty. Baldomero M. Lapak, Register of Deeds 

Capt. Dionisio Velasco, Prov. Commander, MPC 

(NOTK. — The list of municipal officials of Caraarinea Noru will Uj 
published later) 



Province of Catauduanes 

Capitals Yirac 
Hon. REMIGIO SOSITO, Provincial Governor 
Sevenno Tahon, Member, Provincial Board 
Sebastian Quintana, Member, Provincial Board 
Fernando T. Puenies, Provincial Treasure* 
J ose de Guzman, Provincial Auditor 

Huminado G. de Castro, Division Superintendent of Schools 
Atty. Juan Salaz^r, Prov, Fiscal and ^x-Officio Register of Deeds 
Uominador Ermitano, District Engineer 
Dr. Antonio Diaz, Actg. District Health Officer 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL TREASURER 
Fernando T. Fuentes, Provincial Treasurer 
Jose S. Guerrero, Assistant Provincial Treasurer 

e, ^octo Olarte, Bookkeeper 
fcenigno A. Sanchez, Cashier 
Fermin A. Bagadiong, Traveling Deputy 
Demetrio S. Vargas, Internal Revenue Clerk 
Eulogio S. Orendain, Property Clerk 
Domingo Barbara, Deputy Assessor 
Alfredo G. Aldave, Warehouseman 
Juho Guerrero, Janitor-Messenger 

Municipal Treasurer* and Principal Clerks 
Loieto G. Santelices, Municipal Treasurer, Haras 
^eocadio Belaro, Principal Clerk, Treasury, Bar as 
Anastacio A. Gonzales, Municipal Treasurer, Bato 
^smeraldo Chavez, Principal Clerk, Treasury, Bato 
Bartolome T. Regalado, Mun. Treasurer, Calolbon 
Anselmo B. Surban, Prin. Cerk, Treasury, Calolbon 
Leopoldo Santelices, Municipal Treasurer, Pandan 
Dionisio Rojas, Principal Clerk, Treasury, Pandan 
Gaspar Velasco, Municipal Treasurer, Panganiban 
Mateo Fernandez, trine. Clerk, Treasury, Panganiban 
Leoncio M. Mora, Municipal Treasurer, Viga 
Vicente Calderon, Principal Clerk, Treasury, Viga 
Demetrio F. Arcilla, Municipal Treasurer, Virac 
Francisco C. Alejandro, Prin. Clerk, Treasury, Virac 

OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT HEALTH OFFICER 
Dr. Jose Florentino, Dist. Health Officer (On leave) 
Dr. Antonio C. Diaz, Actg. Dist. Health Officer, Virac 
Julian Chavez, Chief San. Insp. and Clerk, Virac 
Inocentes Tablizo, Jan.-Messgr., Virac, Catanduanes 

Presidents of Sanitary Divisions 
Dr. Antonio C. Diaz, 1st San. Div., Virac-Calolbon 
Dr. Raymundo L. Escueta, 3rd San. Div., Viga- Panganiban 



Dr. Alberto P. Redoble, 4th San. Div., Pandan 
(Vacant: President. 2nd Sanitary Division, Bato-Baras) 
0O0 

Province of Cebu 

Capital: Cebu City 

Hon. Manuel Cuenco, Provincial Governor 

Hon. Miguel Raffinan, Member, Provincial Board 

Hon. Placido D. Villacarlos, Member, Provincial Board 

Pantaleon S. Velasquez, Secretary, Provincial Board 

Ubaldo D. Laya, Provincial Treasurer 

Ponciano Reyna, Asst. Prov. Treasurer 

Ramon Fernandez, Prov. Auditor 

Riogracias Estrella. Dist. Engineer 

Felipe Pareja, Prov. Assessor 

Dr. Nicomedes Laborte, Dist. Health Officer 

Dr. Pedro D. Guiang, Div. Supt. of Schools 

Antonio Derecho, Prov. Agr. Supervisor 

Atty. Joaquin T. Maambong, Prov. Sheriff 

Atty. Martina Amoco, Register of Deeds 

Sixto Dancel, Dist. Land Officer 

Dr. Hidelbrando Jurado, Head, Prov. Puericulture Center 
(NOTE— A complete list of Cebu officials and employees in 
eluding' the civ, and municipal .mayors, vice-mayors , count***, 
lecr^ries, treasurers, chiefs of police, P™^*£f 
divisions, justices of the jyeace, teachers, etc.. unU be pubhshect 
in our 'next issue.) 

★ 

Province of (olabato 

OFFICE OF THE REGISTER OF DEEDS 
Cotabato, Cotabato 
« • „f TWH<5- res., Cotabato, Cotabato 
Zacarias C. Antomo ' cVtabato, Cotabato 
Baltazar Macapagal, bemof Cle k, » 
Francisco L. Tan, Clerk; res., Co ab; & 
Alfredo R Bello, Clerk; res., Cotabato, Cotabato 
0O0 

Province of Davit© 

Capital: Davao City 
DAVAO PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENT 
Hon. Antonio C. Lanza r, Provincial Governor 
Hon. Rafael F. Santos, Member, Provincial Hoard 
Hon. Flamin R. Dianco, Member, Provincial Board 

DAVAO CITY GOVKKNM' 
Hon. Leon A. Garcia, Mayor, Davao City 
Hon. PedK) C Quitain, Member, Municipal Hoar, 
Hon. Leopoldo Abellera. Member, Municipal Board 
Hon. Arsenio Villa. osa. Member, Municipal Bp^rd 
Hon. Catalino Sayon, Member, Municipal Boaid 
Hon. Jose Yap, Member, Municipal Board 

OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR 
L. Arabejo, Provincial Secretary 
A. Atienza, Deputy Governor-at-Large 
D. Mirasol, Deputy Governor 

A. Quidato, Deputy Governor 
D. Lacuesta, Deputy Governor 

F. R. Gavales, Deputy Governor 

B. Birov, Deputy Governor 

G. G. Latorilla, Chief Clerk 

Clerks: A. Zamora, J. V. Militante, N. B. Nidia, Miss C. Camus, 
and F. Alvar 

HEADS OF DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS 
P. Encarnacion, Provincial Treasurer, Davao 
B. C. Guerrero, District Engineer 
Fortunato Alagaban, Provincial and City Auditor 
Albert Haynes, Division .Superintendent of Schools 
Maj. Jose J. Jereza, Provincial Provost Marshal 
Alfonso Capili, Prov. Agricultural Supervisor 
Dr. Manuel P. Babao, Chief, Davao Pub. Hospital 
Dr. Marcelino Azusano, Dist. Health Officer 



PAiJK 101 



Atty. M. Belandres, Dist. Land Officer 
Agapito Cenabre, District Forester 
^aulino Valdez, Collector of Customs, Davao port 
Timoti-o Anloague, Provincial Revenue Agent 
Benito Israel, PRRA Representative 

trfecto de los Reyes, Supervisor, Nat. Coop. Adm. 
^emm Cervantes, Chairman and Gen. Mgr., NAFCO 
Sotero Albano, Chief. Fiber Inspection Service 

»audioso Tiongko, Manager, NACOCO, Davao Branch 
kmihano Ealocating, Manager, PNB, Davao Branch 
Atty. Casiano S.- Carin, Public Defender 
^fronio Sencio, Post Office Inspector 
minio Pavino, Immigration Officer 

COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF DAVAO 
Hon. Enrique A. Fernandez, Judge; r Bolton St., Davao 

Alf t0ni ° BaZ ' Clcrk of Court ^ r p - R ^ es St -> Davao 
Alfonso Atilano, Dep. Clk. of Ct.; r Bonifacio St., Davao 
M aho Re stauro, Stenographs r; r Sta. Ana, Davao 
anuel B. Quidato, Interpreter ; r Sea. Ana, Davao 
^nspiniano Siega, Clerk; r Claveria St., Davao 
pastor de l a Cerna, Jr., Clerk; r T. Claudio, Davao 
^icanor S. Bautista, Clerk; r P. Reyes, Davao 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL FISCAL 
Bernardo Teves, Provincial Fiscal; r Claveria St. 
Aida Gil-Damaso, Asst. Prov. Fiscal; r Uyanguren St. 
^mihano Esp^rat, Chief Clerk; r T. Claudio St. 
Caspar C. Eng, Clerk-Messgr. ; r Bonifacio St. 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL SHERIFF 
Eriberto A. Unson, Prov. Sheriff; r San Pedro St. 
fcancho C. Canoy, Deputy Sheriff; r Bolton St. 
Joac Villanueva, Deputy Sheriff; r Claveria St. 
Job Verzosa, Deputy Sheriff; r Legaspi St Ext. 



Province of lloeos Suv 

CAPITAL: VIGAN 
Hon. Peifecto Faypon, Provincial Governor 
Atty, Pablo C. bamdad, Board Member 
Atty. PeiJx V. Vergara, Board Member 
bolronio a. Corpus, Piovmcial Secretary 
Victor F. Dano, Private Secretary 
Mehton Pmoencio, Acting Provincial Treasurer 
J*. Cudiamat, Asst. Pn.vi. Trestfretr ' 
^lorentino Kapili, Division Superintendent of Schools 
Jose Sangalang, Division Academic Supervisor 
Hon Zoilo Huario, .Judge, Court of First Instance, 3rd Judicial 
District 

Alberto A. Awria, Clerk of Court 
Constants Uaius, Deputy Clerk of Court 
Pedro A. Dayao, Provincial Revenue Agent 
Catalino Paraiso, Actg. District fihgin*«r 

Jose K. Letarj»o, Piovmcial Fiscal and Actg. Register of Deeds 

UNUTK. top litt of off&eri and employee*. inclndmu ma,««V lP a/ majors 
and cou,uilo,«, u <at h, pubUshvd Utter) 



Province of La Union 

Capital: San Fernando 
Hon. Agaton R. V:uanon, Provincial Governor 
Hon. Bernabe Aquino, Judge, Couit of First Instance 
Norberto Guray, Member, Prov. Board 
Atty. Joaquin Ortega, Jr., Member, Prov. Board 
Roman Nisperos, Prov. Secretary 
Segundo C. Gloria, District Engineer 
Militon Prudencio, Provincial Treasurer 
Nic. Marin, Provincial Auditor 
Gregorio Dimaano, Div. Supt. of Schnolw 



Dr. Tirso Coronel, Dist. Health Officer 
Atty. Juan P. Aquino, Prov. Fiscal 
Miguel Rilloraza, Clerk of Court 
Pio A. Tadina, Prov. Agr. Supervisor 
Atty. Crisogono Balagot, Register of Deeds 
Atty. Simplicio Cabading, Prov. Sheriff 

(NOTE. — The lint <>)' provincial and municipal officials fur- 
nished t>y the goven nojr will be pubUsked Itater.) 



Province of JLanao 

Capital: Dansalan 

Hon. Louis R. Marohomosar, Governor; r Dansalan, Lanao 
Hon. Muti Araai Kurut, Member, Prov. Board; r Saguiaran 
Hon. Tagoranao Benito, Member, Prov. Board; r Marantao 
Vakntin Daligcon, Prov. Secretary; r Dansalan 
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR 
Datu Berua Alonto, Special Assistant to the Governor; Regan, 
Gata, Lanao 

Datu Barabadan Sultan sa Madamba, Deputy Govenorr-afc- 

Large; r Ganassi, Lanao 
Datu Marmay Radiamuda, Special Deputy Governor; r Dansalan 

Deputy Governors 

Datu Dardagan Macarimbang, Madalum, Lanao 
Datu Darangina Diampuan, Tamparan, Lanao 
Datu Rascid Lucman, Lumbatan, Lanao 
Datu Malawani Mambuay, Ramain, Lanao 
Datu Batugan Malangsaingud, Sungud, Lanao 
Datu Guru Bacu, Marantao, Lanao 
Datu Benasing Macarambon, Uatu, Lanao 
Datu Orangot Marohom, Gamasi, Lanao 
Hadji Cosain Usman, Momungan, Lanao 
Datu Pinto Natangcop, Maguing, Lanao 
Datu Saliwato Radiab, (Asst.), Masiu, Lanao 

Special A gent a 

Datu Buh-g Noska, (At Largej, Gata, Lanao 
Datu Urn par, Kamalig, Lanao 
Hadji Usudan Mama, Dansalan, Lanao 
Datu Macabato Doro, Momungan, Lanao 
Datu Pangcoga Lantong, Tugaya, Lanao 
Datu Udai AlangaUi, Kamain, Lanao 
Datu Sumayan Darimban, Saguiaran, Lanao 
Datu Batalo Radiamoda, Bacolod, Lanao 
Datu Pambayabaya Anaio, Jaiaka, Lanao 
Datu Mangondaya Diciaagen, Malaig, Lanao 
Datu Ambor Radiaugaes, Taraka, Lanao 

Governor's Office Personnel 
Campong Basman, Senior Clerk; r Dansalan, Lanao 
Pantalan Manalundung, Record Clerk; r Dansalan | 
Petronio C. Encabo, Clerk-Stenographer; r Dansalan 
Leo Mbnsanto, Clerk-Typist and Prop! Custodian 

Provincial Warden 

I ran cisco Somosierra, Prov. Warden; r Dansalan 
Juan Ban til an, Sergeant, Jail Guards; r iJansalan 
Simeon Dalura, Corporal, Jail Guards; r Dansalan 

Or KICK OF THE DIST. HEALTH OFFICER 
Dansalan, Lanao 

Dr. Pablo S. Hamoy, District Health Officer 

Dr, Godofredo L. ("allien, Pres., Sanitary Division, Iligan, Lanao 
Dr. Nicanor AguiW, Physician, Maternity Charity Clinic, Ka- 
jiatagan, Lanao 

Dr. ftodolfo N. Padua, Physician, Maternity Charity Clinic, Ma- 
rantao, Lanao 

(NOTE. — The list- of national Officials of the different branches 
qf notional govet n nn fit in Lanao, as well as the list of municipal 
and district officials of this province, will be published in the 
CORN K JO S Dm&CTORY OF TUhl PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC 
for X948) 



PA<;E i0£ 



THE KKPLTBLIC 



Vrovinoe of lA*yte 

OFFICE OF THE DIST. HEALTH OFFICER 
Tacloban, Leyte 

p r> \VeneesL\o Enagc, Acting District Health Officer, TacAoban* 
p r Manuel V. Fuentes, Physician, In Charge, San Jose Civilian 
1 Hospital, Dulag, Leyte 

pr. Ncllo Ro;\, Resident Physician, Baybay Civilian Hospital Ray- 
bay, Leyte 

p r . Jose Silao. Aetg. Chief, Hayhay Civilian Hospital, Baybay, 
r> r . Bernardo Morantte, N.C.C. Physician, Tolosa, Leyte 

Presidents of Sanitary Divisions of Leyte 
pr. Martin Reyes, Carigara, Leyte 
p r . Carlos Matriano, Calubian, Leyte 
p r . Venancio Abanilla. Caibiran, Leyte 
pr. Jorge A. Zamora, Naval, Leyte 
pr. Eutiquiano Fiel, Ormoc, Leyte 
pr. Jose Mercado, Jr., Baybay, Leyte 
Pr. Amado Romero, Hilongos, Leyte 
Dr. Constancio C. Tan, Maasin, ^eyte 
pr. Rannlfo Salazar, Sogod, Leyte 
Pr. James Parado, Liloan, Leyte 
Pr. Leoncio Manalang, Hinundayan, Leyte 

★ 

Province of Misamis Occidental 

Capital: Oroquita 

Hon. GEDEON G. QUIJANO, Governor; r Oroquieta, Misamis 
Occidental 

Bon. PATRICIO CENIZA, Judge, Court of First Instance; r 

Oroquieta, Misamis Occ. 
Hon. Basilio Binaoro, Member, Provincial Board; r Tafigub, 

Misamis Occ. 

Hon. Edilberto Lumasag, Member, Provincial Board; r Plaridel, 
Misamis Occ. 

Filomeno D. Pacana, Provincial Treasurer; r Oroquieta 
Pr. Cayetano Hernandez, Dist. Health Officer; r Oroquieta 
Nazario A. Froilan, Provincial Auditor: r Oroquieta 
Antonio Pinero, District Engineer; r Oroquieta 
Piosdado Bacolod. Provincial Fiscal; r Oroquieta 
Santiago Dizon, Div. Sunt, of Schools; r Oroouicta 
Dr. Jose V. Libunao, Chief, Misamis Occ. Provincial Hospital; 
r Oroquieta 

Simplicio J. Apao Register of Deeds: r Oroquieta 

MUNICIPAL TREASURERS 
Margarito Cagata, Aloran, Misamis Occ. 
Ricardo R. Villanueva, Balingao, Misanrsi Occ. 
Lueio N. Tan, Bonifacio, Misamis Occidental 
Gaudencio Origenos, Clarin, Misnmis Oec. 
Prudent^ Carpio, Jimenez. Misamis Oec. 
Fpnnaco Go. Fernandez. Lopez Jaena. Misamis Occ. 
Maximo Laro, Misamis Misamis Occidental 
Fucrenio Cedilla, Oroquieta, Misamis Occidental 
£ieolas Pascua, Plaridel. Misamis Occidental 
Te6dulo R. Cadiz, Tanguh, Misamis Occidental 
Paulino T. Fuentas, Tudela, Misnmis Occidental 
Pf. Amado Romero, Hilongos, Leyte 
•Dr. Constancio C. Tan, Maasin, Leyte 
Dr. Ranulfo Salazar, Sogod, Levi. 
P*- James Parado, Liloan. Leyte 
Dr. Leoncio Manalang, Hinundayan. Leyte 

★ 

Mountain Province 

OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT ENGINE LR 
Bontoc, Mountain Province 
Rocjuc Peredo, District Engineer, Bontoc, Mt. Province 
F. B. de la Fuente, Civil Engineer, Bontoc 
Joe A. Marana, Assst. Civil Engineer, Bontoc 
Manuel Magno, Asst. Civil Kngineer, Kabugao, Mt. Province 
Manuel Magno, Asst. Civil Engineer, Lagawe, Ifugao, Mt. Prov. 
ince 



V. 0. Ramirez, Chief ClerV, Ledger CAetV and Computer-RegiB- 

trat\on Clerk, Bontoc 
Pedro L. Guiling, Property Clerk. BteftQ 
Simon Aquino, Clerk-Stenographer, Houuc 
Herlindo Bayle, Record Clerk, Bontoc 
Pablo \Yangda\e, C\e\*V>\e$senge\\ Bontoc 

Road Fo roner 
Roberto Tuason. Sabangan, Mt. Province 
Antonio Fagyan, Bontoc, Mt. Province 
Manuel Dunuan, Lagawe, Ifugao, Mt. Province 
Nicomedes Padilla, Lubuagan, Mt. Province 

Surveyors 
P. N. Moron, Bontoc, Mt. Province 
Jose S. Dizon, Bontoc, Mt. Provinc 

Bridge and Building Canxtruetion 
Jose M. Zufiega, Foreman, Bontoc. 
Alfredo M. Matulac, Foreman, Lubuagan 
Pedro Cordero, Foreman. Lubuagan 
Severe Pimentel, Draftsman, Bontoc 
Jesus A. Carino, Gen. Carpenter, Bontoc 

Garage and Storeroom 
Nicanor Valencerina, Chief Mechanic, Bontoc 
Angel Salvador. Garage Foreman, Bontoc 
Porfirio T. Aguana, Checker-Timekeeper 

Road Telephone System 
Felipe Malacas, Superintendent, Road Telephone System, Bontoc 



Province of IVegros Occidental 

Capital: City of Bacolod 

Hon. RAFAEL LA CSON, Provincial Governor 

Hon. Francisco Ferrer, Member, Provincial Board 

Hon. Agustin B. Montilla, Jr., Member, Provincial Board 

Atty. Ladislao Palma, Provincial Auditor 

Fernando S. Fuentes, Actg. Div. Superintendent of Schools 

Fernando Arnaldo, District Engineer 

Jesrs S. Rodriguez, Provincial Fiscal . 

Jose Libon, Assistant Provincial Fiscal 

Jose Encarnacion, Assistant Provincial Fjscal 

Attv. Alfonso Dadivas, Public defender 

Benjamin A. Ledesma. Provincial Sheriff 

Maj. Jesus Mercado, Prov. Pr^vOBt Marshal, MIC 

Cirilo Abrasia. Register of Deeds n „. 

Dr. Ruperto Angodong, District Healt . 0«.cc, 

Dr. Ricardo Jara, Chief, ?XtX+jT^ 

Motees B Aleta, Dist. Land officer, Land District No. R Bacolod 

Dommador D. Pascual, Superintendent , I ; a Crania Sugar Can, 

Experiment Station, La Carlota, Negros Oec. 
Andres T. Pcros Provincial Veterinarian, Bacolod 



COURT OF FIRST INSTANCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAl 
18ht Judicial District 
City of Bacolod 

Hon Francisco Arellano, District Judge 

Hon. Buenaventura Cordova, Judgc-at-Large 

Jose Azcona, Clerk of Court 

Segundo Hip61ito, Dep. Clerk of Court 

Agripino E. Magsuci, Dep. Clerk of Court 

Diosdado Rodrigo, Interpreter 

Luis Sal jay. Docket Clerk 

Apolonio Lamela, Docket Clerk 

Jose Grecia, Docket Clerk 

Felix M. Veniegas, Ch rk 

Bautista Nohlefranca, Clerk 

Aqniles Java, Clerk (Temporary) 



THE REPUBLIC 



Ladislao V. Agudclo, Clerk-Messenger 
Sabas M. Abastillas, Court Stenographer 
Benito C. Jalandoon, Court Stenographer 
Filemon Jalandoon, Court Stenographer 
Perfecto P. Torres, Court Stenographer 
Crisostomo A. Hiceta, Court Stenographer 
Silvino Imperial, Cadastral Clerk 

Josue de Jose, Cadastral Clerk » 
Benjamin Villanueva, Cadastral Clerk 

★ 

Province of Nueva Ecija 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
Cabanatuan 

Amadeo R. Quintos, Provincial Auditor, Cabanatuan 
Filemon O. Olayta, Sr., Chief Clerk 
Dom. B. Cruz, Junior Clerk 

Clerks: 

Rosendo Fi*nncisco Dominador T. Bautista 

Miguel Diaz Rufino R. Oorpuz 

Sergio Abesamis Cristobal G. Javate 

Bembenuto Pcna Francisco V. Santos 

Filemon R. Santos Nicanor S. Hernandez 

Augusto G. Manuel Catalino E. Ferry 

Jose M. Ligon Eu*enio Manabat 

Ernesto Manabat, Felix Mendoza, and Jeremias Alcjo, Laborers 
and Checkers 



Proving of Surigao 

Capital: Surigao 

Ho,. VICENTE L. PIMENTEL, Provincial Governor 
Hon. Canute Sfflrvfflas, Member, Provincial Board 
Hon^ Gmllcrmo ArpilWa, Member, Provincial Board 
Teodoro J. Geraldino, Sectary, Provincial Board 

OFFICE OF THF. GOVERNOR 
Andres F. Olaco, Supt.. non-Christian Tribes 
Juamto Gimcnez, Cbief and Record Clerk 
Catalmo Lesaca, Provincial Warden 

DIFFERENT OFFICE HEADS AND ASSISTANTS 
•Tose. Talon, Provincial Treasurer 
Estcban Andres, Assistant Provincial Treasurer 
Juan Ferrer, Adn, Deputy, Treasurer's Office 
Teodonco Aparicio, Cashier, Treasurer's Office 
Ausp.c.o E. Lopez, Boofckeepet TrrJlJI n ff - 
Enrique Potente, Provincial Audho' 

Vicente *T . •' * uptnnte "<*nt of Schools 

v .cent, Kevecbo, Academic-Industrial Supervisor 
Fernando Catre Chief PWL- a • / \ I,K,vlsm 
M.reelino w <a . ' %*mtendentfs Office 

Mateelmo N. Samson, Distiiet Engineer 
•Tose E. E K ay, Asst. Civil Engineer 

SSVTf' °i ief Clerk > DisWct Engineer's Office 

HoT ™ aVa ' Provi "cial Fiscal 

Hon jfi*! E 1 "" qUeZ ' Jud ^' Co «* of 1st Instance 

K V d ^Z ^' Cleik ° f Cou,t ' ***** Instance 

Att J . Vedasto Nierre, Register of Deeds 

Jose Esp,„o, Provincial Land Offic r 

SgfS T»^rict Forest • 

^^T^^^f ^ster 

Atty. Pablo Cordero \ " ,,Strat0r ' PRC ' Surigao-Agusan 

Dr. Jose L. Quints, lncial Rev em.e Officer 

Luis Catubi K an S^J'^ H( ' aIth Offcier 

Dr. Francis,,, B«fc^, DH Office 

Pantaloon de l 0s P llI,f > Provincial Hospital 

Ceforino C. C0j a . Aprr * Su »»« wisor 

Vicente ViJlamer, LivifajT*' Agr ' Su l )ervisor 

Macario Diaz, Deleg^^V 3 ^ 81 ™ ° fficei * 

° f th ' S*Wj of the Interior 

PAGE 104 



Province of Zamboanga 

Dipolog 

OFFICE OF THE PROVINCIAL TREASURER 
R. D. Macrohon, Prov. Treasurer and Assessor; r. Dipolor, 
Zamboanga 

Leopoldo Suizo, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Aurora, 
Zamboanga 

Ricardo Bergado, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Dapi- 
tan, Zamboanga 

Francisco Martinez, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Di- 
polog, Zamboanga 

I. Carpio, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Kabasalan, 
Zamboanga 

Pedro Milano, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Katipu- 
nan, Zamboanga 

Fantaleon Cabarron. Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, 

Margosatubig, Zamboanga 
Emilio Tagailo, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Paga- 

dian, Zamboanga 

Prudencio B. Melicor, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer. 

Sindangan, Zamboanga 
Melecio Alimpolo, Deputy Prov. and Municipal Treasurer, Siocon, 

Zamboanga 

OFFICE OF THE RROVINCIAL AUDTTOR 
Fe rnando Ordonez. Provincial Auditor, r Dinoloo-. Zamboanga 
Manuel B. Zurbano, Chief Clerk; r Dipolog, Zamboanga 

C I e r k 8 : 

Felix A. Penaranda Angel Sabolboro 

Tereso M. Bomediano Fructuoso Cedeiio 

Feliciano Elias Agripino Sebastian 

Francisco Jimenez Francisco L. Hcrrera 

Aleiandro Gicain 

Jose G. Hamac and Agustin Enriquez, Tnsp.-Checkers 
Irineo Tangcay, Janitor-Laborer 

★ 

City of Zamboanga 

OFFICE OF THE CITY MAYOR 
Hon. Vicente R. Suarez, City Mayor; r Tetuan St, Zamboanga 
Atty. Cesar C. Climaco; City Secretary; r Sta. Maria 
Jesus V. Fernandez, Asst. Secretary; r Canelar 

CITY COUNCIL 
The City Mayor as Presiding Officer 
The City Treasurer as ExJOfficio Member 
The City Treasurer as Ex-Offici oMember 
Hon. Jose C. Fernando, Member; r Urdaneta 
Hon. Abelardo A. Climaco, Member; r Tetuan 
Hon. Tsidro Sta. Elena, Member; r Tsabela 
Hon. Pedro Cuevas, Jr.; Member; r Lamitan 
Hon. Felix G. Pagayonan, Member; r Bailen 

OFFICE OF THE CITY ENGINEER 
Alberto Bautista, City Engineer; r Tetuan 
Balbino Fernandez, Asst. Civil Engineer; r Tetuan 
Marciano Solis. Asst. Civ. Engineer; r Canelar f 
Isabelo Domingo, Chief Clerk; r Alejo Alvarez 

OFFTCE OF THE CITY TREASURER 
Jose Elayda, City Treasurer; r Bailen 
Leon R. Barinaga, Asst. Citv Treasurer; r Sta. Maria 
Ramon G. Regondola, Adm. Deputy; r Gov. Lim Ave. 

OFFICE OF THE CITY AUDITOR 
Saturnino C. Alvarez, City Auditor; r San Jose 
G. M. Pareja, Senior Clerk; r Sta. Barbara 

OFFICE OF THE CITY ASSESSOR 
Monico Luna, City Assessor; r San Jose 
Antonio Rodriguez, Senior Dep. Assessor; r Canelar 

OFFICE OF Tin: CITY HEALTH OFFICER 
Dr. Ricardo A. Climaco, Actg. City Health Officer; r Tetuan 
Dr Filemon Pecson. Medical Officer; r Alejo Alvarez 
Dr Comado Yumol, Medical Officer; r Lamitan 

THE REPUBLIC 



Da Francisco Barrios, Medical Officer— Junior Bacteriologist, Quezon illy 

r Tetuan, Zamboanga City Hon. Ponciano A. Bernardo, Mayor; r 4 Mataba Road, Cubao 

llrs. Isabel C. Climaco, Chief Clerk; r Sta. Maria Hon Matuis q Defensor, Vice-Mayor; r 10 Union Civica, Galas, 

OFFICE OF THE CITY ATTORNEY Quezon City 

Any. Alfonso Dor.esa, Ex-Officio City Attonu-y; r Madrid, Zam- ^ on Lcon Malubay, Councilor; t Sampikoc Aw.. Q. C. 

"boanga City How. Grcgorio Roxas, Councilor; r San Jose, Q. C 

AUr. Pascuat Atilano. Asst. City Attorney; r Canelar ^ ^ Padilla, C ity Secretary; r 515 Montana St., Sampaloc, 

MUNICIPAL COURT * Manila 

Hon. Edmundo S. Pinga, Justice of the Peace; r Jovellar Hon 0 scar Castelo, Judge, Court of 1st Instance; r Sampaloc 

Emiliano Torralba, Clerk of Court; r Canelar Ave., Q. C. 

POLICE DEPARTMENT AUv . Fernando C. ViUaTOSa, City Attorney; r 45 Buenos Aires 

Maj. Felixberto D. Jaldon, Chief of Police; r Canelar Int., Sampaloc, Manila 

Capt. Santiago Alfaro. Asst. Chief of Police; r Tetuan Hon. Prudencio Encomienda, Judge, Municipal Court; r 18o2 

Capt. Gregorio Balajadia, Chief, Secret Service; r Sta. Maria Kalimbas, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

Lt Isabelo Jaldon, Det. Inspector; r Tetuan ' Hon. Ponciano A. Bernardo, Actg. City Engineer (see above) 

FIRE DEPARTMENT Conrado Hernandez, City Treasurer; r 120S Misericordia, Sta. 

Capt. Pablo Sebastian. Fire Chief; r Sta. Maria Cruz, Manila 

Arturo Medina, Fireman Lieutenant; r Tetuan Petronilo I. Vallejo, City Auditor; r Cubao, Q- C. 

Dr Petronio Mor.sod, City Health Officer; r 3 Bulaclac St., Pa 

OFFICE OF THE DIV. SUPT. OF SCHOOLS Ut ' ^ izal 

Sancho Paulino, Ex-Officio City Supt. of Schools; r Madrid Maj ^ c^santo V. Alba, Chief of Police; r 1308 Cavitc St., Sta. 

OFFICE OF THE CITY VETERINARIAN Cruz, Manila 

Dr. Jesus Ballesteros, City Veterinarian; r Gov. Lim Ave. Quintin Pantalcoii, Principal, Quezon City High School: r 255<4 

OFFICE OF THE CITY REGISTER OF DEEDS Angat. Tondo, Manila 

Jose Azcarraga, Ex-Officio City Register of Deeds; r Tetuan Arturo Miranda, Sr., Secretary to the Mayor; r 24 I won mvica, 

(NOTE. — The list of national, provincial <n«l municipal officials ^* l * S ' y,' n n Citv Phvsician r Galas, Quezon City 

of Zamboanga province will be published later) Dr. Lorenzo Yuson, Ut> rny*J.cian 

★ 

MUSIC DIRECTORY 

Directory Of Music Schools And Con- st ma ^ y ; s couege M * usi * Apartment 

•SOrvutorioS Til Manila Alld Provinces Sister T ranquilina Fernandez, Directress; Bspana bt., Manila 

♦ >? * 

Compiled and Edited by CRISANTO R. CORNEJO gT pAUL ,g COLLEGE, Conservatory of Music 

ASSUMPTION COLLEGE, Music Department Sister 'Marie St. Vincent, Directress; Tennessee, Mania 

Prof. P„ra Lacson-ViUanueva, ^Directress; Herran, Manila SCH0LASTICA , S COLLEGE, Conservator,- of Music 

. ~ , _ n q "R Directress; Penns\nania, i*j.<* 

CENTRO ESCOLAR UNIVERSITY', Conservatory of Music Sister Gunfrida Schueyer, u...tf., 

Prof. Hilarion F. Rubio, Director; Mendiola, Manila nila * * * 

COLEGIO DEL SAGRADO CORAZON, Music Department ST. THERESA'S COLLEGE, Co ^*^ 

Sister Celia Garganera, Directress; Iloilo City Rev. Mother Julieta, Direct i ess,, ; 

CONCORDIA COLLEGE, Lool of Music UNIVERSITY OF MANILA, JJ^^JJ^ VI> ^ 

Sister Graciana Raymundo, Directress; 2487 Herran, Paco, Ma- Prof. Concepcion U neuci , 

nila paloc, Manila * * * 

PAoir^^^ * * * TTmvrPQTTV OF THE PHILIPPINES, Conservatory of Music 

COSMOPOLITAN ACADEMY OF MUSIC UNIVERMT* °\ pH p : a Ma „ 51a 

Prof. Antonio J. Molina, Director; Pilar Bldg., Plaza Sta. Cruz, Prof. Ramon Tapales, Director, Iad.e M *" lla 

Mamla ^ UNIVERSITY OF SANTO TOMAS, Conservatory of Music 

HOLY GHOST COLLEGE, M„ sic ^ ^^£ZZ*XZ?S£L "~ °~ 

lister Edgaria, S.Sp.S., Dean; 1G3 Mendiola, Manila &*> 1)1 - Keg 1 

la consolacion music school Philippine Federal ion of Musicians 

Sor Carmeliia de Jesus, O.S.A., Directress; Sa n Rafael, Manila 504 Ronquillo St., Manila 

* * * Ricardo Leuterio, President 

LAPERAL PIANO SCHOOL 

Prof. Leonor Laperal, Directress; 117 Legarda, Sampaloc, Manila X«llioiiaI FodOfaliOM Of >lll*M 

ST. BRIDGET'S ACADEMY, Music Department OFFICERS FOR 1947-1948 

Sister Mary St. John Eudes, Directress; Batangas, Batangas President Rodolfo }l. Cornejo (on Leave in I .S.) 

* * * First Vice President Prof. Antonio J. Molina 

STA. ISABEL ACADEMY OF MUSIC Second Vice President Prof. Hilarion F. Rubio 

Sister Catalina Ledesma, Directress; 210 Taft Avenue, Manila Executive Secretary Lucrecia Kasilag 

* * * - Ass't. Executive Secretary Carolina de la Rama-Cornejo 

ST. JOSEPH'S ACADEMY OF MUSIC General Treasurer Leonor Laperal (on leave) 

Sor Maria Angela, Directress; Espaiia Ext., Quezon City (Gm 



THK REPUBLIC 



PACK 10f» 



PROFESSIONAL AND BUSINESS DIRECTORY 



l> II O F KSSIOX A L 



ACCOUNTANTS, CERTIFIED 
PUBLIC 

BELISARIO, RUPERTO B. 

Certified Public Accountant 

37 Comandante, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
BUENAFLOR, ISAAC 

Certified Public Accountant 

58fi Zamora, Rizal City 
DE LEON, ADOLFO R. 

Certified Public Accountant 

2225 Misericordia, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
DEL ESPIRITU SANTO, JOSE 

Certified Public Accountant 

Rms. 304-306, Regina Bldg., Escolta 

Manila. — Tel. 2-81-34 
GARRIDO, ALEJANDRO T. 

Certified Public Accountant 

C o Rehabilitation Finance Corpn. 

Res., 184 (Int. 2), Dolores St. 

Rizal City 

LANSANG, AM ADO S. 

Certified Public Accountant 

do Peter Paul Phil. Corp. 

Rm. 338 Re ff ina Bid*., Escolta 

Manila.— Tel. 2-61-89 
OCAMPO, HERMINIO P 

SiS?¥5. 1>llblic Ac ^»ntant 

Manila * **** 
PERALTA, MODESTO F 

Certified Public Accountant 

«2 Bamban,,, Sta. C Vuz, Manila 



DENTISTS 



ARCHITECTS 



ABAC, FERNANDO B 
Architect 

ivunUa. -Tt 1. 2-94-53 
BAnAS. ANTONIO V. 
Architect 

720 Humbug, sta. Cruz, Manila 
BMlNAUDo, FERNANDO 
Architect 

im Trabajo, Sampaloc, Manila 
COCADIZ, MACARIO B 
Architect 

2064 Azcarraga, Manila 
Wjr. Address: Lopez. Quezon 
NLGAbo. SUSANO r 
Arehiu>ci 

Mofayt* & p. |> a r*de s Sta 
Sampaloc, Manil, 
RUIZ, ELIAS I 

Architect and Huilder 

AN JUAN, ENRIQUE s 
A rdi it oct ; Tel. 5-1fVU ■ 
^ F ' R Harrison, ,> is5a , ri(y 



CABANLONG, Dr. BUENAVENTURA E. 
Dentist 

229-C Libertad St., Pvizal City 

Res., 42 P. dc Mayo, Rizal City 
IGNACIO, Dr. PASCUAL A. 

Dentist; Prop., Dental Clinic 

3351 Taft Ave., Rizal City 

Telephone 5-18-50 
LAGAK, Dr. JOSE \>. 

Dental Surgeon 

18ir> Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
NAZARENO. Dr. EUSEBIO M, 

I) . T) . S . — Maxillo-Facial Surgery and 

Oral Medicine; Ex-Rcsident Dentist, 

Illinois Hospital, Chicago 

3464-A Taft Ave., Rizal City 
SAN AGUSTIN, Dr. DA LIS AY 

Dentist 

Taft Theatre Building 
3458 Taft Ave, Rizal City 



DRUGGISTS 



FARMACIA CHUAPOCO 

272 Libertad St., Rizal City 

Dr. Cecilio Chuapoco, Pharm. & M.D. 

Proprietor 
FARMACIA GALVEZ 

Drug Store; Tel. 5-15-30 

2£0 Libertad St., Rizal City 
FARMACIA GLORIA 

Drug Store 

322 Libertad St.. Rizal City 
Liwayway Reyes-Llamas 
Pharmacist-Proprietress 
NATIONAL DRUG STORE 
125 Plaza Goiti, Roces Building 
Sta. Cruz, Manila 
Geronimo Santiago, Proprietor 

'engineers, civil 

MMSON, MAXIMO 
Civil Engineer 

1600 Washington, cor. Calamba 
Sampaloc, Manila 
ESCOBAR, EDUARDO R. 
Civil Engineer 
117 Ma/a Goiti, Eta. Cruz 
Manila 

Il C A DOR CONSTRUCTION 

Knginters- Architects-Contractors 

Suite 209. Limjoco Bldg. 

670 Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 
KEYSTONE CONSTRUCTION CO., Inc. 

Civil & Mechanical Engineers 

Architects and Surveyors 

9| San Rafael, Manila 
XEGADO, SUSANO R. 

Civil Engineer ft Architect 

Morayta, cor. P. I 'a rides St. 

Sampaloc, Manila 



ENGINEERS. CONTRACTING 

BISDA, ARSENIO 

Engineering Contractor 

148 Int. La Loma, Quezon City 
DIMSON, MAXIMO 

Contracting Engineer 

151>1> Washington, cor. Calamba 

Sampaloc, Manila 
GOCHANGCO, EPHRAIM G. 

Contracting Engineers 

Cor. Rizal Ave. & Azcarraga 

Sta. Cruz, Manila 
JUGADOR CONSTRUCTION 

Contracting Engineers 

Suite 209, Limjoco Bldg. 

070 Dasmarinas, Manila 
SIOCHI & CO., INC., PEDRO 

Contracting Engineers 

310 Calvo Bldg., Escolta, Manila 

ENGINEERS. ELECTRICAL 

MORA ELECTRIC CO., INC., E. J. 

Electrical Engineers 

941-B Lepanto, Sampaloc, Manila 
ROMAGO ELECTRIC CO., INC. 

Electrical Engineers 

937 Ongpin, Cor. Raon. Manila 

1 . 

ENGINEERS, MARINE 

ATLANTIC GULF & PACIFIC CO. OF 
MANILA 

Marine and Mechanical Engineers 
Sales Office: 222 Regina Bldg. 
Escolta, Manila 

Office and Shop: Barrio Punta, Santa 
Ana, Manila 

ENGINEERS. MINING 

LIM, NESTORIO N. 

Clo Bureau of Mines, Manila 

Res., 446 FuenteS, Singalong Subdiv. 

Manila , 
S A LIT A. DOMINGO C. 

Mining Engineer 

R-313 Center Theatre Bldg. 

Quezon Blvd., Quiapo, Manila 

LAWYER S 

AGUDO, S. B. 

Attorncy-at-La\v and CP. A. 
Suite 211, Calvo Bldg., GO Escolta 
Manila 

ALMEDA, ROLICARPO G. 

Attorney-at-La\v and Notary Public 

R-303 De Leon Bldg., Rizal Ave. 

Cor. Kaon, Sta. Cruz. Manila 
kascox. E&NfiSTO H. 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

27 Romy, Rizal City 



JLEZA, ILDEFOXSO M. 
Attorney- at- Law- 
Suite o(>3. Wilson Bldg., Manila 
Tclephonv 2-f»r>-7 L 
POCORO. GAUDENCIO T. 

(Assistant t it y Fiscal of Manila 
C o City Hall, Manila 
RONT()< , MOISTS O. 

Attorney-at-Law (Ex-Prov. Fiscal) 
jjfel9 Burgos St., Rizal City 
CASTA5TKDA, DEOGRAOIAS B. 
, Attorney -at- Law 

R-402 Sanianillo Bldg., Escolta 
•Manila.— Ti l. 2-64-09 
( 0LAY< o. JOSE C. 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
L05 M. Colayco St., Rizal City 
CORNEJO, MIGUEL R, (A.B.. LL.B.) 
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City; Tel 5-14-59 
u +< VEGA, JOSE C. 
Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 
1342 P. M . Guerrero St., Manila 
DECENA, JUAN C. 
Attorney-at-Law 
127 Sandejas, Int., Rizal City 
DIMAGIBA, HERMOGENES R. 
Attorn cy-at-Law 
Cto Plaridel Surety & Ins. Co. 
l °9 ''la/a Sta. Cruz, Manila 
DOMINGO, ARTEMIO 
Attorney-at-Law 
3577 Taft Ave., Rizal City 
DUNCA, ISIDRO T. 
A ttom ey- at- Law 

2nd Floor, Chaco Bldg., PL Cervantes 

Manila.— Tels. 2-66-51 & 2-70-95 
GALVEZ, CESAR 

Attorney-at-Law and CP. A. 

Park Avenue, Rizal City 
pALVEZ, JOSE S. 
^Attorneyat-Law 

151 Park Ave., Rizal City 
GARCIA, PEREGRINO 

Attorn i-y-at-Law 

104 M. Colayco. Rizal City 
CERALBEZ, CEFERINO M. 

Attorney-at-Law (LL.B., LL.M.) 

R-204 Rcgina BJdg., 144 Escolta 

Manila.- Tel. 2-61-34 
SERMAN, MILAGROS A. 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

R-105 Chaco Bldg:., Plaza Cervantes 

Tel. 2-80130; r 1025 Rizal Ave 

Manila 

J*A MORA, CELSO B. 
Attornev-at-Law 

Taft Ave., in tronl of PGH 
Ermita, Manila 

LEGASPI-BAUTJSTA, Mrs. pa'a 

Attorney-at-Law 

1 y Agrio, Sta. MesS IL-iehts 

Quezon City 

LL AM A NZ ARES, TfEODORO M. 

Attorney-at-Law 

346h Taft. Ave., Rizal City 

Res., 125 M. Colajrco, Rizal Qitj 
LONTOK, MAK( ELIJtfO 

Attorney-at-Law 

K-2J1 Villonco Bldg. 

§15 Quezon Blvd., Manila 

Res., 20 S. Pablo. San Juan. Rizal 



MAN ALOTO. ENRIQUE T. 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City 

Res., 97 M. Colayco, Rizal City 
MENDIOLA. PEDRO C. 

Attorney-at-Law ^ Ex- Asst. City Fiscal) 

Suite 204, Consolidated Inv. Bldg. 

Plaza Goiti, Sta. Cruz. Manila 
MENDOZA, ARTCRO 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

609 Burgos St.. Rizal City 

Tel. 5-15-05 
PALACOL, MLAGDALENO MENDOZA 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

3460 Taft. Ave., Rizal City; Tel 5-14-50 
PE8AFL0R, MARCELO R. 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

.~>p> Burgos St., Rizal City 
I'IMKXTKL, JUAN MAURICIO 

Attorn ey-at-Law and Notary Public 

1)88 Trabajo, Sampaloc, Manila 
VI LLAFUE R T E V E X A L, C 0 R ( ) N A 

Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public 

1177 Dagupan St., ToiidO, Manila 

OPTICIANS & OPTOMETRISTS 

ACEBEDO OPTICAL CO 
Opticians and Importers 
l>r. FeliX B. Acebedo, Manager 
428 Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz, Manila 

ANACLETO & DEL MUNDO 
Opticians and Optometrists 
$00 Rizal Ave., cor. Raon St. 
Also at Crystal Arcade, 63 Escolta 
Manila 

CO DUAN. Di\ BENJAMIN 

Optician and Optometrist 

403 Salazar St., Manila 
GARCIA, Dr. NEMESIO G. 

Optician and Optometrist 

L754 Azcarraga, cor. Rizal Ave. 

Santa Cruz, Manila 
REYES, A. P., OPTICAL & DEPT. 

STORE 

Raon, cor. Sales, Sta. Cruz. Manila 
Dr. A. P. Reyes, Prop. & Mgr. 
SABATER, Dr. MANUEL 
Optician and Optometrist 
306-307 Calvo Bldg., 60 Escolta 

PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS 



BAGABALDO, Dr. CIRIACO V. 

Physician, and Surgeon 

3373 Taft Ave., Rizal City 
CONC.EPCION. Dr. tSABELO 

Physician, Specialist in Nutrition 

Zamora St.. Rizal City 
CRUZ, Dr. ARTEMIO I . 

Physician and Surgeon 

3526 Taft Ave, Rizal City 
1NOCENCIO, Dr. GERMAN 

Physician and Surgeon 

554 F. B. Harrison, Rizal City 

Tel. 5-15-11 
GALVEZ, Dr. MANUEL S. 

Physician and Surgeon 

260 Libertad St., Rizal City 

Tel. a-lf»-36 
GALVEZ, Dr. RUPERTO S. 

Physician and Surgeon 

Specialist, in Eye. Ear, Nose and 

Throat, from Wills Eye Hospital. ISA. 



3454 Tail Ave, R\ta\ City 
JAVIER, Dr. A. B. 

Physician and Surgeon 

35« Taft Ave., Rizal City 

Tels. 5-15-12 & 5-1G-66 
LEVERIZA, Dr. JOSE C. 

Physician and Surgeon 

2164 Tramo Road, Rizal City 

Tel. 5-16-81 
MAYOR, Dr. VICENTE A. 

Physician and Surgeon 

322 Libertad St., Rizal City 
NAZARIO, Dr. TOMAS T. 

Physician and Surgeon 

620 Quezon Blvd.. Quiapo, Manila 
OSTERIA. Dr. ASISLO I. 

Physician and Surgeon 

3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City 
QUINTOS, Dr. ARTURO L. 

Physician and Surgeon 

Skin Specialist: Professor, College of 

Medicine, U.S.T., Manila 

Res., 342 Espaha St.. Manila 
TORRES, Dr. ANDRES 

Physician and Surgeon 

365-367 Echague, Quiapo, Manila. 
SAN JUAN, Dr. EDUARDO S. 

Physician and Surgeon 

3528 Taft Ave., Rizal City 

Tels. 5-15-12 & 2-16-66 
ZABAT. Dr. JOSE V. 

Physician and Surgeon 

Room 10. Upstairs, 517 Azcarraga 
Manila 

SUR VEYORS, LAND 

ANGELES, PEDRO J. 
Land Surveyor 

2nd Floor, Monte dc Piedad Bldg. 
Plaza Sta. Cruz, cor. Ongpm 

PHILIPPINE SURVEYING COMPANY 
201 Peoples Bank Bldg. 
Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 

MISCELLANEOUS 



FRANCISCO DAYRIT 

The Famous Pampango Caterer 

9107 Bolinao, cor. Tayabas 

Sta. Cruz, Manila Call Tel. 2-65-28 
GUILLERMO K. FLORANO 

Representing 

Manila Home Investment 

Rm 309, Eamanillo Bldg. 

Escolta. Manila 
LECHADORES BROS. 

Dry Cleaning & Laundry 

;;7VD Libertad, Rizal City 
MODERNISTIC BEAUTY SHOP 

AND DRESS-MAKING 

1810 Oroqunta, Sta. Cruz 

Manila 
RAMOS, CIR1LO DK 

Special Crop Loan Inspector for Lagu- 
na Agency, Phil. Natl. Bank 

Sta. Cruz and Lumbang. Laguna 
SANTIAGO RADIO & 
ELECTRICAL SUPPLIES 

Radios, Records, Spare Parts, and 

Electrical Appliances 

312 Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz. Manila 



1 HE RBPUBLrtl 



CLASSIFIED KrslXKSK lllltKI TOIKY 



ABACA DEALERS 



AJERO SEPECIALTY PRODUCTS CO. 

Legaspi, Albay 
ALBAY ABACA ARTS 

Daraga, Albay 
ALLIED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES 

233 Rizal St., Legaspi, Albay 
ARGAO MERCHANTS, INC. 

Argao, Cebu City 
GENERAL COMMERCIAL CO. 

R-105 Chaco Bldg., Plaza Cervantes 

Binondo, Manila 
LIM SUI & CO. 

Claveria St., Davao City 
McLAURIN ENTERPRISES 

64 Rizal Ave. Ext.. Grace Park 

Caloocan, Rizal 
NORTHWESTERN TRADING CO. 
„. 3 28 Dasmarifias, Manila 

o ABACA ART FACTORY 

256 Bonot St., Legaspi, Albay 



_J^OBE_ STQ NE DEALER S 

L 1i? r S( i LUCI0N (Andal & 

>¥- -v / Han " iSOn St "> ™* 

SANTO? V**i Ri2al 
SANTOS. MARTIN C 

2( '20 Herran. Manil , 



ALADCO a ' Cruz - Ma »»a 

Ma 3 ni, F r ,lge,ista ' ** Kaon 
ALINSOD ENTERPR ISESf p „ 
BFT Tn Manila 

p-fb O ;tf 0 s c t lt TE p f JESSE 

Ri^al Ave ^ 
MANILA ADV^Ssmr 

MARCHADESTM f nte ' Manil * 

10 43 Castm„ • ' A - C - 
PHILIPptn^^ Q«iapo, Manila 

J** M-Sli^ 0 "^ BUREAU 
binondo, Manila Da smarinas 



^fwl ZV / US 

Moragl il^t Bld S-> Plaza 
CATHAY fiSfc ManUa 

806 Avala SlJ , AIRWAY «' LTD. 

5 AI PLINES, INC. 
INSULAR a^?' Manila 

Manila 125 E scolta 

PAGE J 08 



PAN AMERICAN WORLD AIRWAYS 
Luneta Extension, Manila Hotel 
Manila 

PHILIPPINE AIRLINES, INC. 
M.R.S. Bid., Plaza Cervantes 
Manila 

PHILIPPINE OVERSEAS AIRLINES 

2nd 'Floor, Brias Roxas Bldg. 

75 Escolta, Manila 
TRANS-ASIATIC AIRLINES, INC. 

Mezzanine Floor, Chaco Bldg. 

Plaza Cervantes, Manila 

AIRPORTS 



FEATI AIRPORT 

Grace Park, Caloocon, Rizal 
MAKATI AIRPORT 

San Pedro Makati, Rizal 

ARMS & AMMUNITION 
DEALERS 



ISAAC GUN STORE 

664 F. Torres, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
PHILIPPINE TRADING COMPANY 

R-207, 2nd Floor, Luzco Bldg. 

180 David, Manila 

ARRASTRE 

MANILA PORT TERMINAL 
Muelle de San Francisco, Manila 

ASBESTOR PRODUCTS 

NORTON & HARRISON COMPANY 
814 Echague, Quiapo, Manila 

ASPHALTS 

STANDARD-VACUUM OIL COMPANY 
5th Floor. Ayala Bldg., Manila 

A SSAY ERS ~ 

PHILIPPINE ENGINEERING 
CORPORATION 
936 Raon, Quiapo, Manila 

AUTOMOBILE ACCESSORY 
DEALERS 



ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE 
(Levy Hnos.) 

123 Mendoza, Quiapo, Manila 
FIRESTONE TIRE & RUBBER CO. OF 

THE PHILIPPINES 

130 Legasda, Sampaloc, Manila 
GENERAL AUTOMOTIVE SUPPLY 

CO., Inc. 

1056-1062 Azcarraga, corner of Reina 

Regente, Manila 
GOLDEN STAR AUTO SUPPLY 

L0B1 Rizal Avenue, Manila 
GOODRICH INTERNATIONAL 

RUBBER CO. 

13th & Atlanta Strs., Port Area, Manila 



GOODYEAR TIRE & RUBBER CO. OF 
THE PHILIPPINES, LTD., THE 
Wilson Bldg., Manila 

GUNG HO AUTO SUPPLY 
602 Benavides, Manila 

KIKO ELECTRICAL SERVICE & AUTO 
SUPPLY 

1007 Rizal Ave., Manila 
LUZON AUTO SUPPLY 

Torres Bugallon, Dagupan City 
MANILA AUTO SUPPLY 

1054-1056 Rizal Avenue, Manila 

AUTOMOBILE DEALERS 

AUTOMOBILE & GENERAL MACHIN- 
ERY EXCHANGE 
902 Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

BACHRACH MOTOR CO., INC., The 

Port Area, Manila 
BATAAN MOTOR CORPORATION 

13th & Atlanta, Port Area, Manila 
ELIZALDE MOTORS, INC. (De Soto 

Automobiles and Trucks) 

Elizalde Bldg., Muelle de la Industrie, 

Manila 

ESTRELLA AUTO PALACE 
(Levy Hnos.) 

123 Mendoza, Quiapo, Manila 

LIBERTY MOTORS, INC. (Willys Jeeps, 
Trucks, Station -Wagons, Autos) 
384 Tanduay St., Manila 

McLAURIN ENTERPRISES 

McLaurin Bldg., 64 Rizal Ave. Ext. 
Grace Park, Caloocan, Rizal 

MANILA TRADING AND SUPPLY' CO. 
Port Area, Manila 

PHILIPPINE MOTORS, INC. 
Corner Padre Faura & Dakota 
Ermita, Manila 

RELIANCE MOTORS, INC. 
13th & Boston Sts., Port Area 
Manila 

UNITED MOTORS (P. I.), INC. 
Echague & Ayala, Manila 

BANKING & FINANCING 
CORPORATIONS 

BANK OF THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 
296 Plaza Cervantes, Mania 

CHARTERED BANK OF INDIA, AUS- 
TRALIA AND CHINA 
Trade & Commerce Bldg., 123 
Juan Luna, Manila 

CHINA BANKING CORPORATION 
Corner Dasmarifias & Juan Luna Sts. 
Manila 

HONGKONG AND SHANGHAI BANK- 
ING CORPORATION 
Hongkong & Shanghai Bank Bldg. 
Juan Luna, Manila 

NATIONAL CITY BANK OF NEW 
YORK 

Ayala Bldg., Juan Luna, Manila 

THE REPUBLIC 



NEDERLANDSCH INDISCHE HAND- 

ELSBANK N. V. 

21 Plaza Moraga, Binondo, Manila 
PEOPLES BANK AND TRUST COM- 
PANY 

Peoples Bank Bldg., corner David 
& Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 

PHILIPPINE BANK OF COMMERCE 
State Theatre Bldg., Ground Floor 
Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz, Manila 

PHILIPPINE BANK OF COMMUNICA- 
TIONS 

Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 
PHILIPPINE NATIONAL BANK 

PNB Building, Escolta, Manila 
REHABILITATION FINANCE CORPO- 
RATION 

Regina Bldg., Escolta, Manila 

BROKERS, CUSTOMS 

ANG GIOK CHIN 

320 Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 
CARLOS, VICENTE 

R-214 Maritima Bldg., Dasmarinas 

Manila 

CHAN, FRANCISCO C. Y. 

329 Dasmarinas, Manila 
COMMONWEALTH BROKERAGE 
> 355 Juan Luna, Plaza Binondo, 

Manila 

ESTUDILLO & PAEZ Co., Inc. 

R-211-215 Maritima Bldg., Dasmarinas, 

Manila 
GUASH, JOSE 

329 Dasmarinas, Manila 
HIPONIA, JESUS O. 

Reyes Bldg., cor. Plaza Moraga 

and Rosario, Binondo, Manila 
JOSE TRANSPORTATION INC., 

ANGEL 

207 Tuberias, Manila 
LUZON BROKERAGE CO., INC. 
No. 2 Derham Bldg., Muelle do 
San Francisco, Port Area, Manila 
MAGLIGLIG, AMADO 

329 Dasmarinas, Manila 
MANILA LIGHTER TRANSPORTA- 
TION, INC. 

Office. 305 Trade & Comm. Bldg. 

Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila 

Garages: 613 San Marcelino & 

390 Paz, Paco, Manila 
MANLAPIT, INC., GUILLERMO 

2nd Floor, Maritima Building 

Cor. Dasmarinas & Juan Luna 

Binondo, Manila 
MIA CO., JOSE D. 

2nd Floor, Uy Yet Bldg., 217 Dasmari- 
nas, Binondo, Manila 
NAVALES, A. T. 

No. 1, 491 Dasmarinas, Manila 
ORTEGA, B. L. 

c|o West Pacific Brokerage Corpn. 

Inc., R-311 Maritima Bldg., Manila 
RAPID BROKERAGE CO., INC. 

329 Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 
SANTOS, LUIS DE LOS 

c|o West Pacific Brokerage Corp., 

Inc., R-311 Maritima Bldg., Manila 
SERRANO TRANSPORTATION 

R-207, 2nd Floor, Goldenberg Bldg. 

Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 



TIONLOC, INC., ILDEFONSO 
3rd Floor, Maritima Bldg., Juan 
Luna & Dasmarinas, Manila 
UNION EXPRESS BROKERAGE, INC. 
R-208 Limjoco Bldg., 670 Dasmarinas 
Binondo, Manila 
WEST PACIFIC BROKERAGE CORP., 
INC. 

Room 311, Maritima Bldg., Juan Luna 
corner Dasmarinas, Manila 

BROKERS, GENERAL 

ANGELES COMMERCIAL SERVICE Co. 
3rd Floor, Veloso Bldg., 181 David 
Binondo, Manila 

GREENE & LOVELES 

506 Wilson Bldg., Juan Luna, Manila 

ROXAS Y CIA. 

6th Floor, Soriano Bldg., Plaza 
Cervantes, Binondo, Manila 

WAR VETERANS REALTY ENTERPRI- 
SES. INC. 

2nd Floor, Goldenberg Bldg., R-203 

Cor. Dasmarinas & Nueva, Manila 
WIGER, E. W. 

702 Trade & Commerce Building 

123 Juan Luna, Manila 
YEATON, ELMER & 

309 Villonco Bldg., Quezon Blvd. 

Quiapo, Manila 

INSURANCE COMPANIES 

CENTRAL SURETY CO., Inc. 
885 Rizal Ave., Manila 

CROWN LIFE INSURANCE OF TOR- 
ONTO, The 

4th Floor, Trade & Comm. Bldg. 

123 Juan Luna, Manila 
FILIPINAS COMPANIA DE SEGUROS 

2nd Floor, Filipinas Bldg., Manila 
PLARIDEL SURETY & INSURANCE 

CO. 

109 Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila 
PROVIDENT INSURANCE CO. OF THE 
PHILIPPINES 

3rd Floor, Regina Bldg., Escolta 
Manila 

RIZAL SURETY AND INSURANCE CO. 
3rd Floor, Wilson Bldg., 139 Juan Luna, 
Manila 

UNITED STATES LIFE INSURANCE 
CO., THE 

Wilson Bldg., Juan Luna. Manila 
VISAYAN SURETY & INSURANCE 
CORPORATION 

6th Floor Trade & Commerce Bldg. 

Juan Luna. Binondo, Manila 
WEST COAST LIFE INSURANCE 

COMPANY OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Phil. Branch Office: Ayala Bldg. 

Manila 
WISE <fc CO., INC. 

174-176 Juan Luna. Binondo, Manila 

MERCHANTS, GENERAL 

ALLIED BUSINESS ENTERPRISES 

233 Rizal St., Legaspi, Albay 
AMERICAN FACTORS (PHIL.), INC. 

Gen. Offices: 307 Myers Bldg. 

Port Area, Manila 



ANG MAHUNIT (AMIGLEO BROS.) 

San Pedro St., Davao City 
ANG 96 

145 P. Burgos, San Roque, Cavite City 
ARANETA & CO., J. AMADO 

2nd Floor, Chaco Bldg., Plaza Cervantes, 
Manila 

ARMER IMPORT COMPANY 

Junquera St., Cebu City 
ARTI SUPPLY 

Libertad St., Tagbilaran, Bohol 
ASIATIC COMMERCIAL 

806 San Fernando, Manila 
ASSOCIATED EXPORT & IMPORT CO., 

P.I. 

R-202 Regina Bldg., Escolta, Manila 
AYALA Y CIA. 

3rd Floor, Insular Life Bldg. 
Manila 

BAYBAY ENTERPRISES, INC. 

Bavbav, Tacloban, Leyte 
BAZAR DE LOS AMIGOS 

Washington St., Bacolod City 
BOMBAY DEPARTMENT STORE 

605 Rizal Ave., Manila 
BOMBAY TRADING COMPANY 

35 Escolta, Manila 
BORJA & SONS, INC., J. D. 

224 Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila 
BORROMEO BAZAR 

124 P. Burgos, San Roque, Cavite 

City 

CAMACHO & SONS 
100 P. Burgos, San Roque, Cavite 

CAMARINES SUR RETAILERS' CO- 
OPERATIVE ASSOCIATION, INC. 
Naga, Camarines Sur 

COMPANIA GENERAL DE TABACOS 
DE FILIPINAS 
499 Tanduay, Quiapo, Manila 

FAR EAST AMERICAN COMMERCIAL 

CO., INC. . ^ 

3rd Floor, Yutivo Bldg., Dasmarinas, 

Manila 
FILIPINO STORE 

21 Gonzaga St., Bacolod City 
FRIEDER & SONS, S. 

705 Wilson Bldg., Manila 
GARCIA COMMERCIAL & INDUSTRIAL 

CO., LTD., E. L. 

R-101 Chaco Bldg., Plaza Cervantes 

Manila 
GETZ BROS. & CO. 

3rd Floor, Trade & Commerce Bldg. 

123 Juan Luna, Manila 
GMUR INC., OTTO 

Wilson Bldg., Juan Luna. Manila 
GO SOC & SONS AND SY GUI HUAT, 

INC. 

822 Rizal Ave., Manila 
GOLDEN STAR 

260 T. Padilla St., Cebu Citv 
GOLDENBERG, M. 

New Goldenberg Bldg., Dasmarinas 

Binondo, Manila 
GOMBA & HERMOSURA 

Cor. Sales & Raon, Manila 
GOODWILL TRADING & GOOD- 
WILL ROOK STORE 

707 Rizal Ave., Manila 
GREAT CHINA COMMERCIAL 

29 Escolta, Manila 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE !0P 



GREENE & LOVELES 

506 Wilson Bldg., Juan Luna, Manila 
GREUTER & MATILE 

R-320 Calvo Bldg., 60 Escolta, Manila 
GUAN SENG TRADING 

Guardia Nacional St., Zamboanga City 
HUA TAY TRADING 

491 Nueva, Manila 
INDIAN COMMERCIAL CO. 

779-781 Tabora, Manila 
IPEKDJIAN BROS., LTD. 

312 Ayala Bldg., Manila 
ISLES TRADING 

(Successors to Regino Santos) 

Office. 302 Gandara, Manila 

Tannery: 245 15th Ave., Quezon City 

Snoe Factory: Km. 11.9 N. Domingo 

Quezon City 

Shoe Store: 350 Legarda, Sampaloc 
Manila 

JACINTO COMMERCIAL COMPANY 

421 Nueva, Binondo, Manila 
KAHIRUP DRUG & GENERAL STORE 

Gonzaga St., Bacolod City 
KELLER & CO., Ltd., ED. A. 

3rd Floor, Wise Bldg., 179 Juan Luna, 

Manila 

KHO HOCK SENG CORN AND RICE 

MILL AND SOAP FACTORY 

Tagbilaran, Bohol 
KING TRADING, D. T. 

396-398 Juan Luna, Manila 
LA AMISTAD 

64 Aldeguer St., Iloilo Citv 
LA EDITORIAL (De Dolores G. P. de Ap- 

pelaniz) 

206-208 Jose M. Basa St., Iloilo Citv 

ESTRELLA DEL NORTE 
(Levy Hermanos Inc.) 
7 A°^ 10U R - H; <*al*o, Quiapo, Manila 

BE 0R0 < Chi " Lam de Jose 

<-hu Suey) 

Main Office: 225-227 J. M. Basa St. 

Iloilo City 
1026 San Nicolas, Manila 

*~r EKLA DB ^A INDIA 
6 ' 6 Ilaya, Manila 
LACUNA GROCERY, R. 

t f*xrV Azcarralra - Manila ' * 
LANDAHL & CO., I, c ., A. 

t a I Kscolta < Manila 
LAT, PEDRO M. 
l^avao City 

LF ^ E ^ A C °MMERCIAL CO., INC. 

L1^La£ 0 o B,d *- Jua » Luna, Manila 
LILARAM & COMPANY, V. 

UM BROTHERS & COMPANY 

'16 Lavezares, Manila * 
m i ; CHENG & CO. 

***** *** 

Claveria St., Davao Citv 
^^ AGA nF ^MANOS 

t r IrlnT S?* ^ Manila 
LLAMADO, ALEGRE & qq 

355 Quezon Blvd., Quiapo,' Manila 

LORENZANA & CO., MANUEL L 

R-214 Consolidated Inv. Bldg. 

Plaza Goiti, Manila 



MABUHAY TRADING (Tan Tiong Keng) 

114 Rosario, Binondo, Manila 
MACONDRAY & CO., INC. 

3rd Floor, China Bank Bldg., 

Manila 
MANILA GROCERY 

605 Ilaya, Manila 
MANILA OVERSEAS COMMERCIAL 

505 Wise Bldg., 176 Juan Luna 

Binondo, Manila 
MANILA PALACE 

79 Escolta, Manila 
MANILA TRADING EXCHANGE 

200 Calvo Bldg., 60 Escolta 

Manila 

MANILA TRADING AND SUPPLY CO. 

Port Area, Manila 
MANILA VARIETY STORE CO. 

501 Raon, Quiapo, Manila 
MARZAM COMMERCIAL CO, INC 

928 R. Hidalgo, Manila 
MATEO, N. 

Naga, Camarines Sur 
MATEUS CO., BEN R. 

P. Burgos, Nagn, Camarines Sur 
MENGHAMAL TOPANDAS & CO. 

544 Juan Luna, Manila 

Branch: 40 Escolta Manila 
MENZI & CO., INC.' 

4th Floor, Wilson Bldg., 143 Juan Luna, 
Manila 9 

MERCANTILE MART OF THF PWTT 

IPPINES H1Lr 

614 Trade & Commerce Bldg 

123 Juan Luna, Manila 
MINDANAO COMMERCIAL CO INC 

Zamboanga City, P.O. Box IRS *' 
MIRA HERMANOS, INC. 

Ground .Floor, Wise Bldg. 

174 Juan Luna, Manila 
MIRANDA STORE 

373 Plaza Miranda, Second Floor 

Quiapo, Manila 
MOHAMMAD TRADING 

R-302 3rd Floor, Calvo Bide 

Escolta, Manila 
MONDEJAR TRADING cj q1 0 „ 

System ' Sales & S e ™ice 

Corner P. Burgos & J uan Lu 
Tacloban, Leyte 
MORGAN SALES 

4th Floor, R-425 Wise Bid* 
Manila ft * 

Mimoz TRADING CORPORA Tin w 
144 Escolta, Re K i na wj „ ° N 

MURPHY COMPANY J ^ M ™ U * 
R-209, Uy Yet Bldg ' 2 17 n 
Manila ' 7 Da smannas 

MUTUAL CO., INC. 

504 Trade & Commerce Bld„ m -i 
NATIONAL BOOK STORE 

07!) Rizal Ave.. Manila 
NATIONAL SALES SERVICE COMPA- 

539 P. Paredes, Samnalno tut -i 

nazario^sonsTnc r M r anila 

430 Dasmarinas, Manila 
OCEANIC COMMERCIAT txt„ 
Blum) ^ K( -IAL, INC. (Levy & 

35 Plaza Sta. Cruz m„-i 

PACIFIC INDENT I , 

201 Maritima Bldg S°* T C0 > INC ' 

Binondo, Manila D asmari*as 



PAN-ASIATIC COMMERCIAL CO., 
INC. 

805 Wilson Bldg., Juan Luna, Manila 
PAN PACIFIC TRADING CO. 

R-214 Maritima Bldg., 121 Dasmarinas, 

Manila 
PEOPLE'S SHOE CO. 

252 Gandara, Cor. Nueva, Manila 
PEOPLE'S TRADING CORPORATION, 

INC. 

Tacloban, Leyte 
PEREZ & CO., E. M. 

317 Carriedo, Manila 
PHILIPPINE & EASTERN TRADING 

CO., Inc. 

Manila Office: 101 Chaco Bldg. 

Plaza Cervantes, Manila 

Stores: Baguio City 
PHILIPPINE INVESTMENT CO., LTD. 

206-208 Great Eastern Bldg. 

Echague, Manila 
REDONA & SONS, INC., M. A. 

Tacloban, Leyte 
RELIANCE COMMERCIAL ENTERPRI- 
SES, INC. 

R-402 Trade & Commerce Building 

123 Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila 
REPUBLIC TRADING COMPANY, INC. 

R-301, 3rd Floor, Maritima Bldg. 

Cor. Juan Luna & Dasmarinas Sts. 

Manila 
ROXAS Y CIA. 

6th Floor, Soriano Bldg., Plaza 

Cervantes, Manila 
ROYAL TRADING CO. 

485-487 Dasmarinas, Manila 
SAM GUAM TRADING 

440 Sto. Cristo, Manila 
SAMONTE, RAMON 

96 P. Burgos, San Roque, Cavite City 
SANITARY GLASSWARE AND GEN- 
ERAL MERCHANDISE 

110 Villalobos St., Manila ■ 
SORIENTE-SANTOS COMPANY 

62 Escolta, Manila 
SOUTH ISLAND TRADING COMPANY 

Washington St., Bacolod City 
SOUTHERN CROSS COMMERCIAL CO. 

R-302 Limjoco Bldg., 670 Dasmarinas, 

Manila 

SOUTHERN TRADING CO., INC. 

Gov. Lim St., Zamboanga City 
SOUTHWEST PACIFIC TRADING CO. 

INC. 

Tacloban, Leyte. P. O. Box 52 
STAR JEWELRY STORE 

832 Rizal Ave., Manila 
STATE BAZAR 

J. M. Basa St., Iloilo City 
SUN BEE COMMERCIAL 

62 Guardia Nacional St. 

Zamboanga City 
SUN BROTHERS & COMPANY 

126 Nueva, Manila 
TAILO'S LUMBER 

Vilagonzalo St., Cebu City 
UDHARAM BAZAR CO. 

116 Plaza Goiti, Manila 
UNION TRADING COMPANY 

162-164 Sikatuna, Cebu City 

UNITED IMPORT & EXPORT CO. 

601 Trade & Commerce Bldg. 

123 Juan Luna, Manila 



PAGE 110 



THE REPUBLIC 



UY, MANUEL 

31 P\aza £ta. Cruz, Manila 
VICTORY FISH TRADING CO. (Ong 
Pio & Co.) 

152-154 Tuti St., Cebu Sity 
VILLANUEVA & SONS, A.B. 
113-115 Maria Cristiana, Sampoloc, 
Manila 

WARNER, BARNES & CO., LTD. 

Soriano Bldg., Plaza Cervantes, Manila 
WASHINGTON BAZAR 

115 Plaza Goiti, Manila 

Washington commercial co. 

228 Rosario, Manila 
WEINTZ & CO., INC., CHARLES P. 

209 Goldenberg Bldg., Dasmarinas, 

Binondo, Manila 
WISDOM & COMPANY 

131-135 Rosario, Manila 
WISE & COMPANY, INC. 

2nd Floor, Wise Bldg., Manila 
YEATON & ELMER 

309 Villonco Bldg., Quezon Blvd. 

Manila 

ZION HARDWARE COMPANY 

666-B Rizal Ave., Manila 
2UELLIG, INC., F. E. 

55 Rosario, Binondo, Manila 

METAL ENGRAVERS & MFTRS. 

*\ H. AQUINO &. SONS 

1849 Oroquieta St., Sta. Cruz 
Manila 



METAL SIGNS 



Philippine education co., inc. 

1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila 

zamora, crispulo 

423 Sales St., Manila 

zamora & co., luis 

434 P. Gomez, Manila 
Shop: 506 Dapitan, Manila 

^ NICK EL PLATERS 

AVARICIO ELECTRICAL SHOP, BEN 

Plazoleta Gay, Iloilo City 
BAftEZ ELECTRIC PLATING 

310-314 Doroteo Jose, Manila 
SANTOS NICKEL & CHROMIUM 

PLATING SHOP, S. 

2209 Azcarraga, near Lepanto 

Manila 
ZAMORA, CRISPULO 

423 Sales St., Manila 
ZAMORA & CO., LUIS 

434 P. Gomez St., Manila 

PUBLICATIONS 

AGRICULTURAL-COMMERCIAL-IN- 
DUSTRIAL LIFE 
1103 Rizal Ave., Manila 

ASIA REVIEW 

926 Raon St., Manila 

BAGONG BUHAY (Tagalog Daily) 
918-920 Lepanto, Manila 

BALITA (Tagalog Daily News) 
442 Platerias, Quiapo, Manila 

BAYANI (Eng.-Tag. Monhtly) 

1322 P. Guevara, Sta. Cruz,, Manila 

THE RGPVB1JC 



CORNEJO'S DIRECTORY OF THE 
PHILIPPINE REPUBLIC (Formerly 
Commonwealth Directory oi the Philip- 
pines) 

3460 Taft Ave., Rizal City 
CURRENT EVENTS REVIEW 

123-125 Reten, Sampaloc, Manila 
EVENING HERALD, THE (Daily 

Newspaper) 

509-513 Sales, Manila 
EVENING NEWS (Daily Newspaper) 

Ramon Roces Bldg., Corner 

Calero & Soler, Manila 
ILANG-ILANG (WEEKLY) 

Ramon Roces Bldg., 1055 Soler 

Sta. Cruz, Manila 
INANG WIKA 

123-125 Reten, Sampaloc, Manila 
LAS NOTICIAS (Sat. & Mond. News) 

878 Rizal Ave., Manila 
LIWAYWAY (Tagalog Weekly) 

Ramon Roces Bldg., Cor. Soler 

& Calero, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
MANILA CHRONICLE, THE 

R-301-303 Limjoco Bldg. 

670 Dasmarinas, Manila 
MANILA COURIER, THE 

706 Quezon Blvd., Manila 
MANILA DAILY BULLETIN, The 

Ramon Roces Bldg., Corner 
Soler & Calero, Manila 
MANILA POST, THE 

219 Soler, Cor. Alvarado St. 
Binondo, Manila 
MANILA TIMES, THE 
715-721 Calero St., Manila 

MANILA TRIBUNE, THE 

878 Rizal Ave., Manila 
MINDANAO-SULU HERALD, THE 

R-327 Calvo Bldg., Escolta, Manila 

PAGSILANG (Tagalog Daily) 

Ramon Roces Bldg., 715-721 Calero St. 
Manila 

PARENT-TEACHER'S MAGAZINE 

1878 Azcarraga, Manila 
PHILIPPINE LIBERTY NEWS, THE 

iU8-920 Lepanto, Sampaloc, Manila 

STAR REPORTER, THE 

878 Rizal Ave., Manila 
TRUTH (Twice a month) 

421 Platerias, Quiapo, Manila 

TIKTIK (Tagalog Weekly) 

427 Platerias, Manila 
VOZ DE MANILA, LA 

904 O'Donnell, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
WOMAN'S HOME JOURNAL 

Ramon Roces Bldg., Corner Calom 

& Soler St., Manila 



PHOTO EN0RAVEBS 



BARICAN'S PHOTO ENGRAVING 

495 P. Campa, Manila 
BENIPAYO PRESS & PHOTO 

KNG RAVING 

550 Misericordia, Manila 

FELICIANO & SONS, J. B. 
229-231 Requesens, Manila 



IMPRENTA LOS FILIPINOS 

332-336 Raon, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
LUCKY PRESS & PHOTO-ENGRAVING 
CO. 

1314 Quezon Blvd., cor. Dapitan 
Manila 

PSP PHOTO ENGRAVING 

920 Lepanto, Sampaloc, Mamla 
PROGRESS PHOTO ENGRAVING 

912 Ongpin, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
QUALITY PHOTO ENGRAVING 

1126 Misericordia, near corner 

Zurbaran, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
REPUBLIC PHOTO-ENGRAVING 

COMPANY 

55 Alejandro VI, Sampaloc, Manila 
ROCES INCORPORATED, RAMON 
Soler, cor. Calero, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

PHOTOGRAPHERS 

AIR PORT STUDIO 

670 Evangelista, Quiapo, Manila 
AMOR PORTRAIT STUDIO 

1407 Rizal Ave., Manila 
BOB'S PORTRAITS (Bobs Camera 

Portrait) 

881 Rizal Ave., Manila 

KAHIRUP ART STUDIO 

Mezzanine Floor, Consolidated Invest- 
ments Bldg., Plaza Goiti 
Manila 

VELUZAR INC. 

Suite 201-203; 2nd Floor 
Luzco Bldg., cor. Dasmarinas & 
David, Manila 

DEALERS^ 

FILIPINO PHOTO' SUPPLIES INC. 

316 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 
HEACOCK CO., H E 

600 Dasmarinas, co2_ Dav 

KODAK ^SS^!^ 

io4-i3th st, rNC 

MANILA PHOTO SUPPLIES, INC. 
426-430 Platerias, Manila 

'~PIANO DEALERS 

LOZANO MUSIC* COMPANY . 

307 Uy Yet Bldg., Dasmarinas Manila 
ROSARIO, C. O. DEL 

Azcarraga, cor. Misericordia, Manila 
YUPANGCO & SONS, FELIPE 

320 Cariedo, Manila 

PIANO T UNERS & REPAIRERS 

REYES MUSIC STORE, ENRIQUE DE 
LOS 

322 Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
ROMAN TUASON & SONS 
(Federico Tuason, Manager) 
106 Legarda, Sampaloc, Manila 

~ PRINTERS 

BENIPAYO PRESS & PHOTO- 
ENGRAVING 

550 Misericordia, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

PAGE ill 



CACHO HERMANOS, INC. 
672 Legarda, Sampaloc, Manila 

CARMELO & BAUERMANN, INC. 
2057 Azcarraga, Manila 

CATHOLIC TRADE SCHOOL 
1916 Oroquieta, Sta. Cruz, Manila 

COLCOL & CO., M. 

878 Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz, Manila 

CONSUMER'S PRESS & PHOTO- 
ENGRAVING 

1131-1133 Rizal Ave., Manila 
COSMOS PRINTING 

337 Raon, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
ECONOMIC PRESS 

1087 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 
ILAGAN & SANGA, IMPRENTA 

343-345 Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila 
IMPRENTA LOS FILIPINOS 

332-336 Raon, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
McCULLOUGH PRINTING COMPANY 

1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila 
P S P PRESS 

p ^? T i n > Sampaloc, Manila 
™ P INE EDUCATION CO., INC. 
Ror A^ 1Iej0S> Quia P°> Manila 
Ramon T ° RP0RA TED, RAMON 
Ramon Roces Bldg., corner Soler 
md Calero Sts " Sta. Cruz, Manila 

TLRERS 



THE ORO C0 - ^AR EAST) 

623 Plor t« 

TOtreS ' St * Cru 2 , Manila 



" _ U£ 

144-100 Juan L 
Junes Ave., cetu Ci? 

Th T e & ~- (Pareast)) 

M SF" ^COMPANY 

linl r NE EDU CATION CO INC 
H04 Castillejos, Quiapo, Man^ 



PUBLISHERS 



2034 Azcarraga, Manila 
ALCANTARA & SONS J C 

Awn ?'^ T dalg °' Quia ^' M **Ua 
ALIP & BRION PUBLICATIONS 
A. R Reyes Bldg. f Raon St^ Manila 



AMERICAN BIBLE COMPANY 

(PHIL. AGENCY) 

636 Isaac Peral, Ermita, Manila 
ASSOCIATED PUBLISHERS 

(LAWRERS' COOPERATIVE 

PUBLISHING CO., Owners) 

1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila 
AYUDA BOOK CO. 

2027 Azcarraga, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
CATHOLIC TRADE SCHOOL 

1916 Oroquieta, cor. Tayuman 

Santa Cruz, Manila 
COLCOL & CO., M. 

878 Rizal Ave., Manila 
ISLANDERS PUBLISHING CO., THE 

R-307 Chaco Bldg., Plaza Cervantes 

Binondo, Manila 
LA DEFENSA PRESS 

55 Rizal St., Uoilo City 
MANILA POST PUBLISHING CO., THE 

219 Soler, cor. Alvarado, Binondo 

Manila 

MANLAPAZ PUBLISHING CO. 

123-125 Reten, Sampaloc, Manila 
P S P PUBLICATIONS 

920 Lepanto, Sampaloc, Manila 
PHILIPPINE AGRICULTURAL & 

INDUSTRIAL CORPORATION 

3rd Floor, Brias Roxas Bldg. 

Escolta, Manila 
PHILIPPINE ELUCATION CO., INC. 

1104 Castillejos, Quiapo, Manila 
ROCES INCORPORATED, RAMON 

Ramon Roces Bldg., Corner Soler 

& Calero, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
UNIVERSITY PUBLISHING CO., INC. 

Central Office: 1120 Washington 

Downtown Office: 706 Evangelista 

Manila 

RADIO DEALERS 

243 Kizal St., Legasni, Albay 

BOl^iNAO ELKCTuOiNlCS CORPORA- 
TiOiN 

btft * loor, China Bank Bldg. 
215 Dasmarinas, Jtfmondo, Manila 
Cai'ULK <fc COMPANY, INC. 
1U7 Unaco Bidg., Jflaza Cervantes 
•Hmondo, Manila 

^I^CTKo-equU'MENT & SUPPLY Co, 
Elizaide & Co., Inc. 
3*0 Tanduay St., Manila 
ELIZALDE & CO., INC. 

Elizalde Bldg., to, de la Industria 
Manila 

ESTRELLA AUTO I'ALACE 

123 Mendoza, Quiapo, Manila 
HEACOCK CO., H. E. 

600 Dasmarinas, cor. David, Manila 
PHILIPPINE ELECTRONIC INDUS- 
TRIES, INC. 

Ground Floor, Regina Bldg., 
Muelle del Banco National, Manila 
PHILIPPINE MUSIC CO., INC. 

235 Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
UNITED TRADING COMPANY 
Main Office: Felipe II St 
Meisic, Manila 



SCHOOL SUPPLY DEALERS 

ABIVA PUBLISHING HOUSE 

932 Misericordia, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
ADVOCATE BOOK SUPPLY 

2034 Azcarraga, Manila 
ALEMAR'S 

220 Plaza Sta. Cruz, Manila 
AYUDA BOOK CO. 

2027 Azcarraga, Manila 
BOOKMAN, INC. 

725 Evangelista, Manila 
COLCOL & CO., M. 

878 Rizal Ave., Manila 
COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTORS CO., 

INC. 

358 Raon, Sta. Cruz, Manila 
CORONA SUPPLY CO. 

400-402 Juan Luna, Binondo, Manila 
DEVILLA & COMPANY 

Martires St., Cebu City WAT „ nn 
DUQUE RETAIL STORE, BALBIDO 

Claveria St., Davao City 
EMMANUEL EDUCATIONAL 

DISTRIBUTOR 

1878 Azcarraga, Manl1 * 
FLAVIANO VARIETY STORE 

1*1* Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz, Manila 
GE^N^E R A L COM M E RCI A L COMPANY 

IM05 Chaco Bldg., Plaza Cervantes 

Binondo, Manila 
GINETE, CAMILA 

Uyangurin St., Davao City 
HECHANOVA & SONS 

261 J. M. Basa St Uoilo City 
HBILBBONNCa,J^ ^ 

302 Regma Bldg., * 

LEDDA A C0 ^J d NC c ; r S Requesens 
1309 Quezon Blvd., cox. 

LEYTE COMMERCIAL CO., INC. 

Baybay, Tacloban, Leyte 
LIM & COMPANY 

209 Great Eastern Bldg., l^cnagu 

Manila 
LLAMAS PRESS 

Torres Bugallon, Dagupan City 
LUY KIM GUAN 

11-13 Guardia Nacional t>t- 
Zainboanga City rG 
MANILA VARIETY STORE CO. 

501 Raon Quiapo, Manda 
MARIANO & COMPANY 
720 Evangelista. Manila 
MARTINEZ, LIBRERIA J. 

296 Doroteo Jose St., Manila 
MATEUS CO., BEN R. 

P Burgos Si Naga, Camarines Sur 
MENDOZA & SONS GONZALO B. 

Torres Bugallon St., Dagupan^ City 
MINDANAO COMMERCIAL CO., INC. 

Zainboanga City, P. O. Box 185 
MOREMAT (MORENO-MATILLA) 
Arias Bldg., cor. Rizal Avenue 
and Carriedo, Manila 
NATIONAL BOOK STORE 

679 Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz, Manila 
NATIONAL PRESS & STATIONERY 
STORE— (Luis D. Gutierrez) 
71-73 J. M. Basa St., Iloilo City 
NAZARIO & SONS INC., C. G. 
430 Dasmarinas, Binondo, Manila 



THK SEPOBUC 



NORTH BAY TRADING CORPORATION 

Suite 224 Calvo Bldg., Escolta 

and 702 Lavezares, Manila 
OCONER, L. !\ 

447 Dasmavinas, Manila 
PANGASINAN SALES COMPANY 

Tonnes Bugallon, Dagupan City 
PANGASINAN TRADING CORPN. 

Dagupan City 
PAUL BROS. 

204 Rosario, Binondo Manila 
PAULIN, TEODORO S. 

211 B. Aranas, Cebu City 
PEOPLE'S TRADING CORPORATION, 

INC., The 

Tacloban, Leyte 
PHILIPPINE EDUCATION CO., INC. 

1104 Castillejos, Quiapo Manila 
PHILIPPINE PRODUCERS & CONSUM- 
ERS COOPERATIVE 

Azucena St., San Pablo City 
PICSAL & COMPANY 

Naga, Camarines Sur 
QUALITEX, THE 

22 Escolta, Manila 
SAYCON & CO., INC., THE 

Session Road, Baguio City 
SAYO BOOK STORE PRAXEDES 

225 Rosario, Binondo, Manila 
TABLA ATHLETIC SUPPLY 

Junquera St., Cebu City 
VASQUEZ BROS. & CO. 

740-742 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 
VET BROS & COMPANY 

Tacloban, Leyte 
ZABALA & BR0S JQS 

Dagupan City 
ZAPATA & CO. M D 

Binondo, Manila 



SCHOOL OF AVIATION 



EAK JJJASTUKW SCHOOL OF ~" 
Al«JKOlNAUTlCS 
ratemo Bldg., tfta. Cruz, Manila 

SCHOOL, CORHE SPON DEN CE 

^C E H^ 

a 12 Martinez Bl d g M 121 Dasmarinas 
Binondo, Manila as 

SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND 
UNIVE RSITIES 

ADAMSON UNIVERSITY 

San Marcelino, Ermita Manila 
AFABLE COLLEGE OF MEDICINE 

Espaiia, cor. p. Paredes, Manila 
ARELLANO UNIVERSITY 

Legarda, Sampaloc, Manila 
ASSUMPTION COLLEGE 

405 Herran, Ermita, Manila 
ATENEO DE MANILA 

408 P. Faura Ermita, Manila 
CENTRO ESCOLAR UNIVERSITY * 

Mendiola St., Manila 
COLEGIO DE LA CONCORDIA 

2487 Herran, Manila 



COLEGIO DE LA CONSOLACION 

260 San Rafael, Manila 
COLEGIO DE SAN AGUSTIN DE 
ILOILO 
Iloilo City 

COLEGIO DE SAN JUAN DE LETRAN 
200 Beaterio St., Intramuros, Manila 

COLEGIO DE SANTA ISABEL 
Taft Ave., Ermita, Manila 

COSMOPOLITAN COLLEGES 
Main Bldg.: Plaza Sta. Cruz 
Manila (With Branches in Sta. Ana 
Pasig, Rizal City and other towns) 

DE LA SALLE COLLEGE 
Taft Ave., Malate, Manila 

FAR EASTERN UNIVERSITY 
Quezon Blvd., near Azcarraga 
Manila 

FEATI INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Paterno Bldg., Sta. Cruz Bldg. 
Manila 

GREGG BUSINESS INSTITUTE 

Cor. Rizal Ave. and Soler 

Sta. Cruz Manila 
HOLY ANGEL ACADEMY 

Los Angeles, Pampanga 
HOLY GHOST COLLEGE 

163 Mendiola St., San Miguel 

Manila 

INDEPENDENCE COLLEGE 
Burgos St., Rizal City 

INSTITUTO DE MUJERES 

Gov. Forbes St., Sampaloc, Manila 

JOSE RIZAL COLLEGE 
R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 

MALABON NORMAL SCHOOL 
Ave. Rizal, Malabon, Rizal 

MANILA CENTRAL COLLEGES (For- 
merly Manila College of Pharmacy. Den- 
tistry and Liberal Arts) 
Main Bldg.: Oroquieta-Zurbaran 
Annex: F. Huertas-Mayhaligue 

MAPUA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Doroteo Jose. Sta. Cruz, Manila 

NATIONAL RADIO SCHOOL 
Victoria Bldg., Corner of Sales 
& Ronquillo Sts., Manila 

NATIONAL TEACHERS COLLEGE, THE 
629 Tanduay, Quiapo, Manila 

NATIONAL UNIVERSITY 

355 Lipa Sampaloc, Manila 
PHILIPPINE WOMEN'S UNIVERSITY 
Taft Ave., Ermita, Manila 

RIZAL CENTRAL COLLEGE 
716-719 F. B. Harrison, Rizal City 

ROOSEVELT MEMORIAL COLLEGES, 
F. D. 

Aldecoa Bldg.: 1740-1744 Rizal Ave, 

Annex: 1634 Rizal Ave, Manila 

Tel. 2-61-52 
SAN BEDA COLLEGE 

E. Mendiola St., San Miguel, Manila 
S1LLIMAN UNIVERSITY 

Dumaguete, Negros Oriental 
SOUTHEASTERN COLLEGE 

Burgos St., Rizal City 
UNION COLLEGE OF MANILA 

750 Lepanto cor. Azcarraga, Manila 
UNIVERSITY OF MANILA 

Alejandro > r I, Sampaloc, Manila 
UNIVERSITY OF STO. TOMAS 

Espasa & P. Noval, Sampaloc, Manila 



TAILORS 



ABELARDO'S TAILORING 

Haberdashery & Dry Cleaning 

209 Legarda Manila 
ALICE FASHION SHOP 

849 San Fernando, Manila 
ALICIA'S FASHION CENTER 

1085 Zamora, Rizal City 

Miss Alicia Acabado 

Prop, and Modiste 
ALVIZ TAILORING 

117 Rizal Avenue, Manila 
ARMY STYLE DEPARTMENT STORE, 

The 

Head Office: 511 Juan Luna 
Branch: 44 Escolta, Manila 
BEAUX TAILORING & HABERDASH- 
ERY 

822 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo, Manila 
CERVANTES, JOSE 

Tailoring and Haberdashery 
624 Rizal Ave., Manila 
DE LEON BROS 

Gonzaga St., Bacolod City, P. I. 
M. M. de Leon 
Tech. Designer 
GALANG'S TAILORING 
1122 Rizal Ave., Manila 
GARRIDO'S TAILORING, B. 

423 Raon, Quiapo, Manila 
LA ELEGANCIA 
Modiste Shoppe 
1308 Rizal Ave., Manila 
Julita Roxas de Serrano, Prop. 
LIWANAG FASHION 
241-243 Carriedo, Quiapo 
Manila 
OLIVAR MODEL 

612 Arlegui, cor. Barbosa 
Quiapo, Manila 
VICENTE, R. — GENT'S TAILOR 
521 Evangelista cor. Ronquillo, 
Quiapo, Manila 
YOUTH'S FASHION 
1345 Rizal Ave., Manila 



TEXTILES DEALERS 



ALBAY ABACA ARTS 

Daraga, Albay, Philippines 
ALLEN & SANTOS ENTERPRISES 

INC. 

40-B Jones Ave., Cebu City 
AMERICAN FACTORS (Phil.) I nc , 
R-307 Myers Bldg., Port Area 
204 Wilson Bldg., Manila 
CAVITE FEDERATION OF RETAIL- 
ERS' COOPERATIVE ASSOCIATION, 
INC. 

Imus, Cavite 

CEBU PROVINCIAL TRADING COR- 
PORATION, INC. 
Cebu City 

CONTINENTAL COMMERCIAL CO., 
INC. 

539 Nueva St., Manila 
CRUZ, CAT A LIN A L. DE 

684 Ilaya, Manila 
DE VILLA & COMPANY 

Martircs St., Cebu City 



ill 



EUREKA TRADING CORPORATION 

Tacloban, Leyte 
FAIRMONT, The 

369 Echague, Quiapo, Manila 
FILIPINO RETAILERS & MANUFAC- 
TURERS ASSOCIATION, INC. 

Iloilo City 
FLORENTE, SALOME M. 

Iloilo City Public Market 

Iloilo City 
GAMBOA, MANUEL 

Iloilo City, Public Market 

Iloilo City 

GENATO COMMERCIAL CORPORA- 
TION 

1075-1079 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo 
Manila 

GENERAL COMMERCIAL COMPANY 

MaSa ChaC ° Bldg " ?laZa Cervantcs 
GETZ BROS. & CO 
3rd Floor Trade & Commerce Bldg. 

pii J Luna ' ManiIa 
GMUR INC. OTTO 

go w S T< e ;; Juan ' Luna > ^ 

GOLDEN STAR ' ^ Clty 

G U , SENG GRADING 
Nacional St 

Hn^ b0anga Cit V 

UyanguS J t KA D Dl NG C'O. 
HONG BIO c(w^ aVa0 Cit * 

HOUSE (H? Bacolod City 
Manila ^ 636 Rial Ave 

1DI£ AL BAZAR* 

8 Session Road u 
'NTERn^,^ B^uio City 

J ^TIN1ANI v^luSv 11 

J ' M. Basa St i, T ST0 RE, R. 

Bldg. 

LA CEBUANA 

Cebu City, l. hi i il)pine8 
LA PERLA DE La ,m, 

™ Day., Ma ; LA 1N, >^ 
LA PERLA TRADING 

48 Gn. Luna, Natra • 

LAG UNA TRAmNTeSSSS^ 

302 Peoples Bank Bldg KATI ° N 

Dasmarinas Manila 
LANDAHL & CO., INC., A. 

27 Escolta, Manila 
LEON BROS. FASHION PARK, DE 

Gonzaga St., Bacolod City 

JPAQJB 114 



LEYTE COMMERCIAL CO., Inc. 

Baybay, Tacloban, Leyte 
LIM SUI & CO. 

Claveria St., Davao City 
LUY KIM GUAN 

11-13 Guardia Nacional St. 

Zamboanga City 
MABUHAY TRADING (Tan Tiong Keng) 

114 Rosario, Manila 
MANILA PALACE 

79 Escolta, Manila 
MANILA SILK SUPPLY 

(P. C. Ailmal Co.) 

741 Tabora, Manila 
MARVEX COMMERCIAL CO., INC. 

Suite 206, Limjoco Bldg. 

670 Dasmariiias, Manila 
MENZI & CO., INC. 

4th Floor, Wilson Bldg. 

143 Juan Luna, Manila 
MINDANAO COMMERCIAL CO., Inc. 

Zambaonga City, P. O. Box 185 
MINDANAO COMMERCIAL FACTORS 

Davao City 
MONDEJAR TRADING, SALES & 

SERVICE SYSTEM 

Cor. P. Burgos & Juan Luna Sts. 

Tacloban, Leyte 
MORGAN SALES 

4th Floor, R-425 Wise Bldg. 

Manila 

NEGROS HARDWARE AND DRY 
GOODS 

64 Smith St., Bacolod City 
NEW BACOLOD TRADING 

Washington St. Bacolod City 
NEW INDIAN BAZAAR 

Zamboanga City, P. O Box 172 
NEW YORK INDENT COMPANY 

306 Maritima Bldg., Dasmarinas 

xTrTr 01 ** Juan Luna ' Manila 
NOLASCO ENTERPRISES 

Mnt F * Ramos st - Cebu Cit y 

WORTH BAY TRADING CORPORATION 

Suite 224 Calvo Bldg. 

Escolta, Manila 
OUANO COMPANY, D. M. 

Cor. Mango Ave. & D. Jakosalem 

Cebu City 
OUR STORE, INC. 

Davao City 
PAN-ASIATIC COMMERCIAL CO., INC. 

805 Wilson Bldg. Juan Luna, Manila 
PANGASINAN COOPERATIVE 

LEAGUE, Inc. 

Dagupan City, Pangasinan 
PANGASINAN TRADING CORPORA- 
TION, INC. 

Dagupan City, Pangasinan 

PAULIN, TEODORO S. 

211 B. Aranas St., Cebu City 

I 'HI LAM MERCANTILE COMPANY 
Oov. Lim St., Zamboanga City 

PHILIPPINE MERCHANTS CORPORA- 
TION 

35 Pelaez St., Cebu City 
REDONA & SONS INC., M. A. 
Tacloban, Leyte 

REPUBLIC FINANCING CORPORA- 
TION 

31 Session Road, Baguio City 
RlSMA, AGRIPINA 
Iloilo City 



RIVERA, SALVADOR J. 

Balasan, Iloilo City 
RIZAL ENTERPRISES, INC. 

1262 Tuberias, Manila 

Pro v. Address: Pasig, Rizal 
ROSARIO, C. O. DEL 

Azcarraga, cor. Misericordia, Manila 
ROYAL GROCERY 

Trinidad Road, Market Sub., 

Baguio City 
SANTOS DEPARTMENT STORE 

40-B Jones Ave., Cebu City 
SARMIENTO BROS. COMPANY 

1341-1343 Rizal Ave., Manila 
SHUI SHING COMPANY 

Tacloban, Leyte.— P. O. Box 120 
SINAMAY DEALER (De L. D. Beres) 

271 J. M. Basa St., Iloilo City 
SISON & SONS 

317 R. Hidalgo Quiapo, Manila 
SOUTHERN TRADING CO., INC. 

Gov. Lim St., Zamboanga City 
SOUTHWEST PACIFIC TRADING CO., 

INC. 

Tablocan, Leyte— P. O. Box 52 
STATE BAZAR 

J. M. Basa St., Iloilo City 
STRAIT & COMPANY, INC. 

14 Escolta, Manila 
SUYA, T. 

Tacloban, Leyte— P. O. Box 1 
TABLA ATHLETIC SUPPLY 

Junquera St., Cebu City AmT ^t 
TEXTILES IMPORTING CORPORATION 

4th Floor, Wise Bldg., 

174 Juan Luna, Manila 
THAY HING TRADING 

137 Rosario, Manila 
THEO'S SUPPLY STORE 

Naga, Camarines Sur 
TIA JUANA'S SHOPPE 

Torres Bugallon, Dagupan City 
TINITIGAN SHOES & DRY GOODS 

STORE .... 

105 P. Burgos Caridad v Cavite City 



TH EA TR ES IN MANILA 

ALEGRIA , 

1842 Rizal Avenue 
APOLO 

1348 Rizal Avenue 
ASTOR 

Plaza Sta. Cruz 
AVENUE THEATRE 

Rizal Avenue 
BATAAN 

Plaza Goiti, corner Echague 
BOULEVARD THEATRE 

Quezon Boulevard, Quiapo 
BULOVA 

1425 Herran, Paco 
CAPITOL 

Escolta, Manila 
CENTER 

Quezon Boulevard, Quiapo 
COCO 

446 Juan Luna, Binondo 
CONFUCIUS 

521 Ongpin, Binondo 
DALISAY 

Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz 



-I 



THE REPUBLIC 



DART 

Dart St. Paco 
DIANA 

Labores Extension, Pandacan 
GLOBE 

Raon. cor. Quezon Boulevard 
GLORIA 

Sande St., Tondo 
IDEAL THEATRE 

Rizal Ave., Sta. Cruz 
ILLUSION 

Gomez, corner R. Hidalgo 
LIBERTY 

64 Legarda, Sampaloc 
LIFE 

Quezon Boulevard, Quiapo 
LOTUS 

Rizal Ave., cor. Tayuman 
LUZON 

2488 Rizal Avenue Sta Cruz 
LYRIC 

81 Escolta, Binondo, Manila 
MACTAN THEATRE 

Legarda, Sampaloc 
MADRID 

405 Madrid St., San Nicolas 
MANILA OPERA HOUSE 

Rizal Avenue, Sta. Cruz 
MERCURY 

Espana St., cor. Trabajo, Sampaloc 
METRO 

703 R. Hidalgo, corner Barbosa 
MODERNO 

Legarda, Sampaloc 
MOON 

Juan Luna, Tondo 
NATIONAL 

188 Castanos, Sampaloc 
NOLI 

2264 Rizal Avenue 
ORIENT 

Raon. Quiapo 
PACIFIC 

Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz 
PARK 

308 Carriedo, Sta. Cruz 
RADIO 

Estero Cegado, Sta. Cruz 
RAJAH 

1026 J. Barlin, Sampaloc 
RENO 

530 Camba, San Nicolas 
RIALTO 

Rizal Avenue, near State Theatre 
ROYAL 

333 Ronquillo, Sta. Cruz 
SAMPALOC 

722 G. Tuason, Sampaloc 
SCALA THEATRE 

Rizal Avenue, near the Opera ftouse 
SOCIETY THEATRE 

Echague St., Sta. Cruz 
STAR THEATRE 

Azcarraga, Sta. Cruz 
TIMES 

Quezon Boulevard, Quiapo 
TIVOLI THEATRE 

Plaza Sta. Cruz 
VICTORY 

Teieron, Sta. Ana 

ZEST 

932 R. Hidalgo, Quiapo 



THEATRES IN RIZAL CITY 

GREEN LINE THEATRE 

Taft Ave., Rizal City 
LIBERTAD THEATRE 

Libertad Street, near Levcriza 
LOOK THEATRE 

Libertad Street 
NEW IDEAL THEATRE 

F. B. Harrison Street 
RICA 

Taft Avenue 
TAFT THEATRE 

3456 Taft Avenue 

THEATRE COMPANIES 

ARANETA INC., GREGORIO 

Radio Theatre Bldg., Estero Cegado 

Sta. Cruz, Manila 
CRUZ ENTERPRISES, P. B. 

Concepcion, Malabon, Rizal 
LOPEZ ENTERPRISES 

Iloilo City 
LUZON THEATRES, INC. 

4th Floor, State Bldg., Rizal Ave. 

Manila 

THEATRES SUP PLY 

BERGER CO., INC., S. M. 

2219 Azcarraga, Manila 
DEVILLA & COMPANY 

Martires St., Cebu City 
FEDERAL FILMS, INC 

2283 Azcarraga, Manila 
FILIPINO IMPORT FILMS, INC. 

Rooms 205-206, Central Hotel Bldg. 

Cor. Rizal Ave. and Azcarraga 
JOSEPH BROTHES, INC. 

3rd Floor, State Bldg. 

504 Rizal Ave., Manila 
PHILIPPINE ELECTRONIC INDUS- 
TRIES, INC. 

Ground Floor, Regina Bldg. 
Muelle del Banco Nacional, Manila 



Consulates 



Tel. 
No. 
27901 
27798 



29315 

28301 
87961 
26961 

28059 

28257 
22798 



28903 
29411 



AUSTRALIA, 208 Manila Hotel. 
BELGIUM, 808 Ayala Bldg. 
(Belgian consulate presently in 
charge of the Netherlands consul- 
ate). 

GREAT BRITAIN, Hongkong and 
Shanghai Bank Bldg. 
CHINA, 434 Dasmarinas. 
CUBA, Soriano Bldg. 
DENMARK, 132 Aviles, San Miguel 
Brewery Bldg. 
FRANCE, 202 Wilson Bldg. 
-GUATEMALA, 408 Looban. 
LEBANOS, 802 Wilson Bldg. 
THE NETHERLANDS, 136 Buen- 
camino. 

-NICARAGUA, 309 Sa n Gregorio, 
Paeo. 

NORWAY Insular Ice Plant Bldg., 
Plaza Lawton. 

PANAMA, R-3, Derham Bldg., Port 
Area, Manila. 



86153 PORTUGAL, 158 Invernes, Santa 
Ana, 

29152 SIAM, 7th Floor, Soriano Bldg., 
27576 SPAIN, Samanillo Bldg., Escolta. 

— SWEDEN, Punta, Santa Ana 

26180 SWITZERLAND, 402 Wilson Build- 
ing. 

26228 UNITED STATES of AMERICA, 
M.R.S. Bldg., Plaza Cervantes. 

Marino Directors 



Tele- Agents Address 

phone 

27717 AMERICAN PRESIDENT LINES, 
1 Plaza Goiti, 

28039 AMERICAN STEAMSHIP AGEN- 
CIES, 314 Myers Bldg., Port Area, 
Parry Lines, Inc. 

27931 COMPANIA GENERAL de TABA- 
COS de FILIPINAS. 499 Tanduay, 
Maerk Line. 

29608 COMPANIA MARITIMA, 109 Juan 
Luna. 

28905 M. V. CONCEPCION & CO., 233 

Regina Bldg., Escolta. 
28204 DE LA RAMA LINES, Hongknog & 

Shanghai Bank Bldg. 
26382 EVERETT STEAMSHIP CO., 233 
Dasmarinas — 

American Mail Line 
Everett Orient Line 
Isbrandsten Co. 
Nonsuco, Inc. 
San Vicente, Inc. 
28912 EAST ASIATIC COMPANY, 5th 
Floor, Hongkong & Shanghai Bank 
Bldg. 

27177 GENERAL SHIPPING COMPA- 
NY. 611 Muelle de la Industria. 
26237 HANSON. ORTH & STEVENSON, 
Trade and Commerce Bldg. — 
Ben Lines 
Blue Funnel Lines 
Ellerman Line. 
29522 INTERNATIONAL HARVESTER 
CO. of the PHILIPPINES, 309 
Mvers Bldg. — 

Isthmian Steamship Co. 
Swedish East Asiatic Co. 
Australia- Chin a Line 
26133 JAVA-CHINA-JAPAN LINE, 

Marsman Bide., Port Area 

Julian Brothers 
26523 PAN-ORIENTAL SHIPPING 
AGENCY, 828 Jahoneros, Binondo' 
26931 MANILA STEAMSHIP CO. Mue- 
lle de la Tndu stria. 
Bank Bldg. 
29527 MACONDRAY & CO., 3rd Floor 
China Bank Bldg. — 
Barber Wilhelmsen Lines 
312 Myers Bldg., Port Area 
Norwegian Africa Australia 
28777 LYKES BROS. STEAMSHIP CO 

PAN-ORIENTAL SHIPPING CO 

530 Elcano St. 
28201 ROOSEVELT SHIPPING AGEN- 
CY, Trade & Commerce Bldg. 

Silver Line, LH;d. 

Silver & Java Pacific Line 



THE REPUBLIC 



PAGE 116 



AKSKNIO T. BONIFACIO 

Former Acting City Trcsurer, Rizal City; noiv, Asst. PrwvrM Treasurer of Rizal since Sept. 16, 1947 



With a record of brilliant service behind him, Mr. Arsenic 
Bonifacio y Tamayo has begun his career as clerk in the office 
of the municipal treasurer of Taytay, Rizal, in June, 1913, with 
a salary of P20.00 a month, and rose gradually to various posi- 
tions of trust and responsibility, handling finances for the gov- 
ernment to the satisfaction of his immediate superiors, first, as 
acting municipal treasurer and postmaster in Montalban, Rizal, 
in 1915; later in Marikina, then municipal treasurer, postmaster 
and municipal secretary of Cardona, 1916-17; Antipolo, 1917-18 
Navotas, 1918-19; traveling deputy district 
auditor at Pasig, Rizal, 1919-20; deputy 
provincial and municipal treasurer with 
a salary of fll5.00 a month in Navotas 
again, 1920-21; same position in the provin- 
cial capital, Pasig, with a salary of P150.00 
a month, from 1921 to 1925; same posi- 
tion and salary at Malabon, from 1924 to 
1935; transferred to Pasay on February 
I, 1935, where he stayed until February 
29, 1940, and on March 1, 1940, he was 
promoted to the position of Acting Ad- 
ministrative Deputy in the Office of the 
Provincial Treasurer at Pasig, Rizal, up 
to February 28, 1941. On May 1, 1941, Arsenio T. Bonifacio 
ne was assigned as Deputy and Munici- 
pal Treasurer and Sub-Agent of the Philippine National Bank 

Marino Directory 

(Continued from page 115) 

28729 B.d g F _ SHARr&C0 - m 

Pacific Orient Express Lines 
W aterman Steamship Co 
27047 UNITED STATES LINES CO. 
2nd Floor, Soriano Bldg- 
American Pioneer Line 
Pacific Far East Line, I nc 
27208 ARANETA SHIPPING INC 
Araneta Bldg., 343 Echague ' 



Agency at Pasig, Rizal, with a salary of P160.00 a month; and 
on September 19, 1944, was appointed Acting Provincial Treas- 
urer of Palawan with a salary of P230.00 a month. He returned 
to Pasig on September 12, 1945, as Deputy and Municipal Treas- 
urer and, later, was sent again to Pasay in the same capacity as 
Deputy and Municipal Treasurer, which position he held until Pa- 
say was converted into Rizal City on June 21, 1947, and inaugur- 
ated on August 16, this year. 

The Charter of Rizal City provides for an annual salary of not 
to exceed P4,800.00 for the city treasurer, but up to the present 
time Mr. Bonifacio has not been appointd to the permanent po- 
sition of city treasurer, notwithstanding his long period of ser- 
vice as treasurer mentioned herein-above. The annual gros'> 
income of Rizal City exceeds six hundred thousand pesos to date. 
Mr. Bonifacio has no doubt done his best to increase the collect- 
ion of taxes and to keep the finances of the city in good sh'ape. 
He deserves promotion as an encouragement to government em- 
ployees who render continuous and faithful services to the people. 

Mr. Bonifacio was born in Tagig, Rizal, the hometown of 
Labor Secretary Pedro Magsalin, on December 14, 1893; the 
son of Juan Bonifacio and Basilisa Tamayo. Before entering 
the government service, he was a third year high school student. 
He married the former Miss Matea Sarmiento, with whom he has 
five children: Enriqueta, Liberty, Rizalina, Elvira, and Boni- 
facio. 



Two Outstanding Figures In Itizal City 




Mr. Hcrmenegildo de 

■ la Rosa is the oldest 

■ living ex-municipal coun- 

■ cilor of Pasay, to whose 
ETjj^B initiative the cockpit li- 

■ cense tax was raised 
flP ^ * M Bfrom P3,000 to P10,000 

year in 1913 > when he 

^was appointed acting 

t municipal president of 

— . W,'. , J Pasay. H e is one of the 

UT , ' local organizers of the 

Katipunan" in 1896. 



Mr. fFelix Gatdula, 
who came to live with r 
his family in Pasay in v | 
1913 as ice-vendor and I 
carretela driver, has | 
steadily rose to his pre- 
sent position as owner 
and operator of "El Ni- 
do Transportation" and 
proprietor of "El Nido" 
restaurant on Taft Ave- 
nue and other enterprises. He hails from 
Plaridel, Bulacan. . 



The National FVdVration 

onMnued from page io$) 
§«fc General Treasurer . 

siness Manager ^ ' ' V. LlNvana S Cruz 

Business Manager Benedict* Ma. Savillo 

ditor Alber to Tirona 

Olicity Officer ....V. Domingo D. P asc ual 

Crisanto R. Cornejo 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

( Pura Lacson-Villanueva, representing Assumntion totr* 
Music Department h A8SUm P™>n College, 

prof. Marcela Agoncillo, representing Holv * o „ 

Department * H ° ly Ghost Colle S*> Music 

m t LuciTia t. Sacramento, representing Cosmopolitan Acade 
my of Music 1 utttn A caae. 

r Crisanto R. Cornejo, representing sto. Tom» R 

r - . . ' lumas Conservatory of 

Music 

Pr0 f. Pilar Buencamino-Larracas, representing St. Scholastica'. 

Conservatory of Music cnoiastica s 

Prof. Eugenia Agoncillo, representing Sta, i 8abcl Acadcmy of 
Music 



PAGE 116 



r on tro Escolar 
Lieut. Jose M. Campana, MiPC Band, representing oem* 

Conservatory of Music c Music 

Sor Maria Angola, representing St. Joseph's Academy gchool 
Sor Cannelita de Jesus, representing La Cons'olacion M usl 
Mr. Augusto Villavert, representing Laperal Music Scio 



ENG HO TIN 

Hopia— Ampaw— Caramelo Factory 

1121 Sta. Elena St., Manila 



SE TO, Business Manager 
CHENG SENG, Manager 



THE REPUBLIC 



Southeastern College 



Recognized by the Government 

P. Burgos St., Rizal City 
Tel. 5-14-8-1 



O /* / <> /• i n g : 



EDUCATION (B.S.E.) 
JUNIOR NORMAL (E.T.C.) 



GENERAL SECONDARY 
COMPLETE ELEMENTARY 



All our first High School graduates who took the recent entrance examinations in the University of 
the Philippines are among the few who successfully passed. 



Elmer & Yeaton 

* Ship Specialist 

* Boats All Types 

* Floating Equipments 



UMs PIC KETT BOATS 4 H ASH 
BOATS LCIIPs PONTOON 



Main Office: 

309 Villonco Bldg„ 
Quezon Blvd.. Manila 

Branch Office: 
Davao City 



Stateside Representative 

JOHN LEWIN 
New York City 



E. S. YEATON 

Qsneral Manager 

ATTY. MARIANO T. YAP 

Legal Counsel 



"La Absolution 

(Andal & Sons) 

CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS AND 

TRANSPORT ATION 
212 F. B. Harrison St., Rizal City 



REALTY AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS 
3855 Taft Ave., Rizal City 



REAL ESTATE ENTERPRISES 
Room 301, Guison Bldg., Rizal Ave., Manila 
AGAPITO B. ANDAL, Gen. Manager 



Rizal Central College 

Offering Complete Elementary, High School and Collegiate Courses 
With Adequate Laboratory and Library 1-acihties 
Qualified and Experience Instructors 



Mrs. EUGENIA R. MENDOZA 
President 



Mrs. CARMEN C. VELASQUEZ 
Secretary-Treasurer 



715-719 F. B. HARRISON ST., RIZAL CITY 



