Program nf SimttH 



Wednesday, June 30, 2004 

President Elpidio Quirino Grandstand 
Rizal Park 
City of Manila 

7:00 a.m. Assembly of the General Public and Official Guests 

7:40 a.m. Arrival of the Vice President-Elect of the Philippines, the Honorable 
Noli L. de Castro 

7:45 a.m. Arrival of the President of the Philippines, Her Excellency Gloria 
Macapagal- Arroyo 

Arrival Honors 

National Anthem 

The singing will be led by Ms. Sarah Geronimo 
Ecumenical Invocation 

To be given by religious leaders representing the Catholic Bishops Conference 
of the Philippines and El Shaddai, the Philippine Council of Evangelical 
Churches and the Iglesia ni Cristo, and Islam 

Introduction of the President of the Philippines by the Executive 
Secretary, the Honorable Alberto Romulo 



1 



8:00 a.m. Inaugural Address of the President of the Philippines 
Song-'TayoNa" 

To be performed by Ms. Jolina Magdangal, Mr. MarkBautista andtheAteneo 
Chamber Singers 

Song - "Para sa Inang Bayan" 

Special composition by Mr. Jessie Lucas, to be performed by Dindi Larena 

Departure of the President and Vice President-Elect of the Philippines 
for Villamor Air Base, together with Official Guests 

9: 00 a.m. Departure of the President and Vice President-Elect of the Philippines 
for Cebu, together with Official Guests 



2 



Cebu Provincial Capitol 
City of Cebu 



10:30 a.m. Assembly of the General Public and Official Guests 

11:35 a.m. Arrival of the Vice President-Elect of the Philippines, the Honorable 
Noli L. de Castro 

11:40 a.m. Arrival of the President of the Philippines, Her Excellency Gloria 
Macapagal-Arroyo 

Arrival Honors 

National Anthem 

Ecumenical Invocation 

11:55 a.m. Administration of the Oath of Office to the Vice President-Elect of 
the Philippines, the Honorable Noli L. de Castro, by the Chief Justice 
of the Supreme Court, the Honorable Hilario Davide, Jr. 

12:00 noon Administration of the Oath of Office to the President of the 
Philippines, Her Excellency Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, by the Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court, the Honorable Hilario Davide, Jr. 
Four ruffles and four flourishes, and a 21-gun salute will immediately follow 

March - "Mabuhay" 

Recession of the President of the Philippines 
Recession of the Vice President of the Philippines 



4 



