* 

SYMBOLS 

OF THE 

STATE 




REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 




BUREAU OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

1975 



FOREWORD 

• ^ ^f^^ ^i!^^ ^"^^ conceits of an organized state, the official seals and flags, and 
indeed the flowers adopted by the rational or local government, have a far deeper 
meaning that often elude people. More often than not, such symbols have roots in 
history or tradition, evolving through time by reason of changing events and circums- 
tances until at last they are finally shaped into what they are today, emblems of a 
people's passage through life and evocative of their aspirations, hopes and estimate 
of themselves and their place in the world. Foremost among these symbols, of course 
IS the national flag, which is equated with the freedom and sovereignty of a nation 
Under the national flag are the flags of provinces or cities, all national pnde and the 
uniqueness of a race or people. 

The Philippines takes pnde in its own symbols, not the least because these have 
been created out of their past and bear the stamp of the creativeness of the Filipino 
himself. I view our heraldry as part of the fabric of our history and tokens of our 
determination to endure as a race and nation. 

It is gratifying therefore that this book. Symbols of the State, has been published, 
for It IS a documentation of Philippine nationhood, the beginnings, the strivings the 
goals envisioned, the effort exerted to assert our place in the sun as one people ' one 
nation. Into these symbols may be read the story of our people, the triumphs and 
defeats, the indomitable spirit which has seen us safely through the storms of a chana- 
ing world. 

Congratulations are in order for the dedicated people responsible for this work 
and It IS my hope that Filipinos will value this book as they value their heritage. 



ferdtnanix^^ar'cSs 

President 
Republic of the Philippines 



111 



INTRODUCTION 



Local -Governments in the Philippines have been given the responsibility 
under Section 2102 of the Revised Administrative Code of the Philippines as well as 
other local laws to design the Coat of Arms of their respective local government units. 
The philosophy behind this responsibility in addition to the heraldic values of the Coat 
of Arms is to give the seal of officialdom in local governments. 

Never before has there been a completed and extensive compilation of official 
seals of cities and provinces with their meanings. The completion of such a compilation 
as well as its importance in giving meaning and purpose to local administration need 
not be over emphasized. I am happy therefore, to present to all our local government 
officials this book entitled "SYMBOLS OF THE STATE: COAT OF ARMS OF 
THE PHILIPPINES" which include not only the Coat of Arms of the local govern- 
ments in this country, but likewise their histories and official banners and flowers. 

With this book which the department has completed through the Bureau of 
Local Government, local officials will find deeper meaning in the use and interpre- 
tation of their official symbols. I urge all local officials therefore, to properly use 
the official seals of their respective local units in accordance with the Heraldic guide- 
lines set by the Office of the President. 




JOSE A. RONO 
Secretary 



V 



The increasing interest shown by the National Government in the improve- 
ment of local governments in the Philippines has found expression in a lot of programs 
and projects which have never been tried before. One neglected area of local admin- 
istration is a study of the official seals of local government units and their heraldic 
characteristics, as symbols of authority. Attempts were made in the past to compile 
the Coat of Arms of local units in the Philippines but for one reason or another nothing 
had come of previous efforts. The DLGCD through the Bureau of Local Government, 
is very proud to present to our local officials, this compilation of the official seals of 
cities and provinces, including their meanings. We hope that this book will find 
meaning in your respective localities as you perform your duties and responsibilities as 
local officials. 



/sALVADOr/p. SOCRATES 
/ Undersecretary 



vii 



ACKNOWLEDGMENT 



The Bureau of Local Government provides a wide range of assistance and 
services to local governments. All its efforts are geared to one ultimate objective 
which is the continuing improvement of local administration in all its perspective. 
This pioneering project has been contemplated for a length of time singly aiming 
to compile the official seals of cities and provinces in the Philippines. 

In the completion of this project the Bureau of Local Government acknowl- 
edges with gratitude the full assistance of the following: 

Chairman Esteban A. de Ocampo, as well as his able assistant Mrs. Florde- 
liza K. Militante, both of the National Historical Commission who prepared the 
histories of cities and provinces in the country; 

Dr. Galo B. Ocampo , Technical Adviser on Heraldy, Office of the Presi- 
dent, who has provided us the technical guidance in the completion of the whole 
project; 

Director Gregorio S. Cendana of the National Media Production Center for 
making available the expertise of his staff; 

The Research and Publications Division of the National Historical Commis- 
sion for their researches of the histories of cities and provinces; 

The local government officials who furnished the seals of their respective 
cities and provinces and the interpretation of these seals as well as the DLGCD field 
officers who have spared part of their time in making this project possible. 

The many others who worked in anonymity. 11 




AUDIOSO 




Acting Director 



viii 



Contents 



FOREWORD by President Ferdhnmd E. Marcos iii 

INTRODUCTION by DLGCD Sec. Jose A. Rono v 

PREFACE by DLGCD Uvdersec. Salvador P. Socrates vii 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT . . by BLG Dir. Gaudioso C. Sosmena, Jr. viii 

SYMBOLS OF THE NATION by Dr. Gala B. Ocampo i 



CHAPTER ONE— THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

The History of the Republic g 

The Seal of the Republic 7 

The Flag of the Republic 8 

The National Anthem q 

The National Hero 

The National Flower li 

The National Costume -1^2 

CHAPTER TWO— THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT 

Malacaiiang Palace 

The Seal and Flag of the President of the Republic . . . 15 

The Seals of the Departments of Government 16 

Department of Foreign Affairs ' 17 

Department of Finance ] J7 

Department of Justice 17 

Department of Agriculture Ig 

Department of Public Works 18 

Department of Education and Culture 18 

Department of Labor jg 



Department of National Defense 19 

Department of Health 19 

Department of Trade jc^ 

Executive Office 20 

Department of General Services 20 

Department of Social Welfare 20 

National Economic Development Authority 20 

Department of Agrarian Reform 2I 

Department of Public Information 21 

Department of Local Governments and Community Development 21 

Depai-tment of Tourism 22 

Department of Industry 22 

Department of Public Highways 22 

Depai'tment of Natural Resources 22 

CHAPTER THREE— THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

A. CHARTERED CITIES 
Region I 

City of Baguio .,.| 

City of Dagup:in . . ! •>« 



ix 



City of Laoag 28 

City of San Carlos 30 

Region III 

City of Angeles 32 

City of Cabanatuan 34 

City of Olongapo 36 

City of Palayan 38 

City of San Jose 40 

Region IV 

City of Batangas 42 

City of Caloocan 44 

^-City of Cavite 46 

City of Lipa 48 

City of Lucena 50 

City of Manila 52 

City of Pasay 54 

City of Puerto Princesa 56 

City of Quezon 58 

City of San Pablo 60 

City of Tagaytay 62 

City of Trece Martires 64 

Region V 

City of Iriga 66 

City of Legaspi 68 

City of Naga 70 

Region VI 

City of Bacolo:! 72 

City of Bago 74 

City of Cadiz 76 

City of Iloilo 78 

City of La Carlota 80 

City of Roxas 82 

City of San Carlos 84 

City of Silay 86 

Region VII 

City of Bais 88 

City of Canlaon 90 

City of Cebu 92 

City of Danao 94 

City of Dumaguete 96 



City of Lapu-Lapu 93 

City of Mandaue 100 

City of Tagbilaran 102 

City of Toledo 104 

Region VIII 

City of Calbayog 106 

City of Ormoc 108 

City of Tacloban 110 

Region IX 

City of Basilan 112 

City of Dapitan 114 

City of Dipolog 116 

City of Pagadian 118 

City of Zamboanga 120 

Region X 

City of Butuan 122 

City of Cagayan de Oro 124 

City of Gingoog 126 

City of Iligan 128 

City of Marawi 130 

City of Oroquieta 132 

City of Ozamiz 134 

City of Surigao 136 

City of Tangub 138 

Region XI 

City of Davao 140 

City of Cotabato 142 

City of General Santos 144 



B., PROVINCES 

Map of the Philippines 146 

Region I 

Province of Abra - 143 

Province of Benguet 150 

Province of Ilocos Norte 1.52 

Province of Ilocos Sur 154 

Province of La Union 156 

Mountain Province igg 

Province of Pangasinan I6O 



c 



Region II 

Pi-ovince of Batanes 1(52 

Province of Cagayan 1(54 

Province of Ifugao lf,(; 

Province of Isabela 1(58 

Province of Kalinga-Apayao 170 

Province of Nueva Vizcaya 172 

Province of Quirino 174 

Region III 

Province of Bataan . 17(5 

Province of Bulacan 178 

Province of. Nueva Ecija. 18q 

Province of Pampanga 182 

Province of Tarlac 184 

Province of Zambales 18f, 

Region IV 

Province of Aurora 188 

Province of Batangas 190 

Province of Cavite 192 

Province of Laguna I94 

Province of Marinduque 190 

Province of Occidental Mindoro 198 

Province of Oriental Mindoro 200 

Pr3vince of Palawan 202 

Province of Quezon 204 

Province of Rizal 2p6 

Province of Romblon 208 

Region V 

Province of Albay 210 

Province of Camarines Norte * ' 212 

Province of Camarines Sur 214 

Province of Catanduanes " " 2I6 

Province of Masbate . . 218 

Province of Sorsogon ' 22O 

Region VI 

Province of Aklan 222 

Province of Antique 224 

Province of Capiz " | 226 

Province of Guimaras ' " ' ' 228 



xi 



Province of Iloilo 230 

Province of Negros Occidental / . . ; 232 

Region VII ' ' 

Province of Bohol 234 

Province of Cebu 236 

Province of Negros Oriental 238 

Province of Siquijor 240 

Region VIII 

Province of Biliran 242 

Province of Leyte 246 

Province of Southern Leyte 246 

Province of Eastern Samar 248 

Province of Northern Samar 250 

Province of Samar 252 

Region IX 

Province of Basilan 254 

Province of Sulu 256 

Province of Tawi-Tawi 258 

Province of Zamboanga del Norte 260 

Province of Zamboanga del Sur 262 

Region X 

Province of Agusan del Norte 264 

Province of Agusan del Sur 266 

Province of Bukidnon . 268 

Province of Camiguin 270 

Province of Lanao del Norte 272 

Province of Lanao del Sur 274 

Province of Misamis Occidental 276 

Province of Misamis Oriental 278 

Province of Surigao del Norte 28O 

Province of Surigao del Sur 282 

Region XI 

Province of North Cotabato 284 

Province of South Cotabato 286 

Pi'ovince of Davao 288 

Province of Davao Oriental | _ ^ 290 

Province of Davao del Sur . . . 292 

Province of Maguindanao 294 

Province of Sultan Kudarat 296 



Philippines Copyright 1975 
By the 

BUREAU OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 

Quezon City 



Produced by the 
BUREAU OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
in cooperation with the 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
NATIONAL HISTORICAL INSTITUTE 
and the 

NATIONAL MEDIA PRODUCTION CENTER 



Printed by the 
NATIONAL MEDIA PRODUCTION CENTER 



xii 



SYMBOLS OF THE NATION 

By Galo B. Ocampo 
Technical Adviser on Heraldry 
Office of the President of the Philippines 
Malacanang 




HE Coat of Arms of a country is the political symbol 
of the State. It is emblematic of the form of government 
and illustrative of the political ideology of the people. 



T 

■ Thus, the various coats of arms used in the Philip- 

' pines summarize our historical development and indicate 

the political changes in our country since the 16th century. The 
first coat of arms was that of the City of 
Manila bestowed by the Royal Court Grant 
of King Philip II on March. 20, 1596; the 
the second, that of the erstwhile Philippine 
Republic, known as Aguinaldo's seal used in 
his manifestos since October 31, 1896; the 
third, that adopted by the Philippine Com- 
mission in 1905; the fourth, that of the 
Comonwealth government approve on Novem- 
ber 6, 1935, and the last, is that of the Repub- 
lic which was approved by the Congress of 
the Philippines and by President Manuel 
Roxas on July 3, 1946. 

Among the heraldic blazons common to 
our various coats, of arms are the eight-rayed 
Philippine sun, and the three stars of the 
Philippine National Flag. The eight rays of 
the Philippine Sun represent the eight prov- 
inces of Manila, Bulacan, Pampanga, Nueva 
Ecija, Morong, Laguna, Batangas, and Cavite which were declared 
under Martial Law by a decree of the Spanish government during 
the revolution of 1896. The three five-pointed stars indicate the 
solidarity of Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. The Sun and Three 
Stars are one and inseparable. They are the distinctive and ex- 
clusive emblem of the Philippines as sanctioned by the Constitution, 
the Flag Law and Executive Order No. 23, series of 1936. The 
Special Committee on the Coat of Arms created by the late President 
Manuel L. Quezon on December 15, 1938, under the chairmanship 



Thf «tat of fhr Phaii,„ine Heraldni Conimittre 



of the late Hon. Teodoro Kalaw, Director of the National Library 
and Museum, to study and recommend certain modifications needed 
in the coat of arms of the Commonwealth of the Philippines recog- 
nized the importance of the Sun and Three Stars and recommended 
that they occupy an important place in our coat of arms. The 
recommendations submitted by this Committee were used as the 

basic pattern for the coat of arms of the 
Republic. 

As a symbol of the state, the coats of 
arms of the Republic represents three 
historical phases — Philippines, Spanish and 
American. 

The Philippine symbols are the three 
mullets (five-pointed stars) on the chief 
argent (upper part of the escutcheon proper 
in white), the eight rayed Philippine sun or 
(gold) "in rayonnant"(in splendor straight 
rays) on the heraldic point of honor, argent 
(center of the escutcheon proper m white). 
The National Colors are preserved in the 
tinctures such as white (chief and heraldic 
points of honor are in argent) , red and blue 
(in the paleways of two pieces gules and 
azure respectively on the sinister and dexter 
fields of the excutcheon). 

The Spanish symbol is the Lion Rampant on the dexter base 
(right side), taken from the Royal Spanish Flag, the quartered flag 
of Castile and Aragon. This is the national ensign of Spain used 
by Legaspi in the actual occupation and colonization of the islands 
in latter part of the 16th century as differentiated from the 
Pendon de Castilla or the Royal Standard, the flag brought by 
Magellan in 1521. During the Philippine Commission and Com- 
monwealth eras the coat of arms of the City of Manila occupied 




1 



the point of honor in our coat of arms. This was a mistake. The 
Coat of arms of the City of Manila showing the castle and sea 
lion was bestowed by King Philip II expressly for the "Ever Loyal 
and Noble City of Manila" in the first Royal Decree assigning a 
device for flags, banners, shields and seals for the said City, given 
at Aranjuez on the 20th day of March, 1596. Another error is 
the fact that a Spanish symbol occupied the heraldic point of honor, 
which should have been reserved for a Philippine symbol. 

The American symbol is the American bald-headed eagle dis- 
played on the sinisterit base (left-side), looking towards the dexter 
side which is the peace side or the olive side. On the dexter 
claw is an olive branch with eight leaves and eight fruits on verte 
(green) and gules (red) respectively. On sinister claw are three 
spears in alert in peace or in war. 

Below the excutcheon proper is a scroll with the inscription 
"Repubhc of the Philippines." 

The coat of arms of the Republic was the beginning of a 
heraldic tradition in the Philippines where before there was none. 
What followed thereafter is the implementation of Executive 
Order No. 310 s. 1940, issued by President Manuel L. Quezon 
creating the Philippine Heraldry Committee to make studies and 
recommend the adoption of coat of arms for the different govern- 
ment offices, semi-government corporations, provinces and charter- 
ed cities. This function of the Committee was later expanded to 
cover the design of medals decorations, insignia and flags. 

The use of armorial bearings by civic authorities is traceable 
to the practise of authenticating documents by means of adminis- 
trative or corporated seals bearing distinctive and symbolic devices 
during the latter part of the 12th century. 

The seal had a practical purpose as well as an artistic value- 
it rendered forgery of the seal difficult. 

In this respect civil insignia differed from personal heraldry. 
The device adopted by a knight for display on his shield, surcoat 
and banner served the purpose of enabling him to be identified 
m the field of tournament. The arms used are of a more personal 
and family blazonry. The coat of arms must be clearly recognizable 
at a distance so as to identify the Knight who was covered from 
head to foot with his helmet and armor. 

The symbology of the arms in our civil heraldry really started 
with the coat of arms of the City of Manila when Philip II granted 
the arms composed of the Castillian Castle to represent Spain and 
the Seahon to represent Filipinas Ultramar. Hence the sealion has 
xTrf^^o^ symbolism representing the Philippines and 

NOT Spain as erronerously and oftenly misinterpreted. The raison d' 
etre here is that the Lion Rampant found in the quartered arms 



and flag of Spain is on land. The Philippine archipelago or Islas 
Filipinas, being surrounded by water needed a relevant symbol 
apropos to its geographical location hence the heraldic device of a 
se(v-lion. In heraldic glossary, a sealion or lion-poisson is a heraldic 
arms the upper part of which looks like a lion and the hinder part 
ending in a tail like a fish with webbed feet. 

The lion is one of the most favored emblem in heraldry, 
specially English heraldry. Since the reign of Richard I the Royal 
Arms of England has been: Red, three gold lions passant guardant; 
i.e. on three legs, the right forepaw raised, the head turned so as 
to present the full face. A lion in this posture was termed as a 
lion leoparde or leopard. 

Richard's brother, John, also had two lions passant which 
according to some heralds were actually used by the father, Henry II. 
Earlier Norman Kings including William the Conqueror had lions 
in their arms. This royal heraldic tradition has been carried down 
to the present with the lion being used as a charge or as a supporter. 

The meaning and symbolism of its heraldic representation also 
changes in accordance with its tincture (colors) or position. 

The heraldic lion of Scotland differs from the lion of England 
in tinctures — the former is red while the later is golden. 

It was the Philippine Revolution against Spain that introduced 
a new sets of symbols— the most significant of which are the Sun 
and Three Stars in our National Flag. 

The sun is a universal symbol — a symbol of veneration by the 
ancient man who regarded it as the beneficent sovereign of mankind 
— the earliest form of religious worship. The Egyptians, Mexicans, 
and Japanese were the greatest sun worshippers in history. The 
study of the sun by the Babylonians produced the calendar and 
aided in the development of mathematics. The sun-god Ra, is a 
popular deity of Egypt while its pyramids are oriented by astrono- 
mical calculations. 

In the 14th Century BC, Akhenation established a religion 
around the sun-god Aton. The Greeks believe the sun-god em- 
ployed a chariot in his diurnal journey for his use in the western 
sea where the sun sunk each evening. Sacrifices were made as a 
means of propitiation by the Kings of Judah, the Spartans, Persians 
and the Mayans of Mexico. 

The Incas of Peru built towering Sun Temples in their major 
cities specially Cuzco. Sapa Inca the Sun King of Peru— had 
greater powers than the Sun King of France— Louis XIV who pro- 
claimed that: "L'etat c'est moi". Sapa Inca claimed everything 
under the sun: he was divine, descended by direct line from the 



Sun, the creator — god; everything — the land, the earth, the people, 
gold (sweat of the sun), silver (tears of the moon) — all these 
belonged to him. 

The universal acceptance of the Sun as a symbol of the aspira- 
tions, ideals and myths of all peoples is probably reflected in the 
fact that a survey of the flags of nations shows that Argentina, 
Nationalist China, Iraq, Japan, Nepal, Niger Republic, the Philip- 
pines and Uruguay have the heraldic sun (with eyes, nose, mouth) 
or plain sun, occupying the canton of their flags in varying degrees 
of derivative designs. Similarly the stars are featured in the 
design of the flags of 39 nations. 

The Philippine is the only country that incorporate the sun 
and stars in its flag. Muslim countries feature the crescent 
(moon) and the stars such as Algeria, Lybia, Mauritania, Pakistan, 
Tunisia, and Turkey while the Moldive Islands depict only the 
crescent. 

Originally the Philippine Sun appears in its heraldic inter- 
pretation — ^the biblical sun with eyes, nose and mouth in some of 
the revolutionary seals and flags. The design of the Philippine 
National Flag at present can be traced to Executive Order No. 23 
dated March 23, 1936 which specify the design of the National 
Colors with 8 rayed Philippine Sun without the eyes, nose and mouth 
of the biblical sun. 

The sea-lion, the sun and stars invariably appear in the arms 
of government offices, provinces and cities. 

President Manuel L. Quezon, in issuing Executive Order No. 
310 s. 1940 creating the Philippine Heraldry Committee to make 
studies and recommend ways and means for the adoption of coat 
of arms of the different political subdivisions and semi-governmental 
institutions, set the pattern of symbols to be used reflecting physical 
or geographical considerations, significant emblazonry, allegorical 
ideas, political social or economic emblems as well as supporting 
documents, orders or grants. 

To ensure that the coat of arms of the Republic is a manifesta- 
tion of the ideas and ideals of the offices or the people concerned, 
the Philippine Heraldry Committee from the year of its recons- 
titution on January 7, 1946 to June 30, 1973 encouraged all concerned 
to submit the designs of their coat of arms limiting the work of 
the Heraldry Committee to putting in correct heraldic phraseology 
the designs submitted for an office, province or city. 

The Heraldry Committee through the Technical Staff headed 
by the author prepares the final design with the heraldic description 
for the approval of the President of the Philippines. 

By coursing through the Office of the President the approval 



of all the Republic coat of arms, the duplication of particular symbols 
is avoided by the various offices, provinces or cities. Moreover 
since most of these coats of arms are used for administrative or 
corporate seals to authenticate public documents there is need for 
their registration and approval by the President of the Philippines. 

Heraldry is the language and science of art and symbols. 
Through heraldry the history and/or geneology of a nation or family 
is traced, visualized and recorded. 

In the beginning the "pictorial" suggestions of some provinces 
and cities have to be modified to conform to basic heraldic rules 
and regulations. We have to motivate through concepts such 
emblems which by reason of relationship, association or convention 
are visible signs of the invisible, the abstract if not the ordinary 
objects and scenery that we see everyday. 

Likewise we have to indoctrinate to all concerned the mechanics 
of heraldry principally the division of the shield or escutcheon such 
as the 1. Dexter side (right) ; 2. Sinister side (left; 3. The Chief 
(top) ; 4. The base. The positions of charges are: 5. Dexter Chief; 
6. Sinister Chief; 7. Middle Chief; 8. Dexter base; 9. Sinister 
base; 10. Middle base; 11. Honor point; 12. Fesse point; and 
13. Nombril point. 

For purposes of protocol design of a. coat of arms must ad - 
here structurally to the points enumerated above. 

The crest from the latin words ci'esta, (the tuft or comb which 
grows upon the heads of birds) was placed on top of the helmet of 
chieftains so their followers may readily distinguish them in battle. 
The crest is placed on top of the shield. The French herald call the 
crest the cinder. Another name for the crest is — cognizance from 
the latin word congrosco — to know, since by it the leader is recog- 
nized. For a crest, Alexander the Great used a ram's head while 
Julius Caesar was known by a star. 

The seals of the Republic are the seals of the office — not the 
man occupying the office hence the text "Official Seal" on the cir- 
cular border of the seal — with the exception of one— the seal of the 
President of the Philippines which is officially the "Personal Seal 
of the President" so that no other office or official may use it. 

The Personal Seal of the President is a red triangle (emblem 
of the revolution against Spain) with three golden stars on the 
three corners of the triangle Superimposed at center is the sea lion. 
The background of the triangle is the Philippine Sun. Forming a 
circular border are stars representing all the provinces of the Phil- 
ippines. 

As an extension of the personality of the President, the seal 



of the Executive Secretary feature one element of the Presidential 
Seal — ^the Sealion engarde, to indicate the Executive Secretary's 
executive powers in implementing the Presidential policies and 
program of government. 

Most of the seals of the various Departments under the Execu- 
tive Branch of the government feature symbols pertinent to and 
symbolical to the functions of the Departments. 

Two Departments— the Department of Foreign Affairs and the 
Department of National Defense have for their seals the Coat of 
Arms of the Republic of the Philippines. This is because the nature 
of their functions and ritual or protocol in official functions here or 
abroad identify them as foreign affairs personnel or armed forces 
personnel of the Republic of the Philippines and not merely of their 
respective Departments. 

The seals of our provinces and chartered cities feature symbols 
covered by Executive Order No. 310. They are either visual abstract 
or natural emblems representing the characteristic or regional as- 
pects of their geography, tourist or historical landmarks, agricultural, 
economic and ethnological pertinent to each province or city. 

A few of the cities feature genuine heraldic grants of the Royal 
Crown of Spain like the City of Manila, Lipa and Naga. Some first 
families of the coimtry have their own faihily coat of arms geneolo- 
gically traceable to the Spanish gentry whose coat of arms were 
granted to these families by the ruling Spanish monarch of the period. 

By and large the Philippine heraldic tradition created by the 
Philippine Heraldry Committee from 1946 to the present is a good 
start for other heraldic experts to perfect in the future. 

Certainly the Heraldry Committee tried its best to avoid the 
pictorial coats of arms which some countries introduced in their 
seals. This is understandable specially in the Philippines where 
heraldry is practically unknown. 

It was a dedicated group which President Sergio Osmena ap- 
pointed on January 7, 1946. All the members served without any 
compensation including the author who served as Member, Secre- 
tary, Chairman and now as Technical Adviser on Heraldry in the 
Office of the President of the Philippines. 

Dr. Jose P. Bantug served as the first Chairman of the Com- 
mittee. The members were Dr. Gilbert A. Perez, Dr. Leandro 
Fernandez, Director Pablo Lucas, Director Luis Montilla and the 



then Captain Galo B. Ocampo who also served as the Secretary 
and Heraldic Expert of the Committee. 

Dr. Gilbert A. Perez took over the Secretaryship of the Commit- 
tee in an acting capacity when the author left for the United States 
in 1947 to assume his duties as Technical Assistant to Ambassador 
to the United Nations General Carlos P. Romulo. 

It is a wonder how the Heraldry Committee was able to establish 
and create all the coat of arms, medals and decoration, insignia and 
flags of the Republic without a budget or personnel. 

On June 30, 1973, by virtue of the Reorganization Act, the 
Philippine Heraldry Committee was abolished and the author was 
appointed Technical Adviser on Heraldry in the Office of the 
President of the Philippines. 

The abolition of the Philippine Heraldry Committee does not 
mean that the heraldry work of the Republic is finished. Govern- 
ment offices continue to send requests for designs of new seals, 
medals and flags to the Office of the Technical Adviser on Heraldry 
in Malacanang. Flags, medals and insignia requisitioned by the 
Government have to be evaluated as to conformity to specifications, 
not only to protect the interest of the Government but what is more 
important is to maintain excellence of quality. 

These heraldic symbols of the State do not only represent the 
highest ideals and aspirations of our people but are a living testi- 
mony to the patrimony of our race and nation. 

The Philippine National Flag is not just a piece of cloth — it 
is emblematic of the State; our medals and decorations are not 
just pieces of metals — they are public documents which the Pres- 
ident of the Philippines confers to the country's deserving citizens 
and friends as a recognition for a job well done, for meritorious 
achievements, for distinguished services, for bravery in the field 
of battle or the supreme sacrifice of life beyond the call of duty. 

Today, there is even a greater need for these significant symbols 
of recognition and gratitude of a concerned President Ferdinand E. 
Marcos in the great task of nation building under the New Society. 

Heraldry is a continuing and developing discipline of higher 
learning following the footsteps of history and reflecting the con- 
tinuing changes of our culture, society and body politic. 



THE PHILIPPINES 



The Philippines, off the southeastern coast of mainland 
Asia, lies just above the equator. It is separated from Formosa 
(Taiwan) by the Bashi Channel on the north, and surrounded 
by the Pacific Ocean on the east, the Celebes Sea on the 
south, and the China Sea on the west. Consisting of more 
than 7,000 islands and islets (about 4,000 of which are still 
unnamed), it has a land area of 300,000 square kilometers. 

The archipelago, with two pronounced seasons (wet and 
dry), produces rice, corn, sugar, coconut, abaca, timber, live- 
stock, poultry, etc. Its natural resources are metallic and 
nonmetallic minerals, forestry and fishery. 

The population, 36,684,486 in 1970, is composed of about 
57 major and 20 minor cultural-linguistic groups in Luzon, 
Visayas and Mindanao with Iloko, Tagalog, Bikol and Cebuano 
as the most widely used dialects. Filipino, however, is the 
official language, together with English and Spanish. 

Named Falipinas (later spelled Filipinos) in 1543 by the 
Spanish explorer, Ruy Lopez de Villalobos, in honor of Prince 
Philip of Spain, the Philippines was earlier referred to by 
Chinese as Mai, Liu-Sung and Chinsan; and later by the West- 
erners as Maniolas, Ophir, Mas del Oriente, Islas del Poniente, 
Islas de Luzones, Archipelago de Magallanes and Archipelago 
de Legazpi. The present English and Filipino names are 
Philippines and Pilipinas, respectively. 

The country was discovered in 1521 by Ferdinand 
Magellan, who was subsequently killed by the natives led by 
Lapu-lapu, in an island known today as Mactan. Spain, 
however, continued to reign over the entire archipelago by 
setting up a colonial administration under Miguel Lopez de 
Legazpi, the adelantado and first governor general in 1565. For 
more than three centuries, except during the British occupation 
of Manila (1762-1964), the colonial government ruled over the 
fndios, as the natives were derogatively called by the 
conquerors. 

In the late 1890's, however, the Filipinos started to take 
up arms. A propaganda movement began to take shape and 
to take form. Jose Itizal with his novels fired the imagination 
of the Filipinos and in 1896 the revolution, led by Andres 
Bonifacio, began. This paved the way for the second phase 
of the Philippine Revolution in 1898. 

A group of Filipinos proclaimed the Philippine Indepen- 
dence in Kawit, Cavite, on June 12, 1898. A yeai- later, in 



1899, the first Philippine Republic was inaugurated in Malolos, 
Bulacan, with General Emilio Aguinaldo as president. 

At the turn of the century, after the Spanish-American 
War and during the Filipino-American War, the American 
forces took over. A military government was established by 
the Americans in 1898, and later a civil government in 1901. 

Due to the clamor of Filipinos for independence, the 
United States Congress enacted the Tydings-McDuffie Law 
in 1934. It provided for a transition govei-nment, the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, preparatory to full state- 
hood in 1946. Manuel L. Quezon (1934-1944) became the 
first president with Sergio Osmena (1944-1946) succeeding 
him. 

World War II found the Philippines fighting side by 
side with the Americans against Japan. The Japanese occupied 
the country from 1942 to 1944. In early 1943, a Japanese- 
sponsored Philippine Republic was inaugurated with Jose P. 
Laurel (1943-1945) as president. The country was finally 
liberated by the Americans in 1945. 

On July 4, 1946, the United States recognized the 
independence of the Philippines. Manuel A. Roxas (1946-1948) 
became the first president of the Republic. He was succeeded 
by Elpidio Quirino (1948-1953), Ramon Magsaysay (1953- 
1957), Carlos P. Garcia (1957-1961), Diosdado Macapagal 
(1961-1965), and Ferdinand E. Marcos (1965 to date). 

With critical challenges and a felt need for reforms. 
President Marcos placed the country under a state of martial 
law through Proclamation No. 1081 on September 21, 1972. 
The New Society established peace and order, boosted the 
economy, reorganized the bureaucracy, improved education, 
launched the cultural revival program, and promoted other 
vital aspects of the Filipino life. 

Basically Malayan, the Filipino is a blend of eastern and 
western cultures. Intermarried with Oriental and Occidental 
peoples, he is religious — either Pagan, Muslim, Christian, or 
of other faiths. Christianity and Islam have, however, gained 
a better foothold on Philippine soil. He is also known for 
his hospitality as well as for his close family ties, respect 
for elders, and friendship. 

Significantly, this beloved country- the Philippines — has 
been called the "Isles of Hope," "Isles of Fear," "Isles of Faith," 
"Gems of the East," "Emerald Islands," but the most accepted 
and popular one is "Pearl of the Orient." -^^^ 

^ 



THE GREAT SEAL OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 

Great Seal of the Republic was approved by Commonwealth Act No. 731, Congress of the 
Philippines on July 3, 1946. It was designed by then Captain Galo B. Ocampo member and 
secretary of the Philippine Heraldry Committee. ^ 

The Philippine Sun Rayonnant occupies the point of honor in the center while the Three Stars 

i i^r ^ t ""^^^"^ baldheaded American Eagle, and on the sinister (left side) on a field of 
red the Lion Rampant^ The history of the country is reflected in the coat of arms of the Republic 
from the eight-rayed Philippine Sun to the three ^pointed Stars which are one and nV^rab e 



FLAG OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 



The Philippine Fhg is the national emblem of the country. It stands for unity and national 
identity. It expresses the Filipino sentiments for freedom, equality, justice and nobility. 

The Philippine National Flag has the unique distinction of being the only flag in the world 
signifying peace or war. In time of peace, it is the blue stripe which is on top of the red. In time of 
war, it is the red stripe on top of the blue. 

Tlie equilateral triangle on the left side of the flag is symbolic of equality among men. The 
eight rays of the Philippine Sun in the triangle represent the eight provinces that revolted against the 
Spanish rule. The three stars on each corner of the triangle stand for the three geographical divisions 
of the country — Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

The red stripe symbolizes the willingness of the Filipino to shed blood in defense of his 
country. The blue stands for common unity and the noble aspirations of the Filipino people. 



PAMBANSANG AWIT 

(National Anthem) 




J. Felipe 



Bayang magiliw Perlas ng Silanganan, 




paglayang miimimknl Aug kislap ng watawat 




Alab 



ng puso Sa dihdib mo'y buhay. 



mo'y Tagumpay va nagniningning Ang bituin at 





Lupang hinirang Duyan ka ng magiting, 




draw niya, Kailan pa rna'y di magdidilim. Lupa ng 




Sa tmnlulupig Di ka pasisiU. Sa dagat 



luwalhati't pagsinta, Buhay ay 





at bundok, Sa sinwy at sa langit mmg langit sa piling mo; Aming ligaya rm pag 



N — -N 



bughaw, 




May dilag ang tula At awit M vmy mtng^pi, Ang rmrmtxiy mtng d^hU M iyo. 



9 




JOSE RIZAL 

National Hero 

(From a r dinting by Coniconde, Courtesy of the National Historical Institute.) 

Jose Rizal y Alonzo, the foremost national hero of the Philippines, was bom in Calamba, 
Laguna on June 19, 186 J to Francisco Mercado Rizal and Teodora Alonzo. 

He was educated at the Ateneo Municipal de Manila and the University of Santo Tomas. 
studied in Spain and traveled in other European countries. While abroad he wrote his first novel 
entitled Noli Me Tangere (1887) which dealt with his life in the Philippines, and in this and a later 
novel, EL FUibusterismo, he set forth his ideas for reforms. 

On his return to the country 1892, he was imprisoned in Fort Santiago allegely due to c 
seditious pamphlet, Pobres Frailes, and later exiled to Dapitan, Zamboanga in 1892. He was allowed 
to leave in 1896 as a volunteer physician for Cuba but he was arrested abroad, returned to Manila 
and was confined again in Fort Santiago where he wrote his Mi Ultimo Adios, a farewell poem of 14 
stanzas. 

After a mock trial by a military court on December 26, he was unjustly convicted of rebellion, 
sedition and formation of illegal societies and was sentenced to death two days later. 

On December 30, 1896, Jose Rizal, the greatest apostle of Filipino nationalism and freedom 
, was shot at Bagumbayan Field ( now Rizal Park). 



10 



SAMPAGUITA 

National Flower 



The Sampaguita, a sweet-smelling perrennial with waxy blossoms, is the Philippine National 
Flower. According to folklore, the name is derived from a love-smitten swain's promise ("sumpa- 
kita"), "I promise you", to his lady love. 



BARONG FILIPINO AND BAROT SAYA 

National Costume 

The Filipino woman's dress reflects oriental and western influences- from the Malay the 
sarong; the Chinese, the loose pants and mandarin coat; and the Spanish, the baro (blouse) and saya 
(skirt J The baro, made from either abaca, pina, maguey or jusi fibers, has long loose sleeves with 
panuelo or baksa, draped about the shoulders. The saya is a wide ample skirt with an over-skirt 
called tapis. 

From the baro't saya, several modifications were created, each representing a stvle - the Maria 
Clara, the mestlza dress, and the terno. 

Regional wear is also a fashion. For the women of Luzon, the balintawak, the Visayan women 
the patadyong; and the Muslim women, light-fitting trousers with malong draped over one shoulder 
and wrapped around the body in a sari fashion. 

The Barong Filipino was originally an expensive wear for the Filipino males, traditionally of 
Pina cloth and lavish embroideries. Several modifications were made since its first appearance in 
1770 until about 1830 when the Indio adopted the baro with pigtails and a handkerchief at the 

flCCfCm 

At present, aside from pina fiber, jusi, jusilyn (cotton and polythelene), and ramie or "China 
Grass are used in the manufacture of the Barong. 

Today, the Barong Filipino and the baro't saya or any of its styles are used only during formal 
or semi-formal occasions. 




MALACAfJANG PALACE 

On Calk de Malacanang (now Jose P. Laurel St.), San Miguel District, City of Manila, is 
Malacanan Palace, the official residence of the President of the Republic of the Philippines. A house 
of recreation when purchased by the Spanish Government, it served as summer residence for its 
governors-general. However, when the official residence in Intramuros was destroyed by the 
earthquake in 1863, the Governor-General moved to the Possession de Malacanan, as it was known 
then. From that time on, Malacanan Palace has served as official residence for all the succeeding 
chief executives of the land. 

According to two version, Malacanan originated from the Tagalog words, mamalakaya, 
meaning sitio de Pescadores or "village of fishermen", or from the words mz-y lakan diyan, which 
means "there is a noble there. " Due to Castillan influence and use, it became the hispanized word 
Malacanang, later spelled Malacanan. 



SEAL AND FLAG OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES 



The Sealion represents the heraldic symbol of Filipinas ultramar. The Katipunan triangle in red 
represents equality under the law; the Three Stars are for Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao; and the 
Philippine Sun Rayonnant represents- liberty and freedom. The Stars in the circular border around 
the Sun represent as many provinces as there are in the Republic. 

The Field of the Flag is the Presidential Blue color, which is attributed to royalty and ruling 
hierarchy. 

The use of the Presidential Seal is solely for and by the highest magistrate of the land. 



^^he coat of arms of the Republic of the Philippines are needed in the normal operation of the 
various offices of the government. 

Heraldry has permeated contemporary life in the use of administrative or corporate seals 
(commonly referred to as dry seals> to authenticate and attest to government documents issued by 
these offices. 

The proclamation of Philippine Independence on July 4, 1946 issued by then President Harry 
T. Truman, attested by then Acting Secretary of State Dean Acheson and the corresponding 
Philippine documents have to be attested and authenticated by the Great Seals of the Philippines 
and the United States - hence the request of President Manuel Roxas for the design of the Great 
Seal of the young Republic. 

The Great Seal of the Republic of the Philippines was only the beginning. What followed were 
the seals or coats of arms of the different provinces and chartered cities and the different offices in 
the Executive, Legislative and Judiciary branches of our young Republic. 

Provinces, chartered cities, or offices of the government have to have seals containing symbols 
pertinent to and appropriate for each entity. 



DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 




DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 



DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 




DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE 




EXECUTIVE OFFICE 




DEPAR™ENT of social WELFARE 




DEPARTMENT OF GENERAL SERVICES 




NATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY 



DEPARTMENT OF AGRARIAN REFORM 




DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INFORMATION DEPARTMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS 

AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 



DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY 



DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM 




DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HIGHWAYS 



DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES 



Region I 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF BAGUIO 



Baquio City, which lies among the cloud-kissed moun- 
tains and hills in the subprovince of Benguet, ranges in elevation 
from 4,500 to 5,500 feet. It has an average temperature of 

The city, about 250 kilometers north of Manila, has a 
land area of 48.9 square kilometers and a population of 84,538 
in 1970. Ilokano is the dominant dialect. 

Baguio largely depends on mining and agricultural indus- 
tries. The people are also engaged in floriculture, wood carving, 
weaving, piggery, poultry raising, and 
dairying. They are skilled in fashioning 
gold, silver, and other metals. 

Baguio was named after "bigyiw," 
meaning "moss," a green plant which 
the first Igorot found around the lake 
(now Burnham Lake). The Igorots in 
Baguio are called Ibaloi or Inibaloi, 
resembling the Pangasinan people in 
custom and dialect. They had abandoned 
head-hunting long before the Americans 
came, and have cultivated rice fields, 
camote patches, and raised pigs and 
chickens. 



Alonso Martin Quirante, the chief 
magistrate and commandant of the Prov- 
ince of Pangasinan, went to the Province 
of the Igorots in 1642. The Spaniards 
loosely "governed" the Igorots for over 
200 years from their headquarters 
known as the Comandancia Poltico General de Igorotes at 
Agoo, La Union. The Augustinian friars from 1654 to 1659 
attempted to christianize the Igorots, partly through force, 
but they failed. Later, on October 16, 1755, Padre Vivar, 
an Augustinian friar,, held the first mass at La Trinidad. 
In 1846, Comandante Guillermo Galvey, after 45 preliminary 
exploratory expeditions, established his comandancia at La 
Trinidad (named after his wife). 

Several years before the Revolution of 1896, an uprising 
occurred, in La Trinidad. In July 1899, about 500 revolutionists 




burned the comandancia; Comandante Bejar fled to Bontoc. 
Juan Carino was made the governor of Benguet under the first 
Philippine Republic. 

On November 23, 1900, Act No. 49 of the Philippine Com- 
mission established a civil government for the Province of 
Benguet with Baguio as the capital. H. Phelps Whitmarsh 
became the first civil governor. 

During World War II, Baguio was the first place in the 
Philippines to be struck by the Japanese warplanes when they 

bombed Camp John Hay on December 
8, 1941, and it was the last occupied 
area by the invaders until the American 
forces liberated the city on April 26, 
1945. General Tomoyuki Yamashita 
surrendered at the American Embassy 
in Camp John Hay on September 3, 1945, 
after he lost in a battle in the mountains 
above Kiangan, Ifugao. 

Baguio became a town through Act 
No. 48, enacted on November 22, 1900, 
and Act No. 1397 which superseded it 
on September 14, 1905. On June 1, 1903, 
the Philippine Commission made Baguio 
as the summer capital of the Philippines. 
The City of Baguio was created on 
September 1, 1909 by Act No. 1963. 

Baguio City is famous for its rare 
beauty and grandeur; Mt. Sto. Tomas, 
the 7,500 feet peak, offers a view of 
the China Sea and the pine-carpeted countryside; the Crystal 
Cave, with walls lustered and colored, resembles the best cut 
glass; the Mummy Cave, a vast cavern of mummified bodies 
of warriors and their families; the Asin Hot Spring provides 
medicinal water; and the Trinidad Valley, the green granary 
of Baguio, provides vegetables and luscious strawberries. The 
other places of interest are the Burnham Park and Lake, the 
Mansion House, the Mines View Park, the Outlook Drive, the 
Teachers' Camp, the Philippine Military Academy, the Grotto 
of the Virgin of Lourdes, the Dominican Hill, Mount Mirador 
and the marketplace, 



24 




EVERLASTING 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF BAGUIO 

The City of Baguio was created under Act 2711 (RAC) 
on March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Baguio 

Upper Portion — pine trees, which clad the mount- 

ains and typifies the city. 

Lower Portion - zigzag road, a unique feature of 

the city. 

Right Side — beautiful Bridal Veil Falls, one of 

the best features of Baguio City. 

Diagonal Line —gold coins, signifying the mines 

of Baguio City. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF DAGUPAN 



Dagupan City is bounded on the north and northwest by the 
Lingayen Gulf, on the east by Mangaldan, on the south by 
Calasiao and Sta. Barbara, and on the west by Binmaley. 

With a land area of 37.2 square kilometers, it had a population 
of 83,582 in 1970. 

Fishing is an important source of livelihood of the people. 
Marshlands and swamps have been converted into fishponds. 
Bangus (milkfish) from the city are sold in the markets of 
Central Luzon and Manila at better prices than those from 
other parts of Luzon. Bocayo, a confection of sugar molasses 
and grated coconut, is a famous delicacy of the city. 

Formerly called Bacnotan (or Bagnotan), it was made a 
visita by the Augustinians; but the ministration of the place 
was turned over to the Dominicans in 1614. 

As a flourishing coastal settlement, the village became a 
thriving commercial center in the 17th century. Merchants 
from the other towns of Pangasinan plied their wares and 
established their warehouses on both sides of the river, in the 
barrios of Calmay and Pantal. 

Due to a disastrous fire in 1661, caused by the forces of 
Andres Malong (the leader of the Pangasinan revolt), the 
name of Bacnotan was changed to Nandaragupan, which means 
"where once stood the commercial center." 

In 1720, the name Nandaragupan was shortened to Dagupan. 
Its town plaza, as well as the schoolbuilding and the public 
market, was reconstructed. 



The Dominicans set up the Colegio de San Alberto de Magno 
for the education of young men in 1892. It was turned over 
to the Congregacion de Misionerias de Santo Domingo as a 
school for young girls in 1924. The schoolbuilding, however, 
was destroyed by the great flood in August 1935. 

Dagupan, as a progressive pueblo ruled by a gobemadorcillo, 
and later by a capitan municipal, was destroyed by an earthquake 
on March 16, 1892. The plaza, schoolbuilding, and roads were 
again reconstructed. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the Spanish 
forces led by Federico Coballos surrendered to the Filipino 
revolutionary forces under General Francisco Makabulos. 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, Dagupan suffered 
the hardships and atrocities of the Japanese occupation forces. 
On January 9, 1945, the American Liberation Forces led by 
General Douglas MacArthur landed in Blue Beach, Bonuan. 
The attack of the Americans at Dagupan City led to the 
liberation of Central Luzon from the Japanese invaders. 

Dagupan was made a chartered- city by Republic Act No. 117 
on June 20, 1947. The city, after War, was oftentimes referred 
to as the "Gateway to the North." A noted educational and 
cultural center, it has various colleges, vocational schools, and 
a university, the first to be set up in Pangasinan. 

Dagupan City, a tourist attraction of the province, is 
noted for its sandy beaches, particularly those found in Blue 
Beach, Bonuan. A newly constructed vacationists' resort is the 
Tondaligan Park, overlooking the Lingayen, Gulf. 



City Seal 




ROSAL 

City Flower 




City Flag 



CITY OF DAGUPAN 

The City of Dagupan was created under R.A. 170 on 
June 20, 1947. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Dagupan 

Horseshoe Magnet — suggests the meaning of Dagupan 

which is "the meeting place, the 
center" — because a magnet at- 
tracts all to itself. 



Horseshoe Shape 
Wings in Flight 

Crossroads 



— means good luck. 

— signifies speed, progress, ambi- 
tion. 

— further signifies the name Dagu- 
pan as meeting place and center 
of commerce and industry, educa- 
tion and culture. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF LAOAG 



Laoag City, located in the western part of the Province of 
Ilocos Norte, is bounded by the municipalities of Vintar on 
the north, Bacarra on the northeast, Paoay on the south, San 
Nicolas and Sarrat on the east, and the China Sea on the west. 

The city has a land area of 107.5 square kilometers. It had 
a population of 61,727 in 1970. Farming is the most important 
economic activity of the people. They are also engaged in 
home-weaving and 6asi-making. 

In 1572, Captain Juan de Salcedo reached Laoag by way 
of Laoag River. When he was met by the hostile natives, 
Salcedo left for Currimao. The following year, in 1573, Gover- 
nor General Guido de Lavezares again sent Salcedo to subdue 
the Ilocos region, which was later created as the province of 
Ilocos with the capital at Vigan or Villa Fernandina. 

The parish of Laoag was founded in 1580 by the Augus- 
tinian friars. A wooden chapel was built, which was later 
replaced with a church of stone. 

Six years later, in 1586, the town of Laoag was founded. 
It became the center of the Ilocos revolts caused by the arbitrary 
collection of tributes by the encomenderos, tobacco monopoly, 
and forced labor. The uprising of 1787 was a resentment against 
the imposition of the tobacco monopoly instituted from Feb- 
ruary 9, 1780 to March 1, 1782. In 1807, a revolt was waged 
against the injustices of the wine monopoly and in 1811, the 
uprising was due to the abuses of the friars. A hundred years 
later, in 1882, the tobacco monopoly was abolished. 



On February 2, 1818, Ilocos Norte was created as a province 
with Laoag as its capital. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, 
General Manuel Tinio headed the revolutionary army in the 
region. The revolutionists occupied the church of Laoag after 
the Spaniards were driven out of the town in 1898. 

With the coming of the American forces, civil government 
was established in Laoag on September 1, 1901. 

During World War II, on December 12, 1941, a unit of 
the Kanno Detachment of the Japanese Imperial Forces bombed 
the airfield of Laoag and subsequently occupied the town. The 
combined Filipino-American forces liberated Laoag in February 
1945. 

Laoag was made a chartered city by Republic Act No. 4584 
on June 19, 1965. It was inaugurated on January 1, 1966, 
after the people voted in a plebiscite held during the national 
elections in November 1965. 

The historical landmarks of the city are the centuries old 
St. William Cathedral and the monument to the abolition of 
the tobacco monopoly at the town plaza. Laoag City has also 
panoramic attractions like the "Sinking Tower of Laoag," 
considered the tallest and most massive solid bell tower in the 
Philippines; the Raquiza Gardens and Waterworks; and the 
sand dunes of La Paz. 




CITYOFLAOAG 



The City of Laoag was created under R.A. 4584 on 
June 19, 1961. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Laoag 

Building and Garden — the Ermita Garden and Building 

on top of the Ermita Hill. 

Bridge — formerly the Gilbert Bridge, 

recently renamed Marcos Bridge. 

Airport — the Gabu Airport, one of the 

biggest international airpoi'ts of 
the country. 

Tower — the Sinking Tower, one of the 

oldest and strongest edifices built 
during the early Spanish Regime. 

Monument — the Tobacco Monopoly Monument, 

the only one of its kind in the 
entire country. 



Farmer Plowing 



■ symbol of the agricultural indus- 
try of the Ilocos Region. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF SAN CARLOS 
(PANGASINAN) 



San Carlos City, the oldest town in Pangasinan, is located 
in the central part of the province. It is bounded on the north 
by the town of Calasiao; on the northeast by the town of Sta. 
Barbara; on the northwest by the town of Bugallon; on the 
south by the towns of Urbiztondo and Bayambang; on the east 
by the town of Malasiqui; and on the west by the town of 
Aguilar. 

San Carlos has a land area of 166.4 square kilometers. In 
1970, it had a population of 84,333 (14% urban and 86% rural). 

The important crops of the city are rice, corn, fruits and 
vegetables. 

During the Spanish period, the area of what is now San 
Carlos was the seat of the kingdom of King Kasikis. In 1587, 
the Dominican missionaries founded a pueblo and named it 
Sapan Palapar, the site of the present barrio of San Juan. 
Mongo, or "balatong" in the Tagalog dialect, grew abundantly 
in the place; hence, the town was called "Binalatongan." 

Binalatongan was the site of two local revolts in Pangasi- 
nan. One was waged by Andres Malong in 1660. He set the 
town on fire; hence, the seat of the government was transferred 
from Binalatongan to the present site of the city on November 
4, 1718, St. Charles Day (San Carlos Borromeo). The name 
of the old town was changed from Binalatongan to San Carlos, 
in honor of St. Charles. In 1762, another revolt was led by 
Juan de la Cruz Palaris due to the unlawful and abusive collec- 
tion of taxes. 



During the Revolution of 1896, the residents organized their 
own revolutionary forces despite the attempt of Captain Juan 
Rosario to pacify the local authorities. 

The Americans established a civil government and the 
public school system in 1901. 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, the people of 
San Carlos waged underground operations against the Japanese 
invaders through the organization of guerrilla units. When the 
American Liberation Forces landed in Lingayen on January 9, 
1945, the guerrilla units pushed on towards the other towns of 
Pangasinan. San Carlos was liberated on the following day 
(January 10th). 

Republic Act No. 4487, approved on June 19, 1965, created 
the City of San Carlos. It was inaugurated on January 1, 1966 
as a third class chartered city. 

San Carlos City takes pride in its impressive landmarks 
which include a memorial park in honor of its illustrious son, 
the late Speaker Eugenio Perez; a city hall; and a Catholic 
church. 

The noted educational institutions of the city are the San 
Carlos College; the Schools of Nursing and Midwifery of the 
Virgen Milagrosa Hospital; the San Carlos City General Hos- 
pital; and the Speaker Eugenio Perez National Agricultural 
School. 



30 




ROSAL 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF SAN CARLOS 

The City of San Carlos was created under R.A. 4487 on 

June 19, 1965. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of San Carlos 

Colors —colors of the Philippine Flag. 

Gear — symbol of the city's commerce and 

industry. 

- symbol of the progress and devel- 
opment of San Carlos City. 

- signifies that agriculture is the 
principal means of livelihood of 
the people of San Carlos. 

- signifies that cottage industry 
is another major up-an-coming 
source of income of the city. 



Factory 

Lower Left Portion 
Lower Right Portion 



31 



Region in 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ANGELES 



Angeles City is located in the northeastern part of the 
Province of Pampanga. It is bounded in the north by Mabalacat 
and Magalang, in the east by Arayat and Sta. Ana, in the 
south by Porac, Mexico and San Fernando and in the west by 
the Province of Zambales. 

It has a land area of 6,438.82 hectares (as early as 1846, 
when Captain General Narciso Claveria increased its size), an 
alterna,te dry and wet season, and an alluvial soil suitable to 
sugar cane, rice, corn, ajonjoli (oily grain), and anil (indigo). 
The place also abounds with banana, buri and gogo. 

The early Negrito settlers were driven out from this north- 
ern outpost of Pampanga which was called Culiat, from the 
woody vine, culiat, that grew in the settlement only. In 1796, 
Don Angel Pantaleon de Miranda and Dona Rosalia de Jesus 
moved to the barrio and cleared its forest for the cultivation 
of sugar and rice. 

On May 12, 1812, the new settlers attempted to establish 
a self-governing town which was strongly opposed by the friars 
(including Fray Jose Pometa, O.S.A.) . The same year, they also 
constructed the first chapel of Culiat. Ten years later, in 1822, 
another request was again denied because the separation of 
the barrio would cause a reduction of tributes and an impedi- 
ment to missionary work. 

In the barrio and around the area, Don Angel established 
the first primary school, constructed a muscovado sugar mill 
and an alcohol distillery, locally called aiacan or alamhique. On 
February 11, 1828, he filed a petition for the political inde- 
pendence of Culiat, and in 1829, again jointly signed another 
petition with Dr. Mariano Henson and Don Severino Henson. 
He donated 35 hectares for the construction of the first Catholic 
church and its convent, while Dona Agustina Henson de Miranda 
gave a land for the rebuilding of the public market. 

On December 8, 1829, Don Angel paid the complete amount 
required by law for the political emancipation of Culiat, then 
under a cabeza de barangay, which was sanctioned by the actual 
Alcalde Mayor, Juez and the Senor Teniente Coronel Coman- 
dantejMilitar, Don Antonio Chacon y Conde of San Fernando. 



On the same date, the parish priest of San Fernando also 
granted its spiritual independence. Culiat was renamed Angeles 
in honor of the patron saints, Los Santos Angeles Custodios 
(The Holy Guardian Angels) and the Christian name of its 
founder. Angel. 

On November 24, 1892, the Manila-Dagupan railroad line 
which passed through Angeles was inaugurated. The railway 
route later became a vital link and byway of the revolutionary 
forces at the height of the Spanish-Filipino War. 

During the Philippine-American War, General Emilio 
Aguinaldo transferred the seat of the government from San 
Isidro, Nueva Ecija, to Angeles, Pampanga, on May 7, 1899 
until July of the same year when he moved to Tarlac, Tarlac. 
In this town, the wife of General Aguinaldo organized the 
Angeles Chapter of the Philippine Revolutionary Army Red 
Cross at the home of Don Ricardo Nepomuceno y Paras. After 
three days of bloody battle with the Filipino Revolutionary 
Forces, the United States Infantry under General Arthur Mac- 
Arthur penetrated the town on August 16, 1899 while the 
Filipino brigades were still defending the Mabalacat side of 
the Abacan River. On January 1, 1900, General Grant organized 
the civil government of Angeles by appointing its alcalde. 

During the Second World War, when the Japanese Imperial 
Forces occupied the Philippines, a local government was 
reestablished by the invaders on January 22, 1942, until the 
liberation of the town by the American forces in 1945. 

After years of planning, Angeles became a chartered city 
by virtue of Republic Act No. 3700, which was approved on 
June 22, 1963. 

During the sugar boom, after the opening of the Suez 
Canal in 1869, Angeles became a major market center (collec- 
tion and distribution) of the surrounding sugar-producing 
municipalities. With the subsequent presence of Chinese gremios 
(merchant associations) and the installation of the American 
military base, Fort Stotsenburg, later absorbed by Clark Air 
Base, the economy of the town brought about its classification 
as a first class city, w 



Seal 



City Flag 



CITY OF ANGELES 

The City of Angeles was created under RA. 3700 on June 22, 1963. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Angeles 



-the Antipulu tree leaf, symboliz- 
ing greatness, permanence and 
honor. 

signifies purity of intention, and 
nobility of purpose. 

The hawk, clutching the symbolic 
shell of abundance and leading a 
flight of small birds, represents 
the economic leadership of Ange- 
les City over all Pampanga towns. 



Blue Background 
Red Background 
"A" and 1796 

Golden Background 



— symbolizes the vastness of econo- 
mic potentialities of Angeles City. 

— symbolizes the martyrdom of 
many Angeles citizens. 

— "AA" stands for Angel- Angeles 
Pantaleon de Miranda. The Year 
1796 traces the origin of the city 
from Barrio Culiat. 

— symbolizes the great achievement 
and success of the city founders. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF CABANATUAN 



Cabanatuan City lies in the center of the Province of Nueva 
Ecija. It is bounded by the towns of Llanera and Bohga- 
bon in the north, Santa Rosa in the south, Laur in the east, 
and Talavera in the west. 

It has a land area of 192.7 square kilometers and a popu- 
lation of 23,890 in 1887 and 99,890 in 1970. With a temperate 
and healthful climate, the farm lands yield bountiful harvests 
of rice, corn, sugar cane, vegetables, tobacco and fruits. 

Although there are three versions of the name of "Caba- 
natuan" the popularly accepted origin is the Tagalog word 
"Kabatuhan" which means a place where stones are in abun- 
dance. 

Cabanatuan was founded by the Augustinians in 1770 and 
it became a regular parish in 1775. As a small barrio of 
Gapan, it was converted into a municipality by the Spanish 
Military Governor, Colonel Monet, on July 14, 1777. The town 
was later made the capital of the province, next to Bongabon. 
Due to a big fire that razed Cabanatuan to ashes in 1816, the 
provincial seat of government was transferred to San Isidro. 
The Recollects then administered the parish until it was turned 
over to the seculars in 1864. The old church of the town was 
destroyed by an earthquake in 1880. Thus, Father Mariano 
Rivas directed the rebuilding of a new church while Father 
P. J. La Fuente constructed the parochial house. 

Under General Manuel Tinio, the people of Cabanatuan re- 
sponded to the Northern Luzon Central Command of the Fili- 
pino Revolutionary Forces in 1896. Later, after the fall of 
Calumpit and Malolos, both in Bulacan, General Emilio Agui- 
naldo's troops occupied strategic positions in Nueva Ecija, with 
Cabanatuan, on May 9, 1896, as its temporary seat of govern- 
ment until the national capital was transferred to Bamban, 
Tarlac. In the convent of the Church of Cabanatuan, General 
Antonio Luna was treacherously killed by Captain Pedro Jono- 
lino, whom Luna previously disarmed at Polo, Bulacan, for 
insubordination. His aide. Colonel Paco Roman, was also killed. 



Under the American rule, the civil government was estab- 
lished in Cabanatuan with Juan Jimenez as its first municipal 
president. Later, the Manila Railroad line was extended to 
the town in 1904 and the municipality was again made the 
provincial capital in 1912. 

During World War II, the Japanese planes bombed the 
municipality, while the Japanese Imperial Army who landed 
at Baler, Quezon, slashed their way through Bongabon and 
occupied Cabanatuan on February 1, 1942. The Hukbo ng Ba- 
yan laban sa Hapon (HUKBALAHAP) , a guerrilla force, how- 
ever, controlled the town despite the presence of enemy troops. 
Hence, the place was then referred to as "HuMandia." 

After heavy fighting in the Central Luzon area and the 
destruction of Cabanatuan by incendiary bombs of the liberation 
forces, the Americans occupied the town on February 1, 1945. 
Two sets of government were then established, with the HUKS 
organizing their own headquarters and staff, and the Amer- 
icans, under Captain John L. Evans, reestablishing a civil 
government with Ricardo T. Jimenez and Ricardo G. Carlos as 
mayor and vice-mayor, respectively. 

Congressman Jesus Ilagan sponsored Republic Act No. 526, 
approved on June 16, 1950, which converted the Municipality of 
Cabanatuan into a chartered city. It, however, officially func- 
tioned as a city on July 24 of the same year with Sergio S. 
Ocampo as mayor and Benigno Fajardo as vice-mayor. Its 
official inauguration was held on February 1, 1951. 

The "biggest little city in the Philippines" as referred to 
by the residents is the "rice granary of the Philippines." It 
stands as a keypoint to the richer regions of Northern Luzon 
and as a "Mother City" of two other cities in Nueva Ecija, 
San Jose and Palayan. 

Of historical interest, aside from various religious and 
educational buildings and institutions, are two statues of Gen- 
eral Luna in the Cabanatuan Plaza and (mounted on a horse) 
in front of the Cathedral where he was assassinated. As an 
adopted son of the city, a steel and concrete bridge was named 
after Luna, v^i^ 

^ 



34 



City Seal 



City Flag 



CITY OF CABANATUAN 

The City of Cabanatuan was created under R.A. 526 on June 16, 1950. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Cabanatuan 



CABANATUAN 



Haystack and Grains 
of Palay 



— derived from the Filipino phrase Yellow Background 
kaban ng tuwa meaning "chest 

of joy." Plow and Head of 

„ , Carabao 

— symbolize season of plenty. 

Year 1950 



— common sight during harvest 
time. 

— common tool and working com- 
panion of a farmer. 

— date of birth of the city. 



HISTORY OF THE 



OloNGAPo City is located at the northwestern coast of Luzon 
in the Province of Zambales. It is bounded on the north 
and northwest by the municipality of Subic, south and west by 
Subic Naval Base, and east by the municipality of Subic and 
the Subic Naval Base. 

The city, with a land area of 103.3 square kilometers, is 
isolated from the rest of the province by the surrounding Zam- 
bales mountain ranges. As of 1970, it had a population of 
107,785. 

Olongapo was already a small fishing village inhabited by 
the Zambals, a primitive tribe, when Captain Juan de Salcedo 
reached the region during his exploration of Luzon in 1572. 
The province of Zambales was under the spiritual ministration 
of the Recollects from 1609 to 1679. The Dominicans, however, 
founded its villages, including Subic with Olongapo, which 
became a barrio after the settlement of people from distant 
places. 

In 1868, the Spaniards fully realized the potentialities of 
Olongapo as a naval base due to the uniform depth and width 
of its bay and the mountain ranges on three sides which provide 
protection from strong winds. By 1884, a Royal Decree, issued 
by King Alfonso XII, sought to make Olongapo as Spain's naval 
stronghold in the Far East. Thus, in 1885, Don Juan Bautista 
y Antiquiera founded the barrio as a Spanish naval settlement. 
The intensified construction of the naval arsenal caused by the 
probable threat of Japan as a rising power, was stopped during 
the outbreak of the Spanish-American War. 

On July 7, 1898, the American naval fleet under Admiral 
George Dewey captured the Spanish garrison in Grande Island, 
off Olongapo. This was, however, turned over to the Rev- 
olutionary government as Dewey "had no way to keep them." 
Later, in 1901, the U.S. President, Theodore Roosevelt, issued 
an executive order retaining Subic Bay and 70,000 acres of 
adjacent land, including Olongapo, as a military reservation. 
Subic was developed to Sangley Point, Cavite, in 1922, to 

provide immediate support to Corregidor. Subic then served 
as a dry dock. 

Olongapo, in spite of its isolated geographical position, also 
suffered" the consequences of World War II. The town and 



OF OLONGAPO 



the American naval station were bombed by Japanese planes on 
December 12, 1941 and occupied by the Japanese Imperial 
Forces on January 10, the next year. 

During the Japanese rule, several resistance movements 
were organized, one of which was the Western Luzon Guerrilla 
Forces with an outstanding leader, Ramon Magsaysay, who 
became the third President of the Republic of the Philippines. 

After heavy bombings during the American liberation of 
the islands, Olongapo and the naval base were occupied by the 
XI Corps commanded by Major General Charles P. Hall on 
January 30, 1945. The barrio was transferred to a new 
underdeveloped site a couple of miles north of its former loca- 
tion and the original site was made a part of the naval station. 

After July 4, 1946, when the independence of the Philip- 
pines was recognized by the United States, Subic Bay and the 
Naval reservation in Olongapo were again retained by the US 
government by virtue of the RP-US Military Bases Agreement 
of 1947. 

Olongapo thus continued to be administered by the United 
States Navy. This confusing administrative setup later led 
to conflicts between the US naval authorities and the local 
officials. In a joint survey-study of the Philippine Foreign 
Affairs and the US Embassy, they recommended, despite some 
opposition, to turn over Olongapo to the local government. 

On December 7, 1959, President Carlos P. Garcia signed 
Executive Order No. 366, creating the Municipality of Olongapo. 
Ruben Geronimo became its first appointive mayor and James 
Gordon the first elective mayor in 1963. 

Under Republic Act No. 4645, dated June 1, 1966, which 
was introduced by Representative Ramon Magsaysay, Jr., the 
municipality was created into a city. Three months after, 
on September 3, Vice-President Fernando Lopez formally inau- 
gurated the city, and later, in the first city election, James 
Gordon, the first elected municipal mayor, also became the first 
city mayor. 

The U-shaped Olongapo City, home of the largest Amer- 
ican naval base in the Far East, is also known for its beautiful 
beaches. ^^^^ 

^ 




City Flag 



CITYOFOLONGAPO 

The City of Olongapo was created under R.A. 4695 on 
June 1, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Olongapo 



Mountains 

Structure 
(middle) 



Body of Water 



■symbol of the mountains of 
Zambales. 

■stands for the U.S. Naval Base, 
largest US naval support base in 
Southeast Asia and generates mil- 
lions of US dollars for the city 
economy every year. 

-Subic Bay, which was used as a 
naval stronghold in the Spanish 
regime due to its strategic 
location 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF PALAYAN 



The City of Palayan, about 11 kilometers north of Cabana- 
tuan City, is situated near the barrios of Malate (in the town 
of Bongabon) and Ganaderia (in the Municipality of Laur— 
along the Cabanatuan-Bongabon Road in the Province of Nueva 
Ecija. It consists mostly of rolling hills against the backdrop 
of towering mountains. The newly created city is very near 
the Pampanga River, the source of power of the Pampanga- 
Bongabon River Irrigation System. 

The city has a land area of 35.6 square kilometers. It is 
composed of nine barrios, from the neighboring towns of Laur 
and Bongabon, and the City of Cabanatuan. 

In 1970, Palayan had a population of 8,382. The principal 
sources of livelihood of the people are farming, poultry and 
piggery. Its principal crops are rice, corn and vegetables. 

Palayan, though marked with absence of buildings and 
government edifices, is the only city where the Bayanihan 
Project is intensively and extensively conducted by the residents. 
The town plaza is one big vegetable and fruit garden. 

On June 19, 1965, Republic Act No. 4475 created Palayan 
Citj^. By the end of the year, the city was inaugurated. The 
original kll was introduced by Representatives Eugenio Baltao 
of the First District and Felicisimo Ocampo of the Second Dis- 
trict of Nueva Ecija. It was acted upon during the Fourth Ses- 
sion of the Fifth Congress of the Philippines. 

The city is still a part of the provincial administration 
and belongs to the Second District of Nueva Ecija. Until such 
time as the city shall definitely resolve to elect its officials, the 
provincial governor and the provincial vice-governor remain as 



ex officio city mayor and city vice-mayor, respectively. The 
members of the provincial board and thi'ee others to be appointed 
by the President, are the ex officio members of the city council, 
and the heads of the provincial offices as ex officio heads of the 
city government offices. 

The Fourth National Jamboree of the Boy Scouts of the 
Philippines was held at the 32-hectare Jamboree site at Camp 
Atate (in Palayan City) on May 10 to 18, 1969. 

In June 1969, the capital city of Nueva Ecija was tran.s- 
ferred from Cabanatuan City to Palayan City. 

Spearheading the Green Revolution movement in the prov- 
ince, in line with the program of the National Government, the 
city' has developed a nursery of fruit and vegetable seedlings 
into a growing commercial enterprise. A seed bank has like- 
wise been constructed. Thus, many towns of the province get 
their supply of seeding from the city whenever they undertake 
their Green Revolution projects. 

All the barrios in the city are engaged in intensive food 
production. In Ganaderia, the people have a communal fish- 
pond project supported by the Bureau of Fisheries. In 
another barrio, the residents are assisted by the Bureau of 
Animal Industry in order to improve their poultry and livestock 
farms. The Bongabon Stock Farm takes charge of producing 
new breed of animals in the city. ' 

Palayan City may not have the features of an urban com- 
munity but it promises to be an industrial, commercial, and 
even cultural center of the Province of Nueva Ecija. 



City Seal 




PALAYAN CITY BEAUTY 
( Palung-palungan ) 
City Floiver 



City Flag 



CITY OF PALAYAN 

The City of Palayan was created under R.A. 4475 on 
June 19, 1965. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Palayan 

Upper Portion — Carabao head and plow, signifying agri- 
culture as the province's principal indus- 
try and source of livelihood. 

Lower Portion — three (3) rice haystacks, also to stand for 
farming as the major source of income 
of the population. 

Golden Leaves — symbolizes the wealth and bounty of the 
province. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF SAN JOSE (Nueva Ecija) 



San Jose City, before it became a town, was a veritable 
hunting ground for wild animals by the inhabitants of the 
neighboring towns. Its earliest inhabitants were known as 
Negritoes (BalugaJ headed by Kapitang Banding, a Negrito 
convert residing in Pinagcuartilan. These inhabitants depended 
mostly on hunting and fishing for their livelihood. Some 
hunters from the neighboring towns found San Jose a good 
place for settlers due to its wide and uncleared agricultural 
land. The first group of settlers made some clearings (ka- 
ingin) in the outskirts of the present town. 

Originally, San Jose was a part of the town of Puncan, 
founded in 1701 by the Augustinians. Later, because of its 
nearness to Lupao, it was made a barrio of the latter. 

Formerly, the city was known as Barrio "Kabaritan" 
which means a place where "barit" (an Ilocano word for a 
plant that belongs to the rattan family), grows in abundance. 

On March 19, 1994, San Jose became a full-fledged town, 
jvith an interim government headed by a Kapitan Municipal. 
It was named San Jose, after Saint Joseph, the patron saint 
of the place. The Ilocanos from Tarlac, Pangasinan, Ilocos 
region, and some parts of Nueva Ecija, especially the towns of 
Sto. Domingo, Munoz and Lupao, came to San Jose and cleared 
its wilderness. 

During tho Spanish regime, the barrio of San Jose was a 
municipal district of Lupao under a teniente absoluto, Don Ole- 
gario Fajardo. Later, when it was declared as a town in 1894, 
the position was changed to Capitan Municipal. Canuto Ramos, 
appointed as the first Capitan, served from 1894 to 1898. One 
of his achievements was the construction of an irrigation sys- 
tem (now the Talavera River Irrigation System) which was 
later taken and enlarged by the government to irrigate vast 
icefields, as far as the towns of Munoz and Talavera. 

In 1900, a revolutionary government was set up in San 
Jose until the establishment of a civil government under the 
Americans on June 11, 1901. 

The economic progress started by Kapitan Canuto in 1898, 
was continued by Kapitan Jose Cardenas (a general of the Phil- 



ippine Revolution) who prepared the layout of the town be- 
tween 1900 and 1901. Succeeding Cardenas, was Celestino Ja- 
balde who continued the construction of roads in the poblacion. 

San Jose under the American regime became a progres- 
sive town. In 1904, the election of its local officials was held, 
and Crisanto Sanchez became the first elected municipal pres- 
ident. From 1912 to 1916, school buildings were constructed 
for the increasing school population under the administration 
of Agapito Kurameng. 

At the outbreak of World War II, on December 8, 1941, 
San Jose was made an evacuation center. It was chosen as a 
safe place (with ample water and food supply) because it was 
far from the military installations and troops in Cabanatuan 
City. 

On December 23, 1941, two Japanese planes bombed San 
Jose. The populace suffered heavy casualties and they fled to 
its remotest barrios. An emergency government was estab- 
lished in Barrio Porais with Basilio Duran as the appointed 
mayor of the military command. The emergency government 
existed for a short time due to the arrival of the Japanese Im- 
perial Forces on January 26, 1942. 

With the reestablishment of the Commonwealth govern- 
ment, Anselmo Patacsil, Pedro del Pilar and Basilio Duran 
were successively appointed as mayors by the Philippine Civil 
Affairs Unit (PCAU). Each served for a short term from 
1945 to 1946. They cooperated and coordinated with the 
PCAU. They also helped in the establishment of an emergency 
hospital, the North Nueva Ecija Provincial High School, and 
the reopening of elementary schools. 

Today, San Jose is the "melting pot" of Nueva Ecija. Its 
geographical location has influenced many Tagalogs, Ilocanos, 
Pangasinenses and Pampangos who settled and engaged in agri- 
cultural production for commercial pursuits. It became a city 
by virtue of Republic Act No. 6051, approved on August 4, 
1969. Atty. Arturo B. Pascual and Mr. Jaime A. Patacsil took 
their oaths of office as first city mayor and city vice-mayor, 
respectively. All the other municipal officials of the defunct 
municipality of San Jose also took their oaths as city officials. 




City Blag 

CITY OF SAN JOSE 



The City of San Jose was created under R.A. 6051 on 
August 4, 1969. 



Sun 



Four Sun Rays 



Carabao Head 
and Plow 

Grains of Palay 
and 

Warehouse 



Wheel 



Meaning of the Official Seal of San Jose 

— symbolizes location of the city as 
center of commerce, agriculture 
and industry. 

— represent the routes going north 
of Cagayan, Manila and the South, 
Quezon and Tayabas, and Panga- 
sinan and neighboring towns. 

— signifies that agriculture is the 
main industry of the city. 

— symbol of Wagwag San Jose, a 
high quality variety of rice. 

— symbol of industry and the po- 
tentialities of the city to be an 
industrial center. 

— signifies the fast and continuous 
progress of the city in the fields 
of commerce and industry. 



Region III 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF BATANGAS 



Batangas City, along the Batangas Bay, is bounded on the 
north by the municipaMties of Sta. Teresita, Bauan and Ibaan ; 
on the south by the North Pass of the Verde Island; on the 
east by the municipalities of Taysan and Lobo, and on the west 
by the Batangas Bay. On its southern portion is Mt. Banoy. 
It has an area of 283.8 square kilometers and a population of 
108,868 in 1970. 

Shielded by the Maricaban and Verde Islands, the port of 
Batangas affords a safe anchorage for ships during stonny 
weather. 

Batangas began as a small village where the present Pro- 
vincial Capitol now stands. In 1572, the region was kno-vra as 
Region de Comintan. Nine years later, in 1581, a convent was 
erected by Father Diego Mexica. So progressive was the com- 
munity that in 1601 it became a municipality with Don Agus- 
tin Casulao as the first gobemadorcillo. 

Batangas, though an old settlement, was selected as the 
seat of the provincial government after the eruptions of Mt. 
Taal in 1716 and 1754. By 1870, the barrios of the town were 
Balagtas, Bilogo, Bolbok, Bukal Catandala, Konde, De la Paz, 
Kumintang, Ibaba, Matuko, Mapagong, Pahaz-ang, Kanluran, 
Pairan, Pinamukan, Patulo, Sampaga, San Agapito, San Isidro, 
and Talahib. 

From 1814 to 1892, Batangas was a progressive "coffee 
port" of Lipa. Although the coffee plantations were destroyed 
by a blight, Batangas remained as an important port of call 
after 1892. 



At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, 
Governor Manuel Sapata arrested Casimiro Beredo and Fran- 
cisco Blanco who were exiled to Fernando Po Island west of 
Africa. The others were imprisoned in Manila. Later, the vic- 
tories of the revolutionists forced the Spanish garrison in Ba- 
tangas to surrender to the Filipino forces in May 1898. 

In 1899, in spite of the gallant resistance of Captain Eliseo 
Claudio and the Buenafe brothers, Juan, Lucio and Eulalio, Ba- 
tangas was overrun by the American forces. 

On May 2, 1901, civil government was established with 
Don Jose Villanueva as the first president. The Provincial 
Capitol and Hospital were inaugurated in 1926. 

The Japanese occupied Batangas in January 1942. Aerial 
bombings ruined Batangas City before the Americans occupied 
it on March 11, 1945. In 1949, Jose Medrano led an uprising 
in protest against the alleged fraudulent presidential election 
returns the same year. 

Under Repubhc Act No. 5495, approved on June 10, 1969, 
the town of Batangas was created as a chartered city. It was 
inaugurated on September 25, 1969. 

The old and new edifices in Batangas are the Basilica of 
the Immaculate Concepcion, the Iglesia ni Cristo, the storage 
tanks of Shell Refining Company in Tabangao, the Western 
Philippine College, the Golden Gate College, and the St. Bridget's 
College. 





Upper Portion 



Shape of the Seal, 
Sun and Eight Rays 



CITY OF BATANGAS 

The City of Batangas was created under E.A. 5495 on June 21, 1969. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Batangas 



- symbol of the city's recognition of 
the jurisdiction of the government 
of the Philippine Republic. 

-illustrates the claim of Batangas 
to have the biggest major port in 
Southern Luzon. 



Left-Hand Comer 



Right-Hand Comer — 



- stands for the refinery in the city 
which is the source of a greater 
bulk of its income. 

shows the more notable produce of 
Batangas, namely, citrus, horses 
and fighting cocks. 



43 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF CALOOCAN 



The City of Caloocan, situated three kilometers from 
Manila Bay and 15 kilometers northwest of the mouth of the 
Pasig River, is bounded on the east by Quezon City, on the 
west and north by Malabon, and on the south by the City of 
Manila. 

The city has a land area of 55.8 square kilometers and a 
population of 274,453 in 1970. It has a high rate of literacy, 
with Tagalog as the major dialect. 

There are a number of factories in Caloocan — light steel 
fabricators, textile mills, food processing, and handicraft — 
which offer employment to the residents of the city and the 
Greater Manila Area. However, rice, corn, vegetables and 
fruits are raised for local consumption. Piggery is a dominant 
industry. 

The name of the town originated from the Tagalog word 
"look," meaning "interior" because the place was at the "ends" 
or "corners" of two old towns, Tondo and Tambobong, the old 
name of Malabon. However, the Spaniards called the place as 
"Aromahan" or "Espina," when it was still a barrio of Tondo. 

Caloocan was founded by the Augustinians in 1762. When 
the Jesuits, who owned the hacienda of Maysilo, were expelled 
from the Philippines in 1768, the government sold to a mestizo 
a part of the missionary property which became the main por- 
tion of the town. The Recollects took over the spiritual minis- 
tration of the place in 1814. A year later, in 1815, Caloocan 
was created into a municipality. Mariano Sandoval became the 
first gobernadorciUo and Fray Manuel Vaquero, a Recollect 
father, the first curate. 

THe ^atipunan, a secret society, was discovered by the 



Spaniards on August 19, 1896. Four days later, on the 23rd, 
Andres Bonifacio and about 1,000 members of the Society met 
in Balintawak, Caloocan, in the yard of Juan A. Ramos, son of 
Melchora Aquino ("Mother of the Katipuneros") , where they 
tore their cedulas to express their willingness to fight, and 
shouted, "Long live the Philippines," Long livB the Katipunan ! 

Later, the Filipino forces under Col. Pacheco, captured 
Caloocan from the Spaniards on June 12, 1898. At the battles 
of La Loma and Maypajo, General Antonio Luna and his men 
fought the American forces despite heavy losses. Caloocan was 
occupied by the Americans on February 10, 1899. 

During the Japanese occupation, the town was destroyed 
by Japanese shelling and bombing. The enemy used the Jesuit 
College (now occupied by the Manila Central University) as 
their barracks and the landing field (in Grace Park) as food 
and ammunition warehouses. The Hospital San Ramon, in the 
present site -of the Nobleza Cigar and Cigarette Factory, was 
made the headquarters of the Japanese Imperial Forces. 

On June 17, 1961, Republic Act No. 3278 created the City 
of Caloocan. ,, . 

In honor of Andres Bonifacio and the Katipunan, the 
Bonifacio monument was erected in 1929 on the Manila North 
Road; where the "First Cry of Balintawak" was held (now un- 
der the jurisdiction of Quezon City). In Pasong Tamo, Tan- 
dang Sora fed and supplied the Katipuneros with food. Con- 
sidered as the greatest Filipino epic poet in Spanish, Cecilio 
Apostol, the well-known writer, journalist, lawyer, jurist and 
linguist, hailed from Sangandaan of this city. Fausto J. 
Galauran, one of the country's leading novelists in Tagalog, 
was also from Caloocan. ^ 



City Seal 



City Flag 
I 



CITY OF CALOOCAN 

The City of Caloocan was created under R.A. 3278 on June 17, 1961. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Caloocan 

— the monument of the famous Cry against the Spanish Government, 

of Balintawak ("Long Live the 

Philippine Republic"), symbol of Colors Red, White —colors of the Philippine Flag, 
the revolt of the Katipunan and Blue 

r' 

\ 

\ 

\ 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF CAVITE 



Cavite City, on a hook-shaped promontory, is bounded on the 
north by Manila Bay, on the south by Noveleta, on the east by 
the Canacao and Bacoor Bays, and on the west by Manila Bay. 

The city has a land area of 11.8 square kilometers. It had 
a population of 75,703 in 1970. 

The village named "Cawit" was long known to the Chinese 
as "Keit." 

After the Spanish colonizers settled in Ternate, at the 
southern part of the province, they later moved northward to 
the place called Tanguay, now the present site of the city. 

During the late decades of the 16th and 17th centuries, 
the forts of San Felipe, Guadalupe, and Porta Vaga were con- 
.structed due to occasional Muslim and Dutch raids. 

The town of Cavite was the point of departure and arrival 
of the galleons that plied between Manila and Acapulco during 
the Spanish period. 

During the British occupation, from 1762 to 1764, Captain 
Richard Kempenfeldt captured the town of Cavite. 

In 1787, Joseph Faute D'Agelet set up an astronomical 
laboratory in the town.. Later, in 1792, an astronomical Ob-- 
servatory was administered by Jose Tello and Juan Vernacci 
of the Hydrographic Office. 

At the Cavite Arsenal, on January 20, 1872, the Cavite 
Mutiny, an abortive uprising of the native workers and soldiers, 
in the arsenal led by Sergeant La Madrid, implicated the three 
Filipino priests, Mariano Gomez, Jose Burgos and Jacmto Za- 
mora. Two davs after, on the 22nd, the Mutiny was crushed 



by the relief forces from Manila. It led to the execution of the 
three priests on February 17, 1872. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, the thirteen 
martyrs of Cavite were arrested, and later executed by the 
Spanish authorities. On September 12, 1898, after the Battle 
of Manila Bay, the American forces landed at the arsenal (old 
Cavite) and later occupied Cavite town. Provost Marshal 
Grey appointed Jose Martires San Agustin as head of the pro- 
visional local government. 

In 1901 pursuant to the Municipal Code of the Philippine 
Commission, the districts of the Old Puerto, San Roque and 
Caridad'were merged to form the Municipality of Cavite. 

On May 26, 1940, under Commonwealth Act No. 547, the 
town of Cavite became a chartered city. It also provided that 
the city, would continue as capital of the province. 

At the outbreak of the Pacific War, the Japanese Imperial 
Forces occupied Cavite in January 1942. Later, during the 
liberation period, the American Liberation Forces bombed the 
city, including the forts and the churches of San Telmo, Sto. 
Domingo, Porta Vaga and San Juan de Dios. 

On May 24, 1954, by virtue of Republic Act No. 981, the 
provincial capital was transferred from Cavite City to Trece 
Martires City. 

A coastal city, Cavite is now one of the important com- 
mercial and trading centers of southern Luzon. 

The city is now the site of the Naval Shipyard of the 
Philippine Navy and the Naval Research Development Unit 
of the National Science Development Board. 




ROSAL 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITYOFCAVITE 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Cavite 



Sun and Rays 
Monument 



Peninsula 
Laurel Leaves 



-adapted from the national flag 
of the Philippines. 

-monument of the Thirteen 
Martyrs of Cavite who revolted 
against the Spanish Government 
in 1896. 

- symbol for the city of Cavite. 

- symbolize the victory of our coun- 
try over the Spanish tyranny 
which ended on June 12, 1898 
date of the declaration of Philip- 
pine Independence. 



47 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF LIPA 



THE CITY OF LIPA is in the southwestern Province of 
Batangas in Luzon. It is bounded on the north by the town of 
Malvar; on the east by Tiaong; on the south by Rosario and 
Ibaan; and on the west by the Taal Lake. 

Lipa, 27 kilometers from Batangas City and 87 kms. from 
Manila, had a population of 93,388 as of 1970. Composed of 42 
barrios, it occupies a land area of about 215.2 sq. kms. 

The city, situated on a 1,000-foot plateau, has a cool invi- 
gorating climate throughout the year. The fertile soil of vol- 
canic origin makes suburban Lipa an ideal agricultural area. 
Its principal products are coffee, rice, corn, coconut, sugar cane, 
vegetables and fruits, particularly citrus. The animal stocks are 
cattle, horses, hogs and chicken. Lipa is also famous for fine 
jtisi and pina cloths. 

Originally located in the southeastern part of Lake Bombon, 
in a native settlement called Tagbakin, Lipa is believed to have 
been established by Datus Balensusa and Dumangsil, who came 
with the Bornean chief, Datu Puti, in the middle of the 13th 
century. 

Tagbakin was already well-developed, with well-built 
houses, an agricultural livelihood, and a flourishing commerce 
when the Augustinian missionaries led by Fray Hernando de 
Cabrera, reached the village in 1605. They made the settle- 
ment a mission center and named it after its patron saint, San 
Sebastian. A convent was later constructed which, by 1630, 
ministered to about 400 natives. 

According to a legend, when the image of San Sebastian 
disappeared from the church, it was later found on a lipa tree 
in a place called Lumang Lipa. Believing that the saint desired 
to live in that place, the settlement was transferred there and it 
was called "Lipa." 

Barely had they settled when the Taal Volcano erupted, 
causing the residents to move to the center of the settlement. 
As the area was small and mountainous, they again transferred 
to Balete where the village was organized into a municipality in 
1762., Geronimo de los Santos was its first gobernadorcillo. 

In 1754, Taal Volcano again erupted and its lava almost 



buried the town of Lipa. The people finally transferred to the 
present site for fear that another eruption would take place and 
completely bury the town. 

In 1763, after their attack on Manila, the British forces led 
by Commander Backhouse pursued the Spanish treasurer, Nico- 
las Echaus, who was in custody of the treasures brought in by 
the galleon Filipino from Mexico. Failing to find the treasure 
in Lipa, the British plundered the town and burned its church. 

From 1814 to 1889, Lipa became one of the most important 
coffee-producing centers of the world. The period was referred 
to as the "Coffee Days" of Lipa. Coffee-planting was introduced 
by Fray Benito Baras, and finally compelled by its capitan mu- ■ 
nicipal, Galo de los Reyes. As a reward for the industry and 
virtue of its inhabitants, the Queen Regent, Cristina II of Spain, 
bestowed upon the town on October 21, 1887, the title of "Villa 
de Lipa." Unfortunately, a coffee-disease caused by an insect 
pest, bagombong, plagued the coffee plants in Asia, including 
those in Lipa. "The coffee industry was thus completely de- 
stroyed." 

Batangas was one of the first eight provinces that rose in 
arms against Spain when the Philippine Revolution broke out in 
1896. The following year, the residents of Lipa aided the Filipino 
revolutionary forces when they sieged the convent where the 
Spaniards withdrew. The Spanish Commander, Colonel Navas, 
through the negotiations of Cipriano Kalaw, finally surrendered 
to General Eleuterio Marasigan. General Miguel Malvar and 
his staff then established their official residence in the town. 

During the Philippine-American War, the American forces 
occupied the municipality on January 13, 1900. 

Lipa also suffered during the Japanese occupation. At the 
height of enemy atrocities, 1,500 males were herded in pairs and 
beheaded at the back of the Carmelite nunnery. The town was 
also razed to the ground — reducing to ashes the mansions of 
coffee days — when the American Liberation Forces came. 

On June 20, 1947, Republic Act No. 162, fathered by Con- 
gressman Jose B. Laurel, Jr., created the Municipality of Lipa 
into a city which was inaugurated in August, 1947. Esteban 
M. Mayo became its first city mayor, ^^m^ 




VIOLET 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF LIPA 

20 1947 ^^^^ created under R.A. 162 on June 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Lipa 

Left Upper Quarter -represents the three theological 

virtues of faith, hope and charity. 

Right Upper Quarter —with hammer, anvil and tong, re- 
presents labor. 



Lower Portion 



Year 1887 



-with a farmer and a woman, re- 
presents the agricultural economy 
of the city which underlies virtue 
and labor (virtud y trabajo). 

- represents the year of the Royal 
Decree of the Regent Queen Maria 
Cristina of Spain which made the 
town of Lipa as "Villa de Lipa." 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF LUCENA 



LUCENA CITY, on the southern part of Quezon Province, is 
bounded on the north by Mt. Banahaw, on the east and west 
by the Dumacaa and lyam Rivers, and on the south by the 
Tayabas Bay. 

With a land area of 68.5 square kilometers, it had a popu- 
lation of 77,006 in 1970. 

As a coastal city, Lucena is considered as one of the most 
important commercial and trading centers of southern Luzon. 
Coconut and rice are its principal crops. Fishing is also an 
important source of livelihood of the people. 

The Province of Tayabas (now Quezon) was explored by 
Captain Juan de Salcedo in 1571 and 1572. The town of Taya- 
bas was founded by the Franciscan fathers, Juan de Plasencia 
and Diego de Oropesa, between 1580 and 1583, with Lucena 
as one of its barrios. 

The Spaniards in the 16th century called the present site 
of the city "Buenavista," because of its awe-inspiring scenic 
beauty. Several years later, the name was changed to Oro- 
quieta " In the 17th century, it was called "Cotta, because 
forts or cottas were built to defend the place from occasional 
Muslim piratical raids. Finally, on November 5, 1879, the 
Orden Real Superior Civil officially adopted the name Lucena 
in honor of the friar. Father Mariano Granja, who was a native 
of the town of Lucena in Andalucia, Spam. Granja was 
responsible for the development of the barrio which became 
a parish in 1881. Lucena became an independent municipality 
on June 1, 1882. ,vi«;v?%?:'«:r>v: ^ - 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the capitdn 
municipal of Lucena. Jose Zaballero, led the local revolutionists. 



However, a revolutionary government was organized in Lucena 
by Manuel Arguelles, with Jose Barcelona as president. 

After Philippine Independence was proclaimed on June 12, 
1898 at Kawit, Cavite, General Miguel Malvar, as Commanding 
General for Southern Luzon, took over Tayabas Province on 
August 15 1898. Don Crisanto Marquez was elected municipal 
president during the elections held in Lucena under the first 
Philippine Republic. 

Lucena was the site of bloody struggles between the 
Filipinos and the Americans at the outbreak of the Filipmo- 
American War in 1899. On March 12, 1901, after the Americans 
established a civil government in the country, the provincial 
capital was transferred from Tayabas to Lucena. 

During the Second World War, Lucena was occupied by 
the Japanese Imperial Forces on December 27, 1941 The 
underground resistance movement was so active m Lucena 
that by January 25, 1945, the Hunters ROTC guerrillas ad- 
vanced to Lucena and succeeded in driving the Japanese out 
of the town. Quezon Province was formally liberated by the 
American Liberation Forces on April 4, 1945. 

On June 17, 1961, by virtue of Republic Act No. 3271, 
Lucena was made a chartered city. 

The noted tourist attractions of the city are the Perez 
Park, named after the famous "Model Governor" of Quezon 
Felimon E. Perez; and the Quezon monument, the biggest oi 
its kind in the country, constructed in honor of the most illus- 
trious son of the province, Commonwealth President Manuel 
L. Quezon. 



Golden Color 



Coconut Tree 



Mountain 



City Seal 



CITY OF LUCENA 

The City of Lucena was created under R.A. 3271 on June 17, 1961. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Lucena 



■ signifies progress of the city; also 
Lucena, which shines over all 
other towns of Quezon. 

-symbol of the coconut industry, 
major source of livelihood of its 
people. 

■the famous Mount Banahaw. 



Beach 



-the beautiful Dalahican Beach, a 
major tourist attraction of the 
city. 



Sunshine and Rain — suggests that the weather is al- 
ways fine in Lucena, a blessing 
to its agricultural industry, sym- 
bolized by a farmer at work. 



* 



51 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF MANILA 



The City of Manila is bounded on the north by Bulacan, 
on the east by Rizal, on the south by Cavite, and on the west 
by Manila Bay. With a land area of 38.3 square kilometers, 
the, city had a population of 1,330,788 in 1972. 

The word "manila" is derived from two Tagalog words 
"may" meaning "there is," and "nilad," a shrub that grew 
abundantly along the shores of the bay. 

Originally, Manila was ruled by two native chieftains, 
Rajah Matanda and Rajah Soliman. A village at the other 
side of the Pasig River was ruled by Rajah Lakandula. 

Old Manila during the Spanish regime was at the mouth 
of the Pasig River and was known as Intramuros or Walled 
City. 

On May 8, 1570, Martin de Goiti made his first expedition 
to Manila. He tried to make negotiations with Rajah Soliman, 
but he failed. 

In April 1571, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, the first governor- 
general of the Philippines, led another expedition. He entered 
into a formal pact of peace and friendship with the three 
chieftains. 

The Spanish colonization of Manila took effect on May 19, 
1571, Legazpi gave it the status of a Spanish city. On June 24, 
1571, he created the cabildo, or the city council, composed of 
two alcaldes or mayors, and twelve regidores or councilors, and 
a secretary. Through a Royal Decree on June 20, 1574, King 
Philip II gave the City of Manila the title of Insigne y Siempre 
Leal Civdad (Distinguished and Ever Loyal City). 

In 1595, it was declared as the capital of the Archipelago; 
and the Royal Decree of March 20, 1596, granted the city its 
coat of arms. 

During the 17th and 18th centuries, internal and external 
troubles plagued the city government, such as the Chinese 
uprisings in 1603 and 1609, the Dutch invasions of 1600, 1609 
and 1645, the insurrection among the natives in 1660, the as- 
sassination of Governor General Fernando Bustamante in 1719, 
and the British occupation from 1762 to 1763. However, late in 
the 18th -and 19th centuries, progress in public works, com- 
munications, water works and transportation marked the period. 
The city moats and covered ways were constructed in 1787, 
and the gates of Intramuros in 1781 and 1783. The first tele- 
graph line was opened in 1872, the first cable line in 1880, 
and tiie first telephone line in 1890. The first water system 
(Carried© Waterworks) was inaugurated in 1882, and the 
first railway line between Manila and Dagupan in 1892. 



On July 7, 1892, the secret revolutionary organization, the 
Kataastaasan, Kagalanggalang na Katipunan ng mga Anak ng 
Bay an (KKK), was organized by Andres Bonifacio in the 
arrahal of Tondo. Manila was one of the first eight prov- 
inces which Governor and Captain General Ramon Blanco pro- 
claimed under a state of martial law on August 30, 1896, after 
the discovery of the Katipunan. 

The American forces occupied Manila after the defeat of 
the Spaniards in the socalled "Mock Battle" on August 13, 
1898. Since then, Manila was under a military government 
until August 7, 1901. 

With the establishment of the civil government by the 
Americans, Act No. 183, passed by the Philippine Commission, 
provided for a new charter for the City of Manila. This was 
revised by Act No. 2657, passed by the Philippine Legislature 
on February 24, 1916. 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, Manila was 
declared an open city on December 26, 1941. However, the 
Japanese Imperial Forces continued their air raids that caused 
the destruction of lives and properties. Commonwealth J'res- 
ident Manuel L. Quezon designated on January 1, 1942, Jorge 
B. Vargas as "Mayor of the City of Greater Manila." After the 
Japanese forces occupied the city "blackout" was lifted in 
Manila. 

General Douglas MacArthur led the American Liberation 
Forces during the liberation of Manila from the Japanese Im- 
perial Forces on February 3 up to the end of the month, in 1945. 

Upon the recognition of Philippine Independence on July 
4, 1946, Manila's corporate status was redefined by Republic 
Act No. 409, known as the Revised Charter of Manila, which 
reassured the exercise of local autonomy. However, as late as 
1951, the mayor and vice-mayor were still appointed by the 
President of the Philippines, and the councilors were elected by 
the people of each district. Later, all the officials were elected 
by the qualified voters of the city. 

In 1959, R.A. No. 2264, the Autonomy Act, gave planning 
powers to the city government. Later, in 1967, R.A. No. 5185, 
the Decentralization Act, further gave greater autonomy to the 
City of Manila. 

Manila, the bustling metropolis after the war, remains the 
political, religious, social, cultural, industrial, and commercial 
center of the Philippines. 




ILANG-ILANG 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF MANILA 

The City of Manila was created under R.A. 409 on 
June 18, 1949. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Manila 



Shield Shape 

Shell with Pearl 

Sea Lion 
Wave Lines 

Four Stars 



■ signifies the resistance of our an- 
cestors against foreign invasion 
and domination. 

-symbol of Manila, once the com- 
mon reference of the archipelago, 
the pearl of the Orient seas. 

-symbol of authority of the city 
government over its people. 

- represents the Pasig River, a his- 
torical and important landmark 
of the city. 

- stands for the four (4) congress- 
ional districts of the city. 



4 



. = -..V;,'<v- 

- • ■ I- 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF PASAY 



The City op Pasay is bounded on the north by Manila, on the 
east by Makati, on the south by Parafiiaque, and on the west 
by Manila Bay. 

With a land area of 13.9 square kilometers, it had a popu- 
lation of 206,283 in 1970. . . . , 

The city is noted for its factories and other business and 
commercial establishments which produce wines, furniture, 
varnishes, paints, toys, cosmetics, knitted wears and textiles. 
Many of the inhabitants are small traders and businessmen. 

Pasay was claimed to have been named after a Princess 
who ruled the present site of the city. It was also said that 
"Pasay" was derived from the Spanish phrase, "Paso hay," 
meaning "There is a pass," because the area used to have a clear 
path amidst thick cogon grasses. 

Pasay, for 149 years (1578-1727), was under the jurisdic- 
tion of Sta. Ana de Sapa, a parish district of Manila. It was 
transferred to the parish district of Malate and remained for 
137 years under its jurisdiction. 

In 1863, the people of Pasay petitioned the Spanish admin- 
istration for an independent status, with its own municipal 
government and a parish church. With the recommendation 
of the Manila Archbishop, Gregorio Meliton Martinez y Sta. 
Cruz, their petition was granted. 



In 1864, Pasay was changed to Pineda, in honor of 
Cornelio Pineda, a Spaniard from Singalong, who assisted the 
inhabitants of Pasay in seeking protection from the colonial 
government against lawlessness, then rampant in the locality. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, the inhabitants 
of Pasay became active members of the secret revolutionary 
organization, the Katipunan. 

On August 4, 1901, a resolution, restoring the name of the 
town from Pineda to Pasay, was passed by the municipal council 
and endorsed by the provincial board. On June 21, 1947, 
Republic Act No. 183 created the municipality into a city and 
renamed it Rizal. Three years later, on June 7, 1950, Republic 
Act No. 437 again restored the original name of Pasay. 

The city is the site of the Manila International Airport 
and the Philippine Air Force complex at Nichols Air Base. At 
Nichols Field, the two Spanish pilots, Gallarza and Loriga, 
landed after opening a new air route from Madrid to Manila 
on May 13, 1926. 

Today, Pasay City is one of the progressive chartered cities 
in the country. It has an independent Red Cross unit; a beau- 
tiful public library; over twenty educational institutions; forty 
civic, religious, professional and business organizations; and 
a number of commercial and rural banks, hospitals, theatres 
and churches. 



54 



City Seal 



City Flag 



CITY OF PASAY 

City of Pasay was created under R.A. 183 on June 21, 1947. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Pasay 

— colors of the Philippine flag; sig- Pasay City. 

nif ies that Pasay City is part of 

the Philippines. ti^t t , 

Wings, Wheel and — symbols of the city's progress as 

— stands for the old city hall of Laurel Leaves a commercial center. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF PUERTO PRINCESA 



The City of Puerto Princesa, at the edge of the Honda Bay, 
is located on the eastern coast of central Palawan. 

Considered as the second largest city in the Philippines, 
it has a land area of 2,106.7 square kilometers. In 1970, it had 
a population of 37,774, i 

Puerto Princesa is peopled by the Tagalogs and Ilocanos 
from Luzon, and the settlers from the Visayan Islands. The 
Tagbanuas, however, are its dominant cultural minority group. 

The soil and climate of the city are suited for the cultivation 
of rice, corn, coconut, banana and citrus. Fishing and mining 
are the major industries of the province. The other indus- 
tries are logging, farming, and firewood gathering, and copra, 
sawali, woodcraft, furniture, nipa shingles, and salt making. 

Puerto Princesa, formerly called Puerto Yguahit, was 
founded by the Spanish colonizers, on March 4, 1872. In 1882, 
it was renamed Puerto de la Asuncion in honor of the daughter 
of Queen Isabela II. When Princess Asuncion died, its name was 
changed to Puerto de la Princesa. 

After the signing of the Treaty of Paris in 1898, the Ameri- 
cans occupied Puerto Princesa. In 1902, its municipal govern- 
ment was established. Don Jose Fernandez became the first 
municipal presidente. At the turn of the 20th century, Puerto 
Princesa was made the capital of Palawan. 

On January 1, 1942, Puerto Princesa was bombed by eight 
Japanese planes. On May 18 of the same year, the Japanese 
forces occupied the place. " 



The guerrilla resistance against the Japanese invaders was 
headed by Dr. Higinio Mendoza, former governor of Palawan. 
He was captured and later executed with fifteen others in a 
remote sitio of Puerto Princesa. on January 7, 1944. 

The city also suffered from the atrocities of the Japanese 
soldiers in December 1944, when the American prisoners-of- 
war were herded into an air-raid shelter which was flooded with 
gasoline and ignited with hand grenades. Those who tried to 
escape were bayonetted or shot to death. 

Puerto Princesa was liberated from the Japanese Imperial 
Forces on February 28, 1945. On March 4, the municipal gov- 
ernment was reestablished. 

Under Republic Act No. 5906, Puerto Princesa was made 
into a chartered city on June 21, 1969. It was inaugurated 
on January 1, 1970. 

The province has mining companies, such as the Palawan 
Quicksilver Mines, the Perfectual Mining, the Palawan Con- 
solidated, and the ADECOR. It has also a charcoal processing 
plant where the bakawan, ffom the tree which grows abun- 
dantly in the area, are manufactured into charcoal. 

Puerto Princesa is well-known for being the site of a gov- 
ernment rehabilitation institution for prisoners, the Iwahig 
Penal Colony. The city is noted for white sandy beaches and 
river resorts. Its prominent landmarks are the Provincial Capitol 
Building, the City Hall, the Holy Trinity College, the Provincial 
Hospital, the Mendoza Park, the Children's Park, the Governor's 
Residence, and the imposing Puerto PBincesa City Cathedral. 




BUTTERFLY ORCHID 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF PUERTO PRINCESA 

The City of Puerto Princesa was created under R.A. 
5906 on June 21, 1969. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Puerto Princesa 

Peacock — represents the tandican, rare bird 

found only in the forests of Pala- 
wan, particularly in Puerto Prin- 
cesa, and symbol of pride and 
courage. 



Date 



— the date of the foundation of the 
city. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF QUEZON 



The City of Quezon, capital of the Republic of the Phil- 
ippines, is bounded on the north, east and south by the Prov- 
ince of Rizal, northwest by the City of Caloocan, and west by 
the City of Manila. 

The city, 240 feet above sea level, has a land area of 15,359 
hectares and a population 754,452 as of 1970. 

In 1939, President Manuel L. Quezon, of Ihe Philippine 
Commonwealth, purchased 1,527 hectares from the Diliman 
Estate through the instance and negotiation of Alejandro Ro- 
ces. The lot was converted into a low-cost housing project called 
Barrio Obrero (now Kamuning District) for the working class. 

On October 12 of the same year, the National Assembly 
enacted Commonwealth Act No. 502, which created the City of 
Quezon with 7,335 hectares, one-third of which belongs to the 
government. The law incorporated Cubao, San Francisco del 
Monte, Diliman and the sprawling compound of the University 
of the Philippines. After the city boundaries were determined. 
President Quezon instructed the architectural adviser of the 
Commonwealth, Harry T. Frost, assisted by the former Sec- 
retary of Public Works during the American regime, A. D. 
Williams, to blueprint its master plan. A Zoning Ordinance 
was also drafted by the planning advisers for the proper devel- 
opment of the city. 

President Quezon assumed the position of first city mayor 
from October 12 to November 4, 1939. He appointed Tomas 
Morato as his successor. 

During the Japanese occupation, Quezon City, Manila, and 
certain towns of the Province of Rizal were merged into the 
"Greater Manila." 

In July 1946, under Administrative Order No. 5, Presi- 
dent Manuel Roxas created the Capital Site Committee which, 
after serious deliberations, favorably decided on Quezon City 
as the site of the capital. Consequently, President Roxas sent 
selected architects and engineers to the United States to take 
advanced studies and make observations on the modern develop- 
ment methods 6n the proposed capital. 



On January 2, 1947, the city was formally reconstituted 
and restored to its prewar status under Republic Act No. 54, 
which sponsored by then Congressman Ignacio Santos Diaz. 

Later, President Elpidio Quirino reorganized the Commit- 
tee into the Capital City Planning Commission. The blueprint 
prepared by the Commission was approved by the President in 
April 1948. The same year, on July 17, R.A. No. 333 made 
the City of Quezon as the official capital of the Philippines. 
The city was inaugurated as National Capital through the lay- 
ing of a cornerstone at Constitutional Hill on October 22, 1949. 

Under R.A. No. 537, dated June 16, 1950, the city charter 
was revised and the boundaries and limits increased to its pres- 
ent area, of which sixty-two percent are for residential and 
commercial purposes, fourteen percent for thoroughfares and 
public utility terminals, fourteen percent for the city govern- 
ment needs, seven percent for public parks and playgrounds, 
and three percent for agricultural purposes. 

The city was divided into Cubao District, with the barrios 
of Cubao, Murphy, Bagumbayan, Ugong Norte, Ermitano and 
Duyan-Duyan; Diliman Distfict I, with the barrios of South 
Diliman, East Diliman, West Diliman and North Diliman; Dili- 
man District II, with the barrios of San Isidro, Galas and So- 
ciego; San Francisco del Monte District, with the barrios of San 
Francisco del Monte Proper, San Jose, Balintawak, La Loma 
and Malamig; University District, with the barrios of Balara 
and Culiat; and Novaliches District, with the barrios of San 
Bartolome (Matanda), San Bartolome (Bata), Talipapa, Bag- 
bag, Banlat, Baesa, Balong-Bato, Balintawak, Novaliches Pro- 
per and Pasong Tamo. 

On top of these, historically, within the limits of the cap- 
ital city of the Philippines, the cause of freedom spread through- 
out the islands to break the chains of colonialism and monas- 
ticism — ^that of the first "Cry" by the Great Plebian, Andres 
Bonifacio, and his Katipuneros on August 23, 1896 in Balin- 
tawak where a monument in his honor stands. 

Melchora Aquino (popularly known as Tandang Sora) is the 
official heroine of Quezon City. ^ — 



W PUN0N6 BAYAN N6 PIUPINAS ^ 



City Seal 




Dona AURORA 
City Flower 



City Flag 



DESCRIPTION OF THE SEAL OF 
QUEZON CITY* 

"An equilateral triangle divided azure and gules 
superimpose the silhouette of the Quezon Memorial 
Monument argent with the lamp of Knowledge argent 
over the azure field dexter and the gavel argent over 
the field of gules sinister. On the apex of the triangle 
are three mullets or over a border argent." 

"The text LUNGSOD QUEZON and PUNONG 
BAYAN NG P ILIPINAS complete the border anns." 

* Description issued by the Technical Adviser on Heraldry; meaning 
not available. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF SAN PABLO 



San Pablo City in the southern portion of the Province 
of Laguna is bounded in the west and northwest by Alaminos 
(Batangas), north by Calauan (Laguna), east by Rizal and 
Nagcarlan (Laguna), southeast by Tiaong and Dolores (Que- 
zon), and southwest by Lipa City (Batangas). 

It has a land area of 18,778 hectares and a population of 
31,399 in 1918, 46,311 in 1939, 70,680 in 1947, 50,435 in 1948, 
and 75,308 in 1970. Its climate and soil are adapted to lanzones 
and coconut trees. 

The city is connected by national roads to Manila via 
Calauan and Alaminos; to Sta. Cruz, Laguna, via Calauan and 
Rizal; to Batangas via Alminos; and to Quezon via Tiaong 
and Dolores. The Philippine National Railways line from Ma- 
nila to Bicol also passes through the city. 

According to a legend, the barrio derived its name from a 
giant sampalok (tamarind) tree in the garden of a selfish 
couple who drove away a fairy disguised as a beggar asking 
for some fruit. The following night a storm created a lake in 
the spot where the tree and house stood. 

This barrio at the edge of the lake was originally inhabited 
by Aetas, Dumagats, and Muslims who emigrated from Minda- 
nao through the Laguna de Bay. It was ruled by a certain 
Gat Pag-il whose domain comprised the present provinces of 
Laguna, Batangas and Quezon. 

The Augustinian missionaries converted the inhabitants 
to Christianity and constructed a convent in the mountains of 
the barrio in 1575. Later, the ecclesiastical administration of 
San Pablo was transferred to the Franciscans headed by defi- 
nitor-general Fray Hernando Cabrera who built a well-equipped 
church and convent in 1737. 

The town, originally controlled by the provincial authorities 
of Laguna was placed under the Province of Batangas in 1853. 



When Laguna ceded the regions of Infanta and Angono to 
Tayabas (now Quezon) in 1858, it subsequently acquired San 
Pablo in 1883. 

It was the center of the revolutionary movement under 
General Miguel Malvar and General Mariano Trias during the 
Philippine Revolution of 1896. With the assistance of General 
Malvar's brother, Potenciano, the Filipino Revolutionary Forces 
quickly took over the reins of the local government. 

After the Philippine- American War, a civil government was 
established in San Pablo in 1902 with Potenciano as its first 
mayor. He also became a governor of the Province of Laguna 
from 1912 to 1914. 

The Order of St. Paul ecclesiastically administered the town 
from 1912 to 1918. 

Through the determined and untiring efforts of Tomas 
Dizon, former Congressman and Mayor of San Pablo, Common- 
wealth Act No. 520, approved May 7, 1940, the municipality of 
San Pablo was created as a chartered city. It was classified 
as a second class city under Republic Act No. 4477. 

The City of San Pablo is considered as one of the progres- 
sive cities of Southern Luzon. Its prosperity is attributed to 
the production of coconut oil (from copra), a primary export 
of the country. The city has no less than 35 business estab- 
lishments and 20 banks and insurance companies aside from 
the institutions of higher learning, such as the Ateneo de San 
Pablo, Our Lady of Fatima, Laguna Colleges, and San Pablo 
City School of Arts and Trade. 

The nine "Enchanting Lakes" of the city, with Sampaloc 
Lake as the biggest, are major tourist attractions. The other 
beautiful spots are the Dona Leonila Park which was named 
after the former first lady, Leonila "Inday"' Garcia, and the 
Rizal Avenue which is beautified with monuments and lights, 
including a miniature park with a fountain and lagoon. 



City Seal 



City Flag 



Blue Background 
Coconut Tree 



CITY OF SAN PABLO 

The City of San Pablo was created under R.A. 520 on May 7, 1940. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of San Pablo 

- represents the seven (7) lakes of of the residents, 
the city. 

. . „. , Mountain — symbolizes that San Pablo City 

-signifies that the coconut Indus- Background surrounded by mountains, 

try IS the mam source of income Stairway -signifies progress of the city. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF TAGAYTAY 



Tagaytay City, situated in the Province of Cavite, on highly 
elevated land, is bounded on the north and northwest by the 
towns of Amadeo, Mendez-Nuiiez and Alfonso (Cavite); on the 
east by the town of Talisay (Batangas) ; on the south by the 
Taal Lake; and on the southwest by the town of Taal 
(Batangas) . 

The city has a land area of 74.0 square kilometers. In 1970, 
it had a population of 10,907. 

Basically agricultural, its main product is rice. The other 
crops — corn, camote, gabi, coffee, pineapple, bananas and vege- 
tables—are sold in the city and in the neighboring towns of 
Amadeo and Mendfez-Nunez. 

Tagaytay's invigorating climate, with its exhilarating at- 
mosphere, invites visitors to go southward in an hour's drive 
from Manila. 

Legendarily, the word Tagaytay came from "Taga," mean- 
ing "to cut" and "Itay" which means "Father." A father and son 
were on a wild boar chase when the animal suddenly turned 
back and attacked them. The son immediately shouted, "Taga 
Itay," which means "Slash it. Father," when the boar danger- 
ously menaced the old man. Since then, the Spaniards adopted 
"Taga Itay" as the name of the place. Later, the beautiful 
southern city resort became known as Tagaytay. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Tagaytay was 
still a wilderness. The place was used as a secret passage by 
the revolutionists of Batangas and Laguna in going to and 



from Cavite. . ■ . ' 

Tagaytay became a chartered city with the passage of 
Commonwealth Act No. 338 on June 21, 1938. Originally, it 
consisted of the barrios of Bagong Tubig, Iruhin, Kaybagay, 
Mag-asawang Hat, Maitim Segundo, Mendez Junction, Niugan, 
Patutong Malaki, Sambong, Silang Rotonda and Sungay. 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, the 11th Air- 
borne Division of Lieutenant General William Krueger's 8th 
Army air-dropped military supplies and personnel on the Tagay- 
tay Ridge prior to the liberation of Manila from the Japanese 
on February 3, 1945. To commemorate the event, in 1951, the 
officials of Tagaytay City, in coordination with the Philippine 
Historical Committee, installed a marker at the junction of the 
Silang-Canlubang-Nasugbu Roads. 

The main attractions of the city are the picturesque Taal 
Lake; Mount Taal (the smallest volcano of the world) located 
in Taal Lake; the Taal Vista Lodge and the Picnic Grove; the 
restaurant-hotels overlooking Taal Lake and Taal Volcano; and 
the Ridge which was formed by the diastrophic action of ear- 
lier volcanic eruptions. The elevation of the area has been 
increased by the periodic eruption of Mount Taal. 

The two noted institutions of the city are the Development 
Academy of the Philippines, which serves as the Government's 
training ground in personnel management, and the Bethany 
Chapel, a Protestant mission established by Reverend Leslie 
Wolfe in 1937. 



62 




City Flag 

CITY OF TAGAYTAY 



The City of Tagaytay was created under C. A 338 on 
June 21, 1938. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Tagaytay 



Shape of the Seal 

Red, Blue and Sun 
Background 



Foreground 



— adapted from the seal of the Re- 
public. 

— depicts the highly nationalistic 
spirit of the city populace; also 
signifies the fact that the city was 
one of the eight provinces that 
participated in the Philippine Re- 
volution. 

— pictures Taal Lake and volcano. 
The lush vegetations and the roll- 
ing mountain ranges signify the 
fertility of the soil and the invi- 
gorating climate. The cliff with 
a building atop signifies the libe- 
ration of the city during World 
War II. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF TRECE MARTIREZ 



TRECE MARTIRES, by virtue of Republic Act No. 981, 
approved on May 24, 1954, became a chartered city through 
the determined and untiring efforts of a father-and-son team- 
work, Congressman Justiniano S. Montano, Sr. and Governor 
Delfin N. Montano. They worked hard to build the capital city 
of Cavite Province, called Trece Martires, which was officially 
declared as such as on September 5, 1955. 

The city was named in honor of the Thirteen Martyrs of 
Cavite who were executed by the Spanish authorities on 
September 12, 1896, on suspicion of complicity in the overthrow 
of the Spanish government. The Spanish authorities considered 
them rebels or insurrectos who deserved a "traitor's death." 
To the Filipino people, however, they died a "hero's death." 
These brave men whose names now illuminate the pages of 
our Hall of Fame are Luis Aguado, Eugenio Cabezas, Feliciano 
Cabuco, Agapito Conchu, Maximo Gregorio, Maximo Inocencio, 
Antonio San Agustin, Jose Lallana, Severino Lapidario, Victo- 
riano Luciano, Alfonso de Ocampo, Francisco Osorio and Hugo 
Perez. 

The land area of the city consists of 39,176 square kilo- 
meters, from the cleared and levelled wilderness until its 
expansion in 1954 on the higher elevated portions of the Cavite 
highlands. 

Trece Martires City has a modern city hall, a hospital, 
a public market, and a park. Its modern roads, streets and 
drainage are first class. 

Its water is abundant, originating from the surrounding 
brooks, and purified through the Tres Crucis Dam. 

To provide further convenience to the city residents, the 



CEDA or the Cavite Electric Development Authority provides 
electricity for lighting purposes and power for domestic 
industries. 

In 1960, the population was 4,422 and in 1970, it increased 
to 6,200 inhabitants. Coconut industry appears as the main 
source of income of the residents. Many people settled in this 
city such that in a few years business and trading activities 
picked up in volume and value. Many restaurants were opened 
since the city was inaugurated. 

The rapid progress of the city is due to its healthful 
climate. The surrounding countryside with small productive 
farms, provides the immediate needs of the people. Since it 
is far from the shorelines and the heavy traffic of the national 
highways of Cavite, it is "dust-free," making these factors an 
inducement to people who wish to settle in Trece Martires City. 

The usual thirst for knowledge and zeal for education are 
Very evident in this city which has various elementary schools 
and one high school. 

Its populace are religious — the only city in the Philippines 
we know of that is almost 100% Catholic. The town church, 
with St. Jude Thaddeus as the patron saint, was built in 1960. 

Led by Delfin N. Montano, Provincial Governor of Cavite, 
who was the ex officio City Mayor, its elected officials and 
appointed employees are reputed as able, active, capable, hard- 
working and dedicated servants. 

Trece Martires City is a monument in itself to the Filipino 
struggle for freedom and independence, especially to Cavite 
whose sons played an important role in the war for indepen- 
dence against colonial Spanish administration. 





City Seal 

CUy Flag 



Building 
Thirteen Stars 



CITY OF TRECE MARTIRES 

The City of Trece Martires was created under R.A. 981 on May 24 1955 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Trece Martires 

— the geographical location of Trece 
Martires City. 

Laurel Leaves 



~ the Provincial Capitol, seat of the Map Outline 
Provincial Government. 

— stands for the Thirteen (13) 
Martyrs, for whom the City was 
named. 



Eight Rays of the Sun -represent the eight provinces 

which revolted against the Spa- 
nish Government. 



Brown Color 



— symbol of the honors bestowed the 
thirteen Martyrs. 

— stands for the soil which means 
that the City is mostly agri- 
cultural. 



65 



Region V 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF IRIGA 



THE CITY OF IRIGA, at the foot of Sumagang Hills, stretches 
on the region near the western side of Mount Iriga in the 
Province of Camarines Sur. It is at the crossroads— where the 
Baao-Nabua-Bato and Buhi roads intersect— and in the middle 
of the road from Naga to Legazpi Cities, close to the Camarines 
Sur-Albay boundary. The city has a land area of 119.6 square 
kilometers. 

Iriga had 19,297 souls in 1903, 24,145 in 1918, 31,005 in 
1939, 42,049 in 1948, and 75,439 in 1960. In 1970 its popula- 
tion increased to 77,286 (14,606 in the urban area and 62,680 
in the rural places). 

In 1570,. Miguel Lopez de Legazpi sent the second explor- 
ing party under Captain Andres Ibarra, with Fray Alonso Ji- 
menez as chaplain, to search for provisions in Luzon. Following 
the route of Captain Luiz Enrique de Guzman, leader of the first 
exploration, Ibarra sailed from Panay Island to the islands of 
Masbate, Ticao and Burias, and pushed further from Kamalig 
rancheria to settlements bordering Bato Lake in the Bicol re- 
gion. The place was then known to the Indios as the barangays 
of Kalilingo and Bua (later called Bato and Nabua, respectively) . 

Bua, meaning "coconut bud" was already a flourishing vil- 
lage. It was located on a low marshy terrain which was easily 
flooded. The natives therefore transferred to the highland set- 
tlement of Nabua, near the Sumagang Mountain (Mt. Iriga). 
The settlement was also inundated during the rainy season; 
hence, its curate. Father Felix de Huertas, advised the people 
to go to a higher elevation where they could plant and raise 
crops. 

"Iraga sa Sumagang" which literally means "there is land 
in Sumagang" thus became a byword whenever the seasonal 
floods occurred — because the people always sheltered at the 
nearby Sumagang Hills. The word "Iraga," referring to the 



place, was later corrupted and finally accepted as Iriga, the 
settlement which became a barrio of Nabua in 1578. 

In 1585, the Spanish administrator had already established 
a colony in Iriga with the first church and convent built of 
wood. Through the efforts of Fathers Pablo de Jesus and Bar- 
tolome Ruiz, the barrio was converted into a town in 1683 
and St. Anthony of Padua was chosen as .the patron saint. 

During the incumbency of Capitan Martin Mendoza, in 
1710, the barrios of San Nicolas, San Agustin, San Isidro and 
San Antonio de Abad were created. 

Iriga was under the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical au- 
thorities of Nueva Caceres (now Naga City) . Its first church 
was reconstructed several times: in 1727 after it was burned; 
in 1841, after it was destroyed by fire and typhoon; in 1862, 
renovated with galvanized iron roofings; in 1886, repaired; and 
in 1892, rebuilt the tower with wood and iron. 

The town had then four municipal roads: the first leading 
to Nabua, the second to Baao, the third to Buhi, and the fourth 
to Polangui, Albay. The only route to Nueva Caceres was via 
the Barit River. 

In 1900, after the construction of a railroad line, Iriga be- 
came a booming town of trade and commerce. 

Republic Act No. 5261, dated June 15, 1968, converted the 
Municipality of Iriga into a chartered city, the third in the Bi- 
col region. Its inaugural ceremony was attended by the Presi- 
dent of the Philippines, Ferdinand E. Marcos, on September 3, 
1968. 

Iriga City consists of 26 large barrios on classified forestal 
and timber lands, although the people had long cleared a large 
portion of the nearby forest. Today, the city is still a prosper- 
ous center of the copra and abaca trades in the region. 



66 




ROSE 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF IRIGA 

The City of Iriga was created under R.A. 5261 on 
June 14, 1968. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Iriga 



Half-open Coconut 
or Bvxt 

Full Grown Tree 
Two Smaller Trees 



Coconut 

Years 1573 and 1683 



Mountain 
Eroded Hill 



-symbolizes the history of Iriga 
City. 

-stand for Nabua (Bua), and Bato 
and Iriga, formerly small depend- 
encies of Nabua. 

-the basic product of the locality. 

■ the settlement was established as 
a barrio of Nabua; the Spanish 
authorities recognized it only in 
1638. 

-Mt. Iriga or Mt. Sumagang. 

■accounts for the phrase I-riga sa 
Sumagang across the seal, which 
means "there is land in Suma- 
gang." 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF LEGAZPI 



Legazpi City lies on the eastern coast of the Bicol Peninsula 
and occupies 25,880 hectares. Bounded on the north by the 
municipality of Santo Domingo, east, by the Gulf of Albay, 
south, by the province of Sorsogon, and west, by the Municipal- 
ity of Daraga, it consists of thirty barrios inhabited by 83,826 
people in 1970. 

Early in the 13th century, Datus Balensusa and Dumangsil, 
two of the ten Bornean datus led by Datu Puti, went from 
Panay to Laguna and the Bicol region. In 1587, Captain Es- 
teban de Manchaca reached the barangay Sawangan headed by 
a descendant of Dumangsil, Gat Ibal, whom he vanquished by 
superior arms. 

The inhabitants were easily converted by Fr. Francisco 
de Sta. Ana, a Franciscan missionary who built the first chapel 
of bamboo and nipa. Under the spiritual ministration of Cag- 
saua since 1578, Sawaiigan was elevated to visita regular in 
1605, and established as an independent town in 1616. The 
town was made the capital of the province of Partido IbcUon, 
the name of which was later changed to Albaybay and shortened 
to Albay. 

For two centuries the capital town was occasionally rocked 
by the minor eruptions of Mayon Volcano and the attacks of 
Muslim pirates and the Dutch. On February 1, 1814, the ca- 
tastrophic eruption of Mayon buried Cagsaua, Budiao, Camalig 
and Bulusan, and partially destroyed Sawangan. 

Fr. Pedro Licup thus urged the residents of Sawangan to 
move to Makalaya (now Taysan). Several years later, Sa- 
wangan was restored and called Binanuahan (Banuang-gurang). 
It was made a visita tribtitaria of Taytay, and the combined 
towns was named Albay Nuevo {Bagumbayan) . The residents 
of Binanuahan, however, objected to the annexation. 

On July 17, 1856, Ramon Montero of the Gobiemo Superior 
de las Islas Filipinos signed a decree which created the visita 
of Pueblo Viejo, out of Binanuahan, with Lamba, Rauis and 
Bigaa. In another decree, Montero named the town as Legazpi 
which was inaugurated on October 22 of the same year. 

The port of Legazpi had served as anchorage of ships sail- 
ing to Nueva Espana (Mexico) in the later part of the 16th 
century. In 1873, it was made a port of entry by a Royal Decree 
earlier issued in J^Iadrid on May 18, 1872 and later promulgated 
by Governor Juan Alamenos y de Vivar on December 3, 1874. 



In 1894, the Spanish Minister of Ultramar promulgated a 
decree creating an ayuntamiento composed of the towns of 
Legazpi, Albay and Daraga. This was resented by the residents 
of Daraga. 

On September 22, 1898, the Civil Governor of Albay, Angel 
Bascaran y Federic and the Spanish residents evacuated 
Albay. Subsequently, a revolutionary junta was organized by 
Don Anacleto Solano who later turned over the command to 
General Vicente Lucban, General-in-Chief of Operations of the 
revolutionary government in the southern regions. 

By January 23, 1900, the American forces arrived in Le- 
gazpi and defeated the Sandatahanes led by Generals Vito 
Belarmino and Jose Ignacio Paua at the Battle of San Rafael 
Bridge. 

The American military government reestablished Legazpi, 
Albay and Daraga as independent towns. In 1908, the Philip- 
pine Assembly again merged the three towns to create the 
Municipio de Albay which became the capital of the province. 
Again bitterly opposed, the Philippine Assembly separated Da- 
raga from the capital town in 1922. 

On December 12, 1941, the Kimura Detachment of the 
Japanese Imperial Forces occupied Legazpi while the Philippine- 
American troops were 150 miles away. The provisional mili- 
tary government of the Japanese was terminated upon the 
arrival of the American liberation forces on April 1, 1945. 

On June 18, 1948, Republic Act No. 306 created the City 
of Legazpi and again incorporated Daraga as one of its districts, 
effective upon its proclamation on December 15, 1948. Bitter 
feelings again prevailed in Daraga; so on June 8, 1954, R.A. 
No. 993 was passed. The law repealed R.A. No. 306 and created 
the Municipalities of Legazpi and Daraga. 

Finally, on June 12, 1959, Legazpi was again made a city 
under R.A. No. 2234. It became the capital of the Province of 
Albay and its seat of government. 

Today, Legazpi City is the commercial center of the Bicol 
region. Its rich and volcanic soil is mostly planted with coconut, 
abaca and rice. With one of the busiest ports in the country 
and a majestic Mayon Volcano, the city rightfully deserves the 
title of 'The Queen City of Southern Luzon." 




GARDENIA 

City Flower 



QTY OF LEGAZPI 



City Flag 



The City of Legazpi was created under R,A. on 
June 18, 1948. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Legazpi 



Sluipe of the Seal 

Colors Red, White 
and Blue 

Rising Sun 

Mayon Volcano 



— crown shape which symbolizes 
power. 

— colors of the national flag. 

— symbol of progress 

— denotes the beauty and grandeur 
of Mount Mayon. 

Sea, Wharf, Steamer — signify that Legazpi is a famous 



and Pier 

Bundles of Palay 
and Coconut Tree 



Wing, Wheel and 
Anchor 



seaport. 

-connotes agricultural industry as 
the chief source of its income, 
copra is the leading export pro- 
duct of Legazpi. 

-symbols of air, land and water 
transportation terminals in the 
city. 



69 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF NAGA 



NAGA City, in the Province of Camarines Sur, is surrounded 
by rich agricultural plains, forest reserves and fishing grounds. 
It is bounded in the north by the municipalities of Magarao 
and Calabanga; east and northeast, by Pili and Goa; south, by 
Milaor; and west and northwest, by Camaligan and Canaman. 
The land area of the city is about 77.5 square kms. and its 
population was 79.746 as of 1970. 

Naga is said to have been named after the Bikol word 
"naga" for "narra trees' or, as some believed, for "wild ducks," 
which were then both in abundance in the place. The accepted 
version, however, is the narra trees, a symbol in the present 
coat-of-arms of the city. 

The history of Naga City dates back to the time when 
Camarines was explored by Captain Juan de Salcedo in 1573. 
After his discovery of the Paracale gold mines, Salcedo realized 
the great potentials of the territory. He returned and con- 
quered the region. Finally, he pacified the natives and estab- 
lished garrisons. Later, during the administration of Governor 
General Francisco de Sande (1.575-1580), Captain Pedro de 
Chavez continued the pacification of the natives. 

In 1575, Chavez founded the City of Caceres near the 
flourishing native village of Naga, the first barangay which, 
as a commercial pueblo, grew in size and importance. The 
city was named after Governor Sande's native City of Caceres 
in Spain. By 1591, the capital of Camarines province was 
already Caceres City. 

The City of Caceres was, however, changed to Nueva Ca- 
ceres "with a city government as prescribed by Spanish law" 
in order to distinguish the city in Camarines from that of the 
city in Spain. 

From 1570, there was only one province of Camarines. 
In 1829, the region was divided into two — Camarines Norte and 
Camarines Sur. Camarines Sur included the district of Nueva 
Caceres. 

For hundred of years, it was the religious center in the 
Bicol region. The seat of the Archdiocese of Nueva Caceres 
was .established as a bishopric by virtue of a Bull signed by 



Pope Clement VIII on August 14, 1595. Its jurisdiction ex- 
tended from the Bicol region to Quezon Province and the neigh- 
boring islands. 

The Spanish authorities in Nueva Caceres governed with 
a -reign of terror after the outbreak of the Philippine Revolu- 
tion in August, 1896. On mere suspicion, they arrested, jailed, 
tortured, and exiled or executed prominent citizens and ihis- 
trados. Among them were the "Fifteen Martyrs of Bicolan- 
dia": 

Because of the need of arms and organization, Nueva Ca- 
ceres openly revolted two years after the outbreak of the rev- 
olution. On the 17th and 18th September, 1898, the Filipino 
soldiers of the Guardda Civil led by Corporals Felix Plazo and 
Elias Angeles, in a surprise attack, killed many Spanish offi- 
cials and soldiers. Having been defeated, the Spanish governor, 
Don Vicente Zaidin, signed the capitulation terms on the 18th 
of September at the historic San Francisco Church where they 
earlier sought refuge. Subsequently, a Revolutionary Govern- 
ment was established by Brigadier General Vicente Lukban. 

Two years later, on February 22, 1900, the Americans en- 
tered Nueva Caceres. Although a military government was 
already established by the Americans, many of the residents 
continued their resistance and organized guerrilla movements. 
Civil government was established in the Bicol region in April, 
1901. Later, in 1919, the City of Caceres became a mere mu- 
nicipality, officially known as Naga. 

The Kimura Detachment of the Japanese Imperial Forces 
entered Naga on the 18th of December, a few days after the 
outbreak of World War II in 1941. However, on May 1, 1942, 
the guerrilla forces successively attacked the Japanese garrison 
and controlled the town until their surrender on the 29th. With 
the coming of the American Liberation Forces, the guerrillas 
attacked the Japanese garrison in Naga on April 9, 1945 until 
the town was liberated on the 27th. 

On June 18, 1948, Republic Act No. 305 created the City 
of Naga, which was inaugurated on December 16 of the same 
year. 




NARRA FLOWER 
City Flower 



CITY OF NAGA 



City Flag 



The City of Naga was created under R.A. 305 on 
June 18, 1948. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Naga 



Dates 



Landmarks 
Castle and Cross 



Eagle Head 

Green and Blue 
Background 

Red Background 



— 1573 was the beginning of record- 
ed history of the city; 1575 was 
■ ' the founding of the Nueva Cace- 
res; and 1947 was the year of 
inauguration of Naga City. 

— Mount Isarog, the Bicol River and 
San Miguel Bay. 

— signifies that the city was the seat 
of military and civil government 
and religious authority. 

— symbol of the American rule. 

— represents the Oriental culture 
and paganism of the natives be- 
fore the coming of the westerners. 

— symbolizes the bloodshed by the 
Spanish colonizers and the na- 
tives. 



Region VI 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF BACOLOD 



Bacolod City, situated on the northwestern part of the island 
of Negrros, is bounded by the Guimaras Strait on the west, 
the Municipality of Talisay on the north, the Municipality of 
Murcia on the east, and Bago City on the south. 

The city has a land area of 156.1 square kilometers. In 
1970, it had a population of 187,300. It has a cool and 
invigoratinfi: climate with abundant rainfall. The majority 
of the people speak Ilongo and the rest speak Cebuano. The 
city has a high percentage of literacy. 

Bacolod, the "sugar city of the Philippines," is one of the 
niost progres'sive and elite cities in the country. Along its 
highway, sugarcane plantation is a typical scene; coconut 
and rice are also grown. The people are engaged in livestock, 
fishing and pottery. 

Bacolod was derived from the Ilongo word "bacolod," 
meaning "stonehill," since the settlement was founded in 1770 
on a stone hill area, now the district of Granada and the site 
of the Bacolod-Murcia Milling Company. 

Due to the Muslim i-aids in 1787, Bacolod was transferred 
towards the shoreline. The old site was called "Daan-banwa," 
meaning "old town." 

In 1849, by order of Governor General Claveria, through 
Negros Island Governor Manuel Valdeviseo Morquecho, Bacolod 
was made the capital of the Province of Negros. Bernardino 
de los Santos became the first govemadordllo and Fray Julian 
Gonzaga the first parish priest. 



The success of the Revolution in Bacolod was attributed 
to the low morale of the local Spanish detachment — due to 
its defeat in Panay and Luzon and to the psychological war- 
fare of Generals Aniceto Lacson and Juan Araneta. In 1897, 
a battle in Bacolod was fought in Matabang River. A year 
later, on November 5, 1898, the Negrenso "Revolucionarios," 
armed with knives, bolos, spears, and rifle-like "nipa" stems, 
and pieces of "sawali" mounted on carts, captured the 
convento where Colonel de Castro y Cisneros, well-armed 
"casadores" and platoons of civil guards, surrendered. Two 
days later, on the 7th, most of the revolutionary army gathered 
together to establish a Provisional Revolutionary Junta and 
to confirm the elections of Aniceto Lacson as president, Juan 
Araneta as war-delegate, as well as the other officials. 

On March 1899, the American forces led by Colonel James 
G. Smith occupied Bacolod, the revolutionary capital of the 
Provisional Republic of Negros. 

Bacolod City was occupied by the Japanese forces on 
May 21, 1942. Three years after, it was liberated by the 
American forces on May 29, 1945. 

By virtue of Commonwealth Act No. 326, enacted by the 
National Assembly, the City of Bacolod was created on June 
18, 1938, with Alfredo Montelibano as the first City Mayor. 

Some of the tourist attractions in Bacolod City are the 
San Sebastian Cathedral (the oldest building in the city), the 
Bacolod Public Plaza, the Capitol Lagoon and Building, the 
Plaza Mart, the Sta. Fe Resort, the Taytay Beach, and the 
pottery in Pahanocoy. 



72 



City Seal 



City Flag 



CITYOFBACOLOD 

The City of Bacolod was created under R.A. 326 on June 18, 1938. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Bacolod 



Centerpiece 



Left Upper Quadrant ■ 
Right Upper Quadrant • 

Lower Left Quadrant • 



■hand holding a lighted torch is 
symbolic of the light of reason, 
the oval represents an egg, 
symbolic of imhatched dreams. 

- the salakot and the talibong. 

•the carabao and plow, farm ani- 
mal and implement, respectively. 

•sugarcane mill, processor of su- 



Sugar Cane 



Tractor 



garcane, primary produce of the 
city as well as of the province. 

-main crop and primary export 
product of Bacolod City and Neg- 
ros Occidental 

■ depicts the progress of agriculture 
in the city. 



78 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF BAGO 



Bago City is situated at the northwestern part of Negros Occi- 
dental—bounded by Bacolod City in the north, San Carlos 
City in the east, Guimaras Strait in the west and the 
Municipality of Valladolid in the south. It has a land area of 
37,750 hectares. In 1882, there were 11,565 inhabitants and 
in 1885, 14,903. By 1960, its population was 58,834 and in 
1970, 71,653. The city is at the mouth of the Bago River 
where vast sugar haciendas are found. Its name was tak<'n 
from this river, "Bago." Aside from sugar cane, the other 
agricultural products are corn, rice, tobacco, hemp and copra. 

Bago has a cool and invigorating climate and abundant 
rainfall. The soil is of limestone origin and well adapted to 
sugar cane. Together with Bacolod, Talisay, San Carlos, Hog 
and Binalbagan, they are the centers of the sugar industry in 
the province. 

Only Hog and Binalbagan were the known native settle- 
ments prior to the arrival of the Spaniards in 1565. 
Incidentally, the Spaniards called the island "Negros" because 
they saw black men on their arrival. 

After the Spaniards conquered the island, Negros was 
placed under the jurisdiction of the town of Arevalo, Iloilo. 
Later, the people from Iloilo crossed the Guimaras Strait and 
settled on the coast of the Bago River. 

Bago was founded in 1575. Later, the settlers petitioned 
the Spanish government to declare their village as a town. 
Some of the petitioners were Fernando Villanueva, Manuel 
Sitchon, Gregorio Varela, Paulino Torres, Jacinto Araneta, 
Pedro Advincula, Clemente Cells and Mariano Gonzaga. All of 
them were from the town of Molo, Iloilo, except Pedro 
Advincula of Bohol and Clemente Cells of Leyte. 

On January 20, 1848, Governor General Don Narciso 
Claveria entrusted to the Recollects the evangelization of the 
island of Negros. A year after. Fray Joaquin Soriano, Father 
Provincial of the Recollects, sent missionaries to Negros. They 
formally took over the spiritual ministration of the town of 
Bago with Fr. Balbino Gonzaga as its first parish priest. In 
1882, Fr. Juan Bta. Pereda de la Corzanilla became the parish 
priest of Bago, and in 1885, Fr. Vicente Abrigo. 



The Recollect missionaries introduced the cultivation of 
sugar cane, abaca, coffee and tobacco in this island. In 1854, 
the sugar industry tremendously prospered in Bago. In 1856, 
a great influx of immigrants began to arrive in Occidental 
Negros, and since then large haciendas were created. The 
primitive wooden sugar mills were replaced by steam and 
hydraulic machineries from Europe. By 1864, seven steam 
machineries operated in the towns of Bago, Bacolod and 
Minuluan. In 1865, many hydraulic mills were also installed 
in Bago, Minuluan and Bacolod. These mills were capable of 
milling 100 piculs of sugar in twelve hours. f' 

Bago became the capital of Negros Occidental at the 
outbreak of the revolution in Negros on November 5, 1898. 
Under the leadership of General Juan Araneta, the greatest 
son of this town, the Republic of Negros was proclaimed in 
Bago. During the bloody clash between the rebels and the 
Spanish forces, the Filipino soldiers at Bago outwitted the 
Spanish forces under Colonel Isidro de Castro. The Spanish 
troops surrendered to the revolutionists at Bacolod. A revolu- 
tionary provincial government was then established with Juan 
Araneta as acting governor. Under this government. Occidental 
and Oriental Negros, (divided in 1890) were again united until 
the establishment of a civil government in Occidental Negros 
on April 20, 1901. 

American sovereignty was accepted in Occidental Negros 
without much resistance. Jose de Luzuriaga, a distinguished 
and patriotic Filipino, assured safety to the American troops 
in Negros, under Gen. James F. Smith. However, on May 19, 
1900, a noted outlaw, Dionisio Papa, popularly known as Papa 
Isio, ordered the beheading of any person who sided with the 
Americans. 

Like other towns in the Philippines, Bago suffered the 
same hardships during the Japanese occupation. On May 20, 
1942, Japanese troops occupied the Island oi Negros. Major 
Salvador Abcede, leader of the resistance unit in Negros 
Occidental, established the civil government in Negros on 
December 16, 1942, and Alfredo Montelibano was appointed 
military governor, ^j^^ 




City Flag 



CITY OF BAGO 

The City of Bago was created under R.A. 4382 on 
June 19, 1965. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Bago 

Monument — monument of Capitan Don Juan 

Araneta urging his co-Boguenos 
to fight against the oppression 
and tyranny of the Spaniards. 

Mountain — Mount Canla-on which marks the 

city boundaries. 



Rice Stalk and 
Sugar Cane Plant 

Golden Background 



represent the two major crops of 
the city. 

symbolic of the high aspirations 
of the people of Bago City. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF CADIZ 



Cadiz, situated on the northern tip of Negros Island, is the sixth 
city of Negros Occidental. It is bounded on the east by Sagay, 
on the west by Manapla and Victorias, on the south by Silay 
City, and on the north by the Visayan Sea. 

It has a land area of 516.5 square kilometers. In 1970, 
it had a population of 124,108. Majority of the people in Cadiz 
City speak Hiligaynon. 

The city is the center of the fishing industry in the north- 
ern part of Negros Island. Its soil of limestone origin is 
adapted to sugarcane; hence, vast haciendas surround the 
metropolitan area. It also produces lumber. 

By the decree of Don Narciso Claveria on June 20, 1848, 
the Island of Negros was entrusted to the Recollect Fathers 
who founded Cadiz, one of the towns in the province. 

Cadiz, originally called Hitalon, was later named Valde- 
vieso, after the first Spanish governor of Negros Occidental, 
Manuel Valdevieso Morquecho, whose seat of government was 
at Himamaylan. Later, the Spanish settlers renamed it Cadiz 
after seeing the similarity in location with its progressive coun- 
terpart, the seaport city of Cadiz in Spain. 

In 1878, Cadiz became a municipality and its first gober- 
nadorcillo was Antonio Cabahug, a settler from Mandaue, Cebu. 
The town officials were controlled by the cura fraile who gave 
orders and imposed punishments to all inhabitants. 

In 1894, the members of the municipal tribunal were elect- 
ed for the first time, and Gil Lopez Villanueva became the 
town's first elected official. 



In Cadiz, the Revolution was headed by Francisco Abe- 
larde. He caused the surrender of the civil guards, and the 
capture of the cura fraile and the Spanish residents who were 
detained in the house of Capitana Imang Cabahug de los San- 
tos. Capt. Tomas Belmonte with Mang Kiko and Cirilo Sa- 
montina also headed a group who peacefully succeeded in 
confiscating rifles, muskets, "escopetas," and revolvers from 
the Spaniards. 

On November 26, 1898, the leaders of Negros decided to 
form the Cantonal Government of Negros to replace the pro- 
visional government. By December 19, 1898, a general election 
was held for the legislative assembly, with Jose Vito represent- 
ing Cadiz. 

Later, the American government abolished the Estado Can- 
tonal de Negros and created a government with Melecio Seve- 
rino and James Smith as civil and military provincial governors, 
respectively. 

On August 26, 1918, the statue of Jose Rizal in the public 
plaza of Cadiz was inaugurated by Provincial Governor Matias 
Hilado. 

The Japanese Imperial Forces occupied Cadiz in May 1942. 
Resistance movements were organized in the Island of Negros 
by the end of August 1942, and Lt. Fidel Soliven headed the 
group in Cadiz. By the end of April 1945, Cadiz was one of 
the towns liberated by the American Liberation Forces. 

By the virtue of Republic Act No. 4894, Cadiz became a 
city on June 17, 1967. 



CITY OF CADIZ 



The City of Cadiz was created under R.A. 4894 on 
June 17, 1967. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Cadiz 

Whole — symbol of the dozen whales which 

drifted ashore of the city before 
it was made a chartered city. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ILOILO 



The City of Iloilo is bounded on the north by the Munic- 
ipality of Pavia, on the south and east by the Iloilo Strait, 
and on the west by the Municipality of Oton. 

The city, with a land area of 56.0 square kilometers, is 
composed of the districts of (1) Molo or Parian, (2) Arevalo 
or Villa, (3) the city proper, (4) La Paz, (5) Jaro, and (6) 
Mandurriao. In 1970, there were 206,692 residents in Iloilo City. 

It has one of the finest harbors in the country. At the 
request of the government of the Philippines, a Royal Order 
authorized the opening of the Port of Iloilo on September 29, 
1855. Consequently in 1856, Iloilo was opened to foreign trade. 
The winding waterfront (named Muelle Loney after Nicholas 
Loney, a philanthropist), and the nearby Guimaras Island pro- 
tect the ships and provide safe anchorage. The city has also 
a domestic airport. 

Iloilo, the town and province, is written as "Hilo, Ilo, Iloilo, 
Ilongilong, Iloylo, Yloilo, Ylong-Ylong, Iloylo," and "Ylo Ylo" 
in the book, The Philippine Islands. It has no meaning in 
Spanish; but in the Ilongo dialect, it means "orphan" and in 
the Malayan language, it refers to "nose." 

The city began as a Malayan settlement around Batiano 
River (now Iloilo River). During the 13th century, Datu Puti 
and his wife Pinagpangan, together with nine other datus in 
ten large sailboats called "barangays" anchored at San Joaquin, 
Iloilo, in the southwestern part of Panay (Madya-as). They 
negotiated for the purchase of land where they could live in 
peace under a just ruler. Datu Puti returned to Borneo and 
Datu Sumakwel, considered the wisest among the others, suc- 
ceeded him. He divided the island into Hamtik (now Antique), 
under Datu Sumakwel; Aklan, under Datu Bangkaya; and 
Irong-Irong, under Datu Paiburong. 

In 1565, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi settled in Cebu. He 
then sent advance parties to the old Iloilo towns of Halawod 
(Dumangas) and Ogtong (Oton). Due to acute food shortage 
and the Portuguese threat on Cebu in 1569, Legazpi moved 
to Panay. In 1581, the first settlement in Iloilo was established 



by Gonzalo Ronquillo in the town of Arevalo. 

Between the 16th and the 17th centuries, Iloilo greatly 
suffered from Muslim raids and Dutch incursions. The Spaniards 
thus erected several forts in Oton, Arevalo' and Iloilo. Governor 
General Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera ordered the evacuation 
of Arevalo, Molo and Oton towards La Punta for safety. 

In 1688, the provincial capital was transferred from Are- 
valo to the town of Iloilo. Later on February 7, 1890, the 
city government of Iloilo was established under the Becerra 
Law of 1889. By 1896, the city was authorized to have a 
coat-of-arms with the inscription "La Muy Leal y Noble Ciudad 
de Iloilo." 

During the Philippine-American War, when General Mar- 
cus Miller arrived in Iloilo on December 28, 1898, the Spanish 
garrison had already surrendered to General Martin Delgado. 
The Iloilo revolucionarios fortified the harbor and the San 
Pedro Fort blocked the river entrance, and barricaded the 
streets. On February 11, 1899, the American warships shelled 
the city defense. When the enemy forces landed, Delgado' 
troops set fire to the city and withdrew to its outskirts. 

Iloilo City was reverted to the status of a municipality 
on April 11, 1901. On November 8, 1936, Commonwealth Act 
No. 158 amended C.A. No. 57 (dated October 20, 1936), 
which established the City of Iloilo. The new law incorporated 
the towns of La Paz, Jaro, Mandurriao, Molo and Arevalo. 
The inauguration of the city was held on August 25, 1937. 

Iloilo was also bombed and attacked by the Japanese Im- 
perial Forces. On April 16, 1942, the Japanese forces occupied 
and established a military government in Iloilo. 

On April 29, 1955, President Ramon Magsaysay signed 
into law Republic Act No. 1209 which provided the executive 
and the legislative members of the city to be elective. The bill 
was authored by Rodolfo T. Ganzon who became the first 
elected mayor of Iloilo City. 

Iloilo City, a quiet, refined and cultured place, is usually 
referred to as "the aristocratic city of the South." 



City Seal 



City Flag 



Structure 
Spanish Text 

Mountain 

Four Small Stars 



CITY OF ILOILO 

The City of Iloilo was created under C.A. 158 on November 8, 1936. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Iloilo 



— Fort San Pedro, as viewed from 
one side of the Iloilo River Bank, 

— the words "La Muy Leal Y Noble 
Ciudad de Iloilo" mean The Ever 
Local and Noble City of Iloilo." 

— Bondolan mountain. 

— represent the stars that misled 



Lion 



Eagle 



a group of Moros who planned to 
invade the city of Iloilo. 

— means that Iloilo was formerly 
under the Spanish rule. 

— symbol of the merican Regime. 



Three Big Stars — represent Luzon, Visayas and 

Mindanao. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF LA CARLOTA 



LA CARLOTA, which grew from a small village to an industrial 
and agricultural city in Negros Occidental, lies on the north- 
western irregular coast of Negros Island. Facing the Panay 
Gulf in the west, near the port of Pulupandan and nearest the 
coastal areas of San Enrique, it sprawls inland over the fertile 
limestone plains and hilly regions which are at points broken 
by small streams and big rivers. The territory includes the 
areas around and between Pontevedra and La Carlota— extend- 
ing south and east to the Municipality of Castellana, and to 
the north of most of the haciendas. It is bounded in the north- 
west coast by the Municipality of Valladolid, and on the south- 
west by the rice lands along the San Enrique River. Topo- 
graphically, the city is narrow near the coast which gradually 
spreads out triangularly — extending 20 kilometers — ^to the foot- 
hills where it is as broad as its length. The city proper is 10 
kilometers inland and on fairly level ground of a great number 
of haciendas. The city has a land area of 137.3 square kms. 

Originally, La Carlota was an agricultural settlement. The 
people grew rice for consumption, and cacao and tobacco for 
export. Like other coastal villages. La Carlota suffered from 
the marauding Suluans against whom the Negrenese were 
unable to put up an effective defense. 

On June 20, 1848, through a decree of Governor General 
Narciso Claveria, La Carlota became one of the towns in Negros 
Province to be entrusted to the Recollect Fathers. These mis- 
sionaries introduced the cultivation of sugar cane. In 1856, 
during the term of Governor Emilio Saravia, Negros was made 
into a politico-military region. Settlers then increased, such 
that by 1860 the town was organized into an economic and 
political community. Haciendas were opened and machineries 
were introduced in the production of sugar so that the cultiva- 
tion of sugar cane was made on a large scale. 

In 1890, Negros Province was divided into the eastern and 
western parts: Negros Oriental and Negros Occidental. La 



Carlota was included in the Occidental portion. The "sugar 
belt," of which La Carlota was one of tlie districts, were on 
the coastal plains. By 1908, there were 30 sugar growers on 
1,887 hectares with 8,224 metric tons of sugar production. 

With the exportation of sugar to the United States during 
the American rule, further development of the industry brought 
about the "sacadas" or seasonal laborers who cut the canes 
in the plantations and load them on wagons or railroad baggage 
cars to the sugar centrals. 

The Islands of Negros and Siquijor comprised the 7th 
Military District during the Commonwealth territorial organi- 
zation of the Philippine Army. 

During the Japanese occupation, after the fall of Bataan 
on April 9, 1942, the Negros Force was deployed into five 
subsectors in line with a "guerrilla defense" plan. La Carlota, 
in the third subsector, was under the command of Major 
Francisco Gomez. In October 1944, Major Abenir B. Bornales, 
Commanding Officer of the 76th Infantry, 7th Military District, 
destroyed the enemy positions in Western Negros. In line with 
the Leyte campaign, his regiment liberated La Carlota without 
any American aid. 

On June 19, 1965, Republic Act No. 4585 created the 
Municipality of La Carlota into a chartered city. 

After World War II, modern milling machineries were 
installed and the scientific manufacture of sugar and its by- 
products was introduced in the city in order to cope with the 
increased sugar quota in the United States market and to 
supply the local consumers. Thus, La Carlota produces better 
sugar than any of the sugar sectors in Negros. From a scat- 
tered settlement, it became one of the major sugar-producing 
cities of the country. Its income and importance have likewise 
been notable, im^ 



80 



City Seal 



City Flag 



CITY OF LA CARLOTA 

The City of La Carlota was created under 
R.A. 4585 on June 19, 1965. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of La Carlota 

Volcano —the Canla-on Volcano. 

Sugar Central —main industiy of the city. 

Lady — symbol of manpower. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ROXAS 



The City of Roxas, at the northeastern portion of Panay Island, 
is bounded on the north by the Visayan Sea, on the east by 
the town of Panay, on the south by the town of Panitan, and 
on the west by the town of Ivisan. The city is partly drained 
by the Panay River that flows northward to the Visayan Sea. 
It has an irregular coastline, with Culasi Point on the northwest. 

The city has a land area of 102.0 square kilometers and a 
population of 67,648 in 1970. 

Roxas City, which is within the typhoon belt, experiences 
rains and storms during the months of June to November. 
Basically agricultural, it produces the principal crops of rice, 
sugar, coconut, banana and camote. The fishing industry, a 
main source of livehhood of the city residents, is attested to by 
many lattice-work of bamboo for drying fish in the coastal 
areas. Its home industries are mat and slipper making, banana 
and camote chip preparation, and poultry raising. 

A railroad line connects the city to the busy port of Iloilo 
while several bus transportation facilities serve the residents 
to and from the various towns of the province, including those 
of Akian, Antique, and Iloilo. A domestic airport also offers 
regular plane flights to other parts of the country. 

Roxas City (formerly the town of Capiz) was a part of 
the place where Miguel Lopez de Legazpi settled after he arrived 
from Cebu. In the settlement, the Spaniards found abundant 
food supply. The place also afforded them better protection 



from Portuguese incursions. 

In 1716, Capiz and Aklan were organized into politico- 
military provinces. By 1746, Capiz was made the seat of the 
politico-military government although it was still ecclesiastically 
controlled by the Bishopric of Cebu until May 31, 1837, when 
a Royal Decree made the province into an cdcaldia. Between 
1850 and 1900, Capiz was a bustling trade center. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the center of the 
revolutionary activities in the island of Panay was in Aklan. 
When the American forces under General Robert F. Hughes 
landed in Iloilo in 1899, Generals Ananias Diokno and Roque 
Lopez retreated to Capiz where they surrendered to the Amer- 
icans in 1900. On April 15, 1901, the Americans established a 
civil government in Capiz. 

During the Second World War, the Japanese Imperial Forces 
landed in Panay Island on April 16, 1942. The town of Capiz, 
however, did not suffer much damage due to active guerrilla 
activities of the Free Panay Force and the Emergency Pro- 
vincial Guards. 

On April 11, 1951, President Elpidio Quirino signed into law 
Republic Act No. 603 which created the capital town of Capiz 
into a city, named "Roxas City," in honor of the first president 
of the Republic of the Philippines, Manuel Acuna Roxas. On 
May 12 of the same year, the City of Roxas was inaugurated. 

Former Senator Gerardo L. Roxas, son of Presidert M. 
Roxas, is from the city. 




SAMPAGUITA 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF ROXAS 

The City of Roxas was created under R.A. 603 on 
April 11, 1951. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Roxas 

Picture — President Manuel Acuna Roxas, 

greatest son of the city, in whose 
honor and memory the city was 
named after. 

Shrimp and Crab — symbolize the major products of 

the city and its major land use. 

Caviz Shell —the capiz shell symbolizes the 

geographical location and descrip- 
tion of the city; white color and 
shape symbolize the hospitality 
of its people. ^ 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF SAN CARLOS 
(NEGROS OCCIDENTAL) 



San Carlos City lies at the northeastern part of the Negros 
Islands. It is bounded on the north by the town of Calatrava, 
on the east by the Refugio Pass, on the south by Canlaon City 
(Negros Oriental), and on the west by the town of Murcia. 

The city, with a land area of 451.3 square kilometers, had 
a population of 90,058 (26% urban and 74% rural) in 1970. 

San Carlos, with large tracts of land, is planted to sugar- 
cane, the principal crop which annually earns for the city's 
coffers a miflion peso revenue. Besides corn, tobacco, and 
coffee, soy beans are also raised. 

As an ideal port city, San Carlos has two piers serving 
domestic and foreign ships. 

Aside from being a commercial community, the city is also 
considered as a seat of culture in the northeastern part of 
Negros Occidental. There are four educational institutions: 
Coiegio de Santo Tomas de Villanueva, Colegio de Santa Rita, 
Central Negros Institute, and Tanon College. 

The present site of San Carlos City was a former barrio 
of Calatrava, called Nabingkalan, in honor of a beautiful 
daughter of a Negrito chieftain. It was said that a certain Carlos 
Apurado and his men from the town of Badian, Cebu, bought 



the settlement from the Negritoes. 

Nabingkalan became a municipality in 1898. It was later 
called San Carlos, in honor of San Carlos Borromeo, the town's 
patron saint. 

San Carlos became a city on June 18, 1960, with the passage 
of Republic Act No. 2643. 

During the Second World War, in March 1945, the Japanese 
invaders were repulsed by the local guerrillas under the leader- 
ship of Lieutenants Alfredo Valdevia and Leonardo Marane. 
Under the overall command of Colonel Ernesto S. Mata, the 
guerrillas attacked a Japanese garrison in the compound of 
San Carlos Milling Company. 

Two more of its sons who have distinguished themselves 
are the late Don Julio Ledesma, one-time sugar magnate, and 
Romeo Tabuena, the internationally acclaimed painter. 

The scenic vacation resorts in San Carlos City are the 
Refugio (Sipaway) Island (reached by sailboat or ferryboat 
from the city proper) which is famous for its white beaches; 
and the Mainit Spring (reached in twenty minutes by bus from 
the city's thoroughfares) which is known for its hot water 
of volcanic origin. 




SANTAN 
City Flower 



CITY OF SAN CARLOS City Flag 

The City of San Carlos was created under R.A. 2643 
on June 18, 1960. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of San Carlos 

Upper Right Quadrant — sugar mill, symbolical of San Car- 
los City's main product which is 
sugar; the ship signifies that the 
city is accessible by sea and is a 
typical coastal city of commerce. 

connotes the topographical struc-. 
ture of the city. 



Lower Left Qmdrant 
Map at Center 



Plants 



Wheel 



Text on Band 



- Negros map divided into two com- 
ponent provinces. 

- corn and sugar which are the sta- 
ple food of San Carlosenos. 

-symbol of the local administra- 
tion at the wheel-of -state. 

■ Nabingkalan, the original name of 
the City, first christian settler of 
the city. 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF SILAY 



SiLAY City, located in the northwestern shores of Negros 
Occidental, lies along the navigable Silay River v/hose head- 
waters come from the mountain ranges dominating the central 
portion of the island. The city extends eastward toward Mt. 
Mandalagan, with its two sides marked by the boundaries of 
the municipalities of Talisay in the south, and Tanza and the 
Malaga River in the north. It is reached by good roads from 
the City of Bacolod through Talisay. 

The flat and fertile volcanic soil is best adapted to sugar 
cane and the area along its shorelines to coconut. With a warm 
climate and constant light rains, Silay City derives great profit 
from its natural resources. 

The early settlements were probably inhabited by the Aetas 
or Negritos. The original poblacion, however, was located 
at the delta of Silay River, along the seashore between Calubcub 
Point and Bobong Point. In the early days of Spanish con- 
quest, the place was well remembered for its shoals which were 
found along the coastal areas. 

It was only after the second half of the 16th century when 
the planting of sugar cane was found suitable in the province 
of Negros. Hence, in 1856, during the term of Emilio Saravia, 
politico-military governor, emigrants came in great numbers. 
Consequently, Silay became a sugar-producing municipality in 
1860. With the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869 the sugar- 
producing region prospered. Thus at the close of the Spanish 
era, the Silay sugarlands were linked by the Talisay road to 
Bacolod. 

Under the Filipino revolutionary government in 1900, the 
outskirts of the city were still a wilderness with few houses 
around the sugar-cane fields. In 1904, after attending the 
Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis, Missouri, USA, 



General Juan Araneta and Rafael Ramos came back with modern 
milling machineries. 

On June 12, 1957, Silay was created as a chartered city by 
Republic Act No. 1621. Its population of 19,569 in 1960 zoomed 
up to 47,421 (39,885 literates and 7,536 illiterates) in 1970. 

Some of the distinguished sons of Silay City are Jose C. 
Locsin— medical practitioner. Governor and Representative of 
Negros Occidental (1925-1931), Delegate to the Constitutional 
Convention (1934-1935) of the First District of Negros Occi- 
dental and Senator (1951-1956); Manuel A. Adeva— Consul 
General, Secretary and Charge d' Affaires ad interim of the 
Philippine Legation, Nanking, China (1948), Minister, Envoy 
Extraordinary, Minister Plenipotentiary of the Philippines and 
Chief of Mission to Taipeh (1948-1953) ; Juan L. Ledesma— Del- 
egate to the Constitutional Convention (1934-1935) of the First 
District of Negros Occidental; Ruben Ledesma— Deputy Com- 
missioner of the Civil Service Commission (1956) and Director 
of Personnel Administration, Central Bank (1957); Alfredo 
Montelibano— first Mayor of Bacolod City (1938), Secretary of 
National Defense and of the Interior (1945), Import Commis- 
sioner (1950), Economic Coordinator (1954), and Chairman of 
the National Economic Council (1956); and Teodoro M. Locsin 
— Staff Member of the Philippines Free Press before proclama- 
tion of Martial Law. 

As a major sugar-producing city in the country, its sugar 
boom brought about the emergence of a big labor force called 
"sacada gangs," mostly from Iloilo and Capiz: a considerable 
middle-class group; and a number of sugar "barons" and millers. 
Silay City, with its vast commercial-industrial complex and 
sugar-cane plantations, has to contend with labor-management 
problems to keep up with progress. 




SANTAN 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITYOFSILAY 

The City of Silay was created under R.A. 1621 on 
June 12, 1957. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Silay 

sugar central represents the ma- 
jor industry of the city. Sugar- 
cane and fish represent the major 
products on which majority of the 
people depend for their livelihood. 

represent the eight barrios of the 
city, namely, Balaring, Eustaquio 
Lopez, Guimbalaon, Guinhalaran, 
Nantad, Mambulac, Kapitan 
Ramon and Rizal. )i 



Sugar Central, Fish 
and Sugarcane 



Eight Gold Stars — 



87 



Region VII 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF BAIS 



BAIS, with a land area of 30,000 hectares, is situated along 
the south. It is well protected by Daco Island. Like many 
juyod in the north, Daco Island and Banlas Point in the east, 
Negros Occidental in the west, and Tan jay and Pamplona in 
the south. It is well protected by the Daco Island. Like many 
towns of Negros, Bais has volcanic soil suited for sugar; 
hence this town is the center of a sugar-growing district. 
Sugar, lumber, kapok, rice and corn are its principal products. 
It has a healthful climate and a very short dry season. 

The name of the city is derived from "Bahis," a kind of 
fish which abound in the sea near the place. The North and 
South Bais Bay— divided by Daco Island— are natural fishing 
grounds. 

In the city, there are two big industrial firms, the Central 
Azucarera de Bais and the Compania CelMosa de Filipinos with 
a small hospital and quarters for employees. A railroad runs 
from Bais Sugar Central to the stone pier which extends to 
Guindung Point. The beaches are unfavorable for landing due 
to the treacherous reefs, mud flats, and coastal mangrove 
swamps. 

On January 20, 1848, Governor General Don Narciso Cla- 
veria entrusted the Island of Negros to the Recollect Fathers. 
Fray Joaquin Soriano, Father Provincial of the Recollects, then 
sent missionaries to Negros in 1849. 

Bais vas created as a town in 1849. It had 753 tribute 
payers in 1849, 6,470 inhabitants in 1850; 22,471 in 1944, and, 
as a city, 40,095 in 1970. 

In 1850, Bais was only a "visita" under the civil and 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the town of Tanjay. Later, it be- 
came a barrio of Man juyod. The tribunal was its only strongly- 
built structure. The first village chapel was built of light 
materials and the construction of a concrete church started 
only in 1850, when Father Guillermo Garcia del Carmen became 
parish priest. In 1885, Father Manuel Alonzo took over the 
parish. 



In 1865, hydraulic mills were installed in Bais, Bago, Ba- 
colod, La Carlota, Pontevedra, Granada, Minuluan and Silay; 
altogether, they weer capable of milling 100 piculs of sugar in 
twelve hours. These machineries replaced the primitive wood- 
en mills. From 1865, the progress of Bais started with such 
increasing economic activities, particularly in sugar production, 
until 1896 when the Philippine Revolution broke out. 

The revolution in Negros started on November 5, 1898. 
General Juan Araneta led the resistance movement against the 
Spaniards. Two days after, in Bacolod, the Spanish forces in 
Negros surrendered to Aniceto Lacson y Ledesma, Commander- 
in-Chief of the Filipino forces in Northern Negros. A Can- 
tonal Government was then established and Gen. Juan Araneta 
became the Secretary of War. 

When the American forces arrived. Gen. Araneta counselled 
the Cantonal Government to submit to the American invaders. 
Occidental and Oriental Negros, which were separated in 1890, 
were again united until the establishment of a civil government 
by the Americans in 1901. 

During World War II, Bais was the headquarters of the 
guerrilla forces under Major Placido Ausejo, a constabulary of- 
ficer. A Japanese garrison was stationed in the town for 
sometime. When the Americans landed in Dumaguete, the 
enemy forces withdrew. Fierce fighting took place only in 
the southwestern coastline and mountain areas of Negros 
Oriental. 

The town was created as a chartered city by virtue of 
Republic Act No. 5444, approved on September 9, 1968. 
Genaro Goni was the first city mayor. 

Bais became a bustling big town after the war. Yearly, 
thfr city produces an average of 1,107,491 piculs of sugar. 
Sugar centrals, shipping facilities, trade and commercial 
activities are now handled by the local administration. 




SANTAN 

City Flower 



f 



City Flag 

CITY OF BAIS 



The City of Bais was created under. R.A. 5444 on 
September 9, 1968. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Bais 

Upper Portion — sugar central, which plays a vital 

role in the city's economy and 
supports its sugar and paper in- 
dustries: the coconut represents 
the other segment of agriculture, 
which employs farm hands and 
workers and contributes greatly 
to the income of the city. 

Lower Portion — the fresh- water eel (bais, in the 

Cebuano vernacular and deriva- 
tive of the name of the city), 
symbolic of the city's fishing in- 
dustry and source of livelihood of 
ten percent of its population. 



89 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF CANLAON 



Canlaon City, situated on the eastern side of Mt. Canlaon, in 
the Province of Negros Oriental, is bounded on the north by 
the City of San Carlos, on the east by Valle Hermoso (Negros 
Oriental), on the south by Guihulngan, and on the west by 
La Castellana. 

With a land area of 160.7 square kilometers, it had a 
population of 23,598 in 1970. 

Canlaon used to be a wilderness ruled by a native chief 
called Saniko. In 1584, the settlers from Cebu, Bohol and 
Antique migrated to Barrio Panubigan, the present site of the 
city. During the last decades of the 19th century, Panubigan 
was claimed as a hacienda by Don Diego de la Viiia, a resident 
of Valle Hermoso. Mabigo, the original settlement within the 
hacienda, later became a progressive community. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the 
local revolutionary activity was led by Jose de la Viiia and 
Kapitan Saniko. The former became the Teniente Coronet de 
la Revolucion. 

When the Americans came in 1900, one of the native chiefs, 
Tranquilino Kilana, fought the Americans and died in the battle 
of Panubigan. For sometime, during the American occupation. 



Mabigo became a hideout of bandits ; the noted ones were Papa 
Isio, Sapinay and Magdag-it. 

In 1941, the residents of Mabigo, led by Isidoro Bautista, 
filed a petition urging the National Government to convert Ma- 
bigo into a municipality. The petition, however, was shelved 
indefinitely because of the outbreak of the Pacific War in 
December 1941. 

In 1942, Commonwealth President Manuel L. Quezon and 
his party stayed for sometime in Mabigo on their way to Min- 
danao. The same year, the Japanese planes bombed the place 
because it was the alleged hideouts of Filipino guerrilla units. 

After the Second World War, the barrio of Mabigo, and 
the other sitios surrounding it, became the Municipality of Can- 
laon through the passage of Executive Proclamation No. 19 on 
October 11, 1946. Several months later, on January 1, 1947, 
some barrios of the Municipality of Valle Hermoso were annexed 
to the new Municipality of Canlaon. 

Canlaon became a chartered city under Republic Act No. 
3445, approved on June 18, 1961. But it was not until the is- 
suance of Presidential Proclamation No. 193 on April 20, 1967 
that Canlaon weis inaugurated. 




CALLALILY 

City Flower 



CITY OF CANLAON ^^^^ 



The City of Canlaon was created under R.A. 3445 on 
June 18, 1961. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Canlaon 

Upper Portion — depicts the 8,050 ft. high Canlaon 

Volcano (left) and Mt. Makawi- 
wili, 7,950 ft. high (right) ; green 
color stands for Mt. Canlaon Na- 
tional Park. 

Lower Portion — the giant shell overflowing with 

vegetables symbolizes the over 
abundant supply of vegetables; 
harvested bundles of palay sym- 
bolize abundance in rice mak- 
making Canlaon the rice granary 
of Northern Negros Island; bun- 
dles of sugarcane represent sugar 
varieties which make sugarcane 
the principal crop of the city. 



Laurel Leaves 



— symbolic of the humble beginnings 
of the city. 



HISTORY OF 



Cebu, the "Queen City of the South," is bounded on the east 
by Danao City, Compostela, Liloan, Consolacion, and Mandaue 
City; on the west by Toledo City and Balamban; on the south 
by Talisay and Minglanilla; and on the north by Danao City 
and Asturias; and across on the southeast is the Mactan Island. 

The city has a land area of 280.9 square kilometers. In 1970, 
it had a population of 347,116. Cebuano is the dominant 
dialect. 

The abundant growth of rice, corn, vegetables and fruits 
(mango for export) is due to its fertile clay-loam soil. Coconut 
and sugarcane are planted on the other areas where agricultural 
products are not adapted. The region also abounds in mineral 
resources, lead and coal in particular. 

Cebu City is a busy educational, commercial, and trading 
center in the south. The people are engaged in almost every 
commercial, trade, and business enterprise. The others are 
engaged in horticulture, floriculture, furniture making, wood 
carving, shellcraft, watch repairing, cotton and silk-cloth hand- 
loom weaving, slipper-making, basket and bag making, and 
tuba gathering. 

The name Cebu came from the word Sebu, meaning 
"animal fat." The place was thus referred to as Sebu, Sugbu, 
Cubu, and Zebu. Long before the coming of the Spaniards, 
it was a fishing village ruled by Rajah Humabon. 

On April 7, 1521, Ferdinand Magellan arrived in Cebu. 
Seven days later, on the 14th, Rajah Humabon, his wife, and 
about 800 men, were baptized into Christianity. After 
Magellan's death in the Battle of Mactan on the 27th, Rajah 
Humabon invited the remaining Spanish soldiers to a banquet 
and took advantage of the occasion by killing most of them on 
May 1 of the same year. 

The conquest of Cebu started on April 27, 1565, when 
Miguel Lopez de Legazpi and Father Andres Urdaneta arrived 
at Cebu from Mexico. After bombarding and conquering the 
pallisades of Rajah Tupas, they rebuilt the ruined village which 
became the first permanent settlement in the Philippines. It 
was named San Miguel, and later renamed "Villa del Santisimo 
Nombre de Jesxis,." 

A significant revolt in Cebu, led by Leon Kilat, on April 



CITY OF CEBU 



3, 1898, at the corner of the present Tres de Abril Street and 
Vicente Rama Avenue, was caused by the tragic mass slaughter 
of 70 Visayan sailors in Calle de Camba in Manila on March 
25, 1898. The sailors were suspected of plotting a conspiracy 
against the Spaniards. The city was controlled by the insur- 
gents who set up a secret headquarters at Sudlon until the 
coming of the Americans. 

On October 20, 1936, Cebu became a chartered city by virtue 
of Commonwealth Act No. 58, amended by C.A. No. 129 on 
November 5, 1936. 

The Japanese Imperial Forces occupied Cebu City on April 
10, 1942. Three years later, it was liberated by the Americans 
on April 21, 1945. 

On March 18, 1957, the city received the remains of Presi- 
dent Ramon Magsaysay, Major Pobre, Tomas Cabili, Vicente 
Rama and others who died when Mt. Pinatubo (presidential 
plane) crashed on Mt. Manunggal in Talamban, Cebu. 

Republic Act No. 3857 revised the Charter of the City of 
Cebu on June 10, 1964. 

On April 28, 1965, the anniversary of the 4th centenary 
of the Christianizaticn of the Philippines was celebrated in 
Cebu with His Eminence Hildebrando Cardinal Antonietti 
representing the Holy Father (the Pope) in Rome, and other 
visitors witnessing the occasion. 

Some of its historical landmarks and tourist spots are: 
the Magellan Cross, with stone slab erected in 1845 by Bishop 
Maranon; the Sto. Nino de Cebu, a gift of Magellan to the 
Queen of Cebu; the San Agustin Church, built in 1565 and 
converted by the Holy Father into a Basilica Minore on April 
28, 1965; the Plaza Libertad, dominated by the monuments of 
Miguel Lopez de Legazpi and Ramon Magsaysay; Fort San 
Pedro, a lookout of the Spanish Army against the "Moros" 
built in 1565; the Colon Street, the oldest street in the Philip- 
pines (constructed in 1565); the Avenue of Flags, flanked on 
both sides by narra trees; the Beverly Hills, compared with the 
panoramic views of San Francisco in the United States and 
the Victoria Peak in Hongkong; the Banawa Hills, where reposes 
a quaint and picturesque convent; the Taoist Temple; and the 
Osmeila Fountain and Park. 




SAMPAGUITA 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF CEBU 

The City of Cebu was created under C.A. 58 on 
October 20, 1936. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Cebu 

Magellan Cross — symbol of Cebu City as the cradle 

of Christian faith in the Far East, 

Yellow Background — represents the golden sun which 

makes Cebu one of the major 
fruit producers in the country. 



Blue and Crimson 
Red Colors 



■ stand for courage and valor which 
characterize the Cebuanos from 
the time of Lapulapu, down to 
Tupas, Leon Kilat, the revolu- 
tionaries and the Cebuano soldiers 
of World War II— all of whom 
went down in Philippine history 
as martyrs for the cause of 
freedom. 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF DANAO 



Danao City lies on the northeastern part of the island of 
Cebu. It is limited by Asturias on the west, Carmen on the 
north, Compostela on the southeast, the City of Cebu on the 
southwest, and the Camotes Sea on the east. 

The city has a land area of 107.3 square kilometers. Its 
population in 1970 was 47,662. The dialect used is dominantly 
Cebuano. 

The main source of livelihood of the people is agriculture. 
However, there are other industries in which the people are 
engaged, such as fishing, tMba-gathering, coal-mining, pottery, 
nipa strip-makmg, basket-making, and cheese making. Danao 
has large deposits of coal and gypsum. 

In 1844, the Bishop of Cebu, in order to organize more 
towns in the northern part of the island, selected Capt. Manuel 
del Rosario for the task. After reaching the place, Del Rosario 
christened it "Danao" from the word "Danawan," meaning 
"shallow ponds." He started with the construction of the "Pre- 
sidencia" to house the officers of the town government. He 
also resorted to compulsory labor for the construction of the 
church, convent, municipal building, and town roads. Capt. 
Victorino Buot, the last "capitan municipal" of Danao, com- 
pleted the church and the municipal buildings. 



When the Americans occupied the island in 1898, Buot 
was imprisoned in Fort San Pedro in Cebu City. Later, he 
was asked by the Americans to lead the people of Danao during 
the establishment of the civil government in 1900. 

In April 1942, the Japanese occupied the municipal build- 
ing, convent and church of Danao, and later tortured and killed 
many people. Thus, the guerrillas were forced to fight the 
enemy even with insufficient firearms on September 8, 1942. 
A day after, three Japanese bombers raided the town for almost 
four hours. Three years later, on April 18, 1945, the Americans 
liberated the place. 

Danao City was created on June 7, 1961 by virtue of Re- 
public Act No. 3028. 

Danao City is the first city in the Philippines to have all 
roads cemented. It operates cement, cardboard, sugar mill, and 
bag factories; and car-assembly, electric, ice, laminating and 
embossing plants. 

The finest resorts in Cebu, like the Sand Beach, the Look 
Beach, and Myrna Beach, are found in Danao. The city is also 
famous for its City Hall, and the Public Plaza which was once 
chosen as the most beautiful in the Philippines. 



City Seal 




City Flag 



CITY OF DANAO 

The City of Danao was created under R.A. 3028 on 
June 7, 1961. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Danao 

Upper Portion — depicts the basic livelihood of 

the people of Danao — abundant 
coal and dolomite deposits and 
industries that employ its inhabi- 
tants. 

Lower Portion — symbolic of the progressive sugar 

industry of which has benefitted 
the Dawanons the province since 
the operation of the Durano 
Sugar Mills. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF DUMAGUETE 



THE CITY OF DUMAGUETE, capital of Negros Oriental, is 
situated on the plains of the southeastern coast of the Island of 
Negros, near the mouth of the Banica River. It is bounded on 
the north by the town of Sibulan; on the west by the Mindanao 
Sea, serving as a natural border to the neighboring Province 
of Siquijor; on the southwest by the town of Valencia; and 
the south by the town of Bacong. 

The city, composed of 22 barrios, has a land area of 55.8 
square kilometers and a population of 14,894 in 1903, 22,236 in 
1939, 24,838 in 1948, 35,282 in 1960, and 51,484 in 1970. 

It is a commercial center with a port of call for interisland 
and foreign vessels from Manila and the western provinces of 
Mindanao. 

The people of Dumaguete are engaged in small-scale indus- 
tries—fishing, poultry raising, and nipa roof production— for 
local consumption. 

"Dumaguete" was coined from the Visayan word "daggit" 
which means "to snatch." Because of the frequent marauding 
attacks of the Muslim pirates on the coastal town, the Ne- 
grenese word "dumaguet," meaning "to swoop," was appended 
to the village of Dumaguete. However, Diego Lopez Povedano 
in 1572, indicated the place as "Dananguet." But in 1734, Mu- 
rillo Velarde referred to it, using its present name, as Duma- 
guete. 

The encomendero, Povedano, in 1572, found the Tanjay- 
Dumaguete area as the center of the population in Negros Prov- 
ince. Tan jay, originally called Buglas, was named Negros by 
the Spaniards because of its numerous Negrito tribes. It was 
the former capital of the Province of Negros. 

In 1620, Dumaguete was created as an independent parish 
from Tan jay under a certain Father Herrera. Dumaguete was 
then under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Cebu. Later, in 
1734, Negros Oriental, of which Dumaguete was a town, was 
separated as a military district with a government of its own. 
In 1811, a watchtower was constructed in the town to protect 
the natives from the Muslim pirates. Again, the province was 
created into a politico-military district in 1856 and many people 



from Antique, Capiz and Cebu came to settle in the village. 

In 1890, the island-province of Negros was divided into two 
politico-military provinces. Occidental and Oriental. As earlier 
constituted, in 1898, Dumaguete was included in Negros 
Oriental. 

After the Philippine-American War, on May 1, 1901, a 
civil government was established by the Americans in the Prov- 
ince of Negros Oriental, including Dumaguete. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces occu- 
pied the province. From June 15 to July 15, 1943, the Japanese 
forces operated in the area west of Dumaguete. Powerful enemy 
reconnaissance troops assaulted the command post of the North 
Negros Sector. About two years later, on April 20, 1945, the 
American Liberation Forces landed at Looc Beach in Sibulan. 
The 73rd Guerrilla Division under Major General Ceferino R. 
Galvez and the 2nd Combat Troop, 7th Military District, com- 
manded by Lieutenant Colonel Placido A. Ausejo covered the 
American forces by resolutely attacking the Japanese forces 
along the Maslong-Banica-Palingpian Beach Line. When the 
American armored units entered Dumaguete, the enemy troops 
retreated to the vicinity of Mount Talinis in the "Cuernos de 
Negros" area. Lt. Colonel Ausejo and the 7th Military District 
(2nd Combat Guerrillas), Philippine Army, were commended 
by Col. William P. Mahony, Commanding Officer of the 164th 
Infantry, for their efficient assistance in the liberation of Du- 
maguete City. 

On June 15, 1948, Republic Act No. 327, created the City 
of Dumaguete. Later, in 1969, Republic Act No. 5797 revised 
the city charter. 

Silliman University, founded on August 28, 1901, is the 
oldest and leading protestant school in the city and one of the 
best in the Far East. 

Among the government agencies with offices in the city 
are the Philippine Constabulary, the National Red Cross, the 
Bureaus of Prisons, Public Schools, Health, Internal Revenue, 
Public Works, Lands, Agricultural Extension, and Veterinary 
Medicines. '/.^^ 




ILANG-ILANG 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF DUMAGUETE 

The City of Dumaguete was created under R.A. 327 on 
July 15, 1948. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Dumaguete 

Gate — represents the "Gate of Oppor- 

tunity" of Silliman University, 
the first university established 
outside of Manila. 

Tower — the watch tower built by the 

Spaniards to advise the people 
about the approach of the Moro 
pirates. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF LAPU-LAPU 



Lapu-Lapu City, located on the northern part of Mactan Island, 
is bounded by the Magellan Bay on the north, the Mactan Chan- 
nel on the west, the Hilutangan Channel on the East, and the 
Municipality of Cordoba on the south. 

The city has a land area of 58.1 square kilometers. In 
1970, it had a population of 69,268. 

On April 27, 1521, Lapu-Lapu, a native chieftain, success- 
fully repulsed the foreign invaders in Mactan. He defeated the 
Spanish troops and killed their leader, Ferdinand Magellan. 

Lapu-Lapu City, formerly the Municipality of Opon, was 
founded by the Augustinian missionaries in 1730. It was ceded 
to the Jesuits in 1737, and later restored to the Augustinians. 

When the Philippine Revolution spread to the Visayas in 
1896, the people organized themselves into local revolutionary 
units. 

During the Filipino-American War, a military government 
was established. The continued resistance of the people of Cebu 
prompted the American government to restore military control 
over the province on July 17, 1901. In 1905, Opon held its 
first municipal elections, and Pascual de la Cerna was elected 
town president. 

The presence of oil tanks in Opon made the town an object 
of Japanese raids a week after the outbreak of World War II 
in December 1941. The enemy planes succeeded in blowing 
up two of about fourteen oil tanks in Opon. 

A unit of the Kawaguchi Detachment of the Japanese Im- 



perial Forces landed on the east coast of Cebu on April 10, 
1942. Later, the resistance movement was organized by Colo- 
nel James F. Cushing, leader of the southern and central units, 
and Harry Fenton of the northern unit of the Cebu Resistance 
Movement. 

The Victor II operations of the American Division led by 
Major General William Arnold landed in Cebu on March 26. 
1945, and subsequently liberated the province. 

Lapu-Lapu was made into a chartered city by Republic Act 
No. 3134 on June 17, 1961. It was inaugurated on December 
31, 1961, with Mariano Dimataga, the last municipal mayor, 
as the first city mayor. 

As a fast growing commercial city, some of its commercial 
and industrial firms are the General Milling Company, one of 
the largest in the country; the Cebu Shipyard and Engineering 
Works, pioneered by "Dad" Cleland; and the oil companies 
which resumed their operations after the war. The air flight 
in the city is served by the Mactan Alternate International Air- 
port. 

Historically, the city is the site of the famous "Battle of 
Mactan." On August 1, 1973, by virtue of Presidential Decree 
No. 260, President Ferdinand E. Marcos declared the site of 
the battle as a national shrine; the "preservation, restoration 
and/or reconstruction" of which "shall be under the supervi- 
sion and control of the National Historical Commission in col- 
laboration with the Department of Tourism." Mactan is also 
the birthplace of Leonila Dimataga-Garcia, wife of the late 
Carlos P. Garcia, the fourth President of the Republic. 




CHAMPACA 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF LAPU-LAPU 



The City of Lapu-lapu was created under R.A. 3134 on 
June 17, 1961. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Lapu-lapu 



Top Middle 
Top Left 

Top Right 

Center 

Center Left 

Center Right 
Lower Portion 



— image of the Virgin of Rule, the 
patron saint of the city. 

— indicates that the city is the 
— center of guitar-making through- 
out the country ; also indicates the 
abundance of marine products. 

— the bridge linking the island city 
to mainland Cebu thru Mandaue 
City. 

— depicts killing of Magellan by 
Lapu-lapu on April 27, 1521. 

— monument of Magellan located at 
Mactan. 

— monument of Lapu-lapu. 

— alternate international airport. 



HISTORY OF THE QTY OF MANDAUE 



Mandaue City, on the eastern shores of the Province of 
Cebu, is bounded on the north by the Municipality of Consola- 
cion, on the west by Cebu City, and on the east and south by 
the Maetan Channel. 

Mandaue, a trade center of the province, has a land area 
of 11.7 square kilometers. It had a population of 58,579 in 
1970. 

As a coastal city, fishing is an important economic activ- 
ity of the inhabitants. The people are also engaged in farm- 
ing, salt-making and ceramics manufacturing. Its principal 
products are copra, rice, salt, vegetables and fruits. 

Mandaue, before the coming of the Spaniards, had al- 
ready trade relations with the neighboring Asian countries. 
In 1521, Antonio de Pigafetta mentioned Mandaue as one of 
the many villages of Cebu ruled by a chieftain called Apa- 
nooan. 

The village was exposed to occasional piratical raids; 
hence, a fortress called "Bantayan sa Hari" was constructed. 
The watchtower was later used as quarters of the Guardia 
Civil. 

The Jesuits ministered Mandaue as early as 1600. By 
1656, the Jesuit mission in Mandaue was under the charge of 
the College of Cebu which was founded by Pedro de Aguilar. 



The Recollect missionaries took over the spiritual minis- 
tration of Mandaue in 1846. Father Diego Sanz became its 
first parish priest. 

The people of Mandaue, as in the other towns of the 
Province of Cebu, participated in the struggle against the 
Spaniards during the Philippine Revolution of 1896. 

When the American forces came, Cebu, together with the 
Tagalog provinces, continued its fight for freedom. Later, the 
Philippine Commission passed an act on July 17, 1901, which 
restored the military government in Cebu. 

A week after the outbreak of the Second World War, the 
Japanese planes bombed the province. Cebu was occupied on 
April 10, 1942, when a unit of the Kawaguchi Detachment 
landed on its shores. 

The resistance movements were organized in the province 
when Brigadier General B. G. Chynoweth of the USAFFE com- 
missioned Colonel James F. Gushing and Harry Fenton to lead 
the resistance movement in Cebu. Eventually, the residents 
of Mandaue engaged the Japanese forces in guerrilla warfare. 

During the liberation, the American forces landed in Cebu 
on March 26, 1945. In April 21 of the same year, Cebu was 
liberated fi'om the Japanese invaders. 

Mandaue was made a chartered city by Republic Act No. 
5519 on June 21, 1969. 




City Flag 



CITY OF MANDAUE 

The City of Mandaue was created under R.A. 5519 on 
June 21, 1969. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Mandaue 



Tower 



Golden Wheel 

Twenty Seven Gears 

Red Ribbon with 
Inscription 



the Bantayan sa Hari tower, 
legendary landmark of the city. 

-symbol of the aspirations and 
steady progress of the city. 

■represent the twenty seven (27) 
barrios of the city. 

• tribute to the well-known courage 
and determination of the Man- 
dauehanons. 



Two Green Twigs — twigs of the Mantawi tree, deriv- 
ative of the city's name. The four 
reds fruits in each twig represent 
fruitful results in four major 
fields of endeavor, namely, peace 
and order, community develop- 
ment, economy and education. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF TAGBILARAN 



Tagbiiaran Caty is situated at the. southwestern coast of 
Bohol Island, facing a narrow and sbaUow channel. On the 
opposite is Panglao Island which ser\^es as a natural wall to 
protect Tagbilaran from approaching storms. It faces the pop- 
ulous industrial and commercial island of Cebu toward the 
anchorage for small and big seacrafts, the city serves as a safe 
anchorage for small and big sea crafts. Tagbilaran, being near 
the City of Cebu, is the "door" to the other parts of Bohol. 

The early fishing village was called Tinahilan from Tina 
which means "being," and hikm for "covered." The Span- 
iards in speaking the dialect, adopted Tagbilaran and generally 
accepted it as the name of the place. 

In 1565, Datu Sikatuna and Miguel Lopez de Legazpi per- 
formed the blood compact in Barrio Bo-ol, Tagbilaran, Bohol, to 
seal their friendship. Tagbilaran then had already an advanced 
culture and a flourishing trade with the Chinese, Portuguese 
and Muslims. 

The Jesuits who earlier settled in the islands left the mis- 
sion work on July 3, 1768 to the Recollect Missionaries. They 
maintained sufficient troops at Talibon for security, built many 
churches and developed agricultural lands. The ministry of 
Tagbilaran was controlled from the residence at Talibon and 
Inabangan. 

The enforced labor, heavy tributes, and abuses of the friars 
and government officials, as well as intrusion into the religious 
life of the Boholanos, started the flame of resentment against 
colonial rule. In 1621, a Filipino babaylan or priest, named 
Tamblot, led an armed resistance against the Jesuits for constant 
transgressions on the religious life of the people. The rebels 
were driven and later annihilated in a battle in the hinterlands. 

In 1744, another rebellion led by Francisco Dagohoy rocked 
the island of Bohol. He was later defeated by the Spanish- 
Filipino forces. However, his followers continued to defy the 



Spanish authority. They established a free government in the 
mountains and remained unsubdued in their stronghold for 85 
years (1744-1829). 

In 1902, cholera broke out and claimed several lives in 
Tagbilaran, (a new village then) but its population in later 
years steadily increased. The town had 10,108 inhabitants in 
1903, 12,305 in 1918, 20,250 in 1960, and 24,084 in 1970. 

When the Philippine Revolution broke out in 1896, the 
Spaniards evacuated the capital and the natives established a 
local government under the leadership of Pedro Samson. In 
1900, the Americans occupied Tagbilaran and, with the surren- 
der of Samson, a provincial civil government was established in 
Tagbilaran on April 20, 1901. 

Tagbilaran, being the capital, became the center of the 
provincial administration. It had all the advantages of topo- 
graphy than any of the coastal municipalities. Due to its prox- 
imity to Cebu City, industrial and commercial establishments 
bustled with brisk business activities. It is the hub of trade 
and commerce in the central and western Visayas and the 
northern Mindanao area. The airport in Tagbilaran serves 
the domestic flights of the Philippine Airlines and other national 
airlines. 

On June 18, 1966, Republic Act No. 4660, made Tagbilaran 
into a chartered city. 

Some of the distinguished sons of Tagbilaran are Bernardo 
Inting, lawyer and Delegate of the First District of Bohol to 
the Constitutional Convention (1934-1935); Celestino Gallares, 
lawyer and Representative from the First District of Bohol, 
(1916-1922), member of the Independence Mission to the United 
States (1921), and Provincial Governor of Bohol, (1931-1934); 
and Cecilio Putong, educator, Undersecretary of Education 
(1949-1952) and Secretary of Education (1952-1953). 



City Seal 



KALACHUCHI 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF TAGBILARAN 

The City of Tagbilaran was created under R.A. 4660 on 
June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Tagbilaran 

^^"^ — symbolizes the landing of Legazpi 

in Bohol, Tagbilaran Citv on 
March 16, 1565. 

Braced Elbows -symbol of the blood compact 

between Legazpi and Sikatiina as 
a sign of friendship. 

"^^^^^ —represents the country's first 

peace treaty. 



103 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF TOLEDO 



Toledo City, centrally located on the flat coastal area on the 
western part of Cebu, is bounded on the west and northwest 
by the Tanon Strait, on the east by Cebu City, and on the south 
by the town of Pinamungajan. 

Its shoreline is regular, but the high waves of the Tanon 
Strait, along, the seashore, makes navigation often dangerous to 
shipping. 

The city has a land area of 174.5 square kilometers, and a 
population of 300 in 1903, 1,960 in 1918, and 67,727 in 1970. 

It is the outlet of trading and commercial activities of 
San Carlos, La Carlota and Cadiz in Negros Occidental, and 
Bais in Negros Oriental. Toledo is connected by first and 
second class roads from Santander to Daanbantayan, and from 
Toledo to Cebu City. 

Sugar, rice and corn are its important agricultural products, 
while fishing is an important source of livelihood of the people. 

The old site of Toledo was situated along the banks of 
the Hinolawan River, a kilometer from the present city area. 
The people crossed the river, before reaching their settlement; 
hence, they washed their feet before entering their homes. The 
place wa ; referred to as a "watering hole," and the river and 
the settlement were called "hinawan" or "hinolawan," meaning 
"washing place." 

In 1853, the Spanish colonizers moved the Hinolawan set- 
tlement to the south of the old site, which proved to be 
unfavorable for the establishment of a pueblo. It was then 
called Toledo, after a city in Spain. 

A year after the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 
1896, the natives rose in arms against the Spanish rulers. 



Inspired by Pantaleon Villegas, known as Capitan Leon Kilat, 
the local revolutionary forces led by Claudio Bacus (called 
Calorio), attacked the Spanish community. The town official, 
Capitan Esteban Perez, was caught and tried by the revolu- 
tionists. He was made to run for his life at Talavera Beach 
before the rebels' bullets hit him. The Spanish curate escaped 
to Dumanjug and returned with Spanish soldiers who landed 
at Bato, seven kilometers south of Toledo. They attacked the 
town of Cueva (now Capitan Claudio) where the revolutionists, 
after heavy fighting, were pushed back to the caves of Sudlon. 

Later, by order of Governor General Diego de los Rios, the 
Spanish forces were concentrated in the defense of Iloilo. Most 
of the members of the Spanish community were evacuated from 
Toledo until the revolutionary army fully controlled the town. 

In 1900, when the American forces arrived in the Visayan 
Islands, they fought against the Filipino forces around the 
church of Toledo. After the fall of the town, the Americans 
stormed the general headquarters of the revolutionists at 
Sudlon. The revolutionary government eventually collapsed 
before the American forces. Under the American regime, 
schools were opened in 1905 at Sudlon. 

During World War II, Toledo was heavily bombed by the 
Japanese Air Force and shelled by the Japanese Navy. On 
March 15, 1942, the enemy forces occupied the poblacion. In 
April 10 of the same year, the Japanese forces totally controlled 
Western Cebu. 

When the American Liberation Forces re-occupied Cebu, 
the Japanese burned Toledo before they evacuated to Cebu City. 

Toledo became a city by virtue of Republic Act No. 2688, 
approved on June 18, 1960. 



City Seal 



City Flag 




ILANG-ILANG 

City Flower 



CITY OF TOLEDO 

The City of Toledo was created under R.A. 2668 on 
June 18, 1960. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Toledo 

Pick and Shovel — stand for labor. 

Tower — represents mining. 

Gear — symbol of industry. 

Colors — white is for purity; blue, for 

peace; and red, bravery. 



Region VIII 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF CALBAYOG 



The City of Calbayog, situated on the western part of Samar, 
is bounded on the north by Catarman, Mondragon, San Isidro 
and Pambujan, on the east by Sta. Margarita and Gandara, 
and on the west and south by the Samar Sea. 

The city has a land axea of 903 square kilometers. In 1970, 
it had a population of 94,323. The dialect spoken by the Sa- 
mareiios (as the people are called) is Samar-Leyte (Waray). 

Calbayog is rich in natural resources which provide various 
raw materials for its industrial development. It has a fertile 
soil suited to agriculture. Manganese is also found in the city. 
Copra and abaca production, fishing and mining are industries 
in which the people are engaged. 

Some people believe that the word "Calbayog" was. derived 
from the combined words cat (the Spanish word for lime) 
and bayog (tree from which lime is extracted). The others, 
however, believe it was derived from Ka7i Bayog," meaning 
"Bayog's place". 

The forerunner of Calbayog settlement was Caybago. From 
here the inhabitants moved to Anislag, which was found to 
be unsafe, because it was always visited by flood. The settlers 
decided to move downward, following the course of the river 
toward the sea. Finally, they transferred to Tabok, now known 
as Calle Buroka, where Fr. Sebastian Gomez (also known as 
Fr. Jose Huerce Gomez) became the first parish priest of 
Calbayog from 1836 to 1855. He initiated the construction of 



the Catedral de San Pedro y Pablo (the biggest in Samar) 
and the barracks. 

On July 8, 1899, Gen. Vicente Lukban arrived in Calbayog. 
Upon the arrival of the Americans, he made preparations for 
the burning of the town; but the people of Calbayog refused 
to destroy their properties. 

In the later part of 1900, the barracks built by Gomez served 
as the seat of the civil government under the Americans. 

In 1901, Rufino Pido was appointed "Presidente Municipal." 

The Colegio Seminario de Sa^i Vicente de Paul was founded 
by the Paulistas in 1905. 

Calbayog City, then a municipality, was occupied by the 
Japanese forces from May 27, 1942, until the coming of the 
American forces in January 1945. 

The city, comprising the present municipalities of Calba- 
yog, Oquendo and Tinambacan, was created on July 15, 1948, 
by Republic Act No. 328, which was later amended by R.A. 
No. 3279 on June 17, 1961. 

The beautiful and historical spots and ruins in the city are 
the beach in Malajog, the hot springs and waterfalls in Oquendo 
District, the cave at Guingoan, the slides at Mawacat, the pit in 
Hamorawon (dug by Fr. Gomez), the. old church in Anislag, 
and the guard tower (used as a lookout against the invading 
Maslims) . 




ILANG-ILANG 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF CALBAYOG 

The City of Calbayog was created under R.A. 328 on 
July 15, 1948. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Calbayog 

^OP^ — stands for the abaca industry of 

Calbayog City. 

Cross and Bishop's Cane— means that the city is the seat of 

Diocese of Western Samar. 

Shell and Fish — represent shell and fishing indus- 

tries of the city. 

Coconut Tree and — symbol of copra and rice, major 
Rtcefields products of Calbayog. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ORMOC 



The City of Ormoc, the center of commerce and industry 
on the western part of Leyte, is bounded on the north by the 
town of Kananga, on the south by the Ormoc Bay, on the 
southwest by Merida, on the southeast by Albuera, on the 
west by Palompon, and on the east by Dagami. 

It has a land area of 464.3 square kilometers and a popu- 
lation of 84,563 as of 1970. Because of the city's fertile soil 
and rich fishing ground, the residents are engaged in agricul- 
ture and fishing. 

Before the Portuguese navigator, Ferdinand Magellan, 
reached Leyte in 1521, Ormoc was known as "Ugmok," 
"Ugmuk," or "Ogmuc," meaning "lowland" or "plain." It was 
already a well-established fishing village with a culture and 
civilization of its own. 

On July 16, 1595, Father Pedro Chirino and the other 
Jesuit missionaries arrived in Leyte. In May 1597, the mission 
of Ormoc was founded by Fathers Alonso Rodriguez and Leo- 
nardo Scelsi. 

Ormoc, a seacoast village, was always raided by the Mus- 
lims. Early in 1634, Raja Bungsu, ruler of Sulu, captured 300 
natives from Ormoc after a successful attack in Camarines. 
To protect the people, the Jesuit Juan del Carpio constructed 
fortifications which were attacked by the Magindanaus before 
its completion. The natives were defeated and Carpio was 
killed ; his head was presented to the Magindanau king. 

In 1768, the Augustinians took over the missions in Leyte 
after the Jesuits were expelled. In 1804, these missions were 
transferred to the secular clergy until November 13, 1850. 



Ormoc was then a mere barrio of Palompon. 

During the Philippine Revolution, Leyte became involved 
only several months after its outbreak in August 1896. The 
Revolutionary Government represented by General Vicente Luk- 
ban took possession of Leyte. 

Shortly after the American forces defeated the Spaniards, 
and later the Filipinos, a civil government was established in 
Leyte on April 22, 1901. However, Faustino Ablen organized 
the pulahanes movement which was eventually crushed by the 
American forces. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces, after 
bombing the airfield of Leyte, occupied the province on May 25, 
1942. Consequently, resistance units were organized, among 
them was the Western Leyte Warfare Forces. On November 6, 
1944, the decisive and historic battle of Ormoc "Corridor," a 
three-pronged attack by the combined forces of the Americans 
and Filipinos encircled and placed the Yamashita Line com- 
pletely under control. The American 77th Division landed at 
Deposito, about 3 miles south of Ormoc, on the 7th of December; 
captured Camp Downer on the 9th ; and entered Ormoc the next 
day despite enemy opposition. 

Ormoc became a city through Republic Act No. 179 which 
was approved on June 21, 1947. The law took effect on Octo- 
ber 20th of the same year by virtue of Presidential Proclama- 
tion No. 42. Marcelo Bandalan was elected as its first city 
mayor. 

The city has several scenic spots but the most popular is 
the Tuiigonan Hot Springs with medicinal springs and geyser. 



108 




KALACHUCHI 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF ORMOC 

The City of Ormoc was created under R.A. 179 on 
June 21, 1947. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Ormoc 

Upper Portion — symbol of the city's industrializa- 

tion. 

Left Portion — depicts Tungonan Hot Springs 

National Park, major tourist 
attraction of the city. 

Right Portion — denotes the famous Leyte Land- 

ing on October 20, 19,44, 1947, 
the Battle of Ormoc Corridor (or 
Yamashita Line) and the Libera- 
tion of Leyte. 



1, 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF TACLOBAN 



Tacloban City, acclaimed as the "Queen City of Eastern 
Visayas," is located in the northeastern part of the Province of 
Leyte and in the southern side of the San Juanico Strait. 

Facing the town of Basey in Samar, the city overlooks the 
San Pedro Bay whose waters are daily (throughout the year) 
churned by motor launches and interisland and foreign vessels. 
Tacloban, with an excellent harbor, is the most impox'tant port 
in the eastern coast, an entry where foreign vessels regularly 
load copra, abaca and logs. The wharf has a depth of 18 to 
20 feet. At about 300 to 400 yards from the shoreline, where 
the sea is deeper, bigger vessels of heavier tonnage anchor. 
The north and northwest portion of the bay is even much 
deeper. It is also studded with fish corrals, especially in the 
shallow portions of the Kankabato and Tacloban offshore lands, 
which are good fishing grounds. 

Tacloban is an industrial, commercial and educational cen- 
ter. Within a radius of 50 kilometers, business enterprises are 
established, with the San Miguel Brewery prominently conspic- 
uous in the southern area. The Philippine National Bank, 
the Development Bank of the Philippines, and some private 
banking and financial institutions in the city boost its trade, 
and commercial and industrial investments. 

Tacloban is a "waray-speaking" city. Its local dialect is 
officially called "Leyte-Samarnon." A decade before the end 
of Spanish sovereignty, it was dorainantly a typical colonial 
community — most of its residents were either pure ^Iberian 
families or new generations of Spanish-Filipino blood. 

The tourist spots in the city are the old Spanish edifices, 
the reminders of World War 11, and the 2,162-meter San 
Juanico Bridge or Marcos Bridge, the longest in Asia, which 
was inaugurated by President Ferdinand E. Marcos and the 
First Lady, Mrs. Imelda Romualdez Marcos, on July 2, 1973. 

As originally known, Tacloban was derived from the word 
"Taklub," meaning "cover," a name alluded to the native's 
early means of catching fish, by bamboo. It was also believed 



that the original settlement called Kankabatok, was ruled by 
Headman Khatok. 

During the early Spanish rule, Leyte, like Samar, was 
under the jurisdiction of Cebu. Later, it was created into a 
separate political division. By 1735, Leyte became a politico- 
military province with jurisdiction over Samar. 

In 1768, Leyte and Samar were separated, each constituted 
as politico-military province. The capital of Leyte was trans- 
ferred from one town to another, with Tacloban as the last in 
1872. 

On May 25, 1942, the Japanese forces landed in Tacloban. 
They fortified the city, improved its airfield, and since the San 
Pedro Bay was ideal for larger vessels, the Japanese Imperial 
Naval Force made it a port of call and entry. 

General Douglas MacArthur's assault troops landed on the 
Tacloban-Palo Beaches (White Beach and Red Beach) and on 
the neighboring town of Dulag (Blue Beach). On October 20, 
1944, these landings signalled the eventual victory of the Amer- 
ican forces and the fulfillment of MacArthur's famous promise 
of "I shall return!" 

Three days later on the 23rd, at a ceremony in front of 
the capitol building in Tacloban, Leyte, General MacArthur, 
accompanied by President Sergio Osmena, announced the re- 
establishment of the Commonwealth Government. President 
Osmena made Tacloban the temporary seat of the Common- 
w^ealth. Subsequently, the provincial government of Leyte and 
the municipal government of Tacloban were reestablished. 

The Philippine Legislature passed a bill on June 20, 1952, 
converting Tacloban from a first class municipality to a char- 
tered city by virtue of Republic Act No. 460, as amended by 
Republic Act No. 3068 in 1961. 

On January 8, 1960, General Douglas MacArthur made 
his "sentimental" journey to Leyte, where he had previously 
landed in 1944. 



City Seal 




City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF TACLOBAN 



The City of Tacloban was created under R.A. 760 on 
June 20, 1952. 



Meaning of the Official Seai of Tacloban 

Right Portion 



Left Portion 



Center 
Galleon 



— Leyte side, where Tacloban City 
is located. 

— sister province of Samar, major 
supplier of agricultural and sea 
products to the city thus stabiliz- 
ing its volume of business and 
trade. 

— the beautiful San Juanico Strait. 

— symbolizes the ship of Ferdinand 
Magellan on its way to Limasawa' 
Island where the first mass on 
the Philippine soil was offered, 



111 



Region IX 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF BASILAN 



The City op Basilan, in the present Province of Basilan, is 
composed of the former poblacion of Isabela and all the ba- 
rangays (Campong Baro, Binuangan, Tabiawan, Busay, 
Lanote, San Rafael, Mensi, Kumalarang and Kabong Bata) 
within a radius of three kilometers from said municipality. 
Formerly, the city comprised the island of Basilan (now a 
province) and the adjacent islands. 

The island was explored by Governor General Sebastian 
Hurtado de Corcuera in 1637. It was later evangelized by the 
Jesuit missionaries. In 1663, the Spanish troops in Basilan 
were withdrawn to Manila in preparation for the possible 
attack of Koxinga, a Chinese warlord. The military stations in 
the province were restored in 1747 and the fortifications, par- 
ticularly the stone fort of Fuerte de Isabel, were constructed 
in 1844. 

Aside from continuous Muslim raids, the Dutch and the 
French also attacked the province. In 1848, a garrison under the 
control of the governor of Zamboanga was established in 
Basilan. 



When the American forces came m December 1899, Datu 
Pedro Cuevas helped the Americans in the pacification cam- 
paign. A civil government was established in 1901 and the island 
became a part of Zamboanga. 

After the outbreak of World War II, the Japanese Imperial 
Forces organized a puppet government in Isabela, with Elpidio 
Sta. Elena as mayor. Later, when the American Liberation 
Forces occupied Basilan, Leroy S. Brown became its military 
mayor. 

By virtue of Republic Act No. 288, dated July 1, 1948, the 
Province of Basilan was created into a chartered city. Later, 
under Presidential Decree No. 356, signed on December 27, 1973, 
the City of Basilan was restored to its original status as a 
province. Subsequently, P.D. No. 593, dated December 2, 1974, 
amended P.D. No. 356. It defined the new boundaries of the 
City of Basilan which is now within the province. The law, 
however, provided that the capital of the Province of Basilan 
shall be at the Municipality of Isabela and the seat of govern- 
ment shall be at Barangay Begang. 




BANABA 
( Lagerstroemia Speciosa ) 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF BASILAN 



The City of Basilan was created under R.A. 288 on 
June 16, 1948 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Basilan 



Handshake 



Red Edging with 
Crosses 

Green Edging with 
Crescent 

Island 

Rising Sun 



symbol of the abiding friendship 
and cooperation between the 
Christian and Muslim inhabitants 
of the city. 

■ represents Christianity. 

■ represents Mohammedanism. 

- map of the city in a tranquil sea. 

- represents peace and prosperity 
that prevails in the island city. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF DAPITAN 



Dapitan City is south of the Mindanao Sea, northeast of the 
Municipality of Polanco, north of the Municipality of New 
Piiian, and west of the Municipality of Rizal and the Province 
of Misamis Oriental. 

From th9 original land area of 439.8 square kilometers 
as a town, its size had been increased to 29,521 as a city. 
There were about 1,000 tribute-paying Indios in 1630, 450 
families in 1655, 6,337 souls in 1850, and about 8,000 to 9,000 
persons in 1893, according to Dr. Jose Rizal's estimate. The 
census, however, reveals its population as 8,086 in 1903, 12,866 in 
1908, 28,295 in 1939, 37,984 in 1948, 27,517 in 1960, 37,775 
in 1970, and 42,000 in 1974. 

Dapitan, as an ancient community, was known to early 
Kaerius in 1598, "Dapite" by Dudley in 1646, "Dapyte" by 
cartographers of maps of the Philippines as "Dapito" by 
Sanson in 1652, and "Dapitan" by Murilo Verde in 1734, and 
also by Moll in his map of the East Indies in 1729. 

Another version stated that Dapitan was founded by the 
Boholanos before or after the coming of the Spaniards. The 
name Dapitan came from Dapit in Bisayan which means to 
invite, a rendezvous or meeting place of 800 families from 
Bohol (now Tagbilaran and the neighboring islets of Panglao) , 
Prince Pagbuaya, after the death of his brother. Prince 
Daiiisan of the kingdom of Panglao, from the hands of the 
treacherous Ternatans, led his followers (about 1,000 families, 
500 slaves, and many other families of the Lutao nation) 
across the sea to Dapitan where they seized a small rugged hill. 

Coinciding with the arrival of Legazpi, the king of 
Burney sent his emissary for an alliance with Prince Pagbuaya. 
The Prince, however, dismissed the Bornean ambassador and, 
instead, assisted Legazpi by giving pilots and guides who took 
the Spaniards to Chief Catunas in Bohol and then to Cebu. 

In 1629, the Dapitan mission was founded by Pedro 
Gutierrez. Originally dependent on Cebu, the mission residence 
was transferred in 1639, with Iligan mission, to the Zamboanga 
residence; then in 1643, to the Loboc (Bohol) residence; and 
finally in 1645 or a little later, to Dapitan, with Iligan as 
its dependency! Its jurisdiction extended from Iligan, along 
the coa'st of Zamboanga, to Sindagan Bay. 



From 1768 to 1864, the Dapitan mission was assigned to 
the Recollects, when the Jesuits were expelled until their 
return to the Philippines. 

Politically, at the start, Dapitan was under the civil 
administration of Cebu until 1655 when it was transferred 
to Iligan. In 1850, it was made part of the province of 
Misamis. And in 1863, it was created as a politico-military 
conuindancia which was dependent on Misamis. 

In 1897, during the Philippine Revolution, Zamboanga was 
under the revolutionary leadership of Isidoro Medel and Melanio 
Ramos. A year after, the Philippine Revolutionary Govern- 
ment appointed General Vicente Alvarez, as Commander of 
the Filipino Forces in Zamboanga (of which Dapitan was an 
integral part), who defeated the Spanish garrison and 
controlled the province. At the close of the Spanish rule, in 
1898, Mindanao, together with Sulu, was divided into seven 
districts with Zamboanga as one of the seven. 

In 1903, under William H. Taft of the American adminis- 
tration, the Dapitan District, as a part of Zamboanga, was 
annexed to the Provincia Mora (Moro Province). In 1914, a 
civil government was established and Dapitan came under the 
Department of Mindanao and Sulu, later under the Bureau of 
Non-Christian Tribes. 

On June 6, 1952, under Republic Act No. 711, the Province 
of Zamboanga was divided into two: Zamboanga del Sur 
and Zamboanga del Norte. The Municipality of Dapitan, which 
belongs to Zamboanga del Norte, was then created as a city 
by virtue of Republic Act No. 3811, approved on June 22, 1963. 
The city was, however, inaugurated on November 8 of the 
same year. 

Significantly, Dapitan City featured in Philippine history 
as the place of exile of our foremost national hero. Dr. Jose Ri- 
zal, from July 17, 1892 to July 31, 1896. Three markers, aside 
from others in the shrine, are in the beach of Sta. Cruz, 
where Rizal disembarked; in the Casa Real, residence and 
administration building of the Politico Military Governor of 
the District, where the hero stayed until March 1893; and in 
the Saint James Church, where Rizal heard Mass every Sunday. 




CADENA DE AMOR 

City Flower •. . ' 



•,h'.-a;!,:v,-.. . -v-'iv^^c ■ City Flag 

CITY OF DAPITAN 

The City of Dapitan v/as created under R.A. 3811 on 
June 22, 1963. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Dapitan i . 

Five Stars 

Coconut Trees 
Marker " ' ; 

'.••).•■,"''.— 

Banca 
Year 1963 



— represent the five (5) school 
districts of the City. , 

— represent the main industry and 
■product of Dapitan City. 

— the historical marker found at the 
relief map of Mindanao cons- 
tructed by Dr. Jose Rizal during 
his exile at the city.;.. ; 

— symbol of the next major source 
livelihood of the city which is the 
fishing industry. 

— date when the city was formally 
organized. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF DIPOLOG 



The City of Dipolog, facing the Sindangan Bay, lies along 
the coastal plains of Zamboanga del Norte, just a few kilo- 
meters southwest of Dapitan. It is situated at the mouth of 
the Dipolog River and bounded on the north by the Dapitan 
Bay on the south by the Municipality of Polanco, on the 
east by Dapitan City, and on the west by Dipolog Bay. The 
city has a land area of 220.00 square kilometers in the survey 
of 1970. 

The city had a population of 5,204 in 1903, 15,982 in 1918, 
31 604 in 1939, and 40,618 in 1948. Although the inhabitants 
decreased to 32,236 in 1960, after the area reduction, it again 
increased to 46,129 in 1970. 

Dipolog was earlier referred to as "Dipoloc," "Dipolo," "Di- 
polog," and "Siripolo." The term Dipolog, from the Subano 
word'dipag means "on the opposite bank or side of the 
river." Dipolog was believed to be originally inhabited by the 
Subanos (or Subanon), the river people. 

After the Spaniards obtained a foothold in Mindanao, the 
Jesuit missionaries established a mission station in Dipolog, 
with Dapitan as their headquarters. 

At the height of the Spanish conquest in Mindanao, the 
Muslim pirates raided and plundered the coastal towns. Di- 
polog then provided the Spaniards with a springboard for re- 
taliatory attacks. The natives, Boholano settlers, and the mis- 
sionaries organized themselves into a pueblo in Sianib, about 
20 kilometers from the sea. Later, the township was transferred 
to Isab, Nipaan and a capilla was constructed on a hilltop. 
Again, the settlement was moved to a plain in sitio Tulwaan 
where, by order of the provincial governor of Misamis, a civil 
government was organized. In 1834, the town was finally 
transferred to the present site. 

Dipolog was a municipality under Misamis Province, with 



Cagayan de Misamis as the provincial capital. It remained as 
a dependency of Misamis up to the end of the Spanish rule. 

In 1903, the president of the Second Philippine Commis- 
sion William H. Taft, who was then in Dapitan, decreed that 
the Dapitan District which included Dipolog and the neighbor- 
ing towns should be separated from Misamis Province and 
be transferred to Zamboanga Province, one of the districts of 
the Provincia Mora (Moro Province). 

The municipality of Dipolog was reverted into a barrio 
of Dapitan City on March 4, 1904. The Dipolognons, however, 
protested against the reversion. Hence, at the plaza of Dipo- 
log on July 1, 1913, General John J. Pershing, Governor of 
Mindanao and Sulu, announced Dipolog as an independent 
municipality, after the completion of the new casa mumctpai. 

During the Second World War, Acting Governor Felipe B. 
Azcuna, under the authority of the Secretary of the Interior, 
transferred the seat of the provincial government of Zamboanga 
to Dipolog. However, on June 16, 1948, President Elpidio 
Quirino signed Republic Act No. 286, which created the Munic- 
ipality of Molave, and made it the "capital of the Province 
of Zamboanga: Provided, however, That the necessary buildings 
to be used for housing the different offices of the provincial 
government of Zamboanga shall have been constructed m the 
said municipality, the Municipality of Dipolog shall continue 
to be the capital of the province." 

Finally, on June 6, 1952, House Bill No. 2524 was passed 
into law as Republic Act No. 711. It divided Zamboanga into 
two: Zamboanga del Norte, with Dipolog as capital and Zam- 
boanga del Sur, with Pagadian as capital. On July 21, 1969, 
Republic Act No. 5520 changed the Municipality of Dipolog 
into a chartered city and at the same time made it the provin- 
cial capital of Zamboanga del Norte. 





City Flag 



CITY OF DIPOLOG 



The City of Dipolog was created under R.A. 5520 on 
June 21, 1969. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Dipolog 

Fifteen Stars — represent the fifteen (15) barrios 

comprising the city of Dipolog. 

Eight Rays ' — symbol of the first eight provin- 

ces which started the revolution- 
. •• • • ary movement. 

Sea Horse ■ — signifies that Dipolog City is a 

rich fishing ground. 

Rice Coconut and Corn — major crops grown in the city. 

Apollo Sattelite — symbol of the signing of the city 

charter. 

Year 1970 ' ., , . — inauguration of the city. ^ 



I HISTORY OF THE ( 

The City of Pagadian, capital of Zartiboanga del Sur, is situated 
in the eastern part of the Zamboanga Peninsula. It is bounded 
on the north by the Municipality of Labangan, on the south 
by the Municipality of Dinas, on the east by the Pagadian Bay, 
and on the west by the Zamboanga mountain ranges. It is about 
115 kilometers west of Ozamiz City (Misamis Occidental) and 
and about- 285 kilometers north of Zamboanga City. 

Pagadian has a land area of 378.8 square kilometers and 
a population of 57,615 (51% in the urban area and 49% in the 
rural places) in 1970. Most of the settlers in the city are from 
Luzon and the Visayas. A majority of the populace are 
Cebuanos; hence, Cebuano-Visayan is the dominant dialect. 

The city is an agricultural region with corn, its staple crop, 
as an important product. Aside from farming, the principal 
source of livelihood of the inhabitants is fishing. Salted or 
fresh fish constitutes an important export item. The noted cot- 
tage industries of the city are bakya, or wooden clog making, 
furniture making, and mat weaving. • - 

The early settlers of the village were the Subanons who 
set up the fishing and trading village along the shore. They 
called their settlement as Pagadian, a corruption of the 
Maguindanao word "Padian," which means "marketplace." The 
present site of Pagadian was the old Muslim sitio of Talapukan, 
meaning "where the springs abound." It was under the 
municipal district of Labangan. 

The region now called Zamboanga del Sur was once a part 
of the kingdom of Cachil Corralat or Kudarat. The Jesuit 



TY OF PAGADIAN 

fathers, who started the christianization of the natives in 1642, 
abandoned the missionary work in 1644 due to repeated 
Muslim raids. 

In 1927, the first group of settlers, led by Mariano Cabrera, 
arrived at Pagadian. To attract more settlers, the Philippine 
Constabulary stationed a detachment at Dumagok Island in 
order to protect the inhabitants from occasional raids of the 
Maranaws. '•• 

On March 23, 1937, Executive Order No. 77 of President 
Manuel L. Quezon created the town of Pagadian. The munici- 
pality comprised the municipal districts of Labangan and Dinas. 
Jose Sanson became the first elected local executive. 

During the Pacific War, before the Japanese forces 
occupied the town, the inhabitants evacuated to the highlands. 
Taking advantage of the situation, the Muslims plundered 
and looted Pagadian. After the war, in June 1945, public and 
private schools were opened in the municipality. ,, . , 

On June 21, 1969, Republic Act No. 5478 created the 
Municipality of Pagadian into a city. 

Pagadian City is dubbed 'as "the little Hongkong" of the 
Philippines because of its geographical similarity to the Crown 
Colony — at the foot of an irregular elevated land. ,., . .. ... 

The city's panoramic tourist attractions are the beautiful 
islets, with Dumagok as the most popular, along the Illana Bay ; 
and the boathouses of the Sicubong tribes which dot the 
Pagadian shorelines. 




City Flag 

CITY OF PAGADIAN 

: The City of Pagadian was created under R.A. 5478 on 
June 21, 1969. ^ .,.,„^, ,.,..,,,,, ,„ t,'.^.-y,... ... ■ . .,■ • 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Pagadian . 

Years and Stars — 1937 is the date of creation of 
^ Pagadian as a regular municipal- 
ity and 1969, its conversion into 
a chartered city; three stars in 
gold symbolize the three stages of 
political growth. 

represents the pioneer farmers 
who blazed the trails for agricul- 
tural development. 

project the chief industries of the 
city. , - 



Man on Carabao 



Fishing Vinta, Coconut- 
Land and Rice and 
Com Fields 



Crescent and Cross — the Muslim inhabitants and Chris- 
tian population of the city. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ZAMBOANGA 



Zamboanga City, oftentimes referred to as "Jambangan" or 
"the land of flowers," is located at the southern tip of Zam- 
boanga Peninsula. It is bounded on the north by Zamboanga 
del Norte and Zamboanga del Sur, on the east by the Moro 
Gulf, on the south by the Basilan Strait, and on the west by the 
Sulu Sea. 

The city has a land area of 1,414.7 square kilometers. In 
1970, it had a population of 199,901. It is classified as a first 
class city in 1974. 

The toAyn of Zamboanga was founded on June 23, 1635. 
It was also the date when Father Melchor de Vera, a Jesuit 
priest-engineer, together with some Spanish officials, laid the 
cornerstone for the construction of Fort Pilar. 

Zamboanga was made the capital of the politico-military 
comandancia during the Spanish administration. It was also 
made the capital of the Moro t'rovince, a semi-military regime 
instituted by the Americans from 1903 up to 1913. On recom- 
mendation of Governor John J. Pershing, the Legislative Council 
(governing body of the Moro Province) passed, on September 
15, 1911, Act No. 272, which converted the Municipality of 
Zamboanga into a city, with a commission form of government. 
When the Department of Mindanao and Sulu replaced the Moro 
Province in 1914, Zamboanga, as a commission, was abolished 
and it was reverted to its original status of municipality admin- 



istered by a municipal president and several councilors. It 
remained as the capital of the Department of Mindanao and 
Sulu with a civil government under an American civil governor 
from 1913 up to 1920. 

After the Department was abolished in 1920, the region 
was placed under the jurisdiction of the Department of the 
Interior, through the Bureau of Non-Christian Tribes. 

On September 23, 1936, the National Assembly of the Com- 
monwealth of the Philippines passed a bill, sponsored by As- 
semblyman Juan S. Alano, which sought the conversion of the 
Municipality of Zamboanga into a chartered city. President 
Manuel L. Quezon approved the bill, known as Commonwealth 
Act No. 39, or "The Charter Act of 1936." The city was 
inaugurated on February 26, 1937. 

Zamboanga City, as a tourist spot, has several historical 
landmarks: Zamboanga Capitol Building, Plaza Pershing, Fort 
Pilar, Pettit Barracks, Zamboanga Gulf and Country Club, 
Zamboanga "Yellow Beach," and Pasonanca Park. 

Two cultures have left distinctive imprints in the city. 
The Chabacano dialect, a mixture of Spanish, Tagalog, Visayan 
and Muslim, is spoken by a majority of the population. The 
presence of mosques, Muslim centers of worship, reminds one 
that Zamboanga City, then, as now, is a part of the Muslim 
community. 



City Seal 




BOUGAINVILLEA 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF ZAMBOANGA 

The City of Zamboanga was created under C.A, 39 on 
October 12, 1936. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Zamboanga 



Upper Portion 



— the crescent in argent (silver) on 
a field of green represents the 
muslim population, while the La- 
tin Cross in argent on a field of 
are (gold) represents the Chris- 
tian population. 

Fort and Building — Fort Pilar, then the provincial 

capitol building, now the City 
Hall of Zamboanga. 



Moro Vinta 
Zamboanga 



■projects the culture, history and 
ideals of the city. 

■symbolizes Zamboanga as the 
country's premier land of fish. 



Region IZ 



fflSTORY OF THE 

BUTUAN CITY lies in the broad coastal plains of Northern 
Mindanao, at the mouth of the. Rio Grande de Agusan. It has 
a land area of 758 square kilometers — bounded by the municipal- 
ities of Tubay and Cabadbaran in the north, Las Nieves and 
Esperanza in the south, Surigao Province in the east, and 
Buenavista in the west. 

It has a pleasant and healthful climate. Due to its strate- 
gic location, Butuan became a prosperous trading center. Many 
people from the Visayas, Bicol and Luzon have immigrated to 
this "Timber City" of the south. According to the Censo Oficial, 
Butuan had only 12,013 inhabitants in 1887. Its population as 
of 1970 was 131,094. 

Before the Spaniards came to the Philippines, the village 
was already a flourishing settlement. The Portuguese and Chi- 
nese, who had known the Far East earlier than the Spaniards, 
traded extensively with its inhabitants. 

Butuan, called after the river of the same name, was said 
to be the first place where Magellan anchored, at the mouth of 
the Agusan River in 1521, on his way to Cebu from Limasawa. 

The first mission church was founded by the Jesuits on 
September 8, 1597. Later, the town of Butuan was assigned to 
the Recollect Fathers. During that time, Butuan was heavily 
attacked by the Joloans and Borneans. To protect the natives 
against Muslim piratical incursions, churches and forts were 
built of heavy palisades and stones. In 1624, Fray Juan de San 
Nicolas constructed the first church, under the patronage of 
Saint Joseph, which not only served as a religious center but 
also as a bastion and watchtower. At Bacao-ag, a convent was 
constructed in 1646 under the supervision of Father Prior Fray 
Jacinto de San Fulgencio. There were only six visitas, namely, 
Talacogon, Linao, Tubay, Jabonga, Mainit and Hingoog. 

Although the security of Butuan was maintained by the 
regular troops, the priests also went to the battlefield, using the 
Cross as a powerful weapon for peaceful persuasion. Two of 
the fighting Recollect padres were Fray Alonzo de San Joseph 
and Fray Pedro de San Antonio, who both died in combat on 
June 22, 1632 in Bacao-ag. Another brave Father, Agustin de 
San Pedro, called El Padre Capitan, heroically led the people in 
their fight against the Muslims. 

122 ■ ^ ' ■ • ;■ 



CITY OF BUTUAN 



In 1768, the Jesuits were expelled from the Philippines, but 
they were later recalled in 1859 to resume the evangelization of 
Mindanao and Sulu. During this period, Butuan was not only 
a center of religious administration but a thriving commercial 
town in Northern Mindanao. 

After the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution, the town 
was affected only in 1898, after the guerrilla tioops were or- 
ganized by Gumersindo Flores of Butuan and Andres Atoga of 
Cabadbaran. In 1901, when an encounter took place at San Ma- 
teo, Father Saturnino Urios diplomatically persuaded the insur- 
gents to lay down their arms. 

Upon the establishment of a civil government in 1901 under 
the Special Provincial Government Act, a law was passed pro- 
viding for the establishment of Agusan with two subprovinces, 
Butuan and Bukidnon. The town of Butuan, situated about five 
miles up the Agusan River, became the capital of Agusan, 
and Frederick Johnson, a captain of the Philippine Constabu- 
lary, was appointed governor of the Province of Agusan. 

Butuan was one of the towns that heavily bore the brunt 
of the Japanese occupation. In 1942, the guerrilla troops under 
Colonel Ernesto McLish attacked Butuan and cleared all enemy 
positions along the banks of the Agusan River. Public and pri- 
vate buildings were destroyed but the people rebuilt the town 
after the American Liberation Forces came in 1945. 

Since then, Butuan's local affairs became complicated for 
a provincial executive to administer. Considering the simplifi- 
cation and efficient functioning of the government in the vast 
Agusan Province, Butuan was created into a city by virtue of 
Republic Act No. 523, approved on June 15, 1950. 

Historically, a monument was erected in 1872 at Barrio 
Magallanes, Butuan, to mark the site where the first mass was 
supposed to have been said in the Philippines. However, "Piga- 
fetta records that the first mass was celebrated on Easter Sun- 
day, 31 March 1521, at Limasawa Island." As Magellan's 
chronicler, he stated that the expedition came upon an island 
(Limasawa) where the Spaniards met Rajah Colambu, the na- 
tive chief of Butuan and Calagan, v — 




BOUGAINVILLEA 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF BUTUAN 



The City of Butuan was created under R.A. 523 on 
June 15, 1950. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Butuan 



Two Spears 

Logs, Mills and Saw 



Coconut 

Dominant Shades 



•connotes that Butuan City was 
the center of a flourishing Mala- 
yan culture. 

- depict the economic life of the 
city. Logs are the main product 
of the city and either exported 
or processed into lumber and ply- 
wood. 

- second major product of the city. 
■ traditional Manobo colors. 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF CAGAYAN DE ORO 



The City of Cagayan de Oro in the Province of Misamis 
Oriental is bounded on the north by the Majalajar Bay, on the 
south and east by the Province of Bukidnon, and on the west 
by the town of Manticao. The city is a center of economic and 
cultural activities in northern Mindanao. 

Cagayan de Oro has a land area of 412.8 square kilometers. 
In 1970, it had a population of 128,319. 

The village was originally a part of the Kingdom of Sultan 
Kudarat, and its early settlers were of Malayan origin. Before 
the Recollects established their missions in 1622, the settlement 
suffered much from Muslim raids; but these piratical activities 
were checked by the strong defenses organized by the Caga- 
yenos under the command of the Recollect Fathers. In 1649, 
the Manobos razed the town to the ground. 

In December 1898, before the Spaniards evacuated Misamis, 
the Spanish governor organized a committee of five Filipinos, 
and turned over the government to them. One of these men 
declared himself governor of Misamis and organized the 
government in accordance with the provisions of the decree 
of General Emilio Aguinaldo on June 18, 1898. On January 
2, 1899, Aguinaldo appointed two commissioners in order to hold 
elections and establish a new government in Cagayan de Oro 
and Surigao. 

When the American forces came in 1899, the local armed 
forces were organized by General Nicolas Capistrano in the 
eastern part, and Major Justo Gaerlan in the western part of the 
Province of Misamis Oriental. On January 30, 1900, Brigadier 
General John C. Bates attempted to occupy the town. Later, 
in March of the same year, the American and Filipino forces 
bitterly fought each other in the present sites of Pabayo and 



Chacon streets. Two months after, the American battleship 
Arayat bombarded the town, and, on the 17th, the American 
troops landed in Bayabas at the mouth of Cagayan River. 
Capistrano and his leaders were captured by the enemy under 
Major James F. Case in April 1901. 

Cagayan de Oro felt the ravages of the Pacific War when 
the Japanese Air Force bombed Camp Evangelista on December 
22, 1941. The Kawamura Detachment sailed from Iloilo on 
May 1, 1942 and landed on the coast of Cagayan Bay on the 
3rd. The town was subsequently made a Japanese Supply Center 
of the northern Mindanao area. 

The "Free Cagayan" movement under Governor Pedro 
Baculio and Herminigildo Avancena fled to the hills; hence. 
Governor Jose Artadi and Mayor Pedro Mabuhay took over 
the reigns of the municipal administration of the town. Three 
years later, on May 10, 1945, the Allied Forces occupied and 
captured Cagayan de Oro from the Japanese invaders. With 
the passage of Republic Act No, 521 on June 15, 1950, the town 
of Cagayan de Oro became a city. 

On June 18, 1966, Republic Act No. 4663 created the 
Cagayan de Oro Port Authority in order to administer, manage, 
develop, improve, integrate, coordinate and otherwise mobilized 
terminal facilities in the area. The Port of Cagayan de Oro 
is considered as an important port of call in northern Mindanao. 

Some of the tourist spots in the city are the Xavier 
University and its Museum, a rich showcase of Christian and 
Muslim art and culture; the Catanico Falls, in the city outskirts; 
and the Macahambus Cave, the last stronghold of the Filipino 
forces who fought the American forces during the Filipino- 
American War in the Philippines. 




CITY OF CAGAYAN DE ORO 

The City of Cagayan de Oro was created under R.A. 521 on June 15, 1950 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Cagayan de Oro 

Three Stars 



Coconut and Pineapple — represent the city's two known 

and main export products. 

Comocopia — signifies non-extravagance and 

thrift of its people; their fore- 
parents used it as piggy banks. 



— represent the three geographical 
islands of the Philippines. 

Two Spanish Galleons — signifies that the city has engaged 

in trade even before the coming 
of the Spaniards to our country. 



125 



fflSTORY OF THE QTY OF GINGOOG ^^^^^^^^^^r^^^^^^^^ i r 



THE CITY OF GINGOOG, in Misamis Oriental, lies on the 
coastal plains along the Gingoog Bay of Northern Mindanao. 
Situated between two rivers (Maanas and Gingoog), Gingoog, 
which looks like a horseshoe-shaped city, is partly surrounded 
by mountains covered by dense forest. It is bounded on the 
north by th'fe Gingoog Bay, on the south by the Municipality 
of Claveria, on the east by Agusan Province, and on the west 
by the Municipality of Medina. 

The city has a land area of 404.6 square kilometers and a 
population of 65,513 in 1970. 

During the Spanish period, the settlement was sometimes 
referred to as "Hingooc," "Hingoog," and "Pingoog." As early 
as 1750, it was administered by the Recollect Augustinians under 
the jurisdiction of the Diocese of Cebu. These missionaries 
built the first church and convent of the town. 

Like all other villages of the Visayas and Mindanao, 
Gingoog was not spared from the Muslim attacks. In the 
18th century, they landed at Gingoog and hindered the work 
of the missionaries. 

On November 2, 1929, Act No. 3537 divided the Province 
of Misamis into two: Misamis Oriental and Misamis Occidental. 
Ten years later, its implementing amendment, Act No. 3777, 
was approved on November 28, 1939. Gingoog was then 
classified as one of the municipalities of Misamis Oriental. 

During World War II, a Japanese detachment landed at 
Bogo, about 4 kilometers east of Cagayan de Oro in Misamis 
Oriental. The 61st Field Artillery and 81st Field Artillery of 
the Philippine Army repulsed them but the enemy established 
a beachhead which sealed the northern approach to the Filipino 



headquarters at Del Monte, Bukidnon. The 93rd Infantry 
which came to the rescue stopped the Japanese forces for 
three days. 

During the Japanese occupation, Major Juan A. Rivera 
established his headquarters at Gingoog although the province 
was controlled by the enemy. The united forces of the 
guerrillas in the Mindanao area finally liberated the people 
from the Japanese Imperial Forces. 

By virtue of Republic Act No. 2668, the Municipality of 
Gingoog was created into a chartered city on June 18, 1960. 

Aside from the big lumber concessions, vast coffee 
plantations were opened from the abandoned areas of the 
highlands of the city. Thousands of landless settlers from 
the Visayas and Mindanao came when the Government 
reclassified these idle lands for agricultural purposes. The 
soil technologists have found the slopes of Samay, Balason 
and Kalagonoy mountains (2,000 to 3,000) as most fertile and 
suitable to coffee culture. The other portions are planted 
with abaca, rice and other crops. 

Gingoog City, with a good market and many stores, 
refreshment parlors, bakeries and restaurants, has now thriving 
coffee farms which constitute one of the major dollar-saving 
industries, next in importance to the multi-million-peso logging, 
lumber and plywood industries. Two of the biggest pioneer 
lumbering concerns in the Philippines, Sta. Clara Lumber 
Co., Inc., and the Anakan Lumber Co., Inc., operate their 
concessions under modern methods of logging in the city. 
Several transportation facilities, banking institutions, and hotel 
accommodations serve the city residents and visitors. 



126 





■'■■ili 



City Flag 




CITY OF GINGOOG 



The City of Gingoog was created under R.A. 2668 on 
June 18, 1960. • • ' . 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Gingoog 

Crops — coconut, coffee, banana, cacao 

and log — main products and 
■ .' ' ■'• sources of income when Gingoog 

was made into a Chartered City 
' - ■ ' ' • ■ in 1960. 



127 



1: 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF ILIGAN 



The City of Iligan stands as a "sentinel" of Lanao Prov- 
ince. It is situated on the flat coastal plains and bounded 
on the north and northeast by the Province of Misamis Oriental 
and Iligan Bay, on the south and southwest by the municipal- 
ities of Baloi and Malingao, on the east by the Province of 
Bukidnon, and on the west by the Municipality of Linamon. 

It has a land area of 730.5 square kilometers and a popula- 
tion of 2,872 in 1903, 4,936 in 1918, 28,273 in 1939, 25,725 in 
1948, 58,433 in 1960, and 104,198 (52,261 males and 51,837 
females) in 1970. 

In 1642, Father Diego Patino christianized the natives, 
mostly Subanos, who were considered heathens and not maho- 
metans. The settlement was ministered by the Society of 
Jesus, under the jurisdiction of the Diocese of Cebu. Father 
Ignacio Navarro attended to the spiritual needs of the settlers, 
including some Muslims from Lake Malanao. In 1768, when 
the Jesuit missionaries were expelled from the Philippines, the 
natives were left to the care of the Augustinian Recollects. 

Like the other coastal settlements, Iligan was also con- 
stantly attacked by the Muslims, as retaliatory actions against 
the Spanish intruders. In 1639, on order of Governor General 
Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera, Captain Francisco de Atienza 
y Vanez, a tried warrior from Toledo, Spain, constructed six 
collapsible boats, each capable of carrying 50 to 100 men, to be 
assembled at Lake Lanao. As incharge of Iligan, and after 
receiving suggestions from Father Fray Agustin (known as 
Padre Capitan) on the military technique and strategy against 
the Muslim strongholds, he led an expedition to Malanao. After 
the fall of Marawi to the Spaniards, the Muslims continued to 
harass the enemy on the sea and on the land. They even cut 
off the supply route from Iligan, causing Atienza to pull back 
and fortify Iligan from the increasing Muslim attacks. 

In later years, the poblacion of Iligan began to sink. An- 
other fort was built by Gobernadorcillo Remigio Cabili and the 



town was transferred to its present site. 

After Corcuera's rule, the Maranaos were left to them- 
selves, almost to the end of the Spanish rule. 

With Iligan as a springboard, the Spanish troops were 
again sent to Marawi in 1891. Governor General Eulogio Des- 
pujol continued the campaign to subjugate the lake region. 
However, it was Governor Ramon Blanco who established the 
Spanish power in the region. In 1894, Blanco, with 3,000 men 
under the immediate command of General Parrado, landed in 
Iligan and succeeded in conquering the Muslim cottas and the 
stronghold of Marahui, known as the strongest in Lanao. 

In 1896, when the Philippine Revolution broke out, an in- 
surrection also occurred in Iligan. Three years later, the 
gobernadorcillo abandoned the town, and Captain Hilarion Ra- 
miro took over the reins of the government. He received the 
American forces under the command of Captain Smith who 
landed at Iligan in 1900. 

During the Pacific War; the Japanese Imperial Forces oc- 
cupied Iligan. An active guerrilla movement was organized 
in the province with its base at Liangan, Lanao. In 1944, most 
of the Japanese troops abandoned the area and then shifted 
their activities to Central Mindanao. 

On June 16, 1950, by virtue of Republic Act No. 525, Pres- 
ident Elpidio Quirino proclaimed the tow of Iligan as a city. 
He also announced the development of Iligan City as the 
"nucleus" of the country's steel industry, in line with his plan 
of total economic mobilization for the country. Thus, the 
Maria Cristina Falls which is one of the eight waterfalls in 
Iligan, was tapped by the National Power Corporation to pro- 
vide electric power for the industrial metropolis. 

Iligan City not only offers opportunities for industrial and 
commercial purposes but also spectacular scenery for nature 
lovers. 




BUTTERFLY ORCHID 
(PINK) 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF ILIGAN 



The City of Iligan was created under R.A. 525 on 
June 16, 1950. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Iligan 

Color Scheme — maroon and green is a common 

Muslim color combination; green 
also symbolizes that Iligan is an 
agricultural city. 

— symbolizes muslim-christian popu- 
lation. 

— symbol of labor and progress of 
Iligan, an industrial city. 

— the famous Maria Christina Falls. 

— represents the numerous factories 
that abound in the city making it 
the industrial city of the south. 

— signifies that Iligan is a port of 
entry. 

— indicates that the Maria Cristina 
Falls is harnessed to generate the 
power that Northern Mindanao 
now enjoys. 



Cross Over Crescent 
and Star 

Wheel 



Falls 

Building with 
Smokestack 



Prow of a Ship 

Wire-towar and 
Building 



129 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF MARAWI 



Marawi City, the capital of Lanao del Sur, is located on the 
shores of Lake Lanao, some 2,300 feet above sea level. 
It has a land area of 6,400 hectares, a population of 55,209 
in 1970, and a cool climate almost the year round. The city 
is bounded on the north by the cities of Iligan and Cagayan de 
Oro; east, by the cities of Butuan and Cagayan de Oro; south, 
by the city of Davao; west, by the cities of Pagadian and 
Zamboanga; southwest, by the Province of Cotabato; and 
northwest, by the City of Ozamis. 

Marawi was already a settlement of the Maranaos, a highly 
cultured tribed with an organized government headed by a datu, 
before the Spaniards came in the 16th century. 

For more than two centuries, from 1637 to 1895, the 
Spaniards launched a sei'ies of campaigns to conquer the lake 
regions and to subject the Maranaos to their colonial rule. In 
spite of all these years, and until their withdrawal from the 
Philippines in 1898, the Spaniards never completely conquered 
the lake regions. 

Although the first campaign was launched in 1637, during 
the administration of Governor General Sebastian Hurtado de 
Corcuera (1635-1644), it was formally undertaken only in 1639. 
After a bloody battle on April 4, Marawi was captured by the 
Spanish troops led by Captain Francisco de Atienza y Vanez, 
a tried warrior, and Agustin de San Pedro, a Recollect mission- 
ary. 

The elusive Maranaos fled; but they continued harassing 
the Spaniards who were building a fort. The Spanish troops 
later withdrew and further at'tempts to recapture the fort were 
unsuccessful. 

The campaign was resumed in 1891 when Governor General 
Valeriano Weyler (1888-1891) himself took command of the 
expedition. Marawi, although defended by Datu Amat Amai 
Pakpak, was captured by Gov- Weyler's troops on August 19, 
1891. From the hills where they fled, the Maranaos retaliated 
and drove out the Spanish forces. Governor Weyler returned 
to Manila without conquering the Maranaos. 

Another campaign led by General Parrado in 1895, during 
Governor General Ramon Blanco's administration (1893-1896). 
was -more successful. On March 10, his troops defeated in a 
bloody 'encounter the Maranaos led again by the brave Datu 



Amai Pakpak. With equal bravery and heroism, many lives 
were lost on both side. The Spaniards, however, emerged 
victorious. 

Despite periodic attacks from the vanquished Maranaos, 
a politico-military government was organized in Lanao on 
October 8, 1895, by virtue of a gubernatorial decree signed 
in Marawi. 

Victory for the Spaniards was short-lived in Marawi. On 
May 1, 1898, the Spanish fleet was defeated by the American 
navy at the Battle of Manila Bay. The Spaniards in Marawi 
were therefore evacuated to Zamboanga prior to their departure 
for Spain. In 1900, the Americans captured Marawi. 

In 1906, Marawi was organized into the "Village of Dan- 
salan" with A. Owen Seaman as acting president. A year 
after, on May 24, the village was organized into a regular mu- 
nicipality by virtue of an act of the Moro Province Legislative 
Council. Lt. Jesse Gaston of the United States Army was 
appointed as its first municipal president. 

When the Department of Mindanao and Sulu was organized 
by the Americans, Lanao, one of the five districts of the old' 
Moro Province, was made a province with its capital at Dan- 
salan in 1914. Introduced by Tomas Cabili (then assembly- 
man). Commonwealth Act No. 592, approved on August 19, 
1940, created the City of Dansalan. However, before the city 
government could be inaugurated. World War II broke out in 
December 1941. 

On May 1, 1942, the Japanese planes heavily bombarded 
Marawi and its army occupied the city. Consequently, guerrilla 
movements were organized; and the Americans and the Mara- 
naos fought side by side against the common enemy, until their 
victory in 1945. 

In 1950, Cabili (then Senator) and Congressman Moha- 
mad Ali Dimaporo, finally inaugurated the city government 
on September 30 of the same year. On June 16, 1956, Republic 
Act No. 1552 amended the charter of the City of Dansalan, 
changing its name to "Marawi" and making elective the posi- 
tions of mayor, vice-mayor, and councilors. During the first 
city election in 1959, Hadji Macapado Balaia became the first 
city mayor. 



City Seal 




WALING-WALING 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF MARAWI 



J 



The City of Marawi was created under R.A. 592 
on August 19, 1940. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Marawi 



Symbolic Sun 



Crescent Moon 



Red Portion 
Green Portion 



— symbol of the Divine Providence 
which shines forth over the city, 
considered today as the seat of 
Philippine Muslim culture. 

—symbol of the Muslim faith which 
is the predominant religion of its 
people, called Maranons, and its 
rich Arabic culture which they 
have preserved in spite of Spanish 
and American influence. 

— stands for the bravery and hero- 
ism of its people. 

— symbolizes agriculture which is 
the main industry of the city. The 
map stands for the city itself 
which is located on the shores Of 
Lake Lanao. 



fflSTORY OF THE CITY OF OROQUIETA 



On the northwestern shores of northern Mindanao, along 
the coastline of the D-shaped Misamis Occidental, lies Oroquieta 
City, the capital of the province. It has a land area of 23,109 
hectares and, in 1970, a population of 38,470 industrious, peace- 
ful and hospitable people. The city, composed of 43 barrios, 
is a fertile agricultural plain of the flat coastal area that 
stretches from north to south in the province. With a fair 
climate seldom visited by twphoons, it extensively grows rice, 
corn, root crops and vegetables. Coconut, however, is its main 
product. 

Oroquieta City is in the middle of the crossroads. It is 
only 51 kilometers from Baliang*ao, the last municipality in the 
north towards the highway to Dapitan City, and about 84 kilo- 
meters from Tangub along the road to Aurora in Zamboanga 
del Sur. It is also a terminal point of the Pagadian-Oroquieta 
road which passes through Aurora, and the junction where the 
Dapitan highway meets the Lanao-Misamis route in northern 
Mindanao. Although there are good roads and bridges leading 
to the capital city, the principal means of transportation is by 
water. Its port, Loboc, is 1.8 kilometers from the city proper. 
It is thus reached by ferryboat and launches from Iligan City 
which is just across Panguil Bay. Besides the land and water 
transportation facilities, Oroquieta also enjoys the convenience 
of air travel. 

The city started as a barrio inhabited by Christians and 
Subanons and 20 houses. Named Jimenez, it was later called 
Layawan until 1879. The small village in 1750 is situated 
on the seacost near the mouth of a river with Langaran in the 
northwest and Palilan in the south. At that time, it terribly 
suffered from the attacks of Muslims who killed the gobemador- 
cillo, enslaved the inhabitants, and built their fortifications. In 
1870, the town of 5,682 residents was established, with Manuel 



Barrientos, popularly known as Capitan Awing, as its first 
gobemadorcillo. 

Oroquieta was believed by some to have been coined from 
the words "oro" and "quieta" because the place was abundant 
witti gold and peaceful. Others claimed that it was in honor of 
Governor General Oroquieta. Another group, however, insists 
that it was named after a barrio in Spain where Fr. Tomas 
Casudo, the first parish priest in Oroquieta, and General Domin- 
go Moriones, a hero in the battle of Oroquieta, were born. One 
version further states that the name Oroquieta was taken after 
Bishop Oroquieta who visited the town. 

During the Philippine-American War, the American de- 
tachment in the town convent, in retaliation for the death of a 
soldier, killed hundreds of natives. 

Oroquieta's first public school was organized under an 
American Supervisor named Leece. In the province, from 
1916 to 1920, Oroquieta was the only town with complete ele- 
mentary schools and, from 1924 to 1941, the only municipality 
with a private school. 

When the Japanese forces occupied the town during World 
War II, the government of Oroquieta was transferred to Tubu- 
ran. Many of its people were captured and killed by the 
invaders. 

On June 21, 1969, Republic Act No. 5518 created the City 
of Oroquieta covering all the barrios and sitios comprising the 
municipality of Oroquieta in the Province of Misamis Occidental. 

Today, the chartered capital city, quiet and free from the 
excitement of a busy commercial center, has an imposing con- 
crete capitol — the first of its kind in Mindanao and the pride 
of Misamis Occidental. 




GUMAMELA 

City Flower 




City Flog 



CITY OF OROQUIETA 

The City of Oroquieta was created under R.A. 5518 on 
June 21, 1969. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Oroquieta 

Outer and Inner Cords — represent the coconut coir prod- 
bordering the seal uct made out of coconut husk; 

Coconuts — represents the principal product 

of Oroquieta City and the main 
source of livelihood; 

Red V — a dessicated coconut factory which 

represents the main buyer of co- 
coconut products. 



Rice and Com fields 



— represent the second source of 
livelihood of Oroquieta. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF OZAMIZ 



OZAMIZ City, at the western entrance of Panguil Bay, is located 
on the southeastern part of Misamis Occidental. It is bounded 
by the Municipality of Clarin on the north, Iligan Bay on the 
east, a portion of Panguil Bay on the southeast, and Tangub 
City on the south and west. 

The city has a land area of 144.2 square kilometers. It 
had a population of 36,313 in 1939 and 64,643 in 1970. 

It produces cacao, rice, abaca, fruits and vegetables. The 
principal industries are agriculture, weaving and fishing. 

Because of its strategic location during the Spanish con- 
quest of Mindanao, Jesuit Father Jose Ducos built a cota 
or fortress in the present location of the city. It served as 
the main bastion of a big Spanish task force against the Mus- 
lims and Portuguese. This fort became the nucleus of the 
town of Misamis which subsequently became an ecclesiastical 
center of northern Mindanao. Its patron saint was the Blessed 
Virgin Mary, called the Immaculate Conception. 

The Jesuits maintained a strong fleet under the flagship 
"Triumfo." They called the bastion "Triumfo" and the image 
of Our Lady, Nuestra Senora de Triumfo. 

In 1850, the town of Misamis became the capital of the 
District of Misamis, th'en composed of the present provinces 
of Zamboanga del Norte, Misamis Occidental, Lanao del Norte, 
Misamis Oriental, Bukidnon and Camiguin. 

The Recollect Fathers undertook the spiritual ministration 
of Misamis in 1769. 



After the Filipino-American War, the Americans established 
a civil government in Misamis on May 15, 1901. 

In 1912, the Philippine Independent Church gained a foot- 
hold although the Catholic missionaries had been established 
earlier in the province. In 1920, when many settlers from 
Bohol and Cebu arrived in Mindanao, the town of Misamis 
became a trading center. 

At the outbreak of World War II, the Japanese troops en- 
countered in a bloody battle the Filipino soldiers under the 
command of Major Lucas Naranjo in Baga. On May 18, 1943, 
the Women's Auxiliary Service led by Josefa Borromeo Capis- 
trano was organized. The imit was composed of courageous 
women of Misamis Occidental who assisted the Tenth Military 
District under Colonel Wendell W. Fertig. 

On June 19, 1948, by virtue of Republic Act No. 321, the 
town of Misamis was created into a chartered city. It was 
named Ozamiz in honor of the late Jose Ozamiz, a senator who 
became a hero of World War II. The city was inaugurated 
on July 16, 1948. In 1952, the city was also created as a 
prelature by the Holy See, with Msgr. Patrick Cronin as its 
first bishop. 

Some of the historical features of the city are the collec- 
tion of Chinese vases and jars, dating back to the pre-Spanish 
period, which are mostly owned by the Subanons, a Muslim 
group inhabiting the Malindang mountains ; the four giant Ger- 
man bells at Bukagan Hill (said to have do, re, me and sol 
sounds) ; and the Cathedral of Ozamiz with an organ described 
as "the largest and finest in the country." 




GARDENIA 

City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF OZAMIS 



The City of Ozamis was created under R.A. 321 on 
June 19, 1948. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Ozamis 



Structure 



Blessed Virgin 
Inscription 



— cotta, Spanish Fort Santiago and 
oldest structure in the city; also 
a symbol of the heritage and 
peace and order in the city. 

— patron saint of the city. 

— motto of the city — "Fortes en 
Fide", meaning strength in faith. 



135 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF SURIGAO 



The City of Surigao nestles along the northernmost tip of 
the Province of Surigao del Norte where mountains and hills 
are prominent indentions throughout the coast. It is bounded 
on the north and east by the Hinatuan Passage, on the west 
by the Surigao Strait, and on the south by Tagana-an. 

The city has a land area of 245.3 square kilometers and a 
population of 35,855 inhabitants in 1970. It has an ideal port 
which is shielded by the Nonoc Islands. It is also connected 
with good roads to Butuan City and Lianga, both in Agusan 
del Norte. 

Legendarily, the town of Surigao was a thriving settlement 
ruled by Chief Solibao. When the Spaniards came, they called 
the place "Surigao", but during the arrival of early Christian 
missionaries in the province, it was better known as "Caraga," 
from the name of its inhabitants— the "Caragas" of the Visayan 
stock — warlike, brave and ferocious. 

The settlement of the early colonizers in Bilang-bilang 
Harbor, where the present city is located, became ideal centers 
of trade, commerce and religion. The village had been 
transferred from one place to another. On June 29, 1655, 
Surigao became a town and by 1751, it was made the seat 
of the provincial government, after Caolo, the former provincial 
capital, was burned. Since then, the town of Surigao became 
a center of Spanish political and ecclesiastical power in the 
region, rivalled only by Tandag on the southeastern coast 
of Surigao Province. 

The town suffered severely from Muslim raids. In 1752, 



after the town was devastated, almost all of its 2,000 inhab- 
itants were either killed or taken as slaves by the Muslims. 

During World War II, on May 23, 1942, the Japanese 
Imperial Forces under Captain Yusee occupied Surigao. The 
local government was then managed by Mayor Amat. Later, 
after the American planes bombed Bilang-bilang harbor on 
September 9, 1944, the American troops and guerrilla units 
forced the Japanese forces to withdraw until Surigao was 
liberated on April 12, 1945. 

In July 1945, the Philippine Civil Affairs Unit (PCAU) 
took over the local government, prior to the restoration of 
the administration to the local authorities. 

During the Commonwealth period, Protolico Egay was 
appointed by the guerrillas as governor of Surigao Province 
and Macario Diaz, who resumed his office on September 1, 1945, 
as mayor of the town of Surigao. He was succeeded by the 
guerrilla-appointed mayor, Juan Parrucho. 

By virtue of Republic Act No. 2786, dated June 19, 1960, 
the old Province of Surigao was divided into Surigao del Sur 
and Surigao del Norte, with the Municipality of Surigao as the 
capital of the latter. Surigao became a chartered city under 
Republic Act No. 6134, which was approved on August 31, 1970. 

Surigao City is noted for its proximity to the almost 
fathomless underwater gorge, the "Philippine Deep," which 
is one of the deepest portions in the Pacific Ocean, including 
all other oceans in the world. 




ROSAL 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF SURIGAO 



The City of Surigao was created under R.A. 6134 on 
August 31, 1970. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Surigao 

Miner and Tools — signifies that mining is the prime 

industrial and economic concern 
of the city. 

Three Islands — biggest island is Nonoc Island 

(golden), site of the mining com- 
plex of the Surigao Nickel Project, 
biggest nickel mine in the coun- 
try; its red hills are known as 
the biggest depository of nickel 
in the world. 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF TANGUB 



Tangub City, located in the northern tip of the D-shaped prov- 
ince of Misamis Occidental, is bounded on the north and east 
by Ozamiz City; on the south by the Panguil Bay; and on the 
west by the town of Bonifacio. 

The city has a land area of 119.2 square kilometers. In 
1970, it had a population of 30,918. 

Tangub is famous for fish, shrimp and crab. Rice, corn 
and coconuts, are grown in the area. The supplementary income 
of the people is obtained from rope-making, basketry, pottery, 
nipa thatch-making, fishing and farming. 

The present site of Tangub was formerly a fishing village 
peopled by the Subanons of northern Mindanao. Their houses 
were scattered in different places within the village ruled by a 
chief called Pangpang. This village, named Bawang, is the 
present City of Tangub. 

When the Spanish exploring party landed at the settlement, 
they asked for the name of the place. The Subanons answered 
the hungry strangers "Tangub," pointing to the "rice container." 
Since then the Spaniards called the place Tangub. 

In 1924, the residents of Tangub worked for the creation 
of the Municipality of Tangub through the assistance of the 



late Senator Jose A. Clarin. Its separation from the former 
town of Misamis (now Ozamiz City) was finally approved by 
the Philippine Legislature in 1929. The municipality was 
inaugurated on January 1, 1930, and Timoteo Engracia became 
the first elected town presidente. 

On April 1, 1930, Tangub was officially proclaimed as the 
Municipality of Regidor, in honor of Dr. Antonio Ma. Regidor, 
exile of 1872 and reformer. A majority of the residents did not 
like the idea of changing the name of their town; hence, a 
legislative measure was passed restoring the name of Tangub. 

Under Republic Act No. 5131, the municipality was created 
as a city on June 17, 1957. The city was inaugurated on 
February 28, 1968. 

Tangub was declared as the cleanest city in 1965 and 1968. 
In 1967, the police department was considered as the best 
organized in Mindanao. 

Tangub City is predominantly peopled by Cebuano-speaking 
settlers from Cebu, Bohol, and the other neighboring provinces 
of the Visayas. The hardy and adventurous settlers from 
Luzon, mostly Ilocanos, intermingle with the equally hard- 
working and thrifty Visayans. 



138 




City Flag 

City Seal 



V 



Sea or Bay 



Bridge 



CITY OF TANGUB 

The City of Tangub was created under R.A. 5131 on June 17, 1967. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Tangub 



■ represents the panoramic view of 
Panguil Bay which is rich in 
crabs, shrimps, shells, fish and 
prawns. 

■ represents the dream of the peo- 
ple in Tangub City of the pro- 
posed bridge connecting the city 



Mountain 



and Tubod, Lanao del Norte. 

— beautiful Malindang Mountain 
in front of which are plains, hills, 
plateaus and valleys of rich soil 
planted to corn, coconut, rice 
and root crops — main products 
of the city. 



r 



139 



Region XI 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF DAVAO 



Davao City is bounded on the north by the Municipality of 
Kapalong, on the northeast by the Municipalities of Panabo and 
Sto. Tomas, on the south by the Municipality of Sta. Cruz (all in 
the province of Davao), on the east by the Gulf of Davao, and 
on the west by Mount Apo and the Province of Cotabato. 

In land area, it is five times bigger than Manila. A city of 
244,000 hectares, 25,000 of which are still virgin land, it extends 
30 kms. northward, 29 kms. southward, and 60 kms. westward 
to Mt. Apo. 

The climate of the city is wholesome and agreeable. Out- 
side the typhoon belt and protected by the island of Samal, its 
rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year. 

Davao City was built by Don Jose Oyanguren, a deported 
Spanish adventurer in 1848. By virtue of a decree on February 
27, 1848, Don Narciso Claveria, Governor General of the Archi- 
pelago, authorized him to recruit men and organize a punitive 
expedition against Datu Bago. With the help of the Bagobo 
tribe under Datu Namid, on July 26, 1848, Don Jose defeated 
Datu Bago at the mouth of the Davao River, presumably either 
at Agdao Street or the northern portion of Governor Carpenter 
Street in Davao City. It was the feast day of Sta. Ana after 
whom the present area of the city had been named. 

With the suppression of Muslim piratical and marauding 
activities, Don Jose founded a settlement at the north end of 
what is now Bolton Street. Its first residents were his soldiers 
and their relatives. 

This settlement was later wiped out by the inundation of 
the Davao River; so, they moved to a higher level where the 
present town is situated. He named the village Nueva Vergara 
or Vergara in honor of his native town in Spain. 



The village with a handful of settlers grew into a lusty 
community of 1,500 inhabitants in 1894, 6,059 in 1903, 21,204 in 
1918, 95,546 in 1989, 111,263 in 1948, 225,75 in 1960 and 390,796 
(197,340 males and 193,456 females) in 1970. 

Davao City was created by virtue of Commonwealth Act 
No. 51, approved on October 16, 1936, by President Manuel 
L. Quezon. Composed of the former municipal district of 
Guianga and the Municipality of Davao, the city government 
was formally organized on March 1, 1937. 

Within three decades it has undergone extensive changes 
in political structure. For the first time, by virtue of Republic 
Act No. 1368, dated June 18, 1955, the office of the mayor and 
the newly-created offices of the vice-mayor and the ten city 
councilors were made elective. Under Republic Act No. 4354, 
approved June 19, 1965, otherwise known as the Revised Charter 
of the City of Davao, its political system came close to the 
best concept of the republican system which gave accent to a 
representative form in the local government. 

Davao City is a commercial center in southern Mindanao. 
Through its port, considered the main harbor along Davao Gulf 
and the adjacent provinces, foreign and local vessels load and 
unload the imports and exports of the region. 

Thus Davao City combines the ideal of a tropical paradise 
with modern conveniences. Its progressive development is 
proven by the existence of 16 banking institutions, 18 hotels 
and 14 educational facilities. Some of the tourist attractions 
in the city are the 9,610 feet. Mt. Apo occupying 6,900 hectares, 
Talomo Beach, Davao Penal Colony, two stock farms, the Shrine 
of the Infant Jesus of Prague, and the Folk Arts Center, a 
repository of indigenous articles and folkways of the different 
ethnic groups of Mindanao. 




City Seed 




WALING-WALING 
City Flower 



City Flag 



CITY OF DAVAO 



The City of Davao was created under C.A. 51 on 
October 16, 1936. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Davao 



Four Divisions 



Colors 



Upper Left and Lower 
Left Quadrants 



Shield 



Upper Right Quadrant ■ 



— represent the four (4) districts 
of the city; the star represents 
the union of these districts into a 
singular city. 

— blue, for purity of purpose ; green, 
for growth; and red, for bravery 
and resoluteness. 

■sea and ship depict the city as a 
trade and commercial center, 
while smokestacks represent in- 
dustry. 

•Bagobo shield, representing the 
ethnic origin of the natives. 

symbols for abaca and coconut, 
principal produce. 



141 



1) 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF COTABATO 



COTABATO City is bounded on the north by the Municipality 
of Ruling, on the west by Illana Bay, on the south by 
the Municipality of Dinaig, and on the east by the Municipality 
of Tumbao. 

The city has a land area of 176.0 square kilometers and a 
population of 14,579 in 1948, 37,499 in 1960, and 61,184 in 1970. 

The climate is agreeable and the soil is fertile and productive. 

The term "Mindanao" or "Maguindanao" was originally 
given to the town of Cotabato and the adjacent territory. The 
derivative "mindanao" which means "inundated" or "that which 
has been inundated" is derived from the word "danao," meaning 
"inundation of a river, lake or sea." 

Cotabato, on the other hand, derived its name from a stone 
fort called "kota wato," which was erected by the Muslims on 
a hill towering above the town. 

The city started centuries ago, at the time the Manobos 
or Manubas or Man-subas (river dwellers) lived in the former 
district of Cotabato. 

In October 1526, a Spanish expedition led by Garcia Jofre 
de Loaisa reached Illana Bay and remained there for about 
ten days. The first attempt to conquer the Maguindanao 
Muslims occurred in 1596 when Rodriguez de Figueroa tried 
to occupy the village. The natives, however, repulsed the 
Spaniards and killed their commander. Years later, Pedro de 
Almonte penetrated into Cotabato and established a small 
presidio at Buhayan. Attempts to bring Cotabato under Spanish 
control were later abandoned. 

From 1640 to the middle of the 19th century, the Maguin- 
danao Muslims were independent people, recognizing no 
authority except the datos and sultans, and obeying no laws 
except their own. 



In June 1851, Cotabato was again visited by the Spanish 
forces. They occupied PoUok, and converted it into a naval 
politico-military district. 

With the exception of Parang, the only town inhabited by 
the Christians in 1913 was Cotabato. The religious ministra- 
tion of the town was under the Recollects. 

Upon the establishment of the civil government in 1914, 
the Christian Filipinos from Luzon and the Visayas migrated 
to Mindanao. 

On April 29, 1942, before the Japanese forces invaded the 
town, the retreating Filipino soldiers burned the houses so as 
not to give shelter to the enemy. Cotabato became a ghost 
town. Consequently, Lt. Col. Salipada K. Pendatun, commander 
of the 117th Infantry Regiment at the Cotabato-Bukidnon area, 
led a relentless and highly spirited resistance movement against 
the Japanese. They later aided the liberation of Cotabato on 
April 17, 1945. 

The Municipality of Cotabato, originally the capital of the 
old Cotabato Province, was made into a first class municipality 
by virtue of Executive Order No. 466 on July 1, 1950. Nine 
years later, on June 20, 1959, Cotabato was created into a 
chartered city by Republic Act No. 2364. 

The city is the "melting pot" of diverse ethnic groups with 
varied cultures and occupations which resulted to its becoming 
a fast growing commercial and industrial center. The forest 
products, such as candlenut, almaciga, and gutapercha; and 
the agricultural products, like corn, rice, coconut, abaca, ramie, 
cotton, citrus and durian, which are raised by the neighboring 
towns are brought to the city for transport to other parts of 
the country. 



142 



City Seal 



if 


■if 

i 

Ik 1 







City Flag 



Upper Left Qvxidrant 
Lower Left Qimdrant ■ 
Upper Right Quadrant ■ 



CITY OF COTABATO 

The City of Cotabato was created under R.A. 2364 on June 20, 1959. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Cotabato 



■the Kuta, from which the city's 
name was derived. 

•the red-roofed City Hall showing 
its Mohammedan influence. 

•two hills represent the Colina 
and Timako Hills, dominant fea- 



tures of the city of Coatabato and 
blue winding strip represents the 
Rio Grande de Mindanao, sym- 
bolic of the city's future. 

Right Lower Quadrant — coconut, rice and corn, main agri- 
cultural products of Cotabato 
City. 



143 



HISTORY OF THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS • 



THE CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS is surrounded by beautiful 
valleys, with Mount Matutum and Mount Magolo on the north, 
the coastline of the Sarangani Bay on the south, the Province 
of Davao on the east, the Municipality of Tupi on the northwest, 
and the Municipality of Kiamba on the southwest. It is the 
only gateway within the jurisdiction of the two rich Koronadal 
and Allah Valleys in Southern Cotabato. 

The city has a land area of 795.5 square kilometers and a 
population of 9,787 in 1918. 14,115 in 1939, 32,019 in 1948, 
84,988 in 1960, and 85,743 (43,503 males and 42,240 females) 
in 1970. 

Its fertile soil is suitable for rice, corn, abaca, ramie, 
potatoes, and other agricultural crops, and its hills are ideal 
pasture areas of fine cattle. 

The early natives along the shorelines of Sarangani estab- 
lished their fishing villages at the entrance of rivers— as centers 
of land travelers and seafarers. 

About the fifteenth century, Shariff Kabungawan intro- 
duced Islam to the early settlers. The Tiboli tribesmen were 
driven to the interior and the highly cultured Muslims occupied 
the coastal areas. 

In 1858, when Davao was made a separate district, the 
regions around the Sarangani Bay were controlled from the 
politico-military District of Glan, the largest and earlier Spanish 
settlements at Sumbang Point which faces the Celebes Sea. 
Later, in 1899, the Spaniards evacuated the Mindanao area and 
the administration of Buayan was left to the Muslims, Chinese 
and Indonesian residents. 

In 1939, due to the congestion of the landless people in 
Luzon, the Commonwealth government conceived the opening of 
the valleys of Koronadal and Allah to them in line with the 
Social Justice Program of President Manuel L. Quezon. Thus, 
on February 27 .of the same year, General Paulino Santos with 



30 officials and 69 settlers (including women and children), 
aboard the "SS Basilan," arrived at Alunan Beach, in Glan. 

The new settlers called the Christian community as "Da- 
diangas," after the thorny shrub which abound in the vicinity. 
Later, the village was renamed "Buayan" (the name of the 
early Muslim village) which referred to the crocodile-infested 
river near the site of the city. Buayan was also the name of 
the early Muslim ruler of Koronadal Valley. When Gen. Santos 
died, Republic Act No. 1107, approved June 15, 1954, changed 
the name of the town to General Santos, in honor of the founder 
of the city and the Land Settlement and Development Corpora- 
tion (LASEDECO). 

In 1947, President Manuel A. Roxas created General Santos 
into a regular municipality. The town, which became the seat 
of the provincial government, also included the newly created 
municipalities of Polomolok and Glan, its mother town. 

From a fifth class municipality, it rose to a first class town 
after the separation of the annexed towns of Polomolok and 
Glan. In the province, it was the first municipality to enforce 
the minimum wage law for the working class in the local 
government and the private enterprises. 

By virtue of Republic Act No. 5412, approved June 15, 
1968, the Municipality of General Santos was created into a 
chartered city. The City of General Santos comprises the bar- 
rios of Alabel, Bula, Aleguia, Bacagay, Buluan, Buayan, Kawas, 
Labangal, Lagao, Conel, Dadiangas, Dumolok, Katangawan, 
Maluiigon, Maribulan, New Visayas, Mabuhay, Malandag, San 
Jose, Tambler, Tokawal, Pag-asa, San Isidro, Sinawal and 
Tinagacan. 

Aside from private business and commercial and agricul- 
tural establishments, there are several branches of the National 
Government in the city. Some of these are from the Bureau of 
Lands, Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Telecommunica- 
tions, and Philippine National Bank, --^m^ 




City Seal 

City Flag 



Mountain 



Waves 



Coconut Trees and 
Banana Plants 



CITY OF GENERAL SANTOS 

The City of General Santos was created under R.A. 5412 on June 15, 1968. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of General Santos 



■represents Mt. Matutum, most 
prominent landmark of the city. 

■represents Saragani Bay which 
bounds the coast of the city. 

signifies that coconut plantations 
surround the city and that it is the 



Pineapple Fruits 



first place in the country to be 
earmarked for banana plantation 
in commercial scale. 

■ signifies that General Santos City 
is the only outlet of a pineapple- 
producing firm in South Cotabato 
for pineapple products. 



145 



Region I 



HISTORY OF THE 

Abra lies in the northwestern part of Luzon, between 120° 
11' and 125° 41' east longitude and between 17° 38' and 18° 39' 
north latitude. It has a common boundary with Ilocos Norte 
in the north, Cagayan in the northwest, Ilocos Sur in the 
south and southwest, and Isabela, the Mountain Province, and 
the Central Cordillera Mountain in the east. 

The province is composed of 27 municipalities with a total 
population of 263,358 in 1970. Its land area is approximately 
3,809.89 square kilometers which are drained by the Abra 
River that flows northward from Mt. Data in the Mountain 
Province. 

The summer trade winds and the northeast monsoon, two 
opposite air currents, affect the year-round favorable climate 
of Abra. Its important agricultural products are corn, tobacco, 
and rice, and the rich forest resources are timber, rattan, honey 
and wax. Gold dust is said to be found along Bolongan River 
in Lacub. 

The first inhabitants, about 200 B.C., were the ancestors 
of the Bontocs and Ifugaos who moved later to the Mountain 
Province, and the Tinguians (called Tinguianes or "moun- 
taineers," from tingue which means mountain), who resembled 
the Chichimecos, very savage and cruel headhunters of Nueva 
Espana (Mexico). 

The first mission site in the province was established by 
the Augustinians. 

During the British invasion, Maria Josefa Gabriela de 
Silang fled to Abra (then part of Ilocos province) and continued 
the revolutionary activities of her deceased husband, Diego. 
She was defeated and hanged by the enemy under Manuel 
Ignacio de Arza on September 20, 1763. 

In 1846, Abra was created with Lepanto as a sub-province. 
By 1876, the province had already nine towns, some of which 
were Pidigan (1823), La Paz (1832), Bucay (1847), Dolores 
(1869), and Bangued, the most popular. 

Don Bias Villamor established a provincial government in 
Abra in 1898. With the founding of the first Philippine Re- 



OF ABRA 



public in January 1899, Juan de Castro and Enrique del Rosario 
were designated as delegates to the Assembly of Representatives 
in Malolos. 

After the American military and civil governments took 
over, the Philippine Assembly on February 28, 1905, passed 
Act No. 1306 which annexed Abra to the province of Ilocos 
Sur, made appropriations for the payment of certain out- 
standing liabilities of Abra, and provided for the establishment 
of a civil government in the settlements of non-Christian tribes 
in the province of Ilocos Sur. 

Again, on March 9, 1917, under Act No. 2683, the Philip- 
pine Assembly segregated the sub-province of Abra from the 
Province of Ilocos Sur and reestablished the former Province 
of Abra. 

During the Japanese invasion, on January 8, 1942, the 
United States Army Forces in the Philippines, Northern Luzon 
(USAFIP, NL), composed of the elements of the 11th Infantry, 
71st Infantry, and Troop C of the 26th Cavalry under Major 
Everett Warner, Captain Guillermo Nakar, and Captain Manuel 
P. Enriquez, respectively, was organized. After the fall of 
Bataan on April 9 of the same year, the Japanese forces from 
Abra threatened the rear of the 121st Infantry under Colonel 
John Horan. By the middle of 1942, the guerrilla force was 
reorganized into seven districts, with Abra and the Ilocos 
provinces as the Third District under Major Barnett. As a 
combat force it waged an unrelenting underground movement 
against the Japanese until they almost took possession of the 
mountain stronghold of General Tomoyuki Yamashita during 
the liberation of Northern Luzon. 

Abra is known as the province of sturdy Ilocanos whose 
predominant dialects are Iloco, Tinguian or Itneg, Bontoc and 
Kalinga. Its former governors were Juan Villamor (the first 
civil governor), Eustaquio Purruganan, Julio Borbon, Virgilio 
Valera, Lucas Paredes, Carmelo Barbero and Petronilo Seares. 
Ignacio Vfllamor of Bangued, an educator, statesman, jurist and 
writer, was the first Filipino President of the University of the 
Philippines in 1915. »^ 

/\ 




GARDENIA 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ABRA 



The Province of Abra was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Abra 



Twin Peaks on 
both Sides of a 
River 



Paddied Fields 



- from the Spanish word abre mean- 
ing gorge, pass, breach or opening, 
and it was first used by the Spa- 
niards to denote the region above 
the Banawang Gap where Abra Ri- 
ver exits into the China Sea, thus 
the Rio Grande de Abra. Later it 
was used to name the newly 
created province drained by its 
great basin. 



— Signifies that the main occupation 
and means of livelihood of the peo- 
ple of Abra is farming. 
Prancing Stallion — means that Abra was once upon 

a time famous for its horses — 
noted for their strength, speed and 
endurance. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BENGUET 



THE PROVINCE OF BENGUET, an elevated land mass of 
verdant valleys, lies at the southernmost portion of the old 
Mountain Province. It is bounded on the north by Ilocos Sur 
and Bontoc (now the Mountain Province), on the east by 
Ifugao and Nueva Vizcaya, on the west by La Union and 
Ilocos Sur, and on the south by Pangasinan. The province 
has a land area of 2,655.4 square kilometers. 

Benguet was one of the four provinces of the old Mountain 
Province. It was formerly a portion of the vast unexplored 
mountain fastness inhabited by five distinct cultural minority 
groups with diverse dialects, customs and traditions. The 
province comprises the subprovince of Benguet, and the munic- 
ipalities of Tuba, Sablan, Itogon, Tablay, Buguias, and the 
capital town of La Trinidad. In 1970, Benguet had a popu- 
lation of 263,550, the majority of whom belongs to the minority 
groups. 

During the Spanish colonial era, in January 1829, Guillermo 
Galvey led an expedition to the District of Benguet. In 1836, 
Governor General Salazar also sent an expedition to this "Igorot 
Country." The province was created into a comandancia during 
the Spanish rule. 

On June 1, 1903, the Philippine Commission created a 
committee to take charge of the improvement in Benguet, 
construction of the Benguet Road, erection of buildings, and 
construction of a wagon road from Naguilian. 

On August 18, 1908, Benguet became one of the sub- 
provinces of the Mountain Province by virtue of Act No. 1876, 
which was passed by the Philippine Legislature. The others 
were Bontoc, Ifugao, Kalinga, Ambuarayan and Lepanto. On 
February 4, 1920, the boundary of Benguet was altered because 



of the abolition of the subprovinces of Ambuarayan and 
Lepanto. 

During World War II, the USAFFE guerrillas of Northern 
Luzon withdrew to the mountain fastness, particularly in Ben- 
guet, where they later contacted the General Headquarters, 
Southwest Pacific Area (GHQ-SWPA) by radio, and transmit- 
ted information to General Douglas MacArthUr in Australia, 

During the reorganization of the guerrilla units in Northern 
Luzon, the 66th Infantry under Major Parker Calvert was 
officially activated in Benguet on October 8, 1943. The famous 
guerrilla leaders were Dennis Molintas and Bado Dangwa of 
Itogon. 

In July 1966, Republic Act No. 4695 divided the Mountain 
Province into four provinces, one of which was Benguet. 

The province has the highest percentage of literacy among 
the newly created provinces. Although Baguio City is its 
center of learning, there are several agricultural schools in its 
municipalities. 

There are more mineral resources in Benguet than in any 
of the three newly created provinces. Several mining compa- 
nies operate in the province; the important ones are the Benguet 
Consolidated, Incorporated, Lepanto Consolidated Mining Com- 
pany, Philex Mining Corporation, Benguet Exploration, Incor- 
porated, Itogon-Suyoc Mines, and the Atok-Big Wedge. 

Benguet Province is no longer the abode of non-Christian 
tree dwellers, such as the inland tribal groups of Ibaloys and 
the Kankanoys, etc. They have been assimilated as a part 
of the Filipino nation. 



150 




Provincial Seal 




EVERLASTING 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF BENGUET 

The Province of Benguet was created under Republic 
Act 4695 on June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Benguet 

Dam and Reservoir — represent Ambuklao and Binga 

Hydro-electric plant. 

^ stand for the rich mineral re- 
sources and the mining industry 
of the province. 

— represents the basket-weaving 
and home industries of Benguet 
as, well as its multi-million peso 
vegetable industry. 

— the forests of Benguet and 
its terrace-clad mountains, fore- 
most tourist attractions of the 
province. 

— it symbolizes the highland culture 
of the natives ; also the optimistic 
outlook of the people, their oneness 
and viability to progress. 



Miner's Tools 



Native Basket or 
Kayabong 



Pine Trees 



Gong or Gansa 



151 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ILOCOS NORTE 



The Province op Ilocos Norte is situated in the northwestern 
portion of Luzon. It is bounded on the east by Kalinga-Apayao 
on the south and southwest by Abra and Ilocos Sur, and on 
the north and west by the China Sea. 

The population of the province was 343,427 in 1970 It 
has a land area of 3,399.3 square kilometers. 



In May 1572, Juan de Salcedo occupied Vigan. Subsequently, 
he entered Laoag and sent an expedition to a town called Bacal 
(probably the town of Batac). Salcedo subjugated some of 
the purocs when he explored the Ilocos region. He returned 
to Manila, along the eastern coasthne of Luzon, in the later 
part of 1572. 

^^^^y in 1574, Salcedo again visited Ilocos where he 
nad been given an encomienda by Governor General Miguel 
Lopez de Legazpi. When Limahong attempted to invade Manila 
he returned to the city and helped in repelling the Chinese 
pirates. Later, he proceeded to Pangasinan and returned to 
nis encomienda. 

On February 2, 1818, a Royal Decree was promulgated 
dividing the province of Ilocos into Ilocos Norte and Ilocos Sur 
Laoag was made the capital of Ilocos Norte. 

Ilocos Norte was the scene of many important revolts. The 
first caused by the collection of tributes, occurred in Dingras 

1 7u ' by Pedro Almazan who 

proclaimed himself "King," and his eldest son "Crown Prince", 
m 1782, a general discontent over the tobacco monopoly caused 
an uprising in Laoag. Later, in 1807, the injustices of the wine 
monopoly caused the revolt led by Pedro Mateo. 

When the Filipinos revolted against Spain in 1896, Gregorio 
Aghpay was among the first to join the ranks of the 
revolutionists The Revolutionary Army under General Manuel 
Tinio occupied Ilocos Norte and the other Ilocano provinces. 

During World War II, the first guerrilla activities against 
the Japanese invaders took place in Ilocos Norte, Abra and 



Ilocos Sur. One of the guerrilla units that gained the attention 
A /cr^A Headquarters (GHQ) and the Southwest Pacific 
Area (SWPA) was the Ang Mga Maharliha (The Noble Ones) 
organized and commanded by Lt. Col. Ferdinand E. Marcos' 
which operated in northern Luzon and in the provinces of 
Pangasinan and Zambales, and the City of Manila. 

organization of the United States Armed Forces in 
the Philippines, Northern Luzon (USAFIP, NL), the Maharlika 
was dissolved. Lt. Col. Marcos and the other officers from 
northern Luzon joined the USAFIP, NL. 

Another resistance organization, the Ablan-Madamba guer- 
rilla unit of northern Luzon (organized in January 1942) had a 
series of fights with the Japanese Imperial Forces. ' When 
Colonel Watanabe established the Japanese headquarters in 
Laoag, the enemy hunted Roque B. Ablan, and even air-dropped 
leaflets urging his surrender. He, however, twice escaped the 
enemy trap. On November 8, 1942, Ablan successfully attacked 
the Japanese patrols in Pampanili, Solsona. A month after on 
December 10, he left for Cagayan to confer with General Marcelo 
Adduru. 

Ilocos Norte is the home of many national and local figures, 
some of them were: Ferdinand E. Marcos, incumbent president 
of the Republic of the Philippines; Manuel Luna, Filipino "Vir- 
tuoso" ; Juan Luna, famous painter of the "Spoliarium" ; Gregorio 
Aghpay, founder and first bishop of the Phihppine Independent 
Church; Josefa Llanes Escoda, social worker; Roque Ablan 
guerrilla fighter; Pedro Bukaneg, Father of Iloko Literature' 
and Fidel Segundo, successful general. 

The province has many historical markers, monuments and 
landmarks, namely: the birthplaces of Gregorio Aglipay in 
Batac Juan Luna in Badoc, and Valentin Diaz in Paoay; the 
churches of Laoag Paoay, and San Nicolas; the marke;s of 
Roque Ablan and the abolition of the tobacco monopoly, both 
m Laoag; the monuments of the brave Sarratenos and the Plaza 
Pasuquin; St. William Cathedral, and the Bojeador lighthouse 




152 




Provincial Seal 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ILOCOS NORTE 



The Province of Ilocos Norte was created under Act 
2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Ilocos Norte 

Central Portion — the ancient tower of Laoag City, 

begun in 1580 and considered the 
most solid and tallest belfry of 
the Philippines; also the symbol of 
Christian civilization in the North, 

— the intrepid Ilocano farmer with 
his working tools and companion. 

— the year of separation of the 
northern portion of the old Ilocos 
and creation into a province by a 
Royal Decree. 

— stalks of rice, symbol of abun- 
dance in rice production, the 
stabilizing factor of the economy 
of the Ilocanos. 

— symbol of the tobacco industry in. 
Northern Luzon to which the 
country owed its historical eco- 
nomic emancipation from the 
Mexican Government. 



Figure Below 
Year 1818 

Left Portion 

Right Portion 



153 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ILOCOS SUR 



ILOCOS SUR occupies the northwestern portion of Luzon. It 
is bounded in the north by Ilocos Norte and Abra, in the south 
by La Union, in the east by Benguet and the Mountain Province, 
and in the west by the China Sea. 

It has a land area of 2,579.6 square kilometers and a popu- 
lation of 385,139 in 1970. Its important crops are tobacco 
(Virginia type), rice, corn, sugar cane, onions, camote, cassava, 
and vegetables. 

Juan de Salcedo led the first expedition to the region. After 
his exploration in 1572, he founded Villa Femandina or Ciudad 
Fernandma (now Vigan), in honor of King Ferdinand VI of 
Spain, and the Ilocos province which embraced the present Ilocos 
Norte, Ilocos Sur, Abra, La Union, and parts of the Mountain 
Provmce. As a reward, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi, first Governor 
General of the Philippines, named him encomendero of Vigan 
and Lieutenant General of the Ilocos Province. Vigan, second 
m age to Manila, became the capital of the province. The other 
towns before the end of the 16th century were Santa Maria, 
Narvacan, Bantay, Candon and Sinait. 

In 1574, the Chinese pirate Limahong plundered Sinait 
while on his way to Manila. 

The Ilocanos were among the first Filipinos to oppose 
foreign rule and domination, two of their resistances were the 
Malong Rebellion of 1660 and the Silang Revolt of 1762 to 1763. 
Malong tried to establish a kingdom in Pangasinan and the 
neighboring provinces, as far as Vigan, while Diego Silang 
practically succeeded at the heights of his revolt in establishing 
an independent government in Ilocos Sur, Pangasinan and 
Cagayan. 

In 1611, when Pangasinan was created, a part of La Union 
(then Ilocos) was annexed to the new province. Later, on Feb- 
ruary 2, 1818, a Royal Decree divided the Ilocos province into 
Ilocos Norte and Ilocos Sur. The South (Sur) included the 
northern part of La Union and Abra and the sub-provinces of 
Lepanto and Amburayan which were portions of the Mountain 
Province. In 1846, Abra was created as a province with Lepanto 
as its sub-province, and in 1854, La Union was created out of 
the towns belonging to Ilocos Sur and Pangasinan. On February 
28, 1905, through the passage of Act No. 1306, Abra was again 
annexed to Ilocos Sur until March 9", 1917 when Act No. 2683 



separated Abra from Ilocos Sur. 

During the Philippine-American War, President Emilio 
Aguinaldo and the remnants of the Filipino forces retreated to 
Ilocos Sur, where his youngest general, Gregorio del Pilar, com- 
mander of the rear-guard forces, gallantly fought the American 
forces led by Major Peyton C. March at the Battle of Tirad 
Pass, in the municipal districts of Gregorio del Pilar and Sigay, 
and municipalities of Quirino, Cervantes and Suyo. 

On December 10, 1941, the Japanese Imperial Forces landed 
in Ilocos Sur. Six days later, they invaded Santa, Vigan and 
the neighboring towns and destroyed the churches and rectories 
of Bantay, Lapog, Santiago, Cervantes, and the Presidenciaa of 
Narvacan and Candon. 

A year after, on January 8, the guerrilla force composed of 
the elements of the 11th Infantry, 71st Infantry, and Troop C of 
the 26th Cavalry was organized into the United States Army 
Forces in the Philippines, Northern Luzon (USAFIP, NL). By 
June, it was reorganized into seven districts, with the Ilocos 
provinces and Abra belonging to the Third District. During the 
liberation, on January 8, 1945, the USAFIP, NL led the assault 
on the Japanese line at Bitalag, Tagudin, and the seizures of 
enemy strongholds along Highway 4. The same year, in June, the 
USAFIP, NL, spearheaded by the 121st Infantry, defeated the 
enemy at Bessang Pass in Cervantes which event hastened the 
surrender of General Tomoyuki Yamashita. 

Ilocos Sur is the home of many national and local heroes, 
some of whom were: Gabriela Silang, wife of Diego of the Ilocos 
Revolt and the first Filipino woman rebel leader; Father Jose 
Burgos, one of the three martyred priests in Bagumbayan 
(Luneta) in 1872, on account of the Cavite Mutiny; Isabelo de 
los Reyes, nationalist, co-founder of the Philippine Independent 
Church, and father of unionism; Cosme Abaya, military chaplain 
of the revolution; Isabelo Abaya, hero of the revolution; Ventura 
de los Reyes, a signatory of the Cadiz Constitution of 1812; 
Benito Soliven, assemblyman of the first National Assembly 
(1935); Pedro Bukaneg, father of Ilocano literature; Ignacio 
Villamor, Justice of the Supreme Court and first Filipino Presi- 
dent of the University of the Philippines; and Elpidio Quirino, 
Vice-President and later President of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines upon the death of President Manuel Roxas. 




PUEPLE BOUGAINVILLEA 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ILOCOS SUR 

The Province of Ilocos Sur was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Ilocos Sur 



Maroon Background — stands for courage, self-sacrifice, 

loyalty, perseverance and dedica- 
tion for work which are the 
outstanding virtues of its people. 

Chrome-yellow Circle —represents the province's long 

dry season, conducive to num- 
erous cottage industries which 
constitute the main livelihood of 
the Ilocanos. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF LA UNION 



The Province op La Union is bounded on the north by Ilocos 
Sur, on the east by Benguet, on the south by Pangasinan, and 
on the west by the China Sea. 

It has a land area of 1,493.1 square kilometers. It had a 
population of 373,682 in 1970. 

La Union is one of the noted tobacco-producing provinces 
of the country. Rice and com are also cultivated. Fishing is 
an important economic activity. 

The province is a rich source of limestone for the manu- 
facture of cement, particularly in Bacnotan. 

During his exploration of the north. Captain Juan de Sal- 
cedo reached a place called Atuley (presumed to be La Union). 
In Purao, the present town of Balaoan, Salcedo met strong 
resistance from the natives. 

The Augustinian missionaries arrived in La Union in the 
late decades of the 16th century. Among the first towns they 
founded were Balaoan (1587), Bauang (1590) and Agoo (1598). 

In the 17th century, La Union was conquered by Pedro 
Gumapos of Agoo. He was sent by Andres Malong, the leader 
of the Pangasinan Revolt, to subdue the Spaniards in the prov- 
ince. Gumapos, with his Zambal allies, was defeated by the 
forces of Generals Francisco de Esteybar and Felipe de Ugalde 
in a decisive battle between the towns of Sta. Lucia and Sta. 
Catalina in 1661. 

The province was created out of the towns of Ilocos Sur 
and Pangasinan (San Juan, San Fernando, Bauang, Naguilian, 
Aringay, Agoo and Sto. Tomas) by Governor General Antonio 



Maria Blanco on March 2, 1850. 

During the second phase of the Philippine Revolution, La 
Union was controlled by the revolutionists. In May 1898, Gen- 
eral Manuel Tinio occupied San Fernando. For sometime, the 
provincial government was under Governor Luciano Almeda. 

After the battle in Aringay River on November 19, 1899, 
the American troops under the command of General S. B. M. 
Young occupied the province. Together with the provinces of 
Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Sur, Abra, Lepanto and Bontoc, La Union 
was administered by the First Military District under General 
Young. 

The civil government was established in La Union on August 
15, 1901. A year later, La Union ceded a narrow strip of land 
to Amburayan, a subprovince of Mountain Province. 

During the Second World War, the USAFFE units in La 
Union fought the Japanese invaders in San Fernando, Bauang 
and Damortis. 

On January 21, 1945, the American Liberation Forces, to- 
gether with the 121st Infantry, Northern Luzon, fought the 
Japanese at Poro Point, Baroro River, and the Bacsil Ridge on 
the northern side of San Fernando. The liberating forces were 
supplied with arms and ammunitions by a submarine in Dari- 
gayos. San Fernando was liberated from the Japanese on 
March 24, 1945. 

A place famous for vacation resorts. La Union is well- 
known for its sandy beaches. The famous vacation spots at 
Poro Point, Nalinac, Mar-Fil and Long Beaches attract local 
as well as foreign visitors. 



/ 




POINSETTIA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 

PROVINCE OF LA UNION 

The Province of La Union was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of La Union 



Mountains 

Two Shaking Hands 



Sailboat 

Steamship 

Building 
Spinning Wheel 

Plow 

Tobacco Plant 



— symoblize mountainous La Union. 

— Pangasinan and Ilocos Sur, each 
of which contributed a siezable 
portion of their territories to give 
birth to the province of La Union. 

— means abundance in fish of the 
province. 

— San Fernando port of entry, the 
biggest port north of Manila. 

— the provincial capitol. 

— weaving industry in which its 
people are actively engaged. 

— denotes the fertile land of the 
(Province 

— other main industry of La Union. 



157 



HISTORY OF MOUNTAIN PROVINCE 



At the southern part of the old Mountain Province, between 
Ilocos Sur and Isabela Provinces, lies the present Mountain 
Province. It is bounded on the north by Kalinga-Apayao, on 
the east by Isabela, on the south by Ifugao, and on the west by 
Ilocos Sur. 

The province has more mountains than all the provinces of 
the Philippines have. During the Spanish regime, it was called 
"La Montanosa," meaning "The Mountainous." 

Mountain Province has a land area of 2,097,3 square kilo- 
meters. It had a population of 93,112 in 1970. 

The natives persistently resisted Spanish colonization ef- 
forts and practically remained uninfluenced by Christianity, 
and until recently by European, American and Asian domina- 
tions. They were shut off from the lowlands by rugged peaks; 
thus, preserving their primitive way of life up to this day. 

During the Spanish rule, sporadic expeditions were sent 
against its inhabitants as early as 1663; but not much was done 
to change their old ways. They preferred the primitive mode 
of existence than Spanish subjugation. These tribal groups 
belong to the non-Christian tribes of Indonesian origin. 

Because of its high elevation, the province has a cool cli- 
mate. The major crops are rice, potato and vegetables. Camote 



or sweet potato is used as a secondary staple food among the 
Igorots, and it ranks second to their rice production. 

When the Philippine Kevolution broke out in 1896, the non- 
Christian tribes destroyed the Spanish outposts and massacred 
the people in the Spanish garrisons. The revolutionary forces 
which moved into the mountain areas of the province v/ere given 
complete support by its inhabitants. 

In 1900, the American forces, destroyed the revolutionary 
forces. They later established a civil government in the prov- 
ince. In 1901, the missionaries from the Roman Catholic, 
American Episcopalian (Protestant) and United Brethren (Pro- 
testant) de;nominations entered Mountain Province and initiated 
Christian evangelization work in these highlands. 

Under Act No. 1876, passed by the Philippine Legislature 
on August 18, 1908, Mountain Province was made into a sepa- 
rate province headed by a lieutenant-governor. 

With the passage of Republic Act No. .4695, approved on 
March 11, 1966, the old Mountain Province was divided into 
the provinces Mountain Province (name retained), Benguet, 
Kalinga-Apayao and Ifugao. The municipalities of the new 
Mountain Province are Barlig, Besao, Bontoc (capital), Nato- 
nin, Paracelis, Sabangan, Sadanga, Sagada and Sadian. 




LILY 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



MOUNTAIN PRO\TNCE 



Mountain Province was created under R.A. 4695 on 
June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Mountain Province 

Pure-white Lilies — believed to have been planted by 

the gods to beautify more the 
verdant hills and mountains. 

Five White Stars — the defunct sub-provinces of 

Bontoc, Ifugao, Benguet, Apayao 
and Kalinga. 

■also represent the sub-provinces 
and their attractions. 

• refuge in defense of freedom. 

-banks and industrial buildings 
housing minerals in all forms. 

■ once the principal weapons of war. 
■the headgear of native women. 

■ unity among its ten municipalities. 



Mountain Peaks 

Mountains 

Two Small Homes 

Spear and Head Ax 
String of Agate beads 
Rope 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province of Pangasinan, situated at the western eoast 
of Luzon, is bounded on the north by the Lingayen Gulf, 
La Union and Benguet; on the east and northeast by Nueva 
Vizcaya; on the southeast by Nueva Ecija and on the south 
by Tarlac and Zambales. At its western portion is the China 
Sea. 

Pangasinan has a land area of 5,368.2 square kilometers. 
In 1970, it had a population of 1,386,143. 

The word "Pangasinan," which means "the place where salt 
is made," is derived from the root word asin, meaning "salt." 
It is one of the important occupations (salt making) of the 
inhabitants along the coastal areas of the province. 

When the famous Chinese pirate, Limahong, attempted to 
establish a settlement on the shores of Lingayen, he was re- 
pulsed by the forces of Juan de Salcedo on March 23, 1575. 

A decade after the arrival of the Spaniards in the province, 
Pangasinan was apportioned to six encomenderos. The Laws 
of the Indies in 1580 provided for the organization of 
Pangasinan into an alcaldia mayor. Later, in 1611, Pangasinan 
was created into a province. 

Due to discontentment against Spanish colonial rule, several 
abortive revolts occurred in the province. The noted ones were 
those led by Juan Cagragray, Andres Malong and Juan de la 
Cruz Palaris. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Da- 
niel Maramba, one of the earliest Katipuneros of the province, 
recruited members of the Katipunan from the towns of Urda- 
neta, Sta. Barbara, Malasiqui, Calasiao and Mangaldan. The 
revolutionary forces repulsed a counter-revolutionary move- 
ment of the Guardia de Honor in the barrios of Cabaruan in 
Urdaneta, and in Sta. Ana, Tayug. The Guardia was a reli- 
gious organization instituted by the friars at the start of the 
Revolution. 



OF PANGASINAN 



The first Philippine Republic set up by General Emilio 
Aguinaldo at Malolos, Bulacan, was transferred to Pampanga, 
Nueva Ecija, Tarlac, and finally in Bayambang, Pangasinan, 
after the outbreak of the Filipino-American War in 1899. In 
Bayambang, Aguinaldo disbanded his army and organized 
guerrilla units to escape the pursuing American forces. 

The Americans occupied Pangasinan in November 1899. 
The first appointed Filipino governor of the province was Per- 
fect© Sison. In 1908, Antonio Sison became the first efected 
governor. 

During the Second World War, the Japanese forces landed 
in Pangasinan at Lingayen Gulf on December 21, 1941. After 
the attack of Aparri, Laoag, and Vigan, the Japanese com- 
pletely controlled Northern Luzon. Later, the American Lib- 
eration Forces unexpectedly attacked Lingayen on January 
9,. 1945, and simultaneously landed at San Fabian. 

Claimed to be the "rice granary of the Philippines," 
the province has embarked on an agricultural development 
program geared towards increased rice production. Since 1972, 
communal irrigation dams have been constructed. Several 
agencies like the National Irrigation Administration, the 
Presidential Assistance on Community Development, and the 
Local Irrigation Service unit assist the provincial government 
in carrying out the program. 

Urduja Country (after the legendary heroine), as Panga- 
sinan is popularly referred to, is noted for the Hundred Islands 
of Lucap, Alaminos; the Umbrella Rocks of Sabangan Norte in 
Agno; the Blue Beach in Bonuan, Dagupan City; the White 
Beach of San Fabian; and the historic beach of Lingayen. Hot 
springs are also found in Pugaro, Balungao and in Manleluwag, 
Mangatarem. 

Pangasinan is also famous for its Shrine of the Lady of 
Manaoag, and the Pista'y Dayat, a fluvial parade that starts 
from the Hundred Islands to San Fabian, 

^ 




YELLOW SANTAN 
Provincial Flower 



HtfUSMUWllMUStSSBSBl 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF PANGASINAN 

The Province of Pangasinan was created under Act 
2711 on March 10, 1S17. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Pangasinan 



Building 



Sailboats and Blue 
Background 



MUkfish, Bricks and 
Salt-cooking 

Motif of Coat of Arms 



— the provincial capitol in Lingayen, 
built in 1918 and reconstructed 
after the war. 

— the calm and beautiful Lingayen 
Gulf, haven of today's fishermen 
and the seafarers of the old 
days such as the Chinese trader 
Limahong. 

— main sources of livelihood of its 
people. 

■patterned after the native shield, 
suggestive of the reign of the 
legendary Princess Urduja. 



161 



Region II 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BATANES 



THE ISLANDS in the Batanes group, like stepping stones off 
the northern coasts of Luzon, consist of the inhabited islands of 
Batan, Itbayat, Ibahos, Duquey, Siayan, Mabudis, Diogo, Sab- 
tang, North and Y'Ami, and seven or more small volcanic islets. 

Batanes, with a rugged coastline, has a land area of 209.3 
square kilometers. 

The island, with the seat of the provincial government 
in the Municipality of Santo Domingo de Basco, is the smallest 
among the 67 provinces of the country. It is separated from 
Formosa by the Bashi Channel and from the Babuyan Islands 
by the Balintang Channel. The Balintang Islands, in the center 
of the Balintang Channel, form the connecting link between 
the Babuyanes and Batanes. 

The original inhabitants of Batanes were from the Malay 
stock, the Itavans — short, squat people. Their small houses of 
wood, bamboo and cogon were located in small villages on the 
slopes and top of rocky hills. Each cluster of houses was under 
a Mangpus. In 1970, the island had a population of 11,398. 

The Dominicans started the evangelization of the natives 
in the Batanes Islands. In 1680, Father Mateo Gonzales was 
appointed Vicar of Babuyanes until 1686, when he was assigned 
to Cagayan. 

The difficulty of transportation between the different 
islands caused major drawbacks in the missionary activity. 
However, on June 16, 1783, iting Charles III ordered Qpvernor 
General Don Jose Basco y Vargas to give the people of Batanes 
every chance to receive the Catholic faith, without counting 
the cost of the undertaking. 

On September 16, 1898, the Filipino revolutionists arrived 
in Batanes and killed its governor, Julian Fortea. Teofilo Cas- 
tillejos was installed as chief of the province and the local 
heads were appointed in each of the municipalities in lieu of the 

gobemadorcilla or capitan. 



When the American forces established a military govern- 
ment, after the Philippine- American War, Batanes was classified 
as a municipality of Cagayan. Luciano Barsana was given 
the title of president of the province. 

During the term of Governor General James Smith, Batanes 
was made a subprovince of Cagayan with a deputy governor 
in 1908. Under the administration of Deputy Governor Otto 
Von Scheerer, the projects on the urbanization of municipal- 
ities were initiated, and roads and port facilities were con- 
structed. In Batan Island, all the towns were linked by tele- 
phone and, in Itbayat, a line connected the port to the town. 
A wireless communication tower was also built near Basco. 

With the establishment of a civil government, the first 
elections were held to choose their respective town presidents. 
Batanes became an independent province in 1909. 

During the Pacific War from 1941 to 1945, the Japanese 
forces landed in Batan Island at dawn of December 8, 1941. 
The invading forces consisting of two transports, one destroyer, 
four torpedo boats, and several other large vessels left Takao 
and Hozan, Formosa, on the evening of December 7. The 
enemy seized an airfield in Basco with the plan of transforming 
it into a base for air attacks in Northern Luzon. The Japanese 
Imperial Army also gained complete control of the airfields in 
Laoag, Vigan and Aparri in Northern Luzon. Four years 
later, when the American Liberation Forces arrived, the Ja- 
panese forces surrendered in Batanes on September 8, 1945. 

Today, although Basco was left in ruins after the war, it 
has well-paved streets chiseled out of high cliffs, and modern 
and massive government buildings. 

Batanes is no longer synonymous with people in native 
raincoats made from strips of banana stalks. They have 
learned to live out of the hardships on an island province far 
from the centers of population, production, commerce and trade. 



162 




Cow 



Earthen Jar 



PROVINCE OF BATANES 



The Province of Batanes was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Batanes 



-a major product of the province 
and principal source of income for 
the ordinary farmer. 



— a versatile household item. 



Root Crops 



- above the cow, from left to right, 
rootstocks of gabi, camote and 
ubi; to the left of the jar, garlic 
or onion; and to the right, tugui— 
all of which constitute the major 
agricultural crops of the province. 



1 



163 



HISTORY OF THE 



Cagayan, situated at the northern tip of Luzon, is bounded 
in the north by the Babuyan Channel, east by the Pacific 
Ocean, south by the Provinces of Kalinga and Isabela, and 
west by the Province of Apayao. 

It has a land area of 909,594 hectares which is divided 
into the tobacco and delta regions. Two mountain ranges, 
Mt. Cetaceo (the highest, 1,833 meters) and Mt. Tapha (the 
lowest, 439 meters) yield good hardwoods. 

Cagayan had a population of 532,000 in 1970. The province 
consists of 29 municipalities, with the capital at Tuguegarao. 

Before the Spaniards came, the Ibanags (derived from the 
native word bannag, meaning "river") had' already settled 
along the river banks. They had their own culture and were 
trading with the Chinese, Malays, Japanese, and other 
neighboring peoples. ■ ' 

In 1572, Juan de Salcedo explored Cagayan Valley, via 
the Cagayan River, and visited Aparri, Abulug and Pamplona. 
Tagay trees (tall hardwood) then abounded along the river 
banks; hence, they called the region "Catagayan" which was 
later shortened to "Cagayan." 

The Japanese pirates led by Tayfusa or Taizufa settled 
along the coast of the province and terrorized the natives in 
1581. On orders of Governor Gonzalo Ronquillo de Penalosa, 
they were driven away by Captain Pablo Carreon, Dominican 
Cristobal de Salvatierra and Augustinian Francisco Rodriguez. 
Capt. Carreon founded the City of Nueva Segovia (now Lal-lo) 
and built a port. Another expedition, among others, led by 
Luis Perez Dasmarinas, explored Tuy. 

By 1583, Cagayan, comprising the territories east of the 
Cordillera central mountains and north of the Caraballo del 
Sur, was already recognized as a political division, with Nueva 
Segovia as its capital. 

In 1594, Augustinians Diego de Soria and Tomas Castellar 
undertook the missionary work in the region. The Dominicans, 
however took over the vast mission field on June 13, 1595. 
Two months later, on August 14, Pope Clement VIII created 
the Diocese oi Nueva Segovia with the City of Nueva Segovia 
as its seat and Father Miguel de Benavides as the first bishop. 



164 



OF CAGAYAN 



The seat of the Diocese was later transferred to Vigan in 1755. 

A series of revolts rocked the province. In 1589, Santiago 
de Vera pacified the natives who opposed the collection of 
tributes and killed many Spaniards. In 1596, the people of 
Cagayan led by Magalat and his brother, and later helped by 
the Tuguegarao chieftains, were crushed by Captain Pedro 
de Chaves. In November 1621, the Gaddang tribes led by 
Felipe Cutabay and Gabriel Dayag were convinced by Dominican 
Pedro de Santo Tomas to lay down their arms. Again, in 
1625 (led by Miguel Lanab and Alababan), then in 1627, 
and finally in March 1639, the people of Cagayan again 
revolted but were subdued. In 1718, the natives of Malaoeg 
and Tuao under Magtangaga and Tomas Sinaguingan were 
suppressed by Captain Juan Pablo de Ordufia. 

Led by Dabo and Marayac, the people of Ilagan, inspired 
by the British invasion of 1762 and the revolutionary propa- 
ganda of Silang and Palaris, also revolted and proclaimed their 
independence on February 2, 1763. This uprising spread to 
Cabagan and Tuguegarao where Manuel de Arza finally 
quelled them. 

Nueva Vizcaya was created into a separate politico-military 
province in 1839. Later, Isabela was also separated from 
Cagayan in 1856. By order of General Weyler, Kalinga became 
"Partido de Haves" with the seat of government in Cagayan 
in 1889. Apayao, north of the "Partido," was organized into 
a comandancia the next year. 

During the Philippine revolution. Colonel Daniel Tirona, 
aboard the Filipinos, proceeded to Aparri where on August 
25, 1898, Lieutenant Mariano Perez de Guzman of the Spanish 
marine and infantry forces and Lieutenant Salvador Piera of 
the civil guards surrendered to him. Successively, the other 
towns were occupied by the revolutionary forces. Tuguegarao 
was surrendered on the 30th and occupied by Mayor Jose M. 
Leyba the next day. 

When the Americans came during the Philippine-American 
War, Captain Joseph B. Batchelor entered Tuguegarao on 
December 12, 1899. Later, Colonel Hood was appointed military 
governor of Cagayan until August 22, 1901, when Commissioner 
William Taft visited Tuguegarao and established a civil govern- 
ment in the province, ^^i- 



Provincial Seal 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF CAGAYAN 



The Province of Cagayan was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Cagayan 

Yellow (or Gold ) Color — symbolizes the wealth of the 

province. 

— stands for justice, honor, nobility 
of the people, their sincerity and 
traditional peaceful ways. 

— depicts Cagayan River serving as 
dividing line between the two 
congressional district. 

— represent the small islands on the 
northern part of the province. 

— represent the main agricultural 
crops such as tobacco, rice, corn 
and peanuts, the major sources of 
income of the people. 



Blue Color 



Blue Portion 



Small Islands 



Plant Facsimiles 



165 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF IFUGAO 



166 



The Province of Ifugao, on the central Cordillera Mountains 
of northern Luzon, is bounded on the north by the Mountain 
Province, on the south by Nueva Vizcaya, on the east by Isabela, 
and on the west by Benguet. 

Ifugao has a land area of 2,517 square kilometers. In 1970 
it had a population of 92,487. The Ifugao dialect is spoken by 
about 88.0% of the population, the Ilocano language by about 
9.1 7o, and the other dialects by 2.9%. 

The inhabitants are engaged in agriculture, hunting, and 
forestry. Woodcarving, the famous na- 
tive woodcraft particularly in Hapao, is 
an important home industry. 

Topographically, Ifugao has rugged 
terrain and peaks, except on the western 
portion called the Valley of the Magat 
River which is one of the most fertile 
places in the Philippines, and a part of 
the best tobacco-producing region in 
the north. 

Rice, its chief agricultural product, 
is grown on the terraces. The other 
crops are potato, taro, cotton, and 
vegetables (pea, bean, and onion). 

During the first half of the 19th 
century, the Spanish explorer, Guillermo 
Galvey, led about 45 expeditions to the 
mountain region. He visited Trinidad, 
Lutab, Kalayan (Benguet), Kiangan and 
Mayoyao (Ifugao), Kayan (Lepanto), 
and Suyoc (Amburayan). 

At the end of the Spanish rule, the region of the old 
Mountain Province was devided into several politico-military 
comandancia, one of which was the comandancia of Kiangan, 
now Ifugao. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the 
mountain country was practically unaffected by the war. How- 
ever, during the Filipino-American War, the Filipino soldiers 
who. retreated to central and northern Luzon penetrated the 
district of the Mountain Province. General Emilio Aguinaldo 
retreated to Benguet, Bontoc, Ifugao and Kalinga on his way 
to Palanan, Isabela. 




Originally, the Subprovince of Ifugao was a part of the 
Province of Nueva Vizcaya wlien the latter was created in 1839. 
On August 18, 1908, by virtue of Act No. 1876 of the Philip- 
pine Commission, the Mountain Province was created as a 
separate province and divided into subprovinces each headed 
by a lieutenant-governor. Ifugao was later separated from 
Nueva Vizcaya and made a subprovince of Mountain Province. 

During the American occupation. Colonel William John C. 
Early became the Deputy Military Governor of Ifugao in 1927. 

Col. William E. Dosser was the last 
designated American Deputy Military 
Governor of the subprovince. 

General Tomoyuki Yamashita, 
known as the "Tiger of Malaya," who 
commanded the 14th Area of the Japan- 
ese Imperial Army in the Philippines, 
established the "Yamashita Pocket" with 
headquarters in Kiangan, Ifugao and the 
Bontoc area. 

In Kiangan, Yamashita finally sur- 
rendered to the joint Filipino-American 
Forces in 1945, dignifying the final liber- 
ation of the Philippines from the Japan- 
ese forces. 

Ifugao Subprovince was created into 
a regular province on June 18, 1966, by 
virtue of Republic Act No. 4695. Under 
this law the old Mountain Province was 
divided into four regular provinces — 
Benguet, Ifugao, Kalinga-Apayao and 
the Mountain Province. The municipalities of the province are 
Banawe, Hungduan, Kiangan, Lamut, Mayaoyao (Mayoyao), 
Potia, and Lagawe, which is the provincial capital. 

The Banawe rice terraces of Ifugao, considered as one of 
the eight wonder of the world, is the main tourist attraction 
of the provinces. These terraces, like gigantic stairways, are 
thousands of feet up to the mountain sides, and 12,000 miles (or 
half-way around the world) if placed end to end. They are 
irrigated by an elaborate system of canals and giant ditches 
extending miles in length. Unlike the pyramids of Egypt, the 
terraces were built by free men to support free life, x 



IV 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF IFUGAO 



Blue Background 

Shield 
Greenfields 



The Province of Ifugao was created under R.A. 4695 on June 18, 1966. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Ifugao 



- the blue skies which seem to join 
the famous rice terraces of the 
city when viewed from afar. 

- traditional weapon of the natives 
for self-defense. 

- the famous rice terraces, so much 
like stairways to the skies, and 



considered the eighth wonder of 
the world. 

Divan or hagabe — status symbol of the natives. The 

carving of this furniture is even 
ritualistic — from the search and 
cutting of the narra tree to the 
delivery of the finished product 
to the owner. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ISABELA 



ISABELA, considered as the second biggest province in Luzon, 
is bounded by the provinces of Cagayan on the north, Nueva 
Vizcaya and Quezon on the south, the Pacific Ocean on the east 
and the Mountain Province on the west. 

The province has a land area of 10,644.56 square kilometers. 
It had 48,302 inhabitants in 1887, and 638,123 in 1970. 

With the construction of an irrigation system and the 
introduction of scientific farming methods, Isabela is now an- 
other rice granary of the Philippines and a premiere quality 
tobacco-growing province. It is also a veritable basin of oil 
and ore deposits, and a source of lumber and other forest 
products. 

Isabela originally consisted of the area known as Irraya 
(from Cabagan to Ilagan), Diffun (from Gamu to Cauayan), 
and Paniqui (from Cauayan to Nueva Vizcaya). Fr. Francisco 
de Sto. Tomas, a Dominican, started evangelizing Irraya. He 
was succeeded by Fr. Pedro Jimenez. 

The Dominicans founded Maquila (later called Cabagan 
Viejo), Nalavangan and Pilitan (1598), Talama (1604), Bataoag 
(now Gamu) (1612), Abuatan (now Bangac, barrio of Ilagan) 
and Bolo (now Ilagan) (1619), Cauayan (1739), Carig and Lap- 
pau (1743), and Camarag (now Echague) (1752), Oscariz 
(1882), Reina Mercedes (1885) and Cordon (1896). In 1678, 
Governor General Juan de Vargas Hurtado sent some troops 
to the area for the protection of the missionaries from the pagan 
Gaddanes. 

The province was created on March 1, 1856 and named 
after Queen Isabela of Spain. 

Although the vast region of Isabela was already christian- 
ized, the Gaddanes and Mayoyaos in the mountains continued 
to resist foreign rule. In the middle of the 19th century, Don 



Mariano Oscariz led a punitive campaign against these tribes 
who were later converted to the Christian faith by Fr. Juan 
Prieto. 

Like Pangasinan and Ilocos, Isabela had also several up- 
risings. In 1762, the Silang Rebellion affected Isabela. A year 
later, on February 2, 1763, the people, led by a certain Dabo 
and Juan Marayac, revolted. In 1785, another revolt was staged 
by Labutao and Baladon due to grievances in tributes and the 
enforcement of the tobacco monopoly. 

During the second phase of the Revolution in 1898, the 
province was controlled by the revolutionists under Colonel 
Daniel Tirona, as commander of the Northwestern Luzon Force. 
Colonel Simeon Villa took Isabela without resistance from the 
Spanish forces in the area. Villa established his headquarters 
at Carig, Isabela. 

On March 23, 1901, the American forces under Colonel Fre- 
derick Funston captured General Emilio Aguinaldo in Palanan, 
a small town of Isabela. 

The most important guerrilla force in Isabela during the 
Japanese occupation was led by Lt. Col. Guillermo Nakar. He 
organized the 14th Infantry and the intelligence network in the 
provinces of Isabela, Nueva Vizcaya and Pangasinan. 

Isabela, since the Spanish and American regimes, has been 
famous all over the world for its Philippine cigars. However, 
the province has lately planted the Virginia leaf tobacco due to 
the demand from Manila's cigar and cigarette factories. 

The places of attraction in the province are the Naguilian 
Bridge (the longest in the North), the Magat River Irrigation 
Dam (the biggest single unit system in the country), the old 
artistic church of Tumauini, the historic church ruins at San 
Pablo, and the Siffu Irrigation System. 




SAMPAGUITA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ISABELA 

The Province of Isabela was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Isabela 

Rice and Tobacco — Prime crops of the province. 

Three Wave Lines — three great rivers of Isabela which 

are Cagayan, Pinacanauan and 
Siffu Rivers. 

Tower — signifies the ancient Spanish rule. 

Queen —Queen Isabella of Spain, after 

whom the province was named. 



HISTORY OF THE 



THE PROVINCE OF KALINGA-APAYAO lies between the 
Ilocos Provinces and the Cagayan Valley, at the northernmost 
part of the old Mountain Province. It is bounded on the north 
by Ilocos Norte and Cagayan, on the east by Cagayan and 
Isabela, on the south by the Mountain Province, and on the 
west by Abra and Ilocos Norte. 

The province has a land area of 7,047.6 square kilometers 
and a population of 136,249 in 1970, 

Kalinga is surrounded by mountains whose peaks range 
from 1,514 to 2,576 meters high. Geographically, it is divided 
into three regions: (1) the more or less mountainous western 
portion of the Chico River drainage basin, (2) the valley of 
the Chico River and its branches, and (3) the level plains 
between the Chico River and Cagayan Province. 

Apayao descends eastward .to the valley of the Cagayan 
River. Its most important rivers are Abulug, Talibago, Mata- 
lak and Sinundungan. The products are corn, camote, coconut 
and rice. It has also rich virgin forests from where beeswax 
and rattan are gathered. 

The Dominican missions were established at Tabang and 
Piat, along the Chico River, in 1604, and another at Tuga, 
about sixteen miles south of Tuao, in 1688. 

The Spaniards constructed the military posts at Balbala- 
sang, near the Saltan River, and at Balitokon area, near the 
Pacil River. They withdrew from the hinterlands of North- 
em Luzon at the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896. 
The missionaries also abandoned their mission sites in the 
region because of unfavorable climate which caused diseases. 



OF KALINGA-APAYAO 



At the outbreak of the Filipino-American War in 1899, 
the American forces pursued General Emilio Aguinaldo and 
his army from the capital of the Philippine Republic in Malo- 
los (Bulacan), to Tarlak (Tarlac) and Bayambang (Pangasi- 
nan). Aguinaldo thus pushed to the north towards the prov- 
inces of La Union and Ilocos Sur, up to the settlement of the 
Kalingas, in Lubuagan, where the President celebrated his 31st 
birthday on March 22, 1900. After staying in Lubuagan for 
almost two months, Aguinaldo left for the Cagayan Valley and 
Isabela by the middle of May of the same year. 

Under Act No. 1876, passed by the Philippine Legislature 
on August 18, 1908, the Mountain Province was made into a 
separate province headed by a lieutenant-governor. 

Republic Act No, 4695, approved on March 11, 1966, com- 
bined the subprovinces of Kalinga and Apayao to form the 
Province of Kalinga-Apayao. The municipalities of the new 
province are Balbalan, Lubuagan, Pinukpuk, Tanudan, Tingla- 
yan, Quirino, Liwan, Luna, Flora, Kabugao, Pudtol, Conner, 
Bayag and Tabuk, the capital town. 

The province with wide, fertile virgin lands is a favor- 
able mission site of the Protestants and the Catholics. The 
Congregation of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (Catholic), 
the American Episcopal Mission (Protestant), and the United 
Brethren (Protestant) initiated the Christian missionary work 
in these highlands where a majority of the population belongs 
to the cultural minority group. The non-Christian tribes of 
Kalinga-Apayao have therefore been gradually acculturated 
and assimilated into the Filipino Christian way of life. 




SUNFLOWER 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF KALINGA-APAYAO 



The Province of Kalinga-Apayao was created under 
R.A. 4695 on June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Kalingao-Apayao 



Green Color 



Gold Stars 



Mountain Ranges 



Shield and Spear 



Crossed Adzes 



Wide Fields 



— stands for life, robust vegetation 
and wealth. 

— mineral wealth which must be 
tapped; also stands for dignity 
of character, integrity and loyalty 
to God and country. 

— the province is mountainous but 
cattle ranches abound in the area. 

— the traditional weapons of the 
natives. 

— the two ethnic groups, Apayao 
and Kalinga. 

— signify the vast and luxuriant 
farms of the valley, making the 
the province the rice-granary 
of Northern Luzon. ! 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province of Nueva Vizcaya is bounded by the provinces 
of Isabela on the north, Nueva Ecija on the south, Quezon on 
the east, and Pangasinan and La Union on the west. 

The province has a land area of 82,718 square kilometers 
and a population of 221,965 as of 1970. 

As early as 1596, the Spanish missionaries had already 
penetrated the region. The first mission was at the Ituy 
Valley, which was founded by the Dominicans in 1632. In 1717, 
the Augustinians continued the evangelization of the area. Ba- 
yombong, its capital, was founded in 1737. 

In 1839, Governor General Luis Lardizabal issued an order 
creating the politico-military province of Nueva Vizcaya, in 
memory of his home province, Vizcaya, Spain. 

Several expeditions were repeatedly sent to Nueva Vizcaya 
because the natives refused to accept Spanish sovereignty. In 
some of these expeditions the services of Filipino chieftains 
were utilized. The most famous was that commanded by Don 
Mariano Oscariz in 1847 which carried him through the whole 
province. In 1856, Nueva Vizcaya ceded a big portion of its 
territory to Isabela, including Camarag, its former capital. 

Nueva Vizcaya was affected by the Philippine Revolution 
in 1898 when Cagayan and Isabela fell into the hands of the 
revolutionary forces. The Spanish forces in the province sur- 
rendered to Colonel Jose Leyba on September 15, 1898. When 
General Emilio Aguinaldo asked for voluntary contributions to 
support the war, the Igorots of this province refused and fled 
to the mountains. Consequently, on August 29, 1899, the revolu- 
tionary governor of Nueva Vizcaya immediately requested for 
more rifles because the Igorots were preparing to attack the 
towns. 

On November 1899, the American forces under Colonel J. 
Franklin Bell overtook and captured the forces of General Lu- 
ciano San Miguel and General Jose Alejandrino in the mountains 
of northern Luzon. The next month, on November 2nd, Gen- 



OF NUEVA VIZCAYA 



eral Fernando Canon surrendered the Province of Nueva Vizca- 
ya to Lt. J.N. Munro, of the Fourth Cavalry. Although the 
regular Filipino army had been dissolved, Aguinaldo ordered his 
commanders to conduct guerrilla operations. On August 20, 
1900, he appointed Captain Joaquin Velasquez as leader of the 
guerrillas in Nueva Vizcaya. 

A civil government was established in this province on 
January 28, 1902, and on April 7 of the same year, a law was 
passed providing for the establishment of the local civil gov- 
ernments. 

During World War II, along the 49-kilometer Santa Fe 
road in Nueva Vizcaya, now named Dalton Pass, a big battle 
between the Japanese Imperial Forces and the 25th Division 
of the Philippine Army was fought. About 7,403 Japanese 
soldiers and 2,365 Filipino troops were either killed or wounded. 

During the liberation in 1942, Major Ptussell Volkmann 
divided northern Luzon into seven districts, designated units 
to garrison each district, and. assigned a commander to each 
major unit. The 5th District composed of Nueva Vizcaya and 
Isabela was garrisoned by the 14th Infantry under Major Ro- 
mulo Manriquez, who took over the command after the capture 
of Lt. Col. Guillermo Nakar. Captain Amado S. Bautista, 
commander of the 11th Engineer Combat Batallion, directed 
personally the organization and preparation of the ground de- 
fenses of the various units of the 11th Division in Nueva 
Vizcaya, Isabela, La Union and Pangasinan in January 1942. 

In 1952, through the efforts of Congressman Leon Cabar- 
roguis, the towns of Saguday, Diffun and Aglipay, together with 
Maddela, were added to the territorial limits of Nueva Vizcaya. 

Under Republic Act No. 4734, the subprovince of Quirino 
was created in the Province of Nueva Vizcaya. Later, the sub- 
province was separated and made an independent and regular 
province by virtue of Republic Act No. 6394, approved on 
September 10, 1971. 




Provincial Seal 




CAMIA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF NUEVA VIZCAYA 

The Province of Nueva Vizcaya was created under Act 
2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Nueva Vizcaya 

Foiir Lions — historic symbol for the almost 

four centuries of Spanish rule. 

— our national tree. 

— symbol for the three (3) main 
surrounding ridges, namely, Cara- 
ballo, Cordillera and Sierra Madre. 

— the famous Salinas Salt Spring. 

— indicate a well established lumber 
industry and abundant rice supply 
of the province. 



Narra Tree 
Three Mountains 

White Hill 
Logs and Palay 



173 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF QUIRINO 



The Province of Quirino is bounded on the north by the Prov- 
ince of Isabela, on the east and south by the Subprovince of 
Aurora (Quezon), and on the west by the Province of Nueva 
Vizcaya. 

A small province consisting of only five municipalities, 
namely, Cabarroguis (its capital), Aglipay, Diffun, Maddela, 
and Saguday, Quirino has a land area of 3,057.2 square kilo- 
meters. The estimated population as of 1970 was 49,767. Its 
major industry is agriculture. 

Until its creation as a province in 1971, Quirino was for- 
merly a portion of Nueva Vizcaya. 

In 1591, Luis Perez Dasmarinas explored the region. Sub- 
sequently, several Christian settlements were founded by the 
Dominicans in the area which later became the Cagayan Valley. 
On May 24, 1839, as provided by the Reed Orden of April 10, 
1841, Governor General Luis Lardizabal divided the Cagayan 
Valley into the provinces of Cagayan and Nueva Vizcaya. 

Two years after the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution 
in 1896, Colonel Daniel Tirona established a revolutionary gov- 
ernment in northern Luzon in August 1898. The same year, 
on September 15, the Filipino revolutionary headquarters re- 
ceived the notice of surrender of the Spanish forces in Nueva 
Vizcaya through Major Delfin Esquizel, commander of the rev- 
olutionary forces in the area. 

The revolutionary government, however, was short-lived. 
On November 1899, Cagayan Valley surrendered to the American 
forces led by Captain Joseph B. Batchelder. 



The Province of Nueva Vizcaya was organized by the Amer- 
icans on January 28, 1902. Its local civil government was es- 
tablished on April 7 of the same year. 

Following the outbreak of Wortd War II in December 1941, 
guerrilla forces were organized under the command of Major 
Russell Volkmann of the USFIP-NL. Nueva Vizcaya was gar- 
risoned by the 14th Infantry under Major Romulo Manriquez. 

The present municipalities of Quirino — Diffun, Saguday, Ag- 
lipay and Maddela — were originally the northeastern portion of 
Nueva Vizcaya, on the other side of the Sierra Ma,dre moun- 
tains. Due to their great distances from the provincial capital, 
Congressman Leonardo B. Perez introduced a bill in 1966. It 
proposed the creation of the Subprovince of Quirino, in honor 
of the late president of the Republic, Elpidio Quirino. The bill 
which became Republic Act No. 4734 was approved on June 18, 
1966. Later, on June 21, 1969, R.A. No. 5554 provided for the 
segregation of Quirino Subprovince from Nueva Vizcaya. It 
further provided for the creation of the Municipality of Cabar- 
roguis from some barrios and sitios of the municipalities of 
Diffun and Aglipay. 

However, Congressman Floro Crisologo and Melanio Sing- 
son sponsored a bill that would separate Quirino from Nueva 
Vizcaya and give it an independent political status. R.A. No. 
6394 finally created the Province of Quirino on September 
10, 1971. 

Among the tourist attractions of the province are the natural 
caves in Diffun and Sagqday, and the Ponggo River^ valley in 
Maddela. 




Provincial Seal 




MARIPOSA 
Provincial Flower 



9 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF QUIRINO 

The Province of Quirino was created under R.A. 4734 
on June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Quirino 

Sun with Eight Rays — the eight provinces that first 

revolted against the Spanish 
Government. 



Mountain Ranges 



Three Routes 



Plants 



Three Logs 



- Mamparam and Palale Ranges in 
the Sierra Madre Mountains, main 
sources of forest products and 
wild life. 

•the Addalan, Canwap and Didu- 
yan Rivers forming the Cagayan 
River. 

■ corn, rice and tobacco, main agri- 
cultural products of the province. 

■main source of income of the 
province mainly abundant in the 
municipalities of Aglipay and 
Maddela, 



175 



Region II 



HISTORY OF THE 



THE PROVINCE OF BATAAN, a jutting land mass in the 
southwestern part of Luzon, is bounded on the north by the 
provinces of Zambales and Pampanga, on the west by the China 
Sea, and on the south and east by the Manila Bay. It has a 
land area of 1,373 square kilometers and a population of 216,210 
in 1970. 

Bataan was the first in the neighborhood of Manila where 
a mission site was established by the Dominican missionaries. 
They were given the exclusive right of ministration on Septem- 
ber 15, 1587. 

In the 17th century, the Dutch plundered the coasts of the 
peninsula. The Dutch Admiral, Oliver Van Noort, encountered 
the Spanish-Filipino Army commanded by Antonio de Morga, 
then oidor of the Royal Audiencia, in 1600. 

The province was founded out of the territory of Pam- 
panga and from the corregimiento of Mariveles in 1754 by 
Governor General Pedro Manuel Arandia. It consisted of the 
towns of Orion, Pilar, Balanga, Abucay, Samal, Orani, Llana- 
Hermosa, San Juan de Dinalupihan, Mariveles, Bagac, Morong 
and Maragondon. 

After the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, 
Bataan joined the other provinces that revolted against Spanish 
rule. When the Filipino-American war ended, a civil govern- 
ment was established in the province in 1901. 

During the Pacific War in 1945, the Bataan Peninsula, 
considered as strategically important due to its proximity to the 
Central Plain, Manila Bay, China Sea and Subic Bay, offered 
an ideal defensive teri-ain. Thus, the United States Armed 
Forces in the Far East (USAFFE) retreated to the province " " 
where they undertook an active defense until the time the 
expected aid or reinforcement would come from the United. 
States. Under heavy aircraft and artillery shelling, the be-j, 
leaguered Filipino-American troops valiantly and courageously' 



176 



PROVINCE OF BATAAN 



fought the invading hordes. On April 9, 1942, the final USAF- 
FE defense in Bataan collapsed. 

About 80,000 Filipino and American soldiers were assem- 
bled for the infamous "Death March." Under Major General 
Kawane Toshimitsu, the battle-weary Filipino and American 
soldiers were grouped in Mariveles on April 9, and in Balanga 
on April 10. The prisoners were forced to march from Mari- 
veles and Balanga to San Fernando, Pampanga, where they 
were taken by train to Capas, Tarlac. And from there, the 
prisoners walked another eight miles to Camp O'Donnel, their 
destination. 

Bataan is also historically associated with noted and 
patriotic national figures. Tomas Pinpin, the first Filipino 
printer, was born in Bataan. He printed Arte y Reglas de la 
Lengua Tagala, by Father Francisco Blancas de San Jose, in 
the town of Abucay. Francisco Baltazar, better known as 
Balagtas, and author of Florante at Laura, was an auxiliary 
justice of the peace, teniente mayor, and later juez de semen- 
teras of Orion. After his imprisonment in the Bilibid Prison 
in Manila, he spent the rest of his life in Orion, until his death 
in 1862. General Artemio Ricarte, the irreconcilable Filipino 
revolutionist, was captured by the American forces in Mari- 
veles on May 29, 1904. He was then a clerk of the justice of 
the peace with an assumed name of "Jose Garcia." Manuel L. 
Quezon, then a young major under General Tomas Mascardo, 
stayed as a guerrilla fighter in Bagac. Cayetano Arellano, Chief 
Justice of the Supreme Court, was born in Orion. And the 
first lady of the third President of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines, Luz Banzon Magsaysay, hails from Balanga. 

The tourist and historical spots of Bataan are the hot 
springs and beach resorts along the coastal towns, and the 
national shrine, Dambana ng Kagitingan (Altar of Valor) in 
Mount Samat, Pilar. Majestically on top of a hill, it symbolizes 
the Filipinos as champions of the cause of liberty. 





SAMPAGUITA 

Provincial Flower 





• 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF BATAAN 



The Province of Bataan was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Bataan 



Flaming Sword — the Flaming Sword of Bataan, 

symbol of the bravery of our sol- 
diers during World War II and the 
guerilla movement that followed 
later. 

Three Golden Stars — represent the three geographical 

regions that contributed their sons 
in the bloody resistance of World 
War II. 



Red Panel 
Blue Panel 



•depicts the battles fought in Ba- 
taan and in the country. 

depicts the peace of the night that 
followed. 



HISTORY OF THE 



BULACAN, located north of Manila, is surrounded by Nueva 
Ecija on the north and northeast, Quezon on the east, Rizal 
on the south, Manila Bay on the south and southwest, and 
Pampanga on the west. With a land area of 267,203 hectares, 
its western half lies in the Central Plain of Luzon and is 
drained by the Angat Watershed and the Ipo Dam in north- 
eastern Bulacan to Manila Bay. The eastern portion, of less 
developed uplands that gradually increase in altitude, are the 
foothills of the Sierra Madre and the Eastern Cordillera. Com- 
posed of 24 municipalities with a population of 555,819 in 
1960, the province is generally tilted towards the east, although 
the rainfalls from the mountains and foothills flow to the 
west. 

Believed to be known by its ancient name, "Ma-yi", Bu- 
lacan was one of the earliest provinces founded by the Spaniards 
in 1572. The present name, however, was derived from the 
Tagalog word Bulac (meaning cotton), its former principal 
product. A chronicler of the Order of St. Augustine said that 
"the province of Bulacan can be called the most beautiful of 
the Tagalog regions and the paradise of Luzon." 

In the early years of the Spanish conquest, there already 
existed thriving native settlements from which were founded 
the towns of Bulacan (1572), Calumpit (1572) Malolos (1580), 
Hagonoy (1580), Bigaa (now Balagtas 1596), Quingwa (now 
Plaridel 1601), Paombong (1619), Guiguinto (1641), Angat 
(1683), San Miguel de Mayumo (1725), Baliwag (1732), San 
Jose del Monte (1749), and San Rafael (1750). 

Early records show no serious uprisings such as those 
that plagued other provinces. Rather, it aligned itself with the 
Spanish government. During the Sangley insurrection from 
1638 to 1640, the residents helped the Spanish forces in dis- 
persing the Chinese in Bulacan. The only disorder in Malolos 
was in 1643 when the short-lived activities of a certain Don 
Pedro Ladia were quickly foiled. A native of Borneo, he 
claimed to be a descendant of Raja Matanda and exhorted the 
people to overthrow the Spanish rule and place him in power 
as their king. 

During the British invasion in 1762, Lieutenant General 
Simon de Anda y Salazar escaped to Bulacan before the capitula- 
tion of Manila. With the assistance of native allies, he fierce- 
ly fought and resisted the invaders under Captain Slay. 



OF BULACAN 



In 1848, the town of San Miguel de Mayumo was annexed 
to the province of Pampanga. 

Sharing the revolutionary limelight in 1896, the Bula- 
kenos and the Spaniards engaged heavily in bloody encounters, 
as in the other first seven provinces that rose up in arms, 
until the famous "Pact of Biyak na bato" was signed on Decem- 
ber 14-15, 1897. 

During the second phase of the Philippine revolution, Ma- 
lolos became the capital of the archipelago on September 9, 
1898. A portion of the casa Real was-iKen used as a printing 
office of the revolutionary v&Jt&r&^"KaLay<mn" and "La Inde- 
pendencia." At Barasoain Church in Malolos, the Constitution 
of the first Philippine Republic was drafted by the Malolos 
Congress. And, a colorful historic and significant inauguration 
of the Republic was also held in this capital town. 

When the Philippine-American yt';ar"broke out, the forces 
under General Emilio Aguinaldo," after suffering successive 
defeats, were pursued from Malolos to Baliwag by the U.S. 
Third Infantry Regiment led by Colonel Page. Thus, the seat 
of the national government was transferred from Malolos to 
San Isidro, Nueva Ecija, in April 1899. 

Later, a civil government was established by the Amer- 
icans in Bulacan. Baliwag held its first election on May 6, 
1899 — the first in the province of Bulacan and even in the 
Philippines. With the enactment of Public Lmv No. 88 by the 
Philippine Commission, on February 27, 1901, Malolos became 
the capital of the province. 

When the Japanese Imperial Forces occupied the Philip- 
pines in 1942, several guerrilla units operated and fought the 
invaders in Bulacan. Two of the well-known units were the 
Bulacan Military Area under the command of then USAFFE 
Captain Alejo Santos and the HUKBALAHAP (Hukbo ng Ba- 
yan Laban sa Hapon) led by Luis Taruc. 

Bulacan is the home of national and local figures: Fran- 
cisco Baltazar (Balagtas), "Prince of Filipino Poets"; Marcelo 
H. del Pilar, "Great Propagandist"; Gregoria del Pilar, "Hero 
of Tirad Pass"; Mariano Ponce, managing editor of La Solida- 
ridad; Teodoro Sandiko, General and Secretary of Interior of 
the first Philippine Republic; and Isidro Torres, an outstanding 
general of Bulacan. 




SAMPAGUITA 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF BULACAN 



The Province of Bulacan was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Buiacan 



Mountains 



Church 



Flower 



Bamboo Enclosure 



— symbolize the hills of" Kaka- 
rong and Biak-na-Bato, in the 
town of Pandi, where the first 
and second Bulacan Repubhc 
were proclaimed. 

— Barasoain Church or Baras ng 
Suwail (abode of the belligerents) 
where the first PhiUppine 
Republic was proclaimed in 1898. 

— sampaguita, the national flower 
of the Philippines and official 
flower of the province. 

— connotes the true spirit of the 
Bulakefios that could weather the 
storms and tempests of life; 
thorns stand for their fighting 
spirit in times of aggression and 
tyranny. 



.179 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF NT JEVA ECIJA 



The Province of Nueva Ecija, the "Rice Bowl" of the Philip- 
pines, is bounded on the north by Pangasinan and Nueva Viz- 
caya, on the east by Nueva Vizcaya and Quezon, on the south by 
Pampanga and Bulacan, and on the west by Tarlac and Panga- 
sinan. 

Nueva Ecija, with a land area of 5,284.3 square kilometers 
and a population of 156,610 in 1887 and 851,294 in 1970, com- 
prises 29 municipalities, 3 cities (Cabanatuan, San Jose and Pa- 
layan) , and 600 barrios. It is protected on three sides by moun- 
tain ranges: the Sierra Madre on the east, the Caraballo on the 
north, and the Cordillera on the west. 

In 1701, the Spanish Governor General, Don Fausto Cruzat 
y Gongora, created the province and named it Nueva Ecija in 
honor of his hometown, Ecija, in Seville, Spain. Originally a 
part of Pampanga, the new province acquired territories from 
the adjacent provinces. In 1818, Nueva Ecija annexed the 
towns of Palanan, (from the Province of Isabela), and Baler, 
Casiguran, Infanta and Polillo Island (from the Province of Ta- 
yabas, now Quezon). In 1848, the province acquired the towns 
of Gapan, San Isidro, Cabiao, San Antonio and Aliaga from 
Pampanga. 

Nueva Ecija was one of the first eight provinces that took 
up arms against the Spanish government on August 30, 1896; 
it was declared by Governor General Ramon Blanco as "in a 
state of war." Because of its unique location, the province be- 
came the center of military activities during the Filipino-Amer- 
ican War. When General Emilio Aguinaldo retreated to the 
province, he occupied strategic places and made Cabanatuan as 
the temporary seat of the government from May 9, 1899 until 
the national capital was transferred to Bamban, Tarlac. 



In the convent of the Church of Cabanatuan, General An- 
tonio Luna was treacherously killed on June 5, 1899 by Captain 
Pedro Janolino and other soldiers whom Luna previously dis- 
armed for insubordination at Polo, Bulacan. Luna's aide. Col- 
onel Francisco Roman, who came to the rescue, was also killed 
by the presidential guards in the church premises. 

During the American campaign against the Filipino forces 
of the first Philippine Republic in 1899, the American forces, 
after occupying Nueva Ecija, organized a new government 
headed by Felino Cajucom as governor. The provincial seat of 
government was in San Isidro, [the former capitals were Baler 
(now in Quezon), Bongabon and Cabanatuan]. After the ces- 
sation of hostilities, a civil government was established on 
June 11, 1901, and in 1912, the provincial capital was again re- 
turned to Cabanatuan. When Republic Act No. 4475, approved 
on June 19, 1965, created the City of Palayan, the capital was 
transferred to the new city. 

Cabanatuan was occupied by the Japanese Imperial Forces 
on February 1, 1942. The town was made a Prisoner of War 
(POW) Camp for about 16,000 American soldiers. On January 
30, 1945, a company of the 6th Ranger Battalion commanded 
by Lieutenant Colonel Henry Mucci, assisted by Filipino guer- 
rillas, launched a surprise attack at the Japanese POW Camp 
and liberated all the captives. 

Nueva Ecija is often referred to as the "Educational Cen- 
ter of Central Luzon" because of its 536 schools (482 public 
and 54 private). There are two state colleges in the province, 
the Central Luzon Polytechnic College and the Central Luzon 
State University. 




Three Stars 
Mountains 



Carabao Head 



PROVINCE OF NUEVA ECIJA 

The Province of Nueva Ecija was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Nueva Ecija 



— Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

— Caraballo and Sierra Madre 
Mountains, prominent landmarks 
north and northeastern part of 
the province. 

— the common work-animal, friend 
and companion of the Novo- 
Ecijano farmer. 



Structure between the 
Two Stacks 

Two Rice Stacks 

or Mandala 
Blue Background 

Yellow Background 
Green Background 



■ humble home of the Novo-Ecijano 
farmer. 

■main agricultural farm produce 
of the farmers. 

-the peaceful sky over the Novo- 
Ecijanos. 

-ripened palay, ready for harvest. 
- the robust plants in the farms. 



181 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA 



The Province op Pampanga is bounded on the north by Tarlac 
and Nueva Ecija, on the east by Bulacan, on the south by the 
Manila Bay, and on the west by Zambales and Bataan. 

The province had a population of 904,748 in 1970. It has 
a land area of 2,180.7 square kilometers. 

Basically an agricultural region, Pampanga was the site of 
a land reform pilot project during the administration of Pres- 
ident Diosdado Macapagal. Rice and sugar cane are its im- 
portant crops. 

Pampanga was already the site of a thriving settlement 
before the Spaniards came, and the populous settlements were 
found along the banks of the rivers and riverine areas. The 
settlers were then referred to as the Kapangpangans or "the 
people by the river bank." 

Martin de Goiti explored Pampanga. The province was 
completely controlled by the Spaniards by the middle of 1572. 

Unsuccessful local revolts occurred in Pampanga as early 
as the 16th century. In 1585, the Pampangos revolted against 
the abuses of the encomenderos. In 1660, Francisco Maniago 
led the people in an armed uprising caused by the imposition 
of forced labor and the excessive collection of tributes. 

During the British invasion of Manila, Simon de Anda y 
Salazar escaped to Pampanga on October 4, 1763 and later led 
the Spanish forces in the province, after the surrender of 
Manila to the British on October 5, 1762. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the 
province was controlled by the revolutionary forces of General 



Mariano Llanera. The local revolutionary groups from Bacolor, 
Macabebe and Masantol joined the revolution. 

During the Filipino-American War, the capital town of 
San Fernando fell into the hands of the American Forces. On 
May 5, 1899, the forces of Generals Tomas Mascardo and An- 
tonio Luna were defeated by the troops of General Arthur 
MacArthur. Later, Pampanga was controlled by General Fre- 
derick Dent Grant, Commander of Northern Luzon 5th Military 
District, with headquarters in San Fernando. On February 
13, 1901, the Americans established a civil government in Pam- 
panga, retaining Bacolor as its capital. 

Since the first decades of the 20th century, the province 
had been the seat of agrarian troubles. It was composed mostly 
of landed estates administered by powerful landlords. 

During the Second World War, Pampanga was the seat of 
the Hukbalahap, (Hukbo ng Bayan Laban sa Hapon) or the 
People's Army against the Japanese. Organized as a guerrilla 
unit, it later became the nucleus of the New People's Army. 

Pampanga has produced several eminent Filipinos, namely: 
Jose Abad Santos, World War II hero and martyr; Vidal Tan 
and Bienvenido Gonzales, former UP presidents; and Diosdado 
Macapagal, fifth president of the Republic of the Philippines. 

Pampanga is noted for its old colonial churches in the 
towns of Guagua, Apalit, Magalang and San Fernando. 

With the majestic Mount Arayat, the hiding place of the 
protesting peasantry, Pampanga is the site of the Clark Air 
Base, the home of the 13th Air Force of the Armed Forces of 
the United States in the Far East. 




Provincial Seal ' Provincial Flag 



Tioenty Two Stars 



Shield Division 



Moimtain 



PROVINCE OF PAMPANGA 

The Province of Pampanga was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Pampanga 



— represent the original 22 towns 
of the province. 

— upper portion represents the first 
district, and lower portion re- 
presents the second. 

— the Zambales mountain range 
which borders the western part 



Sugar Cane Plant 
and Sugar Mill 



Lower Portion 



of the province. 

■represent the sugar industry 
which used to be the main 
industry of the province. 

•represents the rice industry of 
the province. 



183 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF TARLAC 



Tarlac Province, popularly known as the "melting pot of Lu- 
zon," is bounded on the north by Pangasinan, on the east by 
Nueva Ecija, on the south by Pampanga, and on the west by 
Zambales. 

The province has a land area of 3,053.4 square kilometers. 
It had a population of 559,708 in 1970. 

Basically agricultural, Tarlac produces sugarcane, rice, 
corn and bean. Rattan and bamboo are other products. It has 
a rich deposit of copper. Cattle is also raised, especially in 
areas along the slopes of Mt. Arayat. 

The early towns founded in the province were Paniqui in 
1574, Tarlac in 1686, and Bamban and Capas in 1710. 

On accofmt of the Palaris revolt in Pangasinan in 1762, 
the inhabitants of Paniqui took up arms against the Spanish 
authorities. The natives, however, were repulsed by the mili- 
tary forces of Manuel Arza. 

In 1860, a politico-military comandancia was created out 
of the towns of Concepcion, Bamban, Capas, Mabalacat, Maga- 
lang, Porac, Floridablanca, Victoria and Tarlac. In 1874, Tar- 
lac was formally organized as a province. It included the towns 
of Camiling, Gerona and Paniqui from Pangasinan. At the 
same time, it ceded Mabalacat, Floridablanca and Magalang to 
Pampanga. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Tarlac was one 
6f the first eight provinces that rose in arms against Spain 
Governor General Ramon Blanco proclaimed martial law in 
Tarlac and seven other provinces on August 30, 1896. In La 
Paz, a bloody skirmish took place between the Spaniards and 
the Fihpmo revolutionists when General Francisco Makabulos 
seized the Spanish garrison. Consequently, on April 17, 1898, 



Makabulos organized a revolutionary government in Tarlac, 
called the Comite Central Directivo-Centro y Norte de Luzon 
(General Executive Committee for Central and Northern 
Luzon) . 

During the Filipino-American War, after San Isidro fell 
mto the hands of the Americans, General Emilio Aguinaldo 
transferred the seat of the evolutionary Government to Tarlac, 
Tarlac, on October 12, 1899. 

On October 23, 1899, Gregorio Aglipay, Military Vicar Gen- 
eral of the Revolutionary Forces, called the Filipino clergy to 
an ecclesiastical conference at Paniqui where the Assembly 
drafted the Provisional Constitution of the Philippine Indepen- 
dent Church. Aglipay and the Filipino clergy then led a move- 
ment for the Filipinization of the clergy that caused the reli- 
gious schism in the Roman Catholic Church in the Philippines. 

Almost a month later, the American forces occupied Tarlac 
on November 12, 1899. A civil government was established in 
the province on February 18, 1901. 

At the outbreak of World War II, a concentration camp 
was set up at Camp O'Donnell in Capas, Tarlac, the terminal 
pomt of the "Death March," wherein Filipino and American 
soldiers participated, after the fall of Bataan on April 9, 1942. 

During the Japanese occupation, the guerrilla forces in 
the towns of Paniqui, Gerona, Ramos and Porac were organized 
as a part of the East Central Luzon Guerrilla Area, First Regi- 
ment, under the command of Colonel Jose Maristela. Tarlac 
was liberated from the Japanese invaders on January 21, 1945. 

The Maria Clara Museum, owned by Dr. Carlos Kipping, 
Jr. (grandson of Leonor Rivera), is in the town of Camiling,' 
Tarlac. 



184 




KAMPUPOT 

Provincial Flower 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF TARLAC 

The Province of Tarlac was created under R.A. 5907 
on June 21, 1969. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Tarlac 

Three Stars — represent the island groups of 

Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. 

Three Clustered Pfonfe— represent rice, com and sugar 

three major products of the prov- 
ince. 



Center Portion 



Golden Horizon 



-intertwined vines stand for the 
groups of people binding them- 
selves together to form a sturdy, 
healthy, vigorous and freedom- 
loving citizenry. 

-represents an "ever-burning de- 
sire to secure life, liberty and 
the pursuit of happiness under a 
regime of justice and democracy." 



185 



1; 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBALES 



Zambales, situated along the western coast of Luzon, is bounded 
on the north and northwest by Pangasinan, on the east by 
Tarlac, and on the southeast by Bataan. Its entire western 
coast is the China Sea. 

Composed of 13 municipalities and a city, it has a land 
area of 3,714.4 square kilometers. , In 1970, it had a population 
of 343,034. 

The area comprising the western half of the province 
consists of virgin lands covered with extensive forests where 
timber and other mineral resources abound. The coastal plains 
are suited to the cultivation of rice, coconut, sugarcane, tobacco 
and mango. 

Zambales has two trading and commercial centers, Olonga- 
po City and the capital town of Iba. 

The name of the province was derived from its earliest 
inhabitants, the Zambals. Even before the Spanish colonizers 
came, the Zambals had already established themselves in 
several villages that became the nucleus of the present towns 
of Zambales. 

In 1572, Juan de Salcedo explored the provinces of Zam- 
bales, Pangasinan, La Union and Cagayan. He landed at Cape 
Bolinao, then a part of Zambales. The Spaniards were able 
to repulse a group of Chinese pirates off the coast of Bolinao; 
hence, they earned the goodwill of the natives. 

Zambales was one of the earliest provinces created during 
the Spanish colonial administration. As founded in the 16th 
century, the Province of Zambales includes all the coastal plains 
and valleys from the Gulf of Lingayen down south towards 
Subic Bay. Among the earliest towns created were Masinloc 
(1607), Iba (1611), and Sta. Cruz (1612). 



The Zambals, one of the bravest and most warlike peoples 
of the country, joined the local revolts in Pampanga in 1645 
and the Pangasinan revolt led by Andres Malong in 1660. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the people of 
Zambales also rose up in arms against the Spanish government. 
General Ricardo Monet, charged with putting down the rebel- 
lion in the North, first rushed to the province with the Filipino 
auxiliaries who later deserted and joined the revolutionists. 
By February 1896, the revolutionists of Zambales, with those 
of Malolos, Bulacan, attacked the Spanish garrisons in Zambales 
and Pangasinan. On December 6, 1899, General Luciano San 
Miguel reorganized the, Katipunan in Zambales. 

In 1901, the Americans established a civil government in 
the province. The northern portion of Zambales, consisting 
of the towns of Alaminos, Agno, Bani, Bolinao, Infanta, and 
San Isidro, were ceded to Pangasinan in 1903. 

During World War II, the first guerrilla unit in Central 
Luzon was organized by Lieutenant Colonel Claude Armenuis 
Thorpe. Its headquarters was located along the Pampanga- 
Zambales borders. 

The panoramic tourist spots of Zambales are Villa Lolita 
Tropical Paradise in Iba, and the Half -Moon Beach in Olongapo 
City. Hermana Mayor, one of the small islands off the north- 
western coast of the province, was awarded as a grand prize — 
the privilege "to own" the island throughout her reign — to 
the winner of the 1975 Miss Universe. 

Zambales is the home province of noted Filipinos. Teodoro 
R. Yangco, the philanthropist and shipping magnate, was from 
San Antonio, and the third president of the Republic of the 
Philippines, Ramon Magsaysay, hailed from Castillejos. 



186 



Provincial Seal 



GUMAMELA 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ZAMBALES 

The Province of Zambales was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Zambales 

Wheel and Axes — represent Zambales' commerce 

and industry, respectively. 

Helmet and Pick Axes — stand for the mining industry of 

the province. 

symbolize agriculture. 

red stands for commerce and 
bravery; white for agriculture 
and purity; and blue for mining 
and peace. 

represent virgin lands and forests 
and minerals, fertile plains and 
valleys running north and south 
parallel to the coastline. ' 



187 



Plow and Bushel of — 
Grains 

Colors Red, White — 
and Blue 

Mountain Ranges — 



HISTORY OF THE SUBPROVINCE OF AURORA 



The Subprovince of Aurora occupies the northern portion 
of Quezon Province. It is bounded on the north by Isabela, 
on the south by the northern part of Quezon, on the east by 
the Pacific Ocean, and on the west by Quirino, Nueva Vizcaya 
and Nueva Ecija. 

It has a land area of 3,239.6 square kilometers. In 1970, 
the population of the subprovince was 82,032. Its important 
crops are rice, abaca, copra, sugar cane, tobacco, cacao, fruits 
and vegetables. 

Aurora was first explored by Juan de Salcedo in 1571 
when he led an expedition from Laguna to Paracale (Cama- 
rines Norte). The following year, Salcedo explored the 
northern coast of Luzon and visited Casiguran, Baler and 
Infanta. 

Like many regions bordering the sea, Aurora also suffered 
from numerous Muslim depredations almost to the end of 
Spanish rule. Casiguran, Palanan and Baler were raided by 
a fleet of Muslim boats in 1798, destroying the settlements 
and capturing some of its inhabitants. 

In 1814, Jose de Torres, Manuel Cuyo and Gregorio Palacio 
founded the village named Bondo. The visita, composed of 
the sitios of Maayas, Mayabak, Maycampana and Kuling, 
became the present municipality of Aurora. 

In 1841, the revolt of the members of the Confradia de 
San Jose, led by Apolinario de la Cruz, spread to Quezon and 
the neighboring provinces of Laguna and Batangas. 

Quezon (formerly Tayabas) also joined the Philippine 
Revolution in 1898. On August 15 of the same year, General 



Miguel Malvar took possession of the province in the name 
of the revolutionary government. During the period, Bondo, 
under the municipal jurisdiction of Malunay, was made as a 
separate municipality. 

Until 1902, when Baler was ceded to Tayabas by Nueva 
Ecija, the region was referred to as Distrito de Principe, 
where the comandancia of the comandante politico militar was 
established. 

During the Commonwealth period, when President Manuel 
L. Quezon unexpectedly visited Bondo, the municipality was 
enlarged and- nanjed Aurora in honor of his wife. 

Later, on June 14, 1951, the region comprising the munic- 
ipalities of Baler, Casiguran, Dilasag, Dinadiawan, Dipaculao, 
Dinalungan, Dingalan, Maria Aurora and San Luis were 
created as a subprovince of Quezon under Republic Act No. 
648. Although the municipality of A,ulrora retained its name, 
the subprovince also adapted the name Aurora in honor of the 
wife of the late Commonwealth president. 

Two of the outstanding national figures of the Sub- 
province of Aurora were Manuel L. Quezon, the first president 
of the Philippine Commonwealth, and his wife, Aurora Aragon 
Quezon, an outstanding woman who was active in the cause 
of charity and social welfare, and who served as Chairman of 
Philippine .National Red Cross until her death. 

The historical markers in Aurora Subprovince are the 
birthplace of Manuel L. Quezon, the Church of Baler, and the 
Lt. Gilmore Rescue Party, all in Baler. 




Provincial Seal 




DONA AURORA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



SUBPROVINCE OF AURORA 



The Province of Aurora was created under R.A. 648 
on June 14, 1951. 



Mountain 
Sun 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Aurora 

— symbol of Cape Encanto Point. 

— stands for the rising sun from the 
East — Aurora is a sub-province 
east of the Philippines. 



Twin Rocks 



Coconut 



Stars 



— coast and geodetic survey points 
in Baler. 

— eight (8) leaves with eight nuts 
represent eight towns of the 
sub-province. 

— also stand for the eight towns of 
Aurora. 



189 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BATANGAS 



THE PROVINCE OF BATANGAS is bounded on the north by 
the provinces of Cavite and Laguna, on the east by the prov- 
inces of Quezon and Laguna, on the south by the Verde Island 
Passage, and on the west by the South China Sea. 

It has a land area of 3,165.8 square kilometers with the 
mountain ranges of Makulot, Malarayap, Lobo, Banga and 
Batulaw, and with the rivers of Paliko, Obispo, Pansipit, Ka- 
lumpang and Bankon. The plains are cultivated for coffee, 
sugar cane and citrus, and the uplands are planted with rice. 
It is also famous for cattle and race horses. 

Batangas had a population of 926,308 in 1970. The people 
are well-known for their embroidery industry and fishing activ- 
ity in the rich fishing grounds off the Batangas Coast, Balayan 
Bay, Batangas Bay and Verde Island Passage. 

In 1570, Martin de Goiti and Juan de Salcedo explored 
the coast of Batangas and came upon a Malay settlement at 
the mouth of Taal River. In 1572, the town of Taal was found- 
ed and its convent and stone church were constructed later. 

Batangas was founded in 1581. It was composed of the 
present provinces of Batangas, Mindoro, Marinduque, and the 
area southeast of Laguna, as far as Camarines. The prov- 
ince was called Bombon or Balayan and its capital was the 
town of Balayan. In 1782, the capital was transferred to Taal 
and the province was named after its new capital. Again, in 
1754, the capital was moved to Batangas, and the province 
was finally called after the capital town. 

The province, one of the first eight provinces which revolt- 
ed against Spain, was placed under martial law by Governor 
General Ramon Blanco on August 30, 1896. 

Batangas has been known as the home of heroes and 
nationalists. Miguel Malvar, one of the first Batangueiios to 
join the revolution and the last Filipino general to surrender 



to the Americans, was born in Santo Tomas. Felipe Agoncillo, 
minister plenipotentiary of the first Philippine Republic, rep- 
resentative of the First District of Batangas, and Secretary 
of the Interior under Governor General Leonard Wood, was 
born in Taal. His wife, Marcela, sewed the first Filipino flag 
which was hoisted during the proclamation of Philippine In- 
dependence in Kawit, Cavite, on June 12, 1898. General Nicolas 
Lantin Gonzales, leader of the Batalyon Makiling under General 
Malvar and governor of Batangas from 1916 to 1919, was born 
in Tanauan. Apolinario Mabini, the sublime paralytic and 
"Brains of the Revolution", also chief adviser of General Agui- 
naldo. Secretary of Foreign Affairs, and President of the 
Government Council of the first Philippine Republic, was also 
born in Barrio Talaga, Tanauan. 

The Laurels are from Tanauan too. The elder Sotero was 
the delegate to the Malolos Congress and the Secretary of the 
Interior in the Aguinaldo Cabinet. His son, Jose Paciano, was 
the President of the Japanese-sponsored Philippine Republic 
from 1943 to 1945. 

The historical spots in the province are the Talaga Mabini 
Shrine, where the replica of the house of Mabini and a mauso- 
leum houses the relics, and publications of and about the hero; 
and the four-century-old Church of Taal, which was also de- 
clared as a national shrine. 

The tourist attractions in Batangas are the panoramic 
Taal Lake (formerly Bombon Lake) where the Taal Volcano, 
the lowest crater in the world and the most active in the coun- 
try, is found (the volcano erupted in 1591, 1634, 1645, 1729, 
1754, 1801, 1904, 1911, and in 1965); the submarine gardens 
in Laiya, San Juan; the subterranean caves of Pulangsaya; 
the Kamantigue and Motoco Hills; the Tombol Springs in Ro- 
sario; and the Tinga Falls, a "pocket edition of Pagsanjan 
Falls". 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 




CABALLERO 
(Fire Tree) 
Provincial Flower 



PROVINCE OF BATANGAS 

The Province of Batangas was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Batangas 

Horse — symbol of the white horse and 

cattle for which the province is 
noted. 

Galleon — goes back to the past when, during 

the Spanish regime, galleons 
sought the safety of the province's 
numerous bays and coves. 

Citrus — the chief produce of the province. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CAVITE 



The Province of Cavite is bounded by the Province of 
Rizal and Manila Bay on the north, Batangas on the south, 
Laguna on the east, and Manila Bay on the west. It has a 
land area of 128,755 hectares, consisting of 19 municipalities 
and three cities, (with Tagaytay as the largest, Trece Martires 
as the provincial capital, and Cavite as the smallest but the 
most populated). 

The province had a population of 519,040 in 1970. The 
most important agricultural crops grown on its volcanic soil 
are rice, banana, sugar, cacao, coffee, coconut and papaya. 

Cavite, originally referred to the present Cavite City 
(formerly of Kawit), was derived from the Tagalog word 
"oauit," meaning a "hook." The portion was used as a shelter 
port during the expeditions from Panay to Manila by Martin 
de Goiti and Juan de Salcedo in 1570, and Miguel Lopez de 
Legazpi in 1571. It became a port of entry and departure of 
Spanish vessels, including the galleons from Mexico and other 
countries. The name of the place was later adopted for the 
province. 

In 1614, Cavite was created as a politico-military province, 
except Maragondon and the neighboring region which belonged 
to the corregimiento of Mariveles until it was annexed to Cavite 
in 1754. 

As a consequence of the Sangley Insurrection in Manila, 
in December 1639, about 2,550 Chinese were killed in Cavite. 

On January 20, 1872, the mutiny at the Cavite arsenal 
led by Sergeant Lamadrid caused the implication, and finally 
the execution, of Filipino priests Jose Burgos, Mariano Gomez, 
and Jacinto Zamora. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Cavite was the 
center of the military operations of the Filipino Revolutionary 
Forces. On November 11, 1896, General Emilio Aguinaldo 
repulsed the Spanish forces at Binakayan, Kawit. However, 
early in 1897, thp Spaniards massively counterattacked Cavite. 
They successively reoccupied the towns of the province, causing 



Aguinaldo to transfer his headquarters to Biak-na-bato in San 
Miguel de Mayumo, Bulacan. 

On May 2, 1898, a day after the Battle of Manila Bay, 
Alexander Hill hoisted the first American flag at the Cavite 
arsenal. Similarly, on the 28th, after a battle against the 
Spaniards at Imus, the revolutionists hoisted the first Filipino 
flag which Aguinaldo brought from exile. 

On June 12, 1898, Aguinaldo proclaimed Philippine 
Independence at his residence in Kawit, Cavite. Bacoor became 
the revolutionary capital until the seat of government was 
transferred to Malolos, Bulacan. 

After the establishment of a civil government in Cavite, in 
1901, several municipalities and cities were subsequently 
created, namely, Noveleta (formerly called Tierra Alta and a 
part of Kawit), 1908; Ternate (formerly of Naic), 1914; 
Mendez-Nunez, 1915; Dasmarinas (formerly a barrio of Imus), 
1916; Tagaytay City, created by Commonwealth Act No. 338 on 
June 21, 1938; Cavite City, established by C.A. No. 547 on 
May 26, 1940; and Trece Martires City (the provincial capital), 
created by virtue of Republic Act No. 981, dated May 24, 1954. 

Some of the outstanding sons of Cavite ai-e Emilio 
Aguinaldo, president of the first Philippine Republic; Felipe 
G. Calderon, "father" of the Malolos Constitution; Roman Basa, 
second president of the Katipunan, and Pascual H. Poblete, 
a journalist and Filipino translator of Jose Rizal's Noli Me 
Tangere and El Filibusterismo. 

During World War II, the Fil-American Cavite Guerrilla 
Forces (FACGF) under Colonel Mariano N.' Castaneda and 
the American Liberation Forces jointly liberated Cavite 
Province on February 4, 1945, except Ternate where the 
Japanese forces fled to escape the FACGF. 

Aside from the historic Aguinaldo Shrine in Kawit, the 
scenic Tagaytay City, atop a ridge (2,000 feet above sea level) 
overlooking Taal Lake, is a main tourist attraction. 



192 




CAMIA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 
PROVINCE OF CAVITE 

The Province of Cavite was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Cavite 



Monument 



Bridge 



Shrine Facade 
(center) 

Staff with 
Musical Notes 



Philippine Flag 



-represents the Thirteen Martyrs 
of Cavite. 

-the Zapote Bridge, site of a deci- 
sive battle during the Philippine 
Revolution. 

-the facade of the Gen. Emilio 
Aguinaldo shrine in Kawit. 

- represents the Philippine National 
Anthem first played in Cavite 
from a composition by a Cavitefio, 
Don Julian Felipe. 

-the original flag used in Kawit 
during the independence procla- 
mation in 1898. 



Scroll with Inscription — its text "Dangal at Pag-ibig sa 

Bayan" represents the true Cavi- 
tefio spirit. 



193 



HISTORY OF THE 



LAGXJNA derived its name from "La Laguna" (the lake) , the 
longest inland body of water in the Philippines. With a land 
area of 1,759.73 square kilometers, it is bounded by the Prov- 
inces of Rizal in the north, Batangas in the south, Quezon in 
the east, and Cavite in the west. As of 1970, it had a popula- 
tion of 699,736. 

From Manila in 1571, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi ordered an 
expedition under Juan de Salcedo to Cainta and Taytay and, 
after both had been conquered, Salcedo pacified the coastal 
towns of Laguna de Bay. 

In 1577, the Franciscan missionaries arrived in Manila 
and, thereafter, in 1578 they started evangelizing Laguna, Ri- 
zal, Tayabas (now Quezon) and the Bicol Peninsula. Fathers 
Juan de Placencia and Diego de Oropeza were the earliest Fran- 
ciscans sent to these places. From 1580 to 1583, the towns of 
Bay, Caliraya, Majayjay, Nagcarlan, Lilio, Pila, Sta. Cruz, 
Lumban, Pangil and Siniloan were founded. In 1678, Fray 
Hernando Cabrera founded San Pablo de los Montes (now 
San Pablo City) and built a wooden church and convent con- 
sidered as the best and finest in the province. 

In 1670, delimitations of borders were made between Luc- 
ban, Majayjay and Cavite. The populous town at that time 
was Bay, the capital of the province until 1688, when the seat 
of the provincial government was moved to Pagsanjan, and 
later, in 1858, to Sta. Cruz. In 1754, the provinces of Laguna 
and Tayabas were divided, with the Malinao River separating 
the towns of Majayjay and Lucban. 

There were numerous protests and dissensions against the 
civil authorities and the regular clergy in Laguna. In 1639, 
the Chinese revolted in Calamba due to the excessive abuses 
perpetrated by the provincial governor. And from 1885 to 
1891, Rizal's family and the other tenants in Calamba had a 
controversy with the Friar Administrator of the Dominicans. 

In 1762, when Governor Simon de Anda left Manila to 
organize the resistance against the British, 400 soldiers volun- 
teered from Majayjay and 800 from the other towns of Laguna. 
They harassed and fought the British in San Pablo and Lipa. 
They also pledged loyalty to the King of Spain by keeping the 
Royal Treasury which was in danger of being seized by the 
British. 



OF LAGUNA 



In 1841, when the "Cofradia de San Jose," a fanatical or- 
ganization founded by Apolinario de la Cruz, spread through- 
out Laguna, many of its members revolted and defeated the 
forces of the Spanish governor. The government immediately 
dispatched a detachment of regular troops which defeated and 
dispersed them. Apolinario de la Cruz was captured and shot. 

Laguna joined the revolution late in 1896. During the 
early months, the military leaders met secretly in the under- 
ground cemetery of Nagcarlan. The province was declared in 
a state of war when Governor General Ramon Blanco declared 
martial law on August 30, 1896. He organized 1,500 men 
under General Aguirre at three points: the first at Noveleta, 
second at Binakayan, and the third at Calamba. And, Laguna 
was pacified within a few days. 

In 1896, Emilio Jacinto was proclaimed "generalissimo 
of the north" by Andres Bonifacio, as Commander of the Zone 
comprising the provinces of Laguna, Rizal, Bulacan, and Nueva 
Ecija. At an engagement with the Spaniards at Majayjay in 
1899, he was wounded in the thigh and taken prisoner. He died 
in that town on April 16, 1899. 

After the outbreak of the Philippine- American War, Major 
General Elwell S. Otis of the American forces ordered the op- 
erations in southwestern Laguna and directed General Henry W. 
Lawton to take Sta. Cruz which was the center of the Filipino 
opposition in the province. Gen. Lawton captured Sta. Cruz 
on April 10, 1899, Pagsanjan on the 11th, and Longos and 
Paete on the 12th. 

In 1905, the condemned officers who did not surrender to 
the American forces launched the Laguna-Cavite-Batangas in- 
surrection. With the titles of "Defenders of the Country" and 
"Protectors of the People," they caused the reign of terror, 
devastations and ruin in the three provinces. 

All of the towns in Laguna terribly suffered during the 
Japanese occupation, from 1942 to 1945. Later, on March 15, 
1945, the American bombers raided and blasted the churches, 
convents, municipal buildings and residences in the province. 
On April 1945, Laguna was liberated by the American libera- 
tion forces with the assistance of various guerrilla units. 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF LAGUNA 

The Province of Laguna was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917, 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Laguna 



Coconut Trees 



Waterfalls 



- represent the main product of La- 
guna. The province is the second 
greatest coconut producing prov- 
ince in the Philippines. 

■represent the foremost tourist 
attraction of Laguna, the world 



Round Shape of Seal 



famous Pagsanjan Falls. 

■signifies the democratic way of 
life and the equality by which 
every citizen pursues his chosen 
livelihood. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MARINDUQUE 



\ 



The Province of Marinduque, a small heart-shaped island, lies 
between Luzon and the Visayas. It is separated on the north 
and east by the Province of Quezon, on the northwest by Ba- 
tangas, on the west by Oriental Mindoro, and on the south by 
Romblon. 

Marinduque, with a land area of 959.5 square kilometers, is 
composed of six municipalities: Boac (earlier named Biac- 
na-Bayan), the provincial capital, established as a town in 
1735; Sta. Cruz, declared as a municipality in 1790; Gasan, 
founded as a settlement in 1800 and established as a municipal- 
ity in 1896; Mogpog (formerly a part of Boac), began as a 
community in 1807; Torrijos (separated from Sta. Cruz), ele- 
vated into a township in 1871 and Buenavista (formerly a portion 
of Gasan), established as a municipality on January 1, 1919. 

The province had a population of 85,828 in 1948, 114,586 
in 1960, and 144,109 in 1970. Basically, it is an agricultural 
island with coconut as the most important crop. Fishing and 
mining, however, are the lucrative occupations of the people. 
The home industries are basket, hat and mat weaving, and 
rope and bunted fiber making. 

Originally, Marinduque was a part of Balayan or Bonbon 
(now Batangas) when Juan de Salcedo and Martin de Goiti 
colonized the region in 1581. Early in the 17th century, the 
Island was separated from Balayan and it became a part of 
Mindoro, as a corregimiento. 

Like in the other provinces of Luzon, the revolucionarios, 
after overthrowing Spanish rule, established a Revolutionary 
Government in Marinduque. Later, on September 30, 1900, 
the Filipino forces led by Colonel Maximo Abad defeated the 
American contingent under the command of Captain Devereux 
Shields at the Battle of Pulang Lupa in Torrijos. 



During the American regime, on May 1, 1901, the ^•United 
States-Philippine Commission passed Act No. 125 which created 
the Province of Marinduque, composed of the islands of Ma- 
rinduque and the adjacent small islands, and established the 
provincial government at the Municipality of Boac, its capital. 
A year later, by virtue of Act No. 423, dated June 23, 1902, 
the US-Philippine Commission annexed the island of Mindoro, 
including the island of Lubang (then separated from the Prov- 
ince of Cavite) , to the Province of Marinduque. Boac remained 
as the capital of the consolidated provinces. Four months after, 
on November 10, by virtue of Act No. 499, Marinduque was 
made a part of the Province of Tayabas (now Quezon). Later, 
on May 17, 1907, under Act No. 1649, the Commission made Ma- 
rinduque as a subprovince of Tayabas. And, finally, on February 
21, 1920, Act No. 2880, sponsored by then representative Ricardo 
Paras, separated the subprovince of Marinduque from Tayabas 
and re-established the former Province of Marinduque. That law 
was signed by American Governor General Francis Burton 
Harrison. 

When the Japanese Imperial Forces invaded the country, 
the enemy landed in Laylay on July 7, 1942. Three years later, 
the American Liberation Forces landed in Buenavista on Jan- 
uary 3, 1945 and liberated the province on the 10th of the 
same month. 

Marinduque is nationally known for its culture, particular- 
ly its unique practices. Two of the popular traditions in this 
province are the moriones (from the Latin word centurion, 
meaning a "Roman Soldier") — a colorful observance by decorated 
participants, simulating the Roman soldiers, during the Holy 
Week; and the putong or coronation — an oral thanksgiving and 
prayer for long life of a celebrant or guest of honor, climaxed 
by placing a crown of flowers on the honoree's head. 



196 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF MARINDUQUE 

The Province of Marinduque was created under Act 
2711 on March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Marinduque 



Three Crowns 
Coconut Tree 
Mountain 



■represent the "Tres Reyes" 
Islands. 

-the principal source of livelihood 
of the people. 

■stands for Mt. Malindig, an in- 
active volcano and the highest 
peak in the province. 



Plain Areas — 



Fishes 



rice fields, means of livelihood of 
the people. 



-represent the different species of 
fish that abound in the sea sur- 
rounding the province. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF OCCIDENTAL MINDORO 



The Province of Occidental Mindoro, formerly a part of the 
old Mindoro Province, lies on the western part of the Island 
of Mindoro. It is bounded on the north by the Maricaban 
Island, on the east by Oriental Mindoro, on the west by Mindoro 
Strait, and on the south by the Semirara Island. 

The province has a land area of 5,879.8 square kilometers, 
and a population of 43,149 in 1948, 84,316 in 1960, and 144,032 
in 1970. The plains in the western portion of the island are 
inhabited by the Tagalogs, and the interior portion by the 
Mangyans — of Malayan origin who live like the Negritos. 

The principal products of the region are rice, coconut, 
sugar, corn and abaca. The inhabitants are engaged in many 
industries, such as cattle and poultry raising, lumbering, rubber 
planting, and fishing. The waters on the west coast of the 
island is one of the most important fishing grounds of the 
Philippines. The hunting ground is located along the baliks 
of the Bugsanga River, where there are deer, wild boars and 
tamaraws. 

Mindoro, formerly called Mait (from the Spanish phrase 
Mina de Oro or "gold mine"), was known to the Chinese traders 
before the Spaniards came. In 1570, Martin de Goiti and Juan 
de Salcedo explored the island. 

In the early years, Mindoro was administered as a part 
of the Province of Bonbon, now Batangas. At the start of 



the 17th century, the island was separated from Bonbon and 
organized into a corregimiento. Puerto Galera became its capital. 

In 1754, Mindoro suffered heavily from the piratical raids 
of the Muslims. They established two strongholds in Mamburao 
and Balete which were abandoned by the Christians due to 
Muslim raids. A successful expedition to Mamburao (dispatched 
by Governor Simon de Anda) , temporarily stopped the Muslim 
raids until the close of the 18th century. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, the Filipino 
revolutionary forces in the province established a government 
until 1901 when the American forces occupied the island. 

The island of Lubang, formerly a part of Cavite, was 
annexed to Mindoro on June 23, 1902. Mindoro was made a part 
of Marinduque when the latter was organized into a regular 
province. Five years later, Mindoro was organized into a special 
province. It was made a regular province under Act No. 2964, 
approved on February 20, 1921. 

On June 13, 1950, under Republic Act No. 305, Occidental 
Mindoro became a new and separate province. Under the law, 
the old Province of Mindoro was divided into two. Occidental 
Mindoro and Oriental Mindoro. The municipalities of Occidental 
Mindoro, including its capital, Mamburao, are Abra de Hog, 
Calintaan, Lubang, Magsaysay, Paluan, Rizal, Sablayan, San 
Jose and Sta. Cruz. 




Provincial Floiver 



Provincial flag 



PROVINCE OF OCCIDENTAL MINDORO 

The Province of Occidental Mindoro was created under 
R.A. 505 on June 13, 1950. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Occidental Mindoro 

Three Tamaraws -the three political regions of the 

province: LubangJ Looc and Pa- 
luan. Tamaraw was made to 
symbolize the province because 
Mindoro is the only place in the 
Philippines where the tamaraw 
can be found. 

Five White Dots —the five speaking dialects of the 

province, namely the Visayan", 
Tagalog, Ilocano, Pampango and 
Bicolano dialects. 



199 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO 



The Province of Oriental Mindoro, formerly a part of the 
old Mindoro Province, is bounded on the north by the Verde 
Island and the Verde Island Passage, on the east by the Maestro 
de Campo Island and the Tablas Strait, on the south by the 
Semirara Island, and on the west by Occidental Mindoro. 

The province has a land area of 4,364.7 square kilometers 
and a population of 124,!5rj6 in 1948, 228,998 in 1960, and 328,364 
in 1970. It is composed of 15 municipalities: (along the coast) 
Bulalacao, Mansalay, Pola, Roxas, Bongabon, Gloria, Bansud, 
Pinamalayan, Naujan, San Teodoro, Puerto Galera and Cala- 
pan (the capital) ; and (inland) Baco, Victoria and Socorro. As 
in the other half of the island, the province is inhabited in 
the plains by the Tagalogs and in the interior by the Mangyans, 
a primitive semi-nomadic tribe -of Malayan origin, with con- 
siderable Negrito blood. 

The principal products of the region are rice, copra, abaca, 
sugar and corn. Its industries are cattle and poultry raising 
(in considerable quantities), lumbering (practised extensively), 
rubber planting (on large-scale), and fishing (engaged lucra- 
tively). The province is rich in mineral deposits: gold, in the 
Baco and Bongabon Rivers; coal, at the northwest of Mount 
Halcon (the highest peak) ; slate deposits, near the headwaters 
of P^gbaban and the rivers on the western coast; sulphur 
and gypsum, at Lake Naujan and south of Calapan; hot springs, 
between the sea and the northwestern part of Lake Naujan; 
salt springs, in Bulalacao; and guano, in the mountain caves. 

Mindoro was formerly called Mait, from the Spanish phrase 
Mina de Oro. It was known to the Chinese traders before the 
coming of the Spaniards. When Captain Juan de Salcedo and 
Marshall Martin de Goiti explored the region, they found Chinese 
junks anchored at the mouth of Baco River. 

In 1572, the Augustinians opened their mission headquarters 
at Baco but they abandoned the site immediately after the 
natives revolted and, imprisoned the friars who were later re- 
leased. In 1578, the Franciscans, Esteban Ortiz and Juan de 
Porras, were assigned to Balayan (now Batangas) and Mindoro. 
After the Franciscans left the place, the Fathers of the 
Society of Jesus attended to the spiritual needs of the inhab- 
itants. In 1673, Captain General Juan de Vargas granted author- 
ity to the Recollects to take charge of the mission in the 



province. The apostolate was then under the Archdiocese of 
Manila. 

Mindoro originally included the island of Mindoro, the 
island of Maestro de Campo, and the small adjacent islands. 
It was politically administered as a part of Bonbon (now 
Batangas). Early in the 17th century, the island was separated 
from Bonbon and organized into a eorregimiento, with Puerto 
Galera as its capital. 

In 1754, the Muslims, whose strongholds were in the islands 
of Mamburao and Balete, frequently attacked the province. 
Governor General Simon de Anda sent a successful expedition 
to the islands and momentarily stopped the raids of the Muslims 
until the close of the 18th century when the Spanish govern- 
ment effectively dealt with them. The inhabitants likewise 
repulsed the Muslim attacks. 

In 1837, the capital of the province was transferred to 
Calapan. 

During the Philippine Revolution, the revolucionarios 
established a government in Mindoro until the American forces 
occupied the island in 1901. 

On June 23, 1902, the island of Lubang, formerly a part 
of Cavite, was annexed to Mindoro. In the same month and year, 
the province became a part of Marinduque. Later, in 1907, the 
Province of Mindoro was declared as one of those specially 
created in the archipelago. However, it was only on February 
20, 1921, under Act No. 2964, that Mindoro was made a regular 
province. 

Mindoro was also occupied by the Japanese Imperial Forces 
during World War II. Nevertheless, the guerrilla units, com- 
posed of ROTC Guerrillas and Philippine Army Guerrillas, 
operated in the province. The ROTC, under Commander 
George Rowe, maintained their headquarters at Abra de Hog. 
From Mindoro, Major Calixto Gasilao and the 1st Battalion, 
49th Regiment, successfully undertook dangerous missions to the 
neighboring region. 

Finally, on June 13, 1950, Republic Act No. 205 divided 
the old Province of Mindoro into Occidental and Oriental Min- 
doro. Calapan was retained as the capital of Oriental Mindoro. 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



Tamaraw 
Six Dots 

Red Color 



PROVINCE OF ORIENTAL MINDORO 

The Province of Oriental Mindoro was created under R.A. 505 on June 13, 1950. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Oriental Mindoro 

War and the Japanese Occupation 

Yellow Color 



— rare wild animal found only in the 
island of Mindoro. 



— represent the original towns of 
the province. 

— stands for the bravery displayed by 
the inhabitants during the Spanish 
Revolution, Filipino-American 



Two Stars 



— stands for gold mine which is 
abundant in Oriental Mindoro 
and remains undeveloped. 

— represent the provinces of Orient- 
al Mindoro and Occidental Min- 
doro upon division of the island 
into two provinces. 



201 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF PALAWAN 



The Province op Palawan lies southwest of Mindoro, bounded 
on the south by Borneo, on the north and west by the China 
Sea, and on the east by the Sulu Sea. 

Palawan, the second largest province in the country, has 
a land area of 14,896.3 square kilometers and a population of 
236,635 in 1970. It is composed of 20 municipalities with Puerto 
Princesa as the capital. 

As an agricultural province, the most important crops 
are coconut, rice, banana, cashew, corn and casava. The im- 
portant forest products include rattan, nipa, tanbark, beeswax, 
bamboo and buri. 

The richest fishing grounds in the Philippines are found 
near Palawan. 

The Spaniards first established their authority on the 
northern portion of the province, over the islands of the Cala- 
mianes group. They organized the region into a province known 
as Calamianes. The southern portion which included the big 
islands of Paragua was then a part of the Sultanate of Borneo; 
as such, it was beyond Spanish authority. However, in the 
early part of the 18th century, the Spaniards established a 
garrison at Taytay, on the northern portion of Paragua. Later, 
they built a fort which was capable of accommodating a garri- 
son of 700 men. Taytay then became the bastion of Spanish 
authority. The Muslims tried to capture the fort in 1730 and 
1735, but they failed. 

About the middle of the century, the Spanish government 
obtained from the Sultanate the cession of the southern part 
of Paragua in order to extend Spanish authority to the newly 
acquired territory. Later, they abandoned the place when a 
considerable number of the expeditionary forces perished from 
fever. 

In 1818, practically all the territories which now belong 
to Palawan were known as the Province of Calamianes with 
the capital at Taytay. In 1858, Calamianes was divided into 
two provinces, Castilla and Asturias. The first comprised the 
Calamianes group and the adjacent islands, and the northern 
portion of Pai^agua. Its capital was Taytay. Asturias included 



the rest of Paragua together with the island of Balabac, which 
early that year was made into a politico-military province 
with the name of Principe Alfonso. Its capital was Puerto 
Princesa. Later, during the term of Governor and Captain 
General Rafael de Izquierdo, the island of Paragua was orga- 
nized into a separate politico-military province with Puerto 
Princesa as the capital. At the end of the Spanish rule, the 
Province of Palawan was divided into three politico-military 
districts — Calamianes, Paragua and Balabac. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, a great number 
of the exiles in Palawan, because of alleged comjplicity with 
the Katipunan, were sent to Balabac in the island of the same 
name. 

After the Filipino- American War, a civil government was 
established by the Americans on June 23, 1902. The province 
was called Paragua. It included practically the former prov- 
ince of Castilla — the Calamianes group, the adjacent islands, 
and a part of Paragua Island — with the capital at Cuyo. 

In 1905, Capt. John Elmick became the governor of Para- 
gua. The same year, pursuant to Act No. 1363 of the Philippine 
Commission, the name of the province was changed to Palawan 
and the capital was transferred from Cuyo to Puerto Princesa. 

At the outbreak of World War II, the Japanese Imperial 
Forces occupied Palawan on May 18, 1942. They established 
garrisons in Coron, Puerto Princesa and Iwahig. Consequently, 
guerrilla units were formed in three sectors led by Capt. Carlos 
Amores in Calamianes, by Higinio Mendoza, Sr., in the mainland, 
and by Emilio Tumbaga in Brooke's Point. During the Japanese 
occupation, a civil government headed by Governor Gaudencio 
E. Abordo was established in the hinterlands. 

The province has historical landmarks and tourist spots, 
such as the forts in Cuyo, Culion, San Juan Bautista, and Labo; 
the Iwahig Penal Colony in Iwahig and Puerto Princesa; the 
Tabon Caves and Tarampitao in Quezon Island; the Ursula 
Island in Brooke's Point; the Ulugan Bay in Puerto Princesa; 
the Paly Island in Taytay; the Malampaya Sound and the cliffs 
in El Nido; and the Culion Leper Colony in Busuanga. ■<4^ 





o 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF PALAWAN 

The Province of Palawan was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Palawan 

the mouse-deer of pilandok and 
the Palawan peacock which can 
be found only in the province. 

the famous underground river at 
St. Paul's Bay. 

the abundance of fish in the 
surrounding Sulu and China Seas. 

vast wealth of timber, metallic and 
non-metallic mines, which also 
house archeological relics of the 
stone age. 



Animals 

River 
Fishing 

Green Mountain 



203 



HISTORY OF THE PR 



Quezon, formerly called Tayabas, is the longest and the third 
largest province in the entire Archipelago. Situated along the 
eastern Pacific seacoast, its elongated territory stretches from 
Isabela on the north to Camarines Norte on the south. Inland, 
the province is bounded by Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, Bula- 
can, Rizal, Laguna and Batangas on the west, and by Camarines 
Norte and Camarines Sur on the southwest. 

The province has jurisdiction over the small islands near 
its coast, the most important of which are Polillo, Patnanongan 
and Alabat. Topographically, the province is characterized by 
rugged terrain, with the Sierra Madre mountain traversing 
lengthwise in the entire region. It has a port of entry at Siain 
(Plaridel) and a subport of entry in Mauban. 

Quezon has a land area of 11,946.2 square kilometers and 
a population of 653,426 in 1960 and 983,342 in 1970. It con- 
sists of 47 municipalities, a municipal district (Dinalongan), 
and a city (Lucena). The climate is suitable to the principal 
crops of rice, corn, sugar, abaca, cacao, and coconut. As the 
biggest coconut producer in the country, the major export of 
the province is copra. Some of its large-scale industries are 
fishing, logging and mining, particularly in the Bondoc Penin- 
sula. The weaving of buntal hats is a famous home industry 
in Lucena City and the municipalities of Mauban and Tayabas. 

The province was first explored in 1571 by Captain Juan 
de Salcedo when he went to Paracale. Later, when Salcedo 
explored the northern coast of Luzon, he visited Casiguran, 
Baler and Infanta. 

Originally, Quezon was divided among the provinces of- 
Batangas, Laguna and Nueva Ecija. In 1585, the central and 
southern portions of the region were under the jurisdiction of 
Bonbon or Balayan (now Batangas). In 1818, the northern 
part of the territory (Baler, Casiguran, Infanta and Polillo 
Island) was made a part of Nueva Ecija. 

Finally, in 1591, the province was created and called 
KalUaya, named after the capital town of Kalilaya (now the 
Mumcipality of Unisan). About the middle of 18th century 
the capital was transferred to the town of Tayabas, from which 
the name of the province was derived. 

t'^l^^^ "'J^'" Provinces of Luzon, Tayabas was raided by 
the Muslims. They 8^ttacked Casiguran, Palanan and Baler in 



OVINCE OF QUEZON 



1798 and also the coastal towns of Bondoc Peninsula. 

In 1841, the Confradia de San Jose, led by Apolinario de 
la Cruz, advocated and fought for racial and religious reforms. 
The rebellion of "Hermano Pule," as he was called, spread to 
the neighboring towns of Laguna and Batangas. The Spaniards 
later suppressed the revolt and De la Cruz was publicly 
executed on November 4 of the same year. 

Tayabas was among the first provinces to join the Philip- 
pine Revolution. On August 15, 1898, General Miguel Malvar 
controlled the province under the Revolutionary Government. 

After the Filipino-American War, the Americans estab- 
lished a civil government in Tayabas on March 12, 1901, with 
Lucena as its capital. 

On June 12, 1902, the district of Principe, under the 
jurisdiction of Laguna and the district of Infanta and the island 
of Polillo, dependencies of Nueva Ecija, were annexed to Taya- 
bas. On November 10, 1902, Act No. 499 made Marinduque 
a part of Tayabas. Later, on May 17, 1907, under Act No. 
1649, the Philippine Commission created Marinduque as a sub- 
province of Tayabas. And on November 21, 1920, under Act 
No. 2880, Marinduque was separated from Tayabas and creat- 
ed as an independent province. 

At the outbreak of the Pacific War in 1941, the 16th Di- 
vision of the Japanese Imperial Forces entered Lamon Bay on 
December 24. The Imperial Forces then made three separate 
and simultaneous landings: the Hiro Detachment in Mauban- 
the Mura Detachment near Siain, and the remainder of the 
division, one and a half miles east of Atimonan. In Mauban 
and Atimonan, except in Siain, the enemy were met with heavy 
artillery fire from the elements of the Philippine Army, South 
Luzon Forces, commanded by Brigadier General Fidel Segundo 
However, the Japanese forces pushed the Filipino forces from 
Mauban to Sampaloc where the gallant defenders were overran 
by the superior invaders. 

On September 7, 1946, President Manuel A. Roxas bv 
virtue of Republic Act No. 14, renamed Tayabas to Quezoi in 
honor of Manuel L. Quezon, the first president of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines who hailed from the town of Baler 
Lucena City was retained as the capital of the province 





PROVINCE OF QUEZON 

The Province of Quezon was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Quezon 

figure —Manuel L. Quezon, first president Golden Portion —symbolizes the natural resources 

of the Philippine Commonwealth. and wealth of the province. 

Three Stars —symbol of the three geographical 

divisions of the country— Luzon, Red Portion —stands for the bravery of its 
Visayas, and Mindanao. people. 



205 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF RIZAL 



The Province of Rizai, bounded by the Province of Bulacan 
on the north, the Province of Quezon on the east, the Laguna 
Bay and the Province of Cavite on the south, and Manila Bay 
on the west, was created out of the Spanish mihtary district 
of Morong and from a part of the Province of Manila. It has a 
horizontal length of about 70 kilometers from east to west and 
a vertical width of 84 kilometers from north to south. 

The Province, with a land area of 1,859.6 square kilometers, 
consists of 26 municipalities, with Pasig as the capital. It had 
a population of 2,844,689 in 1970. 

The terrain is mostly low and flat on the western portion, 
and with rolling hills and a" few rugged ridges on the eastern 
sector. At the foot of these elevations are valleys, the largest 
of which is Marikina Valley, extending from Pasig to Montal- 
ban. The Pasig and Marikina Rivers, both emptying into the 
Manila Bay, respectively drain the Laguna Bay and the Ma- 
rikina Valley. The Montalban Dam, one of the chief sources 
of water in the Greater Manila area, is located in the province. 

Rizal is one of the most industrially developed provinces 
in the country. Shoemaking, of which Marikina is the Philip- 
pine shoe center, is one of its largest industries, aside from 
basic metal production, pharmaceutical, cosmetics and chemical 
manufacturing, food processing, textile weaving, salt making, 
and bangm and duck raising. 

After the fall of Manila in 1571, Captain Juan de Salcedo 
proceeded along the Pasig River and overran Cainta and Taytay 
which were already thriving settlements. 

Some of the towns founded by the Spaniards were Pasig 
and San Mateo (1572), Paz-anaque (1575), Antipolo (1578), 
Taytay (1595), Tanay (1606), Binangonan (1621), Cainta 



(1689), Marikina (1690), Las Pinas (1762), Pateros (1815) 
and Navotas (1859). 

In 1639, when the Chinese revolted against the Spanish 
authorities, many lives were lost in the province. More than 
a century later, in 1762, the British forces under the command 
of Captain Thomas Backhouse invaded Pasig, and subsequent- 
ly "captured Cainta and Taytay which he garrisoned with 
Sepoys." 

On August 23, 1896, the first "Cry" at Pugadlawin (in 
the Municipality of Caloocan, then under the jurisdiction of 
Rizal Province) by Andres Bonifacio and the Katipuneros started 
the Philippine Revolution against Spain. Seven days later, 
a bloody battle was fought between the Spaniards and the 
Filipinos at Pinaglabanan, San Juan. Several encounters also 
occurred in Pateros, San Pedro and Makati. The incident on 
Februai-y 4, 1899, which sparked the Philippine- American War, 
happened at San Juan Bridge in San Juan. 

A civil government was established in Rizal when the 
province was created on June 11, 1901. Ambrosio Flores be- 
came the first appointive governor of the province. 

During the Japanese occupation, the Marking's Guerrillas 
under Marcos Agustin and the ROTC Hunters headed by Eleu- 
terio Adevoso operated in the province. 

Among the prominent sons of Rizal are Juan M. Sumu- 
long, the "Brains of the Opposition" in the government; and 
Eulogio Rodriguez, Sr., the "Grand Old Man of Rizal." 

Some of the tourist spots in Rizal are Antipolo, visited 
annually by pilgrims to venerate the Vii-gin of Peace and Safe 
Voyage; Talim Island, at the middle of Laguna Bay; and the 
Bamboo Organ in Las Pinas, the only one of its kind in the world. 




Provincial Flag 

PROVINCE OF RIZAL 

The Province of Rizal was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Rizal 



Dr. Jose Rizal 
Monument 



■ — Phihppine national hero after 
whom the province was named. 

— represents the historical spot 
where revolutionary hero Andres 
Bonifacio made the First Cry of 
Balintawak. 

Upper Right Portion — represents commerce and indus- 
try of the province. 

Woman at Harvest — portrays agi'iculture as the chief 

industry of the province. 

Nymp — symbol of the famous "Nymph of 

Pasig", traditional legend. 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province Of i2oMBLON comprises the islands of Tablas, 
Sibuyan, Romblon, Banton, Simara, Carabao, Alad, Logbon, 
Cobrador, and a number of scattered islets. It is bounded by 
Marinduque in the north, Panay in the south, Mindoro in the 
west, and Masbate in the east. 

Loarca mentioned "Lomlon" or "Doblon" in his writings 
after he visited the place in 1582. The Recollects, in 1635, 
already founded Christian natives and churches in Banton^ 
Romblon and Cajidiocan. 

Like many regions in the country, Romblon suffered from 
the frequent devastating raids of the Muslims and the attack 
of the Dutch in 1646. In order to protect its people from fur- 
ther depredations, the Recollect Fathers built a fort in Romblon 
in 1650 and another in Banton Island. 

The province underwent various political reorganizations 
m the nineteenth century. In 1818, Romblon was incorporated 
with the province of Capiz. Then in 1853, the islands were 
reorganized into a politico-military comandancia administered 
from Capiz. 

In 1898, Romblon was under the rule of "an army officer 
with the rank of captain." The town of Romblon was its 
capital and the other municipalities were Azagra, Badajoz (now 
San Agustin), Banton (named Jones from 1916 to 1929), Caji- 
diocan, Corcuera, Loocc, Magallanes (now Magdiwang),' Odio- 
ngan, Despujols (now San Andres), and Santa Fe. For some- 
time, during the second phase of the Philippine revolution, 
the province, as a part of Capiz, was under the control of 
General Mariano Riego de Dios, head of the Filipino Revolution- 
ary Forces in the Visayas during the Philippine-American War. 

Upon the restoration of peace and order in the province 
a civil government was established by the Americans on March 
16, 1901. 

Romblon was created as a regular province in 1901; but 
due to insufficient income, it became a sub-province of Capiz 
m 1907 until December 7, 1917, when Act No. 2724 reestablish- 
ed the former province of Romblon. Under Commonwealth 
Act No. 581, enacted without executive approval on June 8, 



)VINCE OF ROMBLON 



1940, the province was reorganized with four municipalities; 
namely, Tablas, embracing Odiongan, Looc, Badajoz, Santa Fe 
and Despujols; Romblon comprising Logbon, Cobrador, Alad 
and Mehali ; Banton, composing Simara and Maestro de Campo ; 
and Sibuyan, with the towns of Cajidiocan, Magdiwang and 
San Fernando. 

The Japanese Imperial Forces maintained a garrison in 
Romblon during World War II, from 1942 until the Naval Battle 
of Sibuyan on October 25, 1945. 

On October 1, 1946, Commonwealth Act No. 581 abolished 
the existing municipal governments and the province of Rom- 
blon and created instead four special municipalities. A year 
after, on January 1, 1947, Romblon regained her provincial 
status through the passage of Republic Act No. 38, which was 
sponsored by Congressman Modesto Formilleza. The law not 
only repealed C.A. 581 but also restored the regular provincial 
government and the municipalities of Romblon, and created the 
municipality of Santa Fe. 

The outstanding sons of Romblon are: Leonardo Festin, 
the first assemblyman of the province who represented Capiz 
from 1916 to 1919 and the district of Romblon from 1919 to 
1935; Florencio Moreno, Secretary of Public Works and Com- 
munications in 1957; Dr. Jose Moreno, who sponsored the 
foundation of the Geriatrics Center of the Philippines; Con- 
gressman Esteban Madrona, the last congressman of Romblon 
before the proclamation of Martial Law in 1972; and Dr. Gabriel 
F. Fabella, an educator, lawyer, politician, and former professor 
of history in the University of the Philippines. He helped in 
the transfer of the Independence Day celebration from July 
4th to June 12 of every year, as provided for under R.A No 
4166, dated August 4, 1964. 

Romblon is more identified with marble than any other 
province in the Philippines- In fact, all the island comprising 
the province have marble. The marble quarries in these islands 
are the sources of raw marble for the hundreds of marble 
sculptors and manufacturers. There are, however, historical and 
tourist landmarks, such as the ruins of Spanish forts, the beauti- 
ful beach in Romblon, Romblon, and the magnificent waterfalls 
in San Andres and Odiongan. ^^^v- 




PROVINCE OF ROMBLON 

The Province of Romblon was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Romblon 

Map — represents the map of the islands comprising 
Romblon. 

White Color of Map — symbol for marble quarries found in 

all the islands of Romblon and for 
which it was known. 



209 



Region V 



HISTORY OF THE 



THE PROVINCE OF ALBAY is located between the provinces 
of Camarines Sur on the north and Sorsogon on the south. 
It is bounded on the east by the Pacific Ocean, on the 
northeast by the Lagonoy Gulf, and on the west and southwest 
by the Burias Pass. The islands in the north under the 
jurisdiction of the province are Rapu-rapu, Batan, Cacraray 
and San Miguel. 

Albay has a land area of 2,552.6 square kilometers, 
consisting of 14 towns, and a population of 673,981 in 1970. 
The important products of the people are hemp, coconut, 
sugar cane, pineapple, vegetables and rice. 

The mountains of the province are Mayon, Masarana 
and Malinao in the northeast, and Catbaruan in the west. 
Its forests are sources of timber, rattan, pili nuts and gum 
elemi. There are also vast grasslands for pasturing horses, 
cattle, carabaos, goats and sheep. 

In 1569, Luis Enriquez de Guzman led an expedition from 
Panay to the islands of Masbate and Ticao, and to the region 
named Ibalon. The Augustinian missionary. Father Alonzo 
Jimenez, christianized the first inhabitants of Ibalon, Cama- 
rines and Burias. He learned the Bicol dialect and composed 
a Bicol catechism. 

In July 1573, Juan de Salcedo, with 120 soldiers, explored 
Ibalon and founded the town of Santiago de Libong. Jose 
Maria Penaranda, a military engineer, was made coregidor 
of the province on May 14, 1834. He constructed public 
buildings and built roads and bridges. 

A decree was issued by Govei'nor and Captain General 
Narciso de Claveria in 1846, separating Masbate, Ticao and 
Burias from Albay to form the comandancia of Masbate. 
Albay was then divided into four districts: Iraya, Cordillera 
or Tabaco, Sorsogon and Catanduanes. 

Glicerio Delgado, a condemned "insurrecto," started the 
revolutionary activities in the province. With headquarters 
in the mountain of Guinobatan, he joined the revolutionary 
government of Albay as lieutenant of the Infantry. 

A unit of |;he Philippine Militia was then organized by 
the Spanish military authorities. Mariano Riosa was appointed 

210 



ROVINCE OF ALBAY 



major of the Tabaco Zone which comprised all the towns 
along the seacoast from Albay to Tiwi, while Anacleto Solano 
was also appointed as major for the Iraya Zone which was 
made up of the towns from Daraga to Libon. Each town 
was organized into sections of fifty men under the command 
of a lieutenant. 

On September 22, 1898, the provisional revolutionary 
government of Albay was formed with Anacleto Solano as the 
provisional president. Major General Vito Belarmino, appointed 
military commander, reorganized the Filipino Army in the 
province. 

During the Filipino-American War, Brigadier General 
William Kobbe headed the expedition that landed on the ports 
of Sorsogon, Bulan and Donsol. From there, the Americans 
marched to Legazpi and captured the place. 

Although a civil government was established in Albay 
on April 26, 1901, Colonel Harry H. Bandholtz, Commanding 
Officer of the Constabulary in the Bicol region, attested that 
Simeon Ola, with a thousand men, continued to defy American 
authority after the capture of Belarmino in 1901. Ola was 
later captured with about six hundred men. 

During the Second World War, the Kimura Detachment 
of the Japanese Imperial Forces occupied Legazpi on December 
12, 1941. Ths region was defended only by the Philippine 
Constabulary unit under Major Francisco Sandico. By December 
19, the Bicol Peninsula up to Sipocot, Camarines Sur, with 
patrols towards Ragay Gulf and Daet, was already under 
the enemy. 

Albay, a progressive province, with the capital city of 
Legazpi, has a large resei-voir of steam deposits in Tiwi, 
according to geothermal expert G. W. Gridley of New 
Zealand. On August 14, 1970, Presidential Proclamation No. 
739 authorized the National Power Corporation to exploit 
and develop the Tiwi power plant project. 

Mayon Volcano, a major tourist attraction of the province, 
is known for its symmetrical, almost perfect cone that rises 
over 7,500 feet above sea level. It erupted 15 times, with 
the catastrophe on February 1, 1814 as the most destructive. 
Its lava buried the town and church of Cagsawa. -n^bn^ 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



Bird or Kalaw 



Volcano 



PROVINCE OF ALBAY 

The Province of Albay was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Albay 



a high-flying bird native to Albay, 
which depicts the hopes and 
aspirations of the people. 

Mayon Volcano in the back- 
ground, emitting smoke as a sign 
of life, vibrant existence in the 
province; streak of light on the 



shoulder of Mayon signifies the 
artistry of the people, noted for 
their various talents in' the arts 
and other creative pursuits. 

— depict the agricultural economy 
of the province. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES NORTE 



The Province of Camarines Norte occupies the northwestern 
portion of the Bicol Peninsula. Along the coastlines, the 
province faces the Basiad Bay on the west, the Pacific Ocean 
on the north, and the San Miguel Bay on the east. Inland, 
it is bounded by the Province of Quezon on the southwest and 
Camarines Sur on the south. The islands under the jurisdiction 
of the province are located on the northeastern coast. 

Although Camarines Norte is generally mountainous, 
coconut and abaca are two of its most important agricultural 
products. The Bacacay and Colase mountains are thickly 
forested and suitable for logging. The province has abundant 
reserves of gold, iron, copper, uranium, lead and zinc. With 
numerous indentations along the coast, a thriving fishing 
industry has gained importance among the seacoast towns. 
Its njost important rivers are the Basigon and Labo. 

The province, with Daet as the capital, is composed of 
12 towns. It has a land area of 2,112.5 square kilometers and 
a population of 262,012 in 1970. 

In 1571, Governor General Miguel Lopez de Legazpi sent 
Captain Juan de Salcedo to locate the rich gold mines in 
Paracale. Salcedo visited the mines in Mambulao and Paracale 
and found them "to be excellent, very rich and more than thirty 
or forty estados in depth." 

Originally, Camarines was one political unit only. In 1829, 
the province was divided into two, Camarines Norte and 
Camarines Sur. Later, in 1854, the two provinces were again 
united to form the Province of Ambos Camarines. However, 
in 1857, they were again separated, and in 1893, again reunited. 

On September 16, 1896, during the Philippine Revolution, 
many of its Katipunan leaders and sympathizers were arrested 
and imprisoned. Two year later, on September 12, 1898, General 
Vicente Lukban took Daet from the Spaniards and he subse- 



quently reorganized and established a revolutionary government 
in the province. 

After two years, the American forces came and occupied 
the Bicol region in January 1900, On April 27, 1901, a civil 
government under the Philippine Commission was established 
in Ambos Camarines. 

The Philippine Legislature passed an Act in March 1919, 
authorizing the Governor General to divide the province into 
Norte and Sur. The North consists of the towns of Capalonga, 
Mambulao, Paracale, Indan, Labo, San Vicente, Talisay, Daet, 
Basud, and the islands along the coast. 

During World War II, on December 12, 1941, the Japanese 
Imperial Forces landed in Legazpi, Albay. Six days later, 
on the 18th, Camarines Norte Governor Wenceslao Q. Vinzons 
organized guerrilla units and operated against the enemy. 
However, on July 8, 1942, Vinzons was captured and later 
executed by the Japanese forces. 

When the American Liberation Forces came. General 
Douglas MacArthur, on February 5, 1945, issued an instruction 
to the Sixth Army to occupy the Bicol Peninsula. With the 
assistance of the Filipino guerrillas, the region was finally 
liberated. 

Among the prominent sons of Camarines Norte were Jose 
Maria Panganiban, a brilliant propagandist during Rizal's 
time; General Vicente Lukban, a patriot and revolutionary 
leader; and Wenceslao Q. Vinzons, one of the youngest delegates 
to the 1934 Constitutional Convention and a World War II hero. 

The tourist attractions in the province are the Shrine of 
the Black Nazarene in Capalonga, the Bicol National Park in 
Daet and Basud, the Calaguas Islands, and the San Miguel 
and Lamon Bays. 



212 



■'■'•,■.<'. .V,' 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



: I PROVINCE OF CAMARINES NORTE 

The Province of Camarines Norte was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Camarines Norte 



Shield with a Cross — stands for Christianity's shield 

of moral protection over the 
;. ,■: „ province. .'v;,. ■-. . 

Monument —represents the historical Rizal's 

monument in the province. 



Three Circles with 
Sickles 



stand for the three mining towns 
of Jose Panganiban, Paracale and 
Capalonga. 



Two Plain Circles 

Yellow Gold 
Background 

Violet Cross 



-represent coconuts, major peso- , 
earning product of the province. 

- tells of the province's high ideals, 
imaginative drive and search for 
self-fulfillment. 

-tells of the Norteenos creative 
ambition for self-expression end- 
less pursuit for improvement. 



1, 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR 



Camarines Sur, situated at the southeastern portion of Luzon, 
is bounded on the north by the Pacific Ocean, on the east by 
the Maqueda Channel, on the south by the Province of Albay, 
on the west by the Ragay Gulf, and on the northwest by the 
provinces of Camarines Norte and Quezon. 

With a land area of 5,266.8 square kilometers, Camarines 
Sur has 34 municipalities and two cities. In 1970, it had a 
population of 947,367 (coimposed of Bicolanos, Tagalogs, Visa- 
yans and Ilocanoe). 

Noted for its rich volcanic soil, the province produces 
abaca, rice and coconut. Fishing is an important activity of 
its coastal towns. The smallest fish (tabios) in the world 
is found in Lake Buhi. Pili trees, known for its nuts, grow 
abundantly in Camarines Sur. The capital town of Pili is named 
after the fruit. 

Camarines Sur derived its name from camarin, the 
Spanish word for "rice granary" or "warehouse." 

In 1569, Luis Enriquez de Guzman, with Augustinian friar 
Alonzo Jimenez, reached the present town of Camalig, then a 
thriving village or rancheria. The natives lived in houses or 
thatched sheds called kamalig, "rice granary" in the native 
tongue. 

Andres de Ibarra, ip search for provisions, followed the 
route taken by De Guzman and reached Kalilingo and Bua 
(the present towns of Bato and Nabua) in 1570. 

In 1571, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi dispatched Juan de Sal- 
cedo to explore the area as far as Paracale. A year after, 
Salcedo cruised the Bicol River and went as far as Bato Lake. 

Later, a Spanish garrison under Captain Pedro de Chaves 
was set up in Naga, a prosperous native rancheria. In 1575, 
De Guzman founded the City of Nueva Caceres after the birth- 



place of Governor General Francisco de Sande in Caceres, Spain. 

Camarines was divided into Camarines Norte and Cama- 
rines, Sur in 1829. The two were united as Ambos Camarines 
in 1854, and again separated in 1857. The North and the 
South were again united in 1893. 

The Philippine Revolution , started in Arabos Camarines 
when Elias Angeles and' Felix Plazo, Filipino corporals in the 
Spanish Army, sided with the revolutionists and fought the local 
Spanish forces on September 17, 1898. Governor Vicente Zaidin 
capitulated to the revolutionists on the following day. V/ith 
the arrival of General Vicente Lukban, the revolutionary govern- 
ment in the Bicol region was established. 

The American forces occupied the Bicol Peninsula in Jan- 
uary 1900. In March of the same year, General John M. Bell 
was made the military governor of southeastern Luzon. Civil 
government was finally established in Ambos Camarines in 
April 1901, 

In March 1919; the Philippine Legislature passed an Act 
authorizing the Governor General to divide the province into 
Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur. 

At the outbreak of World War II, guerrilla units v/ere 
organized by Wenceslao Q. Vinzons. They waged underground 
operations ag'ainst the Japanese troops stationed in Camarines 
Sur. After the capture of Vinzons on July 8, 1942, the guerrilla 
movement was carried on by Lieutenant Francisco Boayes. In 
April 1945, Camarines Sur was finally liberated from the Jap- 
anese invaders. 

Among the great sons of Camarines Sur were W. Q. Vinzons, 
Bishop Jorge Barlin, first Filipino Catholic bishop; Elias Ange- 
les and Felix Plazo, leaders in Naga during the Philippine 
Revolution; and the Bicol martyrs, led by Manuel and Domingo 
Abella, who died for freedom against Spanish sovereignty. 



214 




Provincial Seal Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF CAMARINES SUR 



The Province of Camarines Sur was created under Act 
2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Camarines Sur 



Upper Left Portion 



Upper Right Portion 



Lov^er Portion 



symbolizes abaca industry, one of 
the main industries of the prov- 
ince. 

symbol for banana industry, an- 
other source of livelihood of its 
people. 

■depicts mountain ranges which 
suggest the topographical layout 
of the province. 



215 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CATANDUANES 



The Province of Catanduanes, opposite the Bicol region, is 
bounded by the Maqueda Channel on the west, the Pacific 
Ocean on the north and east, and the Lagonoy Gulf and 
Cabugao Bay on the south. 

The island, with a land area of 1,511.5 square kilometers 
and a population of 162,100 in 1970, is composed of 11 towns, 
with Virac as the capital. Its fertile soil was made richer by 
the volcanic ashes from the distant Mayon Volcano. 

Catanduanes is frequently visited by storms. However, 
the vessels that visit its ports are provided with safe anchorage 
by the bays and coves of Kalapalan, Gigmoto, Soboc and 
Cabugao. 

The important industries of the province are logging, 
fishing, and cattle raising. In Pandan, buri hats and mats, 
roof shingles, and alcohol are manufactured for local consump- 
tion. 

The province, formerly known as "Catanduan," "Catun- 
dognan," and finally, "Catanduanes," derived its name from 
the "tando" trees which then abound in the island. 

In 1573, Juan de Salcedo explored Catanduanes. Later, on 
January 6, 1576, Father Diego de Herrera with nine Augus- 
tinians sailed from Acapulco to the Philippines aboard the 
galleon, Espiritu Santo. Although it was reported that the 
galleon was shipwrecked near the coast of Catanduanes in 
April 1576, the others claimed that the disaster was caused by 
bad weather and all the crew members perished. Some said 
that the survivors were either killed by the natives or made 
servants of a certain datu of the island. 

Catanduanes was once a part of Ybalon, now Albay. The 
ecclesiastical mission in the province was controlled from Nueva 
Caceres. However, in 1582, it was allotted to four encomen- 
deros. In 1663, 'Fr. Francisco Colin, S.J., described the in- 



habitants as noted shipbuilders, without using nails or futtock 
timbers. 

In 1755, the Muslims overran the island, defeated the 
alcalde mayor, and pillaged and burned the towns, including 
important ecclesiastical and municipal records. 

During the Philippine Revolution, the Spaniards left Ca- 
tanduanes on the motorboat, Josefa, on September 18, 1898, 
before the arrival of the first Philippine revolutionary troops 
under Major Estanislao Legazpi. 

When the Philippine-American War broke out, Brigadier 
General William A. Kobbe occupied Virac on January 24, 1900. 

The island was governed by the Japanese Imperial Forces 
after they occupied Legazpi in 1941. After the liberation of 
the Bicol region in 1945, including Catanduanes, the United 
States Armed Forces maintained a military base in Panay 
Island. 

On September 26, 1945, Commonwealth Act No. 687 creat- 
ed Catanduanes (a subprovince of Albay) as a separate and 
independent province. Under Republic Act No. 159, dated 
June 20, 1947, the former municipality of Caramoran was re- 
created out of the Municipality of Pandan; and under R.A. No. 
491, dated June 12, 1950, the Municipality of Bagamanoc was 
also created. 

In the town of Bato, Msgr. Teotimo C. Pacis, Bishop of 
Legazpi, declared the Holy Cross of Batalay as a Diocesan 
Shrine on April 1, 1973. The cross was said to be the one 
placed by Geronimo Galvez at the burial site of Fr. Herrera 
in 1576. 

The tourist spots of Catanduanes are the Balombong Falls 
and Binawahan Falls in Bato, and the beaches of Palta, Virac, 
Cabcab, and Calolbon. 





PROVINCE OF CATANDUANES 

The Province of Catanduanes was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Catanduanes 



Forest Resources — connote that Catanduanes has 

plenty of forests being utilized 
for lumber industry. 

Water Resources — means that the Province has 

plenty of waterfalls and navi- 
gable rivers for agricultural 
development and for generating 



Mineral Resources 



electricity. 

— signify that the province is also 
rich in minerals like coal, copper, 
gold, phosphate, manganese ore, 
black sand, limestone, and silica 
which is used for cement manufac- 
ture, and clay which is suitable 
for cottage industry. 



217 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MASBATE 



Masbate Province, composed of one wedge-shaped mainland 
(Masbate), two major islands (Ticao and Burias), and four- 
teen small islands, is bounded on the north by the Bicol region, 
on the south by the Visayan Sea, on the west by the Sibuyan 
Sea and on the east by the Burias Pass, Ticao Pass and Samar 
Sea. 

The province has a land area of 4,047.7 square kilometers 
and a population of 211,113 in 1948, 335,971 in 1960, and 
492,908 in 1970. 

Because of its geographical location, the province became 
a "melting pot" of dialects and culture. The people of the 
town of Masbate speak the native Masbateno with a mixture 
of Bicolano; the natives in Cataingan, Palanas and Dimasalang 
use Samar-Visayan; the residents from Limbuhan (now Pio 
V. Corpuz) to the southern part of Cataiiigan speak Cebu and 
Bohol Visayan; and the inhabitants of Placer and along the 
western coast of Mandaon converse in Ilongo or Capiceno. 

In 1569, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi sent the first exploratory 
expedition, captained by Luis Enriquez de Guzman with Fray 
Alonso Jimenez, to the islands of Masbate, Ticao and Burias. 
In 1570, the Spaniards collected tributes from the natives of 
these islands. By 1750, there were eight mission stations of 
the Recollects in Masbate. In 1837, many settlers were attracted 
to the island by the news of the abundance of gold in the 
town of Aroroy. 

The island of Masbate, like Sorsogon proper, was originally 
a part of Albay. In 1846, it was separated from Albay and 
was made a comandancia politico-militar, including Ticao. 
Guium was declared capital but because of its inaccessibility 
from Burias, Ticao, and the eastern part of Masbate, the 
capital was moved to Palanog, near the mouth of the Lumbang 



River. The place was likewise found inadequate for commer- 
cial, industrial and political purposes; hence, Mobo was chosen, 
but it was also found insufficient. Finally, the capital was 
transferred from Mobo to the town of Masbate. 

The Philippine Revolution reached Masbate through Pedro 
Kipte. However, General Lucban established the local govern- 
ment and left Vicente Trivinio of Boac, Marinduque, in charge 
of Masbate until the government was turned over to the United 
States forces in 1900. On March 18, 1901, when the Americans 
established the civil government, Masbate was organized as a 
province through Act No. 105. Later, on November 23, 1905, 
under Act No. 1413, Masbate was annexed to So»sogon. The 
act took effect on January 1, 1906. 

On December 15, 1920, the Philippine Legislature, through 
Act No. 2934, made Masbate a province independent of Sor- 
sogon. 

On January 2," 1942, the Japanese soldiers landed at San 
Fernando. The liberation of Masbate from the Japanese forces 
was effected by the Masbate Regiment (Philippine Guerrilla 
Forces) from March to April 1945. 

Although the main livelihood is agriculture, with copra 
as the leading product followed by corn, rice, and tobacco, the 
people are also engaged in cattle-raising, fishing and lumber 
industries. The mineral resources found in the province are 
gold, manganese and limestone. 

Masbate has 21 municipalities, namely: Masbate, Aroroy, 
Balano, Balud, Batuan, Cataiiigan, Cawayan, Claveria, Dima- 
salang, Esperanza, Mandaon, Milagros, Mobo, Monreal, Palanas, 
Pio V. Corpuz, Placer, San Fernando, San Jacinto, San Pascual 
and Uson. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MASBATE 



Masbate Province, composed of one wedge-shaped mainland 
(Masbate), two major islands (Ticao and Burias), and four- 
teen small islands, is bounded on the north by the Bicol region, 
on the south by the Visayan Sea, on the west by the Sibuyan 
Sea and on the east by the Burias Pass, Ticao Pass and Samar 
Sea. 

The province has a land area of 4,047.7 square kilometers 
and a population of 211,113 in 1948, 335,971 in 1960, and 
492,908 in 1970. 

Because of its geographical location, the province became 
a "melting pot" of dialects and culture. The people of the 
town of Masbate speak the native Masbateno with a mixture 
of Bicolano; the natives in Cataingan, Palanas and Dimasalang 
use Samar-Visayan; the residents from Limbuhan (now Pio 
V. Corpuz) to the southern part of Cataiiigan speak Cebu and 
Bohol Visayan; and the inhabitants of Placer and along the 
western coast of Mandaon converse in Ilongo or Capiceno. 

In 1569, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi sent the first exploratory 
expedition, captained by Luis Enriquez de Guzman with Fray 
Alonso Jimenez, to the islands of Masbate, Ticao and Burias. 
In 1570, the Spaniards collected tributes from the natives of 
these islands. By 1750, there were eight mission stations of 
the Recollects in Masbate. In 1837, many settlers were attracted 
to the island by the news of the abundance of gold in the 
town of Aroroy. 

The island of Masbate, like Sorsogon proper, was originally 
a part of Albay. In 1846, it was separated from Albay and 
was made a comandancia politico-militar, including Ticao. 
Guium was declared capital but because of its inaccessibility 
from Burias, Ticao, and the eastern part of Masbate, the 
capital was moved to Palanog, near the mouth of the Lumbang 



River. The place was likewise found inadequate for commer- 
cial, industrial and political purposes; hence, Mobo was chosen, 
but it was also found insufficient. Finally, the capital was 
transferred from Mobo to the town of Masbate. 

The Philippine Revolution reached Masbate through Pedro 
Kipte. However, General Lucban established the local govern- 
ment and left Vicente Trivinio of Boac, Marinduque, in charge 
of Masbate until the government was turned over to the United 
States forces in 1900. On March 18, 1901, when the Americans 
established the civil government, Masbate was organized as a 
province through Act No. 105. Later, on November 23, 1905, 
under Act No. 1413, Masbate was annexed to So»sogon. The 
act took effect on January 1, 1906. 

On December 15, 1920, the Philippine Legislature, through 
Act No. 2934, made Masbate a province independent of Sor- 
sogon. 

On January 2," 1942, the Japanese soldiers landed at San 
Fernando. The liberation of Masbate from the Japanese forces 
was effected by the Masbate Regiment (Philippine Guerrilla 
Forces) from March to April 1945. 

Although the main livelihood is agriculture, with copra 
as the leading product followed by corn, rice, and tobacco, the 
people are also engaged in cattle-raising, fishing and lumber 
industries. The mineral resources found in the province are 
gold, manganese and limestone. 

Masbate has 21 municipalities, namely: Masbate, Aroroy, 
Balano, Balud, Batuan, Cataiiigan, Cawayan, Claveria, Dima- 
salang, Esperanza, Mandaon, Milagros, Mobo, Monreal, Palanas, 
Pio V. Corpuz, Placer, San Fernando, San Jacinto, San Pascual 
and Uson. 





Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF MASBATE 

The Province of Masbate was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Masbate 



Cattle and 
Coconut Trees 

Mountain Range 



■ represents the two main industries 
of the province. 

■connotes its use as pasture land 
and the vast wealth of mineral 
deposits underneath; also des- 
cribes the topographical layout of 
the province. 



219 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SORSOGON 



Sorsogon, at the southeastern part of the Bicol Peninsula, is 
bounded on the north by the Province of Albay, on the east and 
northeast by the Pacific Ocean, on the south by the San Ber- 
nardino Strait, and on the west and northwest by the Ticao 
and Burias Passes. The province has an irregular coastline. 
There are good harbors in Bulan, Magallanes, and along the 
shores of Sorsogon Bay. 

Sorsogon, with an area of 2,141.4 square kilometers and a 
population of 426,935 in 1970, consists of 16 towns (with Sor- 
sogon as the capital). 

In 1569, Captain Luis Enriquez de Guzman, and Fathers 
Alonso Jimenez and Juan Orta celebrated the first mass at 
Otavi (site of the old town of Bulan). In 1570, a chapel was 
built along the Gingara River in Magallanes. The missionaries 
reached the town of Pilar where the Abuca-Catamlangan mis- 
sion was established. Among the early towns founded in the 
province were Casiguran in 1600, and Bulusan in 1601. 

Because of the urgent need for ships during the galleon 
trade, shipbuilding was developed as an important industry in 
the province. In 1669, Fr. Pedro de Espellargas invented the 
abaca stripping knife which revolutionized fiber extraction and 
promoted rope-making or the cordage industry. 

During the Muslim raids on the coastal towns of Sorsogon 
m 1737, 1740, 1749" and 1781, Captain Pedro de Gastambide 
built a fort at Sirangan. Several watchtowers were also con- 
structed at Gubat, Bacon, Bulusan, Sta. Magdalena and Matnog. 

On October 17, 1894, Sorsogon was separated as a province 
from Albay. Juan de la Guardia became the first governor 
succeeded by Guillermo Montes, Saliendo Salazar and Leandro 
Villamil. 



The Spaniards abandoned Sorsogon during the Philippine 
Revolution of 1896. For sometime, the provincial government 
was administered by Father Jorge Barlin, Vicar Forane in 
Sorsogon, who later turned over the province to the revolu- 
tionary forces. 

On January 20, 1900, the American forces under General 
William Kobbe occupied Sorsogon and set up a provisional mi- 
litary government. The resistance movement against the 
Americans ended when Emeterio Funes, head of the local revo- 
lutionary forces, was captured. He later took the oath of 
allegiance to the United States. 

A civil government was established in Sorsogon on April 
30, 1901. Bernardino Monreal was the first governor of the 
province. 

During World War II, after the Japanese occupied Sorsogon 
in 1942, Major Licerio Lapuz and Salvador Escudero organized 
guerrilla units which joined forces with the American Libera- 
tion Forces in the liberation of Sorsogon on April 29, 1945. 

The province is rich in prehistoric culture. The archae- 
logical excavations conducted by Robert Fox in 1959 unearthed 
stone tools and burial jars at the hacienda of Juan Escuetura in 
Bato. Golden crowns, believed to exist from 91 B.C. to 79 A.D., 
were also found in Bulan and Juban. 

Sorsogon is known for its historic and panoramic places, 
such as the century-old towers or baluartes in Sta. Magdalena, 
Bacon, Matnog, Casiguran and Bulusan; the eyecatching water- 
falls in Guinlajon; the summer resorts along Lake Bulusan; 
the Tulong-Gapo in Bacon; the Bato Limestone in Bato; and 
the Irosin Church in Irosin. 





PROVINCE OF SORSOGON 

The Province of Sorsogon was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Sorsogon 



Map Shape 

Coconut Trees 
Blue Waves 

Mountain Range 



— represents the map of Sorsogon 
Province. 

— symbol for its principal industry. 

— symbolize the body of water sur- 
rounding the province. 

— depicts the topographical layout of 
the province. 



221 



Region VI 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF AKLAN 



THE HISTORY of the Province of Aklan is never complete 
without mentioning Datu Bendahara Kalantiaw. In Batan, a 
street has been called Kalantiaw and a barrio as "Mabutiao" 
(Mambukiao), the former name of the Datu. A customary 
gathering of elders, the "ponu-an" is also being practised in 
the barrios of the province. The Aklanon's unique way of 
speaking could even be traced to a congenital defect of an old 
datu's manner which everyone imitated. 

Aklan, with a land area of 1,817.9 square kilometers, is lo- 
cated at the northwestern part of Panay Island. It is bounded 
on the north by the Sibuyan Sea, on the south and southeast by 
Capiz, and on the west by the northern tip of Antique. It con- 
sists of low mountain ranges and wide plains. There are two 
big rivers, the Aklan and Ibajay Rivers, which drain the prov- 
ince and cut across 17 towns. 

Composed of 17 municipalities, the province had a popula- 
tion of 263,3.58 in 1970. 

Rice, coconut, banana, and abaca are its most important 
agricultural crops. Sea products also abound in commercial 
quantities. Natural deposits of clay, limestone and sand are 
found in the towns of Buracay, Buruanga, Banga and Batan. 
These raw materials are processed into finished products, such 
as pots, glass, buttons, fertilizers, etc. 

In 1894, Francisco del Castillo and Candido Iban joined the 
Katipunan and donated a secondhand printing press for the 
printing of the Kartilya and the Kalayaan. Later, early in 1896, 
Del Castillo and Iban organized the Panay Chapters of the Kati- 
punan in the towns of Ochando, Kawayan, Tambok and Lagatik 
(the old municipality of Batang) . Their revolutionary activities 
were carried on the other towns of Jimeno, Balete, Banga, Ka- 
libo, Molino, Lezo and Ibajau. Consequently, Del Castillo be- 
came the General of the Katipunan Chapter in Aklan. 

On March 19, 1897, Colonel Moret, Spanish Commander of 
the Visayas, landed in Dumaguit aboard a Spanish gunboat. 
He proclaimed amnesty for those who surrendered. Four days 
after, on the 23rd, the prisoners called "Nineteen Martyrs of 
Aklan" were tortured and killed. Preparations for reinforce- 



ment were then launched by Esteban Contreras and Pascual 
Barsana in Pontevedra. They were, however, pacified by a 
Comite de Pacificacion led by Professor Simeon Mobo Reyes, 
Natalie Acevedo, Vicente Laserna, Magdaleno Concepcion, Se- 
gundo Martelino, Gregorio Pastrana and Reverend Francisco 
Jayme, the parish priest of Kalibo. The Comite also advised 
the Spaniards to evacuate the towns in Aklan Valley to prevent 
further bloodshed. 

With a culture of their own, distinct from the others, the 
Aklanons agitated for their separation from Capiz. This desire 
to become independent dated back in 1901, when a Memorial ad- 
vocating the separation of Aklan from Capiz was presented to 
the Second Philippine Commission. Several bills were later filed 
in the Philippine Legislature in 1928 and 1934. During the 
term of President Ramon Magsaysay, Congressman Godofredo 
Ramos of the 3rd District of Capiz, together with Gregorio Pas- 
trana, Manuel Laserna, Teodulfo Saner, Rafael Tumbokon, Jose 
Urquiola and Eufrosino Alba also filed House Bill No. 334 on 
March 17, 1955, which aimed for "the restoration to Aklan of its 
birthright to become a province." The law, known as Republic 
Act No. 1414, created Aklan as the 53rd province of the country 
in 1956. 

The historical and tourist attractions of Aklan are the Ati- 
Atihan Festival, the monument in memory of the "Nineteen 
Martyrs," and the Kalantiaw Shrine. The Ati-Atihan, a socio- 
religious fiesta, depicts a home town rejoicing after a victorious 
battle with a neighboring tribe and ends up with an amiable 
reconciliation between the warring tribes. The monument on 
the way to the capital town of Kalibo, in honor of General Fran- 
cisco del Castillo, consists of 19 stone-steps spiralling to the sum- 
mit and the statue of a man on a horse atop these stairs. Lastly, 
the Shrine, in honor of the first known Filipino lawgiver, Datu 
Bendahara Kalantiaw, was declared as national shrine by Pres- 
ident Ramon Magsaysay through Executive Order No. 234 on 
February 11, 1957. It houses documents and publications of the 
National Historical Commission on an area of 12,995 square 
kilometers along the coastline of Batan Bay, including the re- 
claimed portion of 7,347 square meters believed as the location 
of the original settlement of Datu Sumakwel and his kin, ^<m^ 



222 




ILANG-ILANG 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF AKLAN 

The Province of Aklan was created under R.A. 1414 
on April 25, 1956. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Aklan 



Star 



Vinta 



Banana and Abaca 



Rice Grains 



Coconut Trees 



Date 



■symbolizes light and guidance on 
different areas of human endea- 
vor. 

- symbolizes pre-Spanish history 
and civilization of the province; 
also signifies the rich fishing 
ground of Aklan. 

- fertility of soil of the province and 
its abundant supply of banana 
and abaca. 

- signifies that Aklan is a rice pro- 
ducing province and self-sufficient 
in rice. 

-indicate that copra is one of Ak- 
lan's major products. ^ 

- When Aklan was separated from 
its mother province of Capiz. 



HISTORY OF THE 



ANTIQUE is one of the provinces comprising Panay Island; the 
other three are Iloilo, Capiz and Aklan. It is a narrow strip 
of land stretching along the entire west coast of the island — 
shielded from storms by mountain ranges in the east that cut 
off the rains of the northwest monsoon and cause a dry 
season from November to April. The forests in the east and 
the sea in the west, however, temper the climate with rainfall 
during the rest of the year. 

The mineral resources of the province are copper and 
chromite-manganese. Its most important products are rice, 
com, coconut, cassava, mongo and muscovado sugar, particularly 
in the towns of Sibalom, San Jose, Patnongan and Dao in the 
north, and Pandan, Culasi and Bugasong in the south. Tuna 
and bangus fry abound in the official fishing ground of Cuyo 
Pass, along the Antique coast. 

Antique is composed of 18 municipalities on a land area 
of 2,522 square kilometers. It had a population of 289,172 in 
1970 

Although with vast stretches of irrigated rice fields and 
rich fishing grounds, the people engage in cottage industries — 
basket, hat and mat weaving, pot making, pina and jusi cloth 
weaving, and salt processing. Classified as the best sacada 
laborers in the world by the International Labor Organization, 
they migrate to the sugar cane fields of Negros during harvest 
season. 

The province could be traced from the legendary ten Bor- 
nean Datus who landed at Sinogbuhan (near Miag-ao, Iloilo). 
Their chosen site, after the purchase of Panay with the golden 
"salakot" in the 13th centuiy, was called "Hamtic," after "ham- 
tic-hamtic," meaning large ants which were abundant in the 
place. About three hundred years before the arrival of the 
Spaniards, Panay was divided into three political units or 
"sakops." namely Hamtik, Irong-Irong and Aklan. 

During the early years of Spanish conquest, Panay Island — 
12 leagues from Cebu (Cebu) and 21/2 leagues from Negros 
Island — was the 'most fertile and well-provisioned among the 
discovered islands, except Lucon (Luzon). The Augustinians 



OF ANTIQUE 



established the first mission sites in Panay. As early as 1630, 
their records of religious missions were found. 

In 1790, Antique was converted into a politico-military 
province with the town of Antique as its first capital. The 
provincial seat of government was later transferred to Buga- 
song, and finally to San Jose de Buenavista. 

During the Philippine Revolution, in September 1898, 
General Emilio Aguinaldo appointed Leandro Fullon, one of 
the bravest generals, to lead the revolutionary activity in 
Antique. A provincial government of the revolutionists was 
later set up in the province. Angel Salazar became the pro- 
vincial chief and Ariston Gella, its representative to the Malolos 
Congress. With the abolition of the Federal Council, General 
Fullon became the politico-military governor of Antique. 

General Fullon also led the Antiquenos and the other people 
of the provinces of Panay against the American forces. He, 
however, surrendered on March 23, 1901, the same day General 
Aguinaldo was captured by the American forces in Palanan. 
On April 13, 1901, a civil government was established in Anti- 
que, and he was again appointed as governor. 

Under the Philippine Commonwealth in 1935, Calixto D. 
Zaldivar became the representative of Antique to the National 
Assembly. 

Before the outbreak of World War II, in 1939, Antique was 
chosen as one of the mobilization centers, in anticipation of the 
Japanese invasion. On February 12, 1940, San Jose became 
the headquarters of the mobilization. Two years later, in 1942, 
after a series of Japanese bombings, the Japanese Imperial 
Forces commanded by General Masaharu Homma organized 
the Kawane Detachment which occupied the island of Panay. 

Not only rich in history bur aiso m folklore. Antique takes 
pride in its colorful Binirayan, translated as leisurely boat ride 
in Kiniray-a, which commemorates the arrival of the ten Bor- 
nean Datus in Panay. The festival, climaxed by a Mass in 
Kiniray-a, is a tour to the scenic Mararison Island, the Bato 
Cueba, Canagan Waterfalls, the Limpatan Rock, Jurao-jurao 
Island, and the surrounding beaches along the Antique 
shorelines. - ^ 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



Upper Portion 
Left Side Portion 
Right Side Portion 



PROVINCE OF ANTIQUE 

The Province of Antique was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Antique 



signifies the vast mountain ranges 
and ricefields of the province. 



Center Oval 



— symbolizes the Sulu Sea which 
abounds in fish, and the fishing 
industry of the province. 

— represents the five (5) datus who 
stayed in Antique out of the ten 
(10) that left Malay for the Island 
of Panay. 



signifies that copra is the major 

product of Antique. p^^^ p^j^^ 

signifies that sugar, rice and corn 
are the major staple produce of 
Antique. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CAPIZ 



Capiz, one of the provinces comprising the island of Panay, is 
bounded by the Sibuyan Sea on the north, Aklan on the north- 
west, Antique on the west, and Iloilo on the south and east. 

The province, with a land area of 249,000 hectares and a 
population of 393,677 in 1970, is composed of 16 municipahties 
and a city (Roxas City, its capital). 

Agriculture and fishing are the most important industries 
of Capiz. The eastern part is adapted to sugar cane and the 
central portion to rice; the province being called the rice gra- 
nary of Panay and Negros. 

The word capiz was believed to be derived from the 
Visayan word kapid meaning twins, which were born in 
the area. "Capiz" was thus appended to the town now known 
as Roxas City. Later, the Aklan District, composed of the 
present provinces of Capiz and Aklan, also adopted the name. 

The Malay settlements in the island of Panay may be traced 
from the ten datus who sailed from Borneo to escape a rajah's 
persecution. They landed at the mouth of the Sirwaken River, 
near San Joaquin, Iloilo. After their purchase of the island 
from the aborigines (the Ati) under Marikudo, the Bornean 
datus divided Panay into three sakops. Datu Bangkaya ruled 
Aklan district, one of the sakops. ... ;a;V.;;,., 

In 1569, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi built the first Spanish 
settlement on the site of the present town of Panay. This was 
the second Spanish settlement, next to San Miguel in Cebu. 

The flourishing native settlements in the island were later 
organized into towns, namely, Dumarao and Panay in 1581, 
Dumalag in 1596, Mambusao in 1606, Panitan in 1692, Capiz 
in 1707, Dao in 1771, Tapaz in 1802, Ivisan in 1853, Pontevedra 
in 1856, Pilar in 1857, Cuartero in 1867, and Ma-ayon in 1882. 

In 1716, up to the end of the Spanish rule, Capiz and Aklan 
were organized into politico-military provinces, including the 



neighboring islands of Romblon, Maestro de Campo, Tablas and 
Sibuyan. These areas were formerly under the jurisdiction of 
Oton, Iloilo. ■ . 

During the Philippine Revolution, General Ananias Diokno 
occupied Capiz in 1898, after the island of Panay was abandoned 
by the Spaniards. 

When the American forces occupied the country. General 
Elwell S. Otis issued an order on February 29, 1899, providing 
for the creation of a military district comprising the island of 
Panay and other Visayan islands. 

The civil government was established in Capiz on April 15, 
1901. The same year, the efforts to divide Capiz into two prov- 
inces did not materialize. Instead, by virtue of Act No. 1165, 
dated July 2, 1907, the Province of Romblon was annexed to 
Capiz. Later, Act No. 2724, dated December 7, 1917, re-estab- 
lished the former Province of Romblon. 

During the Pacific War, on April 16, 1942, the Japanese 
Imperial Forces landed on Panay Island. The 61st Division 
under General Albert Christie capitulated to the enemy on May 
24, 1942. The USAFFE soldiers who did not surrender orga- 
nized the Free Panay Force under Macario Peralta and Gover- 
nor Tomas Confesor revived the Emergency Provincial Guards. 
Jointly, the two organizations waged a guerrilla warfare in the 
province. By March 1945, Panay was liberated from the Japanese 
forces. 

On April 25, 1956, Republic Act No. 1414, created Aklan 
into a separate and independent province. 

Capiz is the birthplace of the first president of the Republic 
of the Philippines, Manuel A. Roxas. Some of its tourist at- 
tractions are the natural bridge of Suhut, the caves in Dumalag, 
the bubbling springs of sulphurous and salty water near the 
Suhut bridge, the numerous waterfalls and the springs in Jamin- 
dan and Mambusao. 





Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



Mi, I. ■ 



PROVINCE OF CAPIZ 



^' The Province of Capiz was created under Act 2711 on '.'t-; 
March 10, 1917. 'v^-, •■■o....^:,,/ v 

V. fii .i ^ Meaning of the Off icial Seal of Capiz 

Upper Portion — depicts Manuel A. Roxas, foremost Capi- i . v 
zeno and first president of the Republic :, ; . 
;,:v ■. : of the Philippines. 



•1 . ..;iv-' 



Lower Portion — represents agriculture and fishing as the , 
most important industries of the province. I 



227 



HISTORY OF THE SUBPROVINCE OF GUIMARAS 



GuiMARAS lies between the islands of Panay and Negros in the 
Western Visayas. It is surrounded on the north and northwest 
by the Iloilo Strait which separates it from the province of 
Iloilo, on the south and southwest by the Panay Gulf, and in 
the east and southeast by the Guimaras Strait that sets it apart 
from Negros Occidental. The subprovince is composed of the 
islands of Guimaras (the biggest), Inampulungan, Tandog, 
Nadulao, Nalunga, Panubulon and other islets which comprised 
the municipalities of Buenavista, Jordan and Nueva Valencia, 
Most of the populous towns of the subprovince are reached by 
ferry boats or motorized bancas from Iloilo City. Sebaste, on 
the southeastern part of Guimaras Island, is a landing beach 
for sea vessels of light tonnage. 

Guimaras Subprovince, with an aggregate land area of 604.4 
square kilometers and a population of 73,014 in 1970, is a broad 
flat land. Mounts Acdan and Pandin are the only highlands. 

Rice, corn and sugar cane are raised. Basket, hat and 
mat weaving from the pandan and buri palms, and fishing are 
its industries. Charcoal, however, is the principal product of 
Guimaras. A cement factory is established in Buenavista. 

In 1565, the crew dispatched by Legazpi from Bohol cruised 
along the eastern shores of Guimaras. After 1569, Panay Island 
was divided into two civil provinces, Panay on the north, and 
Oton or Ogtong (later known as Arevalo) and finally Iloilo 
province on the south, to which Guimaras was an integral part. 
Guimaras remained as a part of Iloilo until the end of Spanish 
rule. 

After the American forces occupied the island of Panay, 
during the Filipino-American War, the U.S. Army maintained 



a military reservation, known as Camp Jossman, (now barrio 
of Sunang) in Buenavista, which was the headquarters of the 
American forces in Panay, Negros and nearby provinces. 
During this period. General Douglas MacArthur, then a first 
lieutenant, had his first tour of duty as an officer of the Army 
Engineers. He built the wharf at Buenavista. 

During World War II, the Japanese forces occupied and 
garrisoned the towns of Buenavista, Jordan and Nueva Valen- 
cia, in 1942. Later, due to the active operations of the guerri- 
llas, many of its residents became victims of Japanese atro- 
cities, particularly in Buenavista where many persons were 
executed from July 9 to September 8, 1943 — for being sus- 
pected of complicity with the underground movement. 

On February 14, 1945, a contingent of Panay Forces under 
the command of Captain Luis Herrera attacked Buenavista. 
When the Americans landed on Guimaras in 1945, the Japanese 
forces had already evacuated to Iloilo and Negros where they 
made their final stand. Prior to the landing of the American 
forces, their aerial bombings destroyed many buildings, includ- 
ing the Trappist Monastery in Nueva Valencia. 

Guimaras was created as a subprovince of Iloilo under 
Eepublic Act No. 4667, approved on June 18, 1966, as amended 
by R.A. No. 5463, approved on April 14, 1969, with Buenavista 
as the seat of its political administration. 

Two of the historical spots in Guimaras are the site of 
Camp Jossman in Buenavista (the Municipal Board of Buena- 
vista proposed to the NHC the installation of a historical 
marker in 1973), and the huge Cross at the shoreline — on 
the Iloilo-side of the Island, near the town of Jordan. 



228 




SUB-PROVINCE OF GUIMARAS 



Three Stars and 
Three Hills 



The sub-province of Guimaras was created under R.A. 
4667 on June 18, 1966. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Guimaras 



Left Lower Portion — 



■symbolizes the three municipali- 
ties of Jordan, Buenavista and 
Nueva Valencia. The center hill 
represents Jordan, the capital of 
Guimaras. The Cross symbolizes 
the Balaan-Bukid Chapel, the 
mecca of devout catholics, 

coconut trees represent the major 
crop of the island. Carabao head 
and plow suggests that Guimaras 
is agricultural. The lighthouse 



symbolizes the municipality of 
Nueva Valencia. Motorized banca 
symbolizes the means of transpor- 
tation in the island. 



Lower Right Portion — the ship and bulk sugar handling 

installation thru which 80% of 
the country's export bulk sugar is 
channeled. The factory represents 
the Panay Cement Plant located in 
Buenavista. 



229 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ILOILO 



THE PROVINCE OF ILOILO, on the southeastern portion of 
Panay Island, is bounded on the north by Capiz and Aklan, on 
the west by Antique, on the south by the Guimaras Strait and 
the Panay Gulf, and on the northeast by the Visayan Sea. 

The province, composed of the mainland Guimaras Island 
and other small islands, has a land area of 5,324 square kilo- 
meters and a population of 1,164,271 in 1970. 

Iloilo has many good harbors and rich^ fishing grounds. 
It is a commercial center in the Western Visayas, particularly 
Iloilo City, Jaro, Oton and Pototan. 

The region produces rice, sugar cane, corn, tobacco and 
cacao. Its home industries are jmi, pina and silk weaving and 
rope making. Fishing is an important industry. 

In the 13th century, Datu Puti and nine other datus pur- 
chased Panay from Negrito Chief Marikudo for a gold hat 
{salakot) and a golden necklace. These datus established 
barangays or "sakops" which became the Confederation of the 
Madyaas, the first known organization of barangays composed 
of Hantik (now Antique) under Datu Sumakwel, Aklan (now 
Aklan and Capiz) under Datu Bankaya, and Irong-Irong (now 
Iloilo) under Datu Paiburong. 

In 1569, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi settled in Arevalo, a 
district of Iloilo. In 1572, a mission center was established 
in Oton. Later, in 1582, Gonzalo Ronquillo enlarged Arevalo 
and made it the capital of Iloilo, referred to as alcaldia-mayor 
of Ogtong (Oton). 

In 1600, Captain Juan de Sierra saved Arebalo (Arevalo) 
from the Muslim raids under Sali and Salonga. 

When the Dutch assaulted Iloilo, Fernando de Ayala re- 
pulsed Admiral Wittert in 1609, and Diego Quinones defeated 
Admiral Jan Derickson Lam on March 14, 1616. 

The Augustinians founded the mission centers which grew 
into the towns of Oton (1572), Dumangas (1572), Janiuay 
(1578), Tigbjfuan (1580), Passi (1591), Laglag (1610), Miagao 
(1716), Cabatuan (1732), Comando (1738), Pototan (1740), 
Igbaras (1750), Lambunao (1752), Alimodian (1754), Maasin 



(1755), Sta. Barbara (1759), Calinog (1767), San Joaquin 
(1793), Tubungan (1814), Barotac (1825), Dingle (1825), and 
San Miguel (1825). 

Originally, Iloilo Province included Antique, Aklan and 
Negros Island. Capiz was organized into a politico-military 
district in 1716, and Antique in 1790. Negros and Antique 
were created into provinces in 1798. The Port of Iloilo was 
opened in 1856. 

After the fall of Manila to the Americans, Governor 
General Basilio Agustin decreed the organization of the Filipino 
Voluntario Militia on May 4, 1898. Consequently, General 
Ricardo Monet, governor of Iloilo, ordered the organization of 
voluntarios in the different towns. He appointed Captain 
Martin Delgado to organize the militia in Sta. Barbara and 
Mayor Vicente Gay y Acosta to take charge of the town of 
Iloilo. However, Delgado, Colonel Quintin Salas of Dumangas 
and Adriano Hernandez of Dingle turned out as revolutionists. 
They organized a revolutionary government and raised the 
Filipino flag in Santa Barbara on November 17, 1898, and 
occupied the municipality of Iloilo on December 25, 1898. 

On February 11, 1899, the American forces under General 
Marcus Miller occupied Iloilo town and subsequently defeated 
the Filipino forces at Balantang, Sambag, Tacas and Jaro. 
After the surrender of Delgado to General Robert Hughes on 
February 2, 1901, a civil government was established in Iloilo 
on April 11, the same year. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces oc- 
cupied Iloilo on April 11, 1942. Later, the American Liberation 
Forces and the Panay guerrillas under Colonel Macario Peralta, 
Jr., with Lt. Colonels Leopoldo Relunia, Julian Chavez, Valentin 
Grasparil and Pedro Serran liberated Iloilo on March 22, 1945. 
Tomas Confesor, Jose Zulueta, Juan Borra and other civil of- 
ficials of the Free Panay Government also extended assistance 
to the victory of the 6th Military District Forces in the province. 

Iloilo has mineral springs in Maasin, Tubungan, Janiuay 
and Nagaba. In Guimaras Island, General Douglas MacArthur, 
then a lieutenant, had his first tour of duty from 1900 to 1903 
at Camp Jossmann, in the town of Buenavista. w -y 





Provincial Seal 



Provincidl Flag 



PROVINCE OF ILOILO 

The Province of Iloilo was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Iloilo 



Three Mountain Peaks — signifies the separation of Iloilo 

from the provinces of Capiz and 
Antique. 



Carabao Head 



■ represents agriculture; also signi- 



Ship and Factory 



f ies that Iloilo is a rice producing 
province. 

— represents commerce, trade and 
industry. 



231 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL 



Negros Occidental is bounded on the north by the Visayan Sea, 
on the northeast by the Tanon Strait, on the south and south- 
east by Negros Oriental, on the southwest by the Panay Gulf, 
and on the northwest by the Guimaras Strait. 

Separated from Negros Oriental by a central mountain 
range, Negros Occidental has a land area of 7,926.1 square kilo- 
meters. In 1970, it had a population of 1,503,782. 

Sugar is the most important product of the province, aside 
from copra, tobacco, rice and lumber. In 1972, Negros Occi- 
dental supplied 64.49% of the country's sugar output. Fishing 
and mining are its developing industries. 

Negros Island was formerly called Buglas, but the Spaniards 
changed its name to Negros because of the presence of Negritos 
in the place. 

In 1565, Captain Juan de Isla, with Guido de Lavezares, 
Andres Mirandola, Martin de Rada, and 70 men, took possession 
of Negros Island in the name of the King of Spain. On April 
7 of the same year. Captain Juan de Aguirre with Esteban 
Rodriguez Figueroa sailed around the island and found many 
Negrito settlements. 

By 1575, the Augustinian mission was established in Binal- 
bagan, and another one at Hog in 1584. Later, the Jesuits took 
over the spiritual ministration from 1628 to 1767. When the 
Jesuits were expelled from the country in 1768, the missions 
were turned over to the Recollects. 

During the second half of the 16th century, the towns of 
Binaibagan, Hog, San Isidro, San Carlos and Calatrava were 
founded. 

In 1734, Negros Occidental was created as a politico-military 
comandancia. However, in 1856, the whole Negros Island be- 



came a politico-military district. Later, in 1890, Negros Occi- 
dental was finally made a separate province. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the 
local revolutionary groups were organized in the province. It 
was, however, in 1898, that General Aniceto Lacson raised the 
"Cry" in Talisay, which openly declared the resistance of Negros 
Occidental against the Spaniards. The revolutionists seized and 
captured two Spanish garrisons under the command of Lieute- 
nant Maximo Correa in Talisay and Colonel Isidro de Castro y 
Cisnore in Bacolod. The Filipino flag, sewed by Olimpia and 
Perpetua Severino and Eutropia Yorac, was unfurled in Talisay. 

When the American forces came, Lacson, realizing the futil- 
ity of further resistance, negotiated for peace. On March 4, 
1899, General James F. Smith, with the California Volunteers, 
occupied Bacolod. A civil government was established in the 
province on April 20, 1901. 

On May 20, 1942, the Japanese Imperial Forces occupied and 
controlled Negros Occidental. The guerrilla units, which were 
organized later, became the 7th Military District under the 
command of Lieutenant Colonel Salvador Abcede. A war-time 
provincial government was established with Alfredo Montelibano 
as governor. 

On March 29, 1945, the American Liberation Forces under 
General Rapp Brush landed in Bacolod. The Japanese Forces 
led by Lieutenant Colonel Takeshi Kono surrendered to the 
Americans in August 1945. 

The historical landmarks in the province are the house in 
Talisay and the statue in Bacolod of Generals Aniceto Lacson 
and Juan Araneta, respectively, both local revolutionary leaders. 

The mineral springs of Mambucal and Murcia are noted 
tourist attractions of the province. 



232 



'-■■■■iKli1>TTiliyriiTiW- |'MlViVilliiri111lli 




ILANG-ILANG 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF NEGROS OCCIDENTAL 

The Province of Negros Occidental was created under 
Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Negros Occidental 

Upper Portion — represents the sugar industry 

which is the hood of the prov- 
ince, and the majestic Kanla-on 
Volcano. 

Middle Portion — shows the Provincial Capitol, seat 

of the Provincial Government. 

Lower Portion — sailing ship signifies sugar as a 

potential export industry of Neg- 
ros; also depicts the development 
of fishing as a secondary industry. 



Region VII 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BOHOL 



BOHOL PROVINCE, rugged and oval-shaped, is considered 
the tenth largest island in the Archipelago. It is located east 
of Cebu and southwest of Leyte, and bounded on the north 
by the Camotes Sea, on the west by the Bohol Strait, and 
on the south by the Mindanao Sea. 

The province, with a 161-kilometer coastline and an area 
of 4,117.3 square kilometers, has four seaports, namely, Tag- 
bilaran, Jagna, Tubigon and Jetafe. It has also several moun- 
tain peaks, the most popular are Alimani, Bunucon, Lusday, 
Calihumangad, Colayhuan, Canliboy and Campusa. The notable 
rivers of the island are the Inabangan River in the north 
and the Loboc River in the south. 

Because of topographical conditions, the climate is not 
uniform — warm and dry along the coast, and cold and humid 
in the interior. The rainfall, however, is evenly distributed. 

Bohol had a population of 683,297 as of 1970. 

After Ferdinand Magellan was killed by Lapu-Lapu in 
Mactan, the Spaniards burned one of their ships, the Concep- 
cion, in the island of Bohol. 

In 1565, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi dropped anchor at 
Jagna, Bohol. The natives were unfriendly because the Span- 
iards were mistaken for Portuguese marauders who used 
to plunder the coasts of Bohol. However, in the small village 
of Bohol, a few kilometers from the present capital of Tag- 
bilaran, Legazpi performed the "blood compact" with Chiefs 
Sikatuna and Sigala, signifying that they were blood brothers. 

The province became a Jesuit mission site in 1595. On 



November 17, of the same year. Fathers Juan Torres and 
Gabriel Sanchez stayed at Baclayon, and later at the fishing 
village of Loboc. A chapel was constructed, "and soon eleven 
barangays had settled down (sic) near the chapel to form the 
town of Loboc. A mission site was also established at Talibon," 

Bohol records two local revolts: the Tamblot rebellion in 
1621, led by a native priest or Babaylan and the Dagohoy 
revolt from 1744 to 1829 (the longest ever recorded in Philip- 
pine history), led by Francisco Dagohoy. 

During the Filipino-American War, the American forces 
seized the province on March 17, 1900. In 1901, the revolu- 
tionists led by Captain Gregorio Casenas fought the Americans 
in a bloody battle at Jagna which was captured and burned 
by the enemies. 

At the outbreak of World War II, the Northern Bohol 
Guerrilla Forces was organized in Loon in September 1942 
under Lieutenant Vidal V. Cresencio, and in Guindulman under 
Major Esteban Bernido. On November 19, 1943, the united 
command of the Bohol guerrilla forces was organized, with 
Major Ismael Ingeniero as the Bohol Area Commander. 

Bohol is the home province of the fourth President of the 
Republic of the Philippines, Carlos Polistico Garcia (1957-1960) 
who was born in Talibon. 

The tourist attractions of the province are the Chocolate 
Hills which look like "inverted kettledrums covered with grass" 
in the towns of Carmen, Bilar, Loon, and Clarin; the Badiang 
Swimming Pool in Valencia where the water gushes from a 
spring; and the old watchtower in Punta Cruz, Maribojoc. 



Provincial Seal 



I 



Provincial Flag 




PROVINCE OF BOHOL 



WHITE GUMAMELA 
Provincial Flower 



The Province of Bohol was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Bohol 



Colors 

Blood Compact 



Upper Mid-section 



-represent the Philippine flag 
and its true meaning. 

■symbolize the historical blood- 
letting by Sikatuna and Legazpi 
on March 16, 1665, the country's 
first peace treaty. vv-v ' i;; : 

■replica of the famous chocolate 
hills of Carmen town which is a 
famous tourism attraction of the 
country. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CEBU 



The Island Province op Cebu is bounded on the north by the 

Srarand'o'n tL''' T "^^^^^ ^^e Bohd 

btrait, and on the south and west by the Taiion Strait. 

area^5'4 86«'?,r"'''?? of 1,631,531 in 1970. With a land 

the fountrv^Tph^'"f ^ "''T^'"^ corn-producing province of 
^nut ll^;.? n , «»^^rcane. abaca, 

peanut, banana, pineapple, camote and tobacco. Cotton cloth 
IS woven for local consumption, while sinumay] woven out of 
banana and pineapple fiber, is an important export Item 

rZ. v^ ^5^^ ^^^"^ in East Asia-the Atla^ 

Consolidated Mining Company-located in Toledo City A^mt^ 
emment cement factory is also found in the town of 

Cebu. or Sugbu, ruled by Rajah Humabon, was alreadv « 
prosperous settlement before the Spanianis camrin 1521 it 
b^^tj^e relations with China and the other countries of South! 

On April 14, 1521, in the first Catholic Mass at r.h„ 
fZ ^^f'"" 800 nativS were bap 



to be the gift of Magellan to Humabon's wife. A chaoel wfl«, 
built or the Holy Child, and Legazpi named the town 'a San 

ofTt '""""'f i' ''''' ^^^"^P* the present City 

of Cebu changing its former name of San Miguel to "La Villa 
del Santissimo Nombre de Jesus." 

"^SnKilif'ktS^rH^r?'^" y"''^"'' ^^^^'^^^^ ^"^^^ as 
Leon K^at, attacked the Spanish garrison at the corner of the 

present Calamba and Tres de Abril streets in the city. 

TV. ^'''■''^^ ''^'^"P^^^ C«bu in February 1899 

They established a military government which was later changed 

rection, the military government was restored. Finally the 
civilian authority was established on January 1, 1902. 

On April 10, 1942, the Japanese Imperial Forces landed 

^L ^^ r^""''''' U""' ^ number of fIS 

pmo and American soldiers fled to the mountains. Later thev 
regrouped and organized themselves inte guerrilla bands kd bJ 
Colonels James Gushing and Harry Fenton. ?hey harassed 
the enemy and aided the American Liberation Forces In 1945 

fh. pvT-,?^^^'^ ^l' ^^^^ P^««ident of the Republic of 



236 




AFRICAN DAISY 

Provincial Flower 




PROVINCE OF CEBU 

The Province of Cebu was created under Act 2711 on 
March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Cebu 

Spear Crossed by a Bolo — symbolizes the resistance of Lapu- 

Lapu against Magellan. 

Six Oysters — represent the six (6) generals 

who revolted against the Spa- 
niards and Americans, namely, 
Generals Maxilom, Echavez, Cab- 
reros, Leon Kilat, Jaca and Genes. 

Black and White — represent the forty-eight (48) 
Squares municipalities of the Province, of 

Cebu. 



237 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province of Negros Oriental, occupying the eastern half 
of Negros Island, is bounded on the northeast by the Municipal- 
ity of San Carlos, on the southwest by the Sulu Sea, on the 
northwest by Negros Occidental, and on the southeast by the 
Tanon Strait. The coastal areas in the northern section are 
drained by the Hibaigo, Magingin, Payabon aiid Tan jay Rivers 
while the most deeply wooded areas in the southwestern portion 
are the sources of Maayontubig, Candugay, Siaton, Sta. Catalina 
and Bayawan Rivers. 

The province has an area of 5,745.8 square kilometers and 
a population of 715,240 in 1970. With its rich soil of volcanic 
origin, sugar, coconut, abaca, rice and corn grow well. Lum- 
bering, mining and ceramics are some of its important industries. 

Mount Canlaon, and Cuernos de Negros^ called Talinis by the 
natives, are two of its well-known volcanoes. 

Facing Cebu, the province has good harbors in Dumaguete, 
Bais, and Tan jay. 

Long before the Spaniards came, the Chinese, Muslims and 
Malayans had already visited the place. 

In April 1521, Ferdinand Magellan dispatched a small crew 
which landed on the eastern part of Negros. This group was 
considered as the "first European to set foot on the island." 

In 1565, Esteban Rodriguez, a member of the Legazpi expe- 
dition, sailed from Bohol. He encountered a storm and took 
shelter on the eastern coast of Negros Island from where he 
cruised to the western side of Cebu. In his trip, he mentioned 
many Negritoes inhabiting the region. In June of the same 
year. Father Andres de Urdaneta sailed via the Danao River 
and landed near Escalante. The following September, Mateo 
del Saez and Martin de Goiti landed near Tan jay. They were 
followed in October 1565 by Captain Manuel de Loarca, one 
of the members of the Legazpi expedition, who took possession 
of "Negros." 

Because of the many Negritoes in Buglas, as Negros was 
then known, the Spaniards changed the name of the region to 
"Negros." 



OF NEGROS ORIENTAL 



In 1572, Lope de Povedano, an encomendero, found out that 
the Tanjay-Dumaguete area was the most populous among the 
regions. To convert the people into the Christian faith, Don 
Ferriera, first Archdeacon of the Cathedral of Cebu, sent Father 
Gabriel Sanchez to give further religious instruction to the 
natives. In 1620, Dumaguete was created as a separate parish 
from Tan jay with Father Juan de Rosa y Herrera as the first 
priest. 

The region now Negros Oriental was administered from 
Cebu before 1734. It was, however, made a part of the politico- 
military comandancia of Negros Island until 1856. In 1890, 
Negros Island was divided into the provinces of Negros Occi- 
dental and Negros Oriental. As a regular province, it comprised 
the towns of Amlan, Ayungoh, Ayuquita, Bacong, Bais, Baya- 
nan (Bayawan), Canoan, Dauin, Dumaguete, Guihulngan, Man- 
juyod. New Valencia, Siaton, Tanjay, Tayasan, Tolon and 
Zamboangita, with Don Joaquin Tavera as the military governor. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, the people took 
up arms against the Spanish government under the leadership 
of Pantaleon Villegas, better known as "Leon Kilat." 

After the outbreak of the Filipino-American War, the local 
revolutionary forces surrendered to the American forces. A 
civil government was subsequently established and Don De- 
metrio Larena became the first governor. During this period, 
Siquijor was made a subprovince of Negros Oriental. 

In 1942, during World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces 
occupied Negros Oriental. The guerrillia forces of the 7th Mili- 
tary District under Lt. Col. Placido Ausejo, however, controlled 
large portions of the province prior to the landing of the Amer- 
ican Division in Looc, Sibulan, on April 26, 1945. For sometime, 
fighting raged around the Dumaguete area. Negros Oriental 
was liberated on June 20, 1945. 

The provincial jurisdiction of Negros Oriental diminished 
when Republic Act No. 6398 separated the Subprovince of Siqui- 
jor and made it independent of Negros Oriental on September 
17, 1971. 

A noted Protestant educational institution of the province, 
Silliman University, was established in 1901. 

^ 




Provincial Seal 




BANABA 
Provincial Flower 



» 




PROVINCE OF NEGROS ORIENTAL ^ | 

The Province of Negros Oriental was created under Act - • ; ' ;| 

2711 on March 10, 1917. ' ■ , ) 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Negros Oriental | 



Sugar Central and — signifies the two major industries : ■ 

Coconut Tree . of the province, namely, the coco- i | 

nut and sugar industries. ivv^lli^S 

Upper Portion — the famous "Gate of Opportunity" 

representing Silliman University 
: ' ■ : ■• which has been mainly responsible . 

for the education and cultural 
■ growth of the province. '^-if 



239 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SIQUIJOR 



SlQUlJOR lies east of the southern tip of Negros, south 
of Cebu and southwest of Bohol. It is separated by the Min- 
danao Sea from the northern coast of Mindanao. The island 
with low mountains has light rainfall throughout the year. 

Siquijor, earlier known to the Spaniards as "Isla de Fuegos" 
or "Fire Island" because of the lights from hundreds of fireflies 
and to the friars as "Siquijod, Siquijor, and Siquijor," was 
claimed by others to have been named after King Kihod, its 
legendary ruler. However, the old people stated that it was 
called Katugasan, from tugas (molave tree in the Cebu-Visayan 
dialect) which covered the island. 

The original inhabitants came as farmers and fishermen 
from Cebu, Bohol, and the adjacent islands. In the new settle- 
ment they planted tobacco, cacao and corn, and raised poultry 
for sale in the markets of Dumaguete. 

Larena, one of the well-organized towns founded by Father 
Eustaquio Ruiz, was for sometime the capital of the island. 
It was an ecclesiastical and trading center. The other towns 
then were Maria, (formerly Can-Meniac), San Juan, Lazi 
(Tigbauan), and Enrique Villanueva (formerly Barrio 
Talingting) . 

From 1638 to the close of the Spanish sovereignty, Siquijor 
remained under the control of the ecclesiastical authorities in 
Cebu. For sometime, it was politically administered by the 
province of Bohol. It was not until June 4, 1901, when it 
was separated from Bohol and made a sub-province of Negros 
Oriental. 



Unlike in Cebu and Negros, the conditions in the island 
were generally quiet during the Philippine revolution. 

In 1922 General Leonard Wood visited Siquijor to appraise 
its public works. Aboard the presidential yacht, "Casiana," 
President Manuel L. Quezon also came and visited the island. 

During World War II, Siquijor was briefly governed by 
Shunzo Suzuki, a Japanese civilian appointed by the Japanese 
Imperial Forces, until he was assassinated by the guerrilla 
forces under Lt. Jumawan in October 1942. Mamor Fukuda 
took over the control of Siquijor from June 1943 until the 
Japanese forces abandoned the island when the liberation forces 
came in 1944. 

Siquijor became a sub-province of Negros Oriental and re- 
mained as such until the enactment into law of House Bill No. 
652, known as Republic Act No. 6398, dated September 17, 
1971, which provided for the separation of Siquijor as an inde- 
pendent and regular province of Negros Oriental. The province 
was then composed of the municipalities of Enrique Villanueva, 
Maria, Lazi, Larena and San Juan. 

By virtue of Proclamation No. 1075, signed on September 
12, 1972, the capital was transferred. from Larena to the town 
of Siquijor where it remains today. 

Although rice^ corn and a few products are produced in 
Siquijor, trade and commerce have to supplement these sources 
of income of the 54,006 inhabitants (in 1970) in order to 
alleviate their economic problems. 





Silhoutte of Island 

Sunrise 

Sailboat 

Coconut Trees 



PROVINCE OF SIQUIJOR 

The Province of Siquijor was created under R.A. 6398 on September 17, 1971. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Siquijor 



— the Island of Siquijor 

— represents trade and commerce 

— represents the bright future of the 
province. 

— represent the coconut industry, 
major source of livelihood of 
Siquijor. 



Miner's Hat, Pick, 
Shovel and Lamp 

Six Stars 



— signify the rich natural resour- 
ces of the province. 



— represent the six municipalities 
comprising the province. 

Colors Red, White and^ represent the Philippine Flag and 
Blue its true meaning. 



241 



/ 



Region VIII 



HISTORY OF THE SUBPROVINCE OF BILIRAN 



BiLlRAN Island, a subprovince of Leyte, consists of the mu- 
nicipalities of Almeria, Biliran, Cabucgayan, Caibiran, Culaba, 
Kawayan and Naval, and the island-municipality of Maripipi. 
It is north of Leyte Province, and surrounded by the Samar 
Sea on the north and east, the Leyte and Carigara Bays on the 
south, and the Visayan Sea on the west. Its total land area 
is 555.6 square kilometers. 

In 1970, the subprovince had a population of 90,498. The 
inhabitants in the western part speak Cebuano while those in 
the eastern side use Samar-Leyte (Waray). They are engaged 
in agriculture, hunting, fishing, lumbering and manufacturing. 

Naval, Biliran and Caibiran have wide areas of cultivated 
lands while Cabucgayan and Kawayan have good fishing 
grounds. Sulphur is found in the island and coral reefs dot 
its coasts. 

Biliran Subprovince is generally mountainous. Steep vol- 
canic peaks dominate the central part while Mount Suiro, with 
an elevation of 1,300 meters, rises on the southeastern portion 
of the island. Rivers also abound in the place. ^ 



The island was originally known as Panamao. 
under the jurisdiction of Leyte. 



It was then 



In 1601, Francisco Vicente conducted the building of gal- 
leons in the island. Under Spanish engineers, the Filipino, 
Negro and Chinese workmen were able to build six galleons. 
In one of these ships, Fr. Pedro Chirino sailed for Rome to 
personally report to Fr. Claudius Aquaviva, the Jesuit general, 
about the Leyte missionary work. 



In 1768, the Jesuit missions in Leyte were assigned to the 
Augustinians until 1804 when some of the parishes were ceded 
to the secular clergy and the others (those on the eastern coast 
of Leyte, except Biliran which was given to the diocesan clergy) 
to the Franciscans. 

During the Second World War, the Japanese Imperial For- 
ces landed at Barrio Pinamopo-an in the Municipality of Ca- 
poocan, Leyte. A few days later the islands of Leyte and 
Biliran were occupied by the enemy. 

When the American and Filipino troops surrendered in 
1942, many civilians and members of the armed forces in Leyte 
fled to the hills in order to engage in guerrilla warfare. By 
late 1942, Alejandro Balderian became one of the prominent 
guerrilla leaders in northern Leyte. Biliran Island was under 
the control of the 1st Battalion commanded by Captain Antonio 
Cinco. About the middle of 1943, the guerrilla forces in the 
island under Capt. G. Corpin joined the forces of Lt. Col. File- 
mon Pamanian. The guerrilla unit became the 3rd Battalion 
of the 95th Regiment under Colonel Ruperto Kangleon. 

On October 20, 1944, the American Liberation Forces land- 
ed at Palo, Leyte. Consequently, the Japanese forces under 
General Suzuki immediately deserted their camp in the prov- 
ince. However, it was only on May 5, 1945, when the mopping 
operations against the enemy were terminated in Leyte. 

On April 8, 1959, Republic Act No. 2141 created the Sub- 
province of Biliran. The law was later amended by R.A. No. 
5977, enacted on June 21, 1969, and by R.A. No. 6415, approved 
on October 4, 1971. 




SUB-PROVINCE OF BILIRAN 

The Sub-Province of Biliran was created under R.A. 
2141 on April 8, 1959. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Biliran 

Island and Islets — the sub-province of Biliran, Leyte 

Eight Rays — represent the eight municipalities 

of the sub-province. 



243 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF LEYTE 



The Province of Leyte is composed of the northern 
portion of the old Leyte Province and the islands of Biliran, 
Gigatangan and Marapipi. It is bounded by the Carigara Bay 
and the San Juanico Strait on the north, the Visayan Sea on 
the west, the Leyte Gulf on the east, and the Province of 
Southern Leyte on the south. 

The province, with a land area of 6,268.3 square kilometers 
and a population of 1,110,626 in 1970, has 49 municipalities 
and two cities, with Tacloban City as the capital. The most 
important crops are rice, corn, sugar cane, coconut, abaca, sweet 
potato, tobacco and cassava. 

In 1521, Magellan sailed from the island of Homonhon, 
Samar, to the island of Limasawa, Leyte, where a blood compact 
was held between Rajah Kolambu and Magellan on March 29 
of the same year. In Limasawa, on Easter Sunday, March 31st, 
Father Pedro de Valderama and the other friars celebrated the 
first mass which was attended by Rajah Siago and Magellan. 

In February 1543, the Spanish navigator, Ruy Lopez de 
Villalobos, named Leyte as "Felipina," after Prince Philip of 
Spain. This name was later given to the whole Archipelago 
Villalobos later landed at the Bislig Bay, Surigao, and com- 
manded Captain Bernardo de la Torre to proceed to the north 
where he possibly landed at Tendaya, Leyte, after a shipwreck 
caused by storms. 

In 1580, Fr. Alonso Velasquez started a mission site in 
Barugo with Fr. Alonso Gimenez, who later became the "Apostle 
of Bicolandia." On July 16, 1595; Fr. Pedro Chirino built a 
church and planted a cross at the beach of Abuyog. The seat 
of the missionary work was later abandoned for Dulag and 
Carigara. In 1630, the Dulag residence was transferred to 
Dagami. 

Leyte, particularly the settlements of Palo, Palompon, Or- 
moc, Carigara, Cabalian, Sagod, Babay, Dulag and Tinagon, 



suffered from the separate raids of the Muslim Sultans, Pag- 
dalanum Buhiran and Kudarat, and the Suluans. To check 
further depredations, Fr. Melchor de Vera, built forts or 
bcdtiartes for defense and refuge in case of attack. 

Aside from the Muslim raids, Datu Bankaw of Limasawa, 
with the help of his son Pagali, revolted; but they were quelled 
by superior Spanish arms. 

Leyte was under the jurisdiction of Cebu in the early years 
of Spanish rule. In 1735, it became a politico-military province, 
with Samar under its jurisdiction. Samar and Leyte were 
separated in 1768. The first capital of Leyte was Carigara 
then Palo, Tanawan, and finally Tacloban. 

On February 27, 1768, the Jesuits were expelled from 
the country and the Augustinians, under Fr. Joseph Victoria 
took over the religious work in 1770. The same year, Governor 
Simon de Anda stationed the Armada de Pintados in the Visa- 
yas to protect the islands from Muslim retaliative attacks. This 
was followed by the opening of the port of Tacloban. 

Under the American military government. Colonel Arthur 
Murray became the first military governor of Leyte until 
April 10, 1901, when he was succeeded by Henry T. Allen 
under the civil government. In February 1904, Jaime de Veyra 
became governor; later he was appointed Philippine Commis- 
sioner to Washington. 

During the liberation of the Philippines from the Jap- 
anese Imperial Forces, the American troops led by General 
Douglas MacArthur and President Sergio Osmena landed at 
Palo, Leyte,. on October 20, 1944. MacArthur then announced 
the re-establishment of the Philippine Government with Osmefia 
as the president. 

On May 22, 1959, by virtue of Republic Act No. 2227, the 
old province of Leyte was divided into the present Leyte and 
Southern Leyte Provinces. 




ROSE 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF LEYTE 



The Province of Leyte was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Leyte 



Upper Portion 



White Cross 



Alphabet on Cross 
Argent 

Stars Around Inner 
Circle 



a perspective of the National Free- 
dom Park commemorating the 
landing of General Douglas Mac- 
Arthur and the American Libera- 
tion Forces in Leyte during World 
War IL 

■represents the second phase of 
Leyte's development when Magel- 
lan stopped there on his way to 
Cebu. 

-the ancient Visayan paleographic 
syllabary of the letter L which 
stands for Leyte. 

- symbolize the forty-nine (49) 
towns of the province. 



245 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE 



The Province of Southern Leyte, a portion of the old Leyte 
Province, is bounded by the present Province of Leyte on the 
north, the Camotes Sea on the west, the Sugod Bay on the 
south, and the Leyte Gulf on the east. 

The province, consisting of 17 municipalities including four 
islands and islets (Limasawa, Panaon, San Pablo and San 
Pedro), has a land area of 1,734.8 square kilometers and a 
population of 251,425,997 in 1970. Its important crops are 
coconut, abaca, rice, corn, sugar cane, and banana. The Sugod 
Bay abounds with fish. 

Most of the people of Southern Leyte are descendants of the 
Boholanos. Generally, they speak the Cebuano and Boholano 
dialects. 

Limasawa, where the first Christian Mass was held in the 
Far East in 1521, is in Southern Leyte. It became the spring- 
board of Catholicism in the country. 

On August 13, 1898, the province had already a Court 
of First Instance and the Offices of the "Promoter Fiscal" 
(now Provincial Fiscal) and "Administrador de Hacienda" 
(now Provincial Treasurer) in Maasin, the present capital. 

Under the American administration, these offices were 
abolished and the provincial government, except the adminis- 
tration of justice, was transferred to Tacloban. 

A general movement to divide Leyte Province into two 
became a recurrent election issue. After his election in 1919, 
Ciriaco K. Kangleon, 2nd Legislative District, presented in 
the House of Representatives the first bill providing for the 
division of Leyte into two. The bill was defeated in the Senate 



by a difference of one vote. 

In 1922, Tomas Oppus, also of the 2nd District, presented 
House Bill No. 254 which became Act No. 3117. The law 
provided for an Oriental and Occidental Leyte which shall 
take effect after the proclamation of the Governor General; 
but the proclamation never came. 

In 1930, the Philippine Legislature passed Act No. 3788 
which provided for the five districts without regard to the 
demarcation line between the two provinces. The towns of 
Palompon and Villaba in the Occidental were grouped with 
those of the Oriental. The new law (Act No. 3788) not only 
modified but also impliedly repealed the former law (Act No. 
3771). 

In 1953, Francisco Pajao, with Alberto Aguja, authored 
a bill for the division of Leyte simultaneously with Ruperto 
Kangleon, who presented Senate Bill No. 2140. The Senate 
Bill was passed in the Chamber but it died in the House 
when Pajao withdrew his bill, leaving the Kangleon Bill with- 
out any sponsor. 

In 1957, Nicanor Yniguez, 3rd Congressional District, 
also presented another bill, co-authored by Marcelino Veloso of 
the First District, Alberto Aguja of the 5th District, and 
Daniel Romualdez of the 4th District. But Dominador Tan 
of the 2nd District opposed said bill; hence, it was finally 
shelved. An alternate version, H. B. No. 1318, provided for 
the creation of a separate province from the municipalities 
of the 3rd District. It became Republic Act No. 2227, 
approved on May 22, 1959. This law finally created Southern 
Leyte from the confederated string of municipalities. 



246 




Provincial Seal 




ORCHID 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF SOUTHERN LEYTE 

The Province of Southern Leyte was created under R.A. 
2227 on May 22, 1959. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Southern Leyte 

Handclasp —symbolizes friendship and hos- 

pitality which the Southern Ley- 
tefios are noted for. 

Cross and Galleon — signify the introduction of Chris- 
tianity in the Philippines by Fer- 
dinand Maggelan and the first 
Mass held at Limasawa Island. 



Two Leaves 



■ represent abaca and coconut, prin- 
cipal products of the province.' 



fflSTORY OF THE 



Eastern Samar comuprises the eastern portion of the former 
Province of Samar. The coast of the province faces the Pa- 
cific Ocean. It is separated by mountain ranges from North- 
ern and Western Samar. Along the coastline, it has good 
harbors, such as those in Borongan, MacArthur, Balangiga, 
Sulat and Homonhon where ships anchor during stormy seasons. 

Borongan, its capital, was an important port of commerce 
and trade during the Spanish times and a port of call during the 
early days of the galleon trade. The Municipalities of Eastern 
Samar are Arteche, Balangiga, Balangkayan, Borongan, Can- 
Avid, Dolores, General MacArthur, Geporlos, Guiuan, Hernani, 
Jipapad, Lawa-an, Llorente, Maslog, Maydolong, Mercedes, Oras 
Quinapundan, Salcedo, San Julian, San Policarpio, Sulat and 
Taft. The province has a land area of 4,339 square kilometers 
and a population of 237,744 in 1960. 

Although few good roads connect the coastal towns and 
the regions in the hinterlands, buses make regular trips from 
the Municipality of Arteche in the north to Guiuan in the south- 
ern tip of this province. The Wright-Taft roadway links 

< Eastern Samar with Western Samar through the southern 

/i portion of the island. 

i 

Eastern Samar was the first area of the Philippines sighted 
by Magellan on March 16, 1521. The lofty mountains of Zamal 
(called by Magellan's crew) are the mountain ranges that sepa- 
rate the province from Western Samar and Northern Samar. 
The Spaniards, however, anchored at the tiny island of Ho- 
monhon on the southern side of the province. 

During the early days of Spanish rule, the Province of 
Samar (of which Eastern Samar was a part) was called "Iba- 
bao." It was under the political and ecclesiastical jurisdiction 
of Cebu. Borongan, Sulat and Balangiga were thfen the fabulous 
centers of religious activities. Borongan was also a center of 
trade and a military outpost of Spain in the Pacific Ocean 
during the Spanish rule. 

In 1649, the Sumoroy rebellion broke out in Palapag, on 
the northern part of Samar. In Sulat and Dolores, the people 
rose in defiance against the Spaniards. The natives fortified 
themselves in the mountains and, in the skirmishes, they were 
usually victorious. 



OF EASTERN SAMAR 



Samar was made a separate province from Cebu in 1768, 
From its capital, Catbalogan, the administration of the enco- 
miendas in the eastern coast was controlled. 

In 1931, Borongan Bridge was built and public schools were 
constructed at Balangiga, Borongan and Guiuan, as part of 
the aid for schools, by virtue of Act No. 3823 of the Philippine 
Legislature, approved on June 11, 1931. 

During the American liberation of the Philippines, the 
United States Forces, Sixth Army, made Homonhon, MacArthur 
and Guiuan as army depots. 

On May 8, 1967, the province was divided through Re- 
public Act No. 4867, which was introduced by Congressmen 
Eladio T. Balite of Northern Samar and Felipe Abrigo of East- 
ern Samar. The province was also divided into three engineer- 
ing districts to conform with the Congressional Zoning law of 
the province. Then, three positions of division superintendents 
of schools were created to facilitate school supervision. The 
church, due to the size administered by one bishop and the 
increase of population, also created a new diocese by dividing 
the province into two diocesan areas, one with center at Calba- 
yog and the other at Borongan. 

Eastern Samar became a province after a plebiscite was 
held during the general elections of 1965. Since then, there has 
been a steady growth of commercial and industrial activities, 
transportation and communication utilities, health facilities, and 
the general life of the people. 

The province has a rugged surface, and a constant rainfall 
from November to February, and the least rains during May 
and June. Due to its geographical position, the province suffers 
very often from violent and destructive storms in September 
and October. 

Coconut growing is the leading industry of the people. 
They also raise cacao, tobacco, camote, rice and corn for local 
and regional needs. From the forest, they get logs, rattan, dye- 
bark, nipa and firewood. Fishing, cattle and poultry 
raising are also their important industries. Guiuan, Mercedes 
and Borongan are noted for cattle, while Oras and Borongan 
excel in poultry and swine breeding, respectively. 

^ 



Provincial Seal 




CAMIA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF EASTERN SAMAR 

The Province of Eastern Samar was created under 
R.A. 4221 on June 19, 1965. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Eastern Samar 

Upper Portion — the rising sun to denote the east, 

Eastern Samar being one of the 
easternmost provinces in the 
country. 

Lower Portion — galleon signifies the landing of 

Magellan, his first on Philippine 
soil, on the island of Homonhon 
which is now a part of the prov- 
ince (island depicted at left). 

Coconut Tree — depicts the main industry of the 

province and the main source of 
livelihood of its people. 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province of Northern Samar occupies practically one 
third of the northern portion of Samar, the third largest island 
of the Philippine Archipelago. It has a total land area of 
3,498.0 square hectares. The boundaries are the Pacific Ocean 
on the east, the San Bernardino Strait on the north, Samar Sea 
on west, and Samar (Western) on the south. The San Bernar- 
dino Strait separates it from the Province of Sorsogon. In 
1970, its estimated population was 306,114 persons. 

Between 1599 and 1605, the Jesuits established a mission 
residence in Palapag, among the Ibabao populace. These mis- 
sionaries stayed until 1768 when they were expelled fro:5n the 
Philippines and were replaced by the Franciscans. Despite 
fi-equent Muslim piratical raids and depredations, the mission 
residence flourished and the other villages in the Ibabao region 
were swiftly evangelized. 

As the San Bernardino Strait was along the route of the 
Spanish galleons plying between Manila and Acapulco, a royal 
port was established in Palapag where the richly-laden Manila 
galleons were protected from unfavorable winds and troubled 
seas. 

In 1649, shipbuilders were drafted from Palapag to the 
Cavite shipyards for the construction of galleons and vessels 
for the conservation and defense of the islands. The same year, 
these recruits ignited the Sumoroy insurrection which signalled 
a general uprising against Spain in the Visayas and Mindanao. 
The insurrection simultaneously flared northward to Albay 
and southward to the northern coast of Mindanao, in the prov- 
inces of Caraga and Iligan, from wher it reached Cebu. It 
took over a year before the Spaniards were able to quell the 
rebellion. 

Later in 1898, when the Americans landed on the beach 
of Catarman, the organized revolutionary army under Colonel 
Narciso Abuke (by authority of Genera! Vicente Lukban) 
fought the cannons and rifles of the invaders with only bolos 
and paltiks. Although defeated, they, however, continued to 
harass the American forces through guerrilla warfare. 

During WoHd War 1, the people of Northern Samar or- 
ganized a platoon of volunteers which was supported by volun- 



OF NORTHERN SAMAR 



tary contributions. The contingent became a part of the 
Philippine National Guard in Manila. The province also helped 
the government by purchasing a considerable amount of bonds 
which were floated to finance the National Commission for 
Independence, then organized by Manuel L. Quezon after a 
coalition of the Nacionalista and Democrata parties was formed. 

After the surrender of Bataan in January 1942, four 
intrepid guerrilla organizations operated in Samar: the 93rd 
Infantry Division, USAFFE, organized by Lt. Sevillano and 
Capt. V. Merritt in Catarman had the widest area of command ; 
the Philippine Guerrilla Forces formed by ex-governor Pedro 
Arteche (then representative of the second district of Samar) 
had its headquarters in barrio San Andres, Villareal; and two 
other units founded by Major Vicente Valley in Guiuan and 
by Major Luciano Albia in Basey. 

Authored by Congressmen Eladio T. Balite of Northern 
Samar and Felipe J. Abrigo of Eastern Samar, Republic Act 
No. 4221 was approved in 1963. The law, overwhelmingly 
ratified in a plebiscite on November 9, 1965, divided Samar 
into three, namely. Northern Samar, Eastern Samar, and West- 
ern Samai-. Two years later, in the election of November 14, 
1967, the first officials of Northern Samar were elected and 
on January 1, 1968, they officially assumed office as its first 
provincial officials. 

The province is composed of twenty-three municipalities, 
namely, Allen, Beri, Bobon, Catarman, Catubig, Capul, Camay, 
Lapinig, Laoang, Las Navas, Lavesares, Mapanas, Mondragon, 
Palapag, Pambujan, Rosario, San Antonio, San Isidro, San Ro- 
que, San Vicente, Silvino Lubos, San Jose and Victoria. 

Although not fully developed. Northern Samar has histor- 
ical landmarks and beauty spots nowhere seen in the Archipel- 
ago: Tamburusan Beach, White Beach in Catarman, Onay 
Beach and Batag lighthouse in Laoang, Pinipisacan Falls in Las 
Navas, the rocks and cave between Palapag and Camay, Rosario 
Hotsprings, in Victoria Falls, the University of Eastern Philip- 
pines, the stretch of the Philippine Superhighway from Allen 
to San Isidro, and the tall stone towers in Capul and Palapag 
which used to be lookouts for Muslim pirates, 

^ 



Provincial Seal 




ILANG-ILANG 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF NORTHERN SAMAR 



The Province of Northern Samar was created under 
R.A. 4221 on June 19, 1965. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Northern Samar 



Circular Form and 
Golden Rim 

Letter "S" at the 
Inner Circle 

Letter 'W" at the 
Upper Curve of "S" 

Blue Triangles 



Blue Portion 



■signifies the continuous flow of 
wealth in the province. 

-represent the physical, historical 
and economic features of the 
province. 

- recalls the physical and historical 
features of the province. 

- shows the economic feature of the 
province — its coconut, logging, 
abaca and rice industries. 

- stands for the fact that Northern 
Samar was originally a part of 
Samar. 



Red Portion 



— stands for the word "northern"; 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SAMAR 



Samar, occupying the southwestern part of Samar Island, is 
bounded on the north by Northern Samar, on the east by East- 
ern Samar, on the south by the Leyte Gulf, and on the west by 
the Samar Sea. 

Samar has a land area of 5,591.0 square kilometers. It had 
a population of 442,244 in 1970. 

As an agricultural province, the most important products 
are coconut, rice, corn and camote. Timber is gathered from its 
forests. Fishing is also an important economic activity in the 
coastal towns. 

On March 16, 1521, Ferdinand Magellan landed in the small 
island of Humunu or Homonhon, near Samar. 

The Jesuit missionaries established their mission sites in 
Samar in 1596. 

Samar waged one of the biggest local revolts recorded in 
Philippine history. Led by Sumuroy in 1649, the people of Pala- 
pag and Pambujan resented the recruitment of the natives for 
forced labor in the Cavite shipyards, and the excessive collection 
of tributes. 

During the early days of the Spanish colonial administra- 
tion, Samar Island was under the jurisdiction of the bishopric 
of Cebu. 

In 1735, Samar and Leyte were merged to form one prov- 
ince with Carigara in Leyte as the capital. Three years later 
Samar was separated from Leyte and Catbalogan became its 
capital. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, General Vicente 
Lukban organized the provincial revolutionary government in 



Catbalogan on December 10, 1898. 

With the arrival of the American forces aboard nine war- 
ships at Maqueda Bay in Catbalogan on January 27, 1900, the 
Filipino forces, instead of surrendering after the 12-hour Am- 
erican ultimatum, set Catbalogan on fire and fled to the hills 
Later, on February 27, 1902, the Americans captured General 
Vicente Lukban. 

On July 5, 1902, a secret organization led by Enrique Dago- 
hob and Antonio Anugar attempted to overthrow the local 
government of Gandara but they failed. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces occu- 
pied Samar on May 24, 1942. Cayetano Lucero was installed 
governor of the wartime-provincial government. 

An allied Intelligence Bureau under Major James Smith 
started the liberation of Samar from the Japanese forces. On 
December 19, 1944, the American Liberation Forces repulsed 
the Japanese invaders. 

Republic Act No. 4221, passed on June 19, 1965, created 
the Province of Western Samar, out of the towns located at the 
western portion of Samar Island. However, R.A. No. 5650 
changed the name of Western Samar to Samar on June 21, 1969. 

The Blanca Aurora Falls and the ruins of Bongahon in 
Gandara are famous beauty spots of the province. The Sohotan 
Caves of Basey, rich in archaeological remains, is a noted tourist 
attraction of Samar. Basey is also famous for the manufacture 
of beautifully designed mats. Moreover, in the town of Basey 
the northern end of the 2.16-kilometer-long San Juanico Bridge 
starts and spans down south to the Province of Leyte 



252 



. — ■■ i.-. ■..■.•^.■>—_.,i,-. — .-^^wjji^;^^ .-|-.|-nttftVf|ij^s.v^.w ^ w-ii ...v . . -Vail ffFfitl ^-.Mfu«^-'..U3M^M»>M^^.Vota^ 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF SAMAR 



The Province of Samar was created under R.A. 4221 on June ]9, 1965. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Samar 



Upper Left Portion — mining helmet and tools, to signify 

mining as an important industry. 

UpjJer Right Portion — logs representing another principal 

industry of the province. 



Lower Left Portion. — symbol for coconut industry, ano- 
ther important source of income 
of the province. 

Lower Right Portion — represents the bountiful fishing 

industiy of Samar. 



Region IX 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BASILAN 



THE PROVINCE OF BASILAN is separated from Mindanao 
by the Basilan Strait on the northeast, the Celebes Sea on the 
south, the Moro Gulf on the east, and the Sulu Sea on the west. 
The total land area of the island province, including the adjacent 
islands, is 1,359 square kilometers. 

The province embraces the entire Island of Basilan, the 
municipal districts of Lamitan, Maluso and the new municipality 
of Isabela which presently composes the remaining barrios and 
sitios of the former town of Isabela. The towns, including the 
previously constituted municipalities of Maluso and Lamitan, 
are Lantawan, Sumipsip, Tipo-Tipo, Tuburan, Tapiantana, Ma- 
lamawi and Pilas. In 1895, the island had a population of 1,424, 
and in 1970, a total of 143,829 inhabitants. 

The early settlers of Basilan were the Orang Dampuans, 
the descendants of the Yakans. In 1637, Governor General 
Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera made an expedition to Mindanao 
and captured Lamitan, a stronghold of Sultan Kudarat in the 
island. 

The Jesuit missionaries formally evangelized Basilan in 
1644. They, however, withdrew because of the threats of the 
Lutaus (sometimes called Samals) from the coastal settlements. 
Later, Father Francisco Lado succeeded in winning their friend- 
ship and also expelled the Muslim panditas among the Lutaus. 

In 1663, Governor General Sabiniano Manrique de Lara 
withdrew all the troops from Mindanao, including the garrisons 
of Zamboanga and Basilan, in order to concentrate the forces 
in Manila against the possible attack of the Chinese warlord, 
Koxinga. Although the assault did not materialize, the stations 
in Zamboanga and Basilan were not restored until their re- 
occupation in 1718. The Dutch attacked Basilan in 1747 hut 
they were repulsed by the natives. On the, other hand, the 
Muslims continued their piratical incursions. 

Thus in 1844, Governor General Narciso Claveria ordered 
the fortification of Basilan. A strong stone fort, called "Fuerte 
de Isabela" in honor of Queen Isabela II of Spain, was con- 
structed. 

The French also attempted to occupy Basilan in 1844. But 
the forces of Datii Ussuk of Maluso firmly resisted and capture d 
the invading sailors. Voicing the displeasure of the French 



government, the French Ambassador, Monsieur Lagrene, 
attacked the principal village of Lamitan. Later, in 1845, a 
French naval commander proposed for the cession of the Basilan 
Island for one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) ; but the Sultan of 
Sulu refused the offer. 

In 1848, the Spanish government established a military 
garrison in Basilan and placed it under the control of the 
governor of Zamboanga. Later in 1854, a company of Spanish 
soldiers was assassinated by the Muslims due to the imprudence 
of the governor. The island was then separated from Zam- 
boanga and it became the 6th District of the politico-military 
government of Mindanao in 1863, 

The people of Basilan had its first municipal president in 
January 1899. But it was short-lived when the American 
forces established a military government in December of the 
same year. Datu Pedro Cuevas, leader of the Muslims in the 
District of Lamitan, helped much in the pacification campaign 
of the Americans. In 1901, a civil government was re-estab- 
lished and Basilan was again made a part of Zamboanga. The 
island was divided into three principal districts, Isabela, Lami- 
tan and Maluso. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces orga- 
nized a puppet government in Isabela and Lamitan. Elpidio 
Sta. Elena and Teofilo Saavedra became mayors of Isabela and 
Lamitan, respectively. Immediately, after the American Lib- 
eration Forces occupied Basilan, a military government was 
again established and Leroy S. Brown was named military 
mayor. Later, the Americans re-established a civil government 
in Isabela with Pantaleon Banas as deputy governor. 

On July 1, 1948, Republic Act No. 288 created the Province 
of Basilan into a chartered city. However, on December 27, 
1973, Presidential Decree No. 356 created the City of Basilan , 
into the Province of Basilan "to provide the area closer govern- 
ment attention for the purpose of spurring its growth." Ano- 
ther Presidential Decree No. 593, dated December 2, 1974. 
amended Presidential Decree No. 356. The law not only defined 
the city territory but also provides that "the capital of the 
Province of Basilan shall be at the Municipality of Isabela and 
its seat of government shall be at Barangay Begang."^^^ 




JADE VINE 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF BASILAN 

The City of Basilan was created under R.A. 288 on 
June 16, 1948. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Basilan 



Ten Rays 

Left Portion 
Right Portion 

Bolo or Pira 

Year "1973" 



■represents the ten ((10) munic- 
ipalities of the city. 

•depicts the map of Basilan City. 

• rubber and coconut trees, major 
industries of the city. 

symbol of the Yakan aborigines, 
natives of Basilan. 



• when Basilan 
created. 



Province was 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SULU 



The island province of Sulu is bounded on the north by the 
Sulu Sea, on the northeast by the Province of Basilan, on the 
east and southeast by the Celebes Sea, and on the west by the 
South China Sea. 

Sulu derived its name from the native word "Sug," mean- 
ing "current." It is also referred to as Sooloo, Soolooc, Xole, 
Sojo, Jolo or Sulu. 

The early inhabitants of Sulu were the Baranuns in Main- 
bung, the Taguimaha in Bwansa, and the Baklayanons and 
Badjaos, who are the ancestors of the Tausogs, the dominant 
Muslim group in Sulu today. 

Sulu had already established commercial relations with 
China even before Islamic faith was introduced by Karimal 
Makdum in 1308. He was followed by Rajah Baguinda in 
1390, and Sayyid Abubakar. in 1450. Better known as Sharif 
ul-Hashim, Abubakar married the daughter of Baguinda. He 
became the political ruler of Sulu who made Islam as the state 
religion. 

As early as 1578, Captain Esteban Rodriguez de Figueroa 
conducted an expedition against the Muslims. This started the 
series of wars between the Spaniards and the Muslims. The 
"Moros," as they were referred to by the Spaniards, retaliated 
by pillaging the coastal towns of the Visayas and Luzon under 
the Spanish control. 



In 1878, the Sultan of Sulu leased the remaining portions 
in Borneo to Baron von Overbeck representing the British North 
Borneo Company. 

Sulu did not participate in the Philippine Revolution of 
1896. In May, 1899, the American administration sent Gen. 
John C. Bates to negotiate a treaty with the Sultan of Sulu, 
wherein the Muslims and the Americans would coexist har- 
moniously. The Bates Treaty in August of the same year 
recognized the sovereignty of the Sultan, the free exercise of 
Islam, and respect for Islamic traditions. 

During World War II, the Muslims guerrilla units were 
also organized in the region. The guerrillas of the Sulu Com- 
mand Area under Lieutenant Colonel Alejandro Suarez facili- 
tated the landing of the American forces in Tawi-Tawi, Siasi 
and Jolo in 1945. 

In 1947, the Philippine Government succeeded in the ac- 
quisition of the island of Taganak, Bakkungan, Bauyna, Si- 
baung and Lihiman, which were leased by the Sultan to the 
British North Borneo Government. 

In 1973, the provincial jurisdiction of Sulu was diminished 
when Presidential Decree Nos. 303 and 356 created the prov- 
inces. 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



Sun and Eight Rays 



PROVINCE OF SULU 

The Province of Sulu was created under Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Sulu 

Crescent 



— symbolic of the Philippine Sun and 
the first eight (8) provinces which 
revolted against the Spanish Gov- 
ernment. 

Cross, Star and — symbols for Christianity (Cross) 



Sailing Vinta 
Two Towers 



and Islam (star and crescent). 

— portrays the sea and marine prod- 
ucts as main sources of livelihood. 

— replicas of Spanish forts. 



HISTORY OF THE 



The Province of Tawi-Tawi, composed of the Cagayan de 
Sulu Islands, the Turtle Islands, and the Tawi-Tawi island 
groups, is surrounded by the Sulu Sea on the north ahd west, 
and the Celebes Sea on the east and south. 

Although storms do not visit the province, heavy rains and 
squalls cause the high waves in the capes and channels of the 
islands. Its mountains, including Dromedary in Tawi-Tawi, 
are low. 

Due to volcanic eruptions, the soil is fertile and suited to 
the raising of rice, coconut and tropical fruits. The important 
industries of the province are fishing, boat building, lumbering, 
cattle raising, pottery, and mat and basket weaving. Turtle 
eggs are gathered in the Turtle Islands and Tapioca is produced 
in Cagayan de Sulu and Tawi-Tawi. 

The region, now the Province of Tawi-Tawi, was for some- 
time controlled by Great Britain. As early as January 28, 1761, 
Sultan Muizz ud-Din entered into an agreement with Alexander 
Dalrymple of the British East India Company fdr commercial 
and economic concessions. The subsequent treaties with Muizz 
ud-Din on September 12, 1762 and with Sultan Azim ud-Din, 
claimant to the Sultanate and a prisoner of the British in Ma- 
nila, on February 23, 1763, confirmed these British claims. 
However, on March 5, 1775, Datu Teteng annihilated the British 
troops in Balambangan. Since then, the Muslims not only 
fought the British soldiers but also the Spanish troops. After 
the brother of Sultan Aliyud-Din I captured the Spanish ship, 
San Jose, in Tawi-Tawi, the British forces withdrew from Ba- 
lambangan in 1805. 

On January 28, 1878, Baron von Overbeck, representing 
the British Borneo Company, signed a treaty with Sultan Ja- 
malul Alam for the lease of the Sultan's land in Borneo at an 
annual rent of $5,000 Mexican dollars. The Germans also 
asked for commercial concessions. Due to foreign encroach- 
ments, the Spaniards constructed a naval base at Tata'an and 
built garrisons ^in Bongao and Siasi. 



OF TAWI-TAWI 



On March 7, 1885, Spain, Britain and Germany signed a 
protocol in Madrid, whereby Spain relinquished all her claims 
to the offshore lands in Borneo, granted freedom of trade and 
navigation in Sulu, and Britain and Germany recognized the 
Spanish sovereignty over Balabac and Cagayan de Sulu. How- 
ever, the British diplomatically continued to pay the annual 
rents for Sabah (Sultan's land in Borneo) to Harun ar-Rashid. 

During the Philippine Revolution of 1896, the mutiny of 
the 68th Regiment at Busbus, Jolo, implicated Tagalog soldiers. 
The Muslims, however, retained their own views on indepen- 
dence and freedom. 

When the American forces occupied Jolo on May 19, 1899, 
they established garrisons at Bongao and Siasi after the Mus- 
lims wiped out the Spanish garrison in Tata'an, Tawi-Tawi. 
In 1900, the United States entered into a treaty with Spain 
whereby Sibutu and Cagayan de Sulu were ceded to the former 
for $100,000. The Sultanate continued to receive the rentals 
for Sabah until 1946 when the British Company sold its rights 
to the British Crown. 

During World War II, after the Japanese Imperial Forces 
occupied Tawi-Tawi, guerrilla forces were organized under Lts. 
Konglamtio and Alejandro Tresperes in Siasi and Tawi-Tawi. 
These units were under the Sulu Command led by Lt. Col. Ale- 
jandro Suarez. The Command aided the American Liberation 
Forces at Sanga-Sanga Island on April 2, 1945. 

On October 16, 1947, the offshore lands of Borneo — Taga- 
nak, Bakkungan, Bayaua, Sibauang and Lihiman Islands — ^were 
turned over to the Philippines by the British North Borneo gov- 
ernment. The unveiling ceremonies of the marker in Taganak 
Island, on June 26, 1948, were attended by M. G. Combe, rep- 
resenting Great Britain, former President Diosdado Macapa- 
gal for the Philippines, Princess Tarhata Kiram for the Sul- 
tanate, and Governor Kalinangan Calauag'for Sulu. 

On September 27, 1973, Tawi-Tawi Province was created 
with Rear Admiral Romulo Espaldon as its first governor. V. ^ 



Provincial Seal 




ORCHID 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF TAWI-TAWI 

The Province of Tawi-tam was created under Presiden- 
tial Decree no. 341 on September 27, 1973. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Tawi-tawi 

Oyster — the great Jameson (pinctada ma- 

xim) variety of oyster which pro- 
duces costly pearls — symbolizes 
how precious the province is to its 
people. 

Islets — the islands that comprise Tawi- 

tawi. 

Central Features —coconut tree, sailing vinta, oil der-, 

rick and eucheuma laurels, all of 
which represent the main indusf 
tries of the province. 

Year "1973" — the year when the province was 

created. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE 



The Province of Zamboanga del Norte, on the northwestern 
portion of Mindanao, is bounded by the Sulu Sea on the north 
and west, Zamboanga del Sur on the south, and Misamis Occi- 
dental on the east. 

The province has a land area of 6,075.2 square kilometers 
and a population of 409,379 in 1970. The most important crops 
are coconut, rice, corn, banana and mango. 

As early as 1565, Miguel Lopez de Legazpi visited the town 
of Dapitan (one of the oldest towns in the Philippines) which 
was founded by the settlers from Bohol. 

Zamboanga, as a center of Spanish activity in Mindanao, 
was subjected to continuous Muslim raids. The Spaniards, on 
the other hand, conducted their expeditions against their foes 
from the place. In 1636, the governor of Zamboanga, accom- 
panied by Jesuit Fathers Pedro Gutierrez and Melchor de Vera, 
defeated Tagal, brother of the Sultan of Mindanao, off the coast 
of Punta de Flecha. About 300 Muslims and their famous 
"admiral" perished in the battle. In 1662, the Spanish garrison 
in Zamboanga was abandoned and the troops were recalled to 
Manila. 

In order to strengthen the Spanish position in Zamboanga 
and the neighboring region, three companies of Zamboanga 
volunteers were organized in 1832. These natives, together with 
the Spanish troopers stationed in Zamboanga, admirably de- 
fended the province from the Muslims. 

The province was known as a "corregimiento" of Zam- 
boanga. In 1837, the government was changed to a "gobierno 
militar." 

Zamboanga was one of the seven districts into which Min- 
danao and Sulu were divided at the end of Spanish rule. The 
town of Zamboanga was the capital of Mindanao since the 
Spanish regime, except the period between 1872 and 1875, when 



the general government was at Cotabato. 

In 1897, a rebellion broke out in Zamboanga under the 
leadership of Isidro Midel and Melanio Ramos. A year later, 
in 1898, the Philippine Revolutionary Government appointed 
General Vicente Alvarez as general of the revolutionary forces 
in the region. Alvarez attacked the Spanish forces which were 
concentrated in Zamboanga, and finally took possession of the 
province. 

The American forces organized Zamboanga as one of the 
districts of the Moro province. In 1914, a civil government was 
established under the Department of Mindanao and Sulu. 
Later, under the Bureau of Non-Christian Tribes, Zamboanga 
became one of the regularly constituted provinces of the depart- 
ment. 

Durijig World War II, the Japanese forces landed in Zam- 
boanga on March 2, 1942. The enemy was twice repulsed by a 
detachment of Filipino troops under Lt. Abdul Hasin Uddin 
before they finally entered Zamboanga City. After the Japanese 
had occupied the province, their garrison was subjected to a 
number of raids by the Filipino troops. On March 28th of 
the same year, a company of constabulary troops led by Capt. 
Alejandre attacked the garrison and caused heavy casualties on 
the enemy. 

Under Republic Act No. 711, approved on June 6, 1952, 
Zamboanga was divided into two provinces: Zamboanga del 
Norte with Dipolog as the capital, and Zamboanga del Sur with 
Pagadian as the capital. 

Some of Zamboanga del Norte's historical landmarks and 
beautiful spots are: the Dapitan Rizal Shrine, the Rizal Pai'k and 
the Rizal concrete marker at Dapitan City; the Wooden Holy 
Cross planted near the seashore in Dapitan City; the capitol 
building in Dipolog; the Roman church of Dipolog; and the 
Dipolog Airport. 




ORCHID 

Provincial Flower 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL NORTE 

The Province of Zamboanga del Norte was created under 
R.A. 711 on June 6, 1952. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Zamboangra del Norte 



Sea Horses 



Fruit 



— signifies that the province has 
vast sea resources. 

— the durian, a fruit of rare quality 
which the province is noted for. 

Sailboat or Vinta — symbolic of the vast water area of 

the province where the swift sail- 
ing vinta is a common sight either 
for transportation, fishing or for 
other productive purposes. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF 2AMB0ANGA DEL SUR 



Zamboanga del Sue, formerly a part of the old Province of 
Zamboanga, is bounded on the north by the Province of Zam- 
boanga del Norte, on the south by the Moro Gulf, on the north- 
east by the Proyince of Lanao del Sur, and on the west by 
Zamboanga City. 

Its coastline, irregular with many indentions, has many 
coves and harbors which are usually three to seventeen fathoms 
deep. There are many bays in the province, some of them are 
the Dumanquilas and Sibuguey Bays (the biggest), the Taga- 
wan, Bisan, Taba, Locsico, Tantanang, Maligay, Malubug, Du- 
pulisan and Pagadian. The Kumalarang, Sibuguey, Dinas and 
Labangay Rivers, in whose deltas are the important towns of 
the province, drain the broad and flat coastal lands. 

Zamboanga del Sur has a land area of 9,922.1 square kilo- 
meters. It had a population of 80,932 in 1903, 90,078 in 1918, 
217,135 in 1939, 354,241 in 1948, 742,404 in 1960, and 1,033,164 
in 1970. 

The climate of the province is delightful and invigorating. 
Its rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year. Strong 
winds and storms seldom visit the region. On the fertile land 
grows luxuriantly rubber, corn, rice, abaca, and coconut. Lum- 
bering, gold and coal mining, and fishing are important sources 
of livelihood of the people. 

The region now called Zamboanga del Sur was earlier known 
by different names, as "Sibuguey," "Sibugay" or "Sibuguei." 
Being a part of the empire of Cachil Corralat or Kudarat, it 
was referred to as "the storehouse for Corralat" during the early 
part of the Spanish conquest of Mindanao and Sulu. 

The Spanish culture influenced the province only after Tagal 



was defeated in the famous battle at Punta de Fletchas in the 
Dumanquilas Bay on December 22, 1637. 

In 1642, the Jesuits extended their missionary work from 
Iligan to Zamboanga del Sur. Father Alexandre Lopez started 
the mission at Sibuguey. In 1644, however, the friars aban- 
doned their church in the province. 

The expeditions of Fernando de Bodabilla in January 1657 
and Francisco de Esteybar in 1658, did not abate the strife 
between the Muslims and the Christians. These bloody clashes 
were carried down to the close of the Spanish rule. 

From 1860 to the end of the Spanish era, Zamboanga del 
Sur was an integral part of the old Zamboanga Province. 

In 1938, the Christian settlers founded Molave and in 1941 
the town of Aurora. 

During World War II, in 1942, the Japanese forces occupied 
some parts of the province but many of them withdrew to central 
Mindanao in 1945. 

Under Republic Act No. 286, approved on June 16, 1948, 
Molave was made a municipality and at the same time the capital 
of the province. Later, in 1952, R.A. No. 711, approved on 
June 6, 1952, created Zamboanga del Sur as a regular province 
with its capital at Pagadian. By virtue of R.A. No. 5478, dated 
June 21, 1969, Pagadian became a chartered city and retained 
as the provincial seat of government. 

The municipalities of Zamboanga del Sur, as originally ccto- 
stituted under R.A. No. 711, are Molave, Aurora, Labangan, 
Pagadian, Dimataling, Margosatubig, Ipil, Kabasalan, Dinas, 
Malangas (sic) and Alicia. 



262 




SANTAN 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR 



The Province of Zamboanga del Sur was created under 
R.A. 711 on June 6, 1952. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Zamboanga del Sur 



Trees 



Fish 



Fruits 



Vinta 



Logs 



Minerals 



■ represent the vast area of forested 
lands existing at the time of the 
creation of the province. 

• represents the rich fishing resour- 
ces and potential of the province. 

■ symbolize the agricultural poten- 
tial of the province. 

■common emblem for territories 
within the Muslim belt, especially 
in Southern Mindanao. 

-signifies that the province is a 
leading supplier of logs and 
lumber materials in the country. 

■ symbolize the vast mining poten- 
tials of the province. 



Region X 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL NORTE 



THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL NORTE is bounded on 
the east by the Province of Surigao del Norte, on the west by 
the Province of Misamis Oriental, on the north by Butuan Bay, 
and on the south by the Province of Agusan del Sur. 

It has a land area of 2,590.3 square kilometers. Its lush 
and virgin forests are perennial sources of timber while the 
cultivated areas are utilized for rubber plantations and the 
grasslands for cattle raising. From its deep humus soil, like 
Agusan del Sur, the province produces rice, abaca, coconut and 
papaya. 

In 1970, the population of Agusan del Norte was 278,053. 
It has a high rate of literacy, with Cebuano as the major dialect. 
The Samar-Leyte, Hiligaynon and Tagalog dialects are also 
spoken in the region. 

Most of the inhabitants are occupied in agriculture, hunting 
and forestry while the others are engaged in manufacturing and 
commerce. The people are also engaged in fishing at Butuan 
Bay for export and local consumption. 

Agusan del Norte was formerly a part of the old province 
of Agusan, which was a politico-military comandancia of the 
province of Surigao during the Spanish colonial administration. 
It was then referred to as the "Manobo Country." The Mano- 
bos are the Muslims who inhabit the present sites of Agusan 
del Norte and Agusan del Sur. 

Agusan, like the other provinces of the Visayas and Luzon, 
also took up arms against Spain. The revolutionists were led 
by Lieutenant Colonels Comte, Gumersiendo Flores, Andres 
Atega, Francisco Martinez, Luis Cassion and Timoteo Calo. 

The old province was separated from the province of 



Surigao by Act No. 1306 which was passed by the Philippine 
Legislature in 1914. Frederick Johnson was appointed as the 
first governor of the province. In March 1922, the first 
provincial elections were held and Apolonio Curato was elected 
provincial governor. 

During the Pacific War, from 1941 to 1945, Captain Luis 
P. Morgan, a Philippine Constabulary Officer, initiated the 
organization of guerrilla units in Mindanao. In February 1943, 
Lieutenant Colonel Wendell Fertig was appointed by General 
Douglas Mac Arthur (then in Australia) as commanding officer 
of the 10th Military District, effective March 1, 1943. Its 
units later successfully attacked a Japanese garrison at Butuan. 

On June 17, 1967, Republic Act No. 4979 divided the old 
province of Agusan into Agusan del Norte and Agusan del Sur. 
Del Norte comprises the municipalities of Carmen, Nasipit, 
Buenavista, Cabadbaran, Tubay, Jabonga, Kitcharao, Las 
Nieves and the capital city of Butuan. The almost aristocratic 
Butuan City is the nerve center of commercial, industrial and 
cultural activities not only of the province but also of Northern 
Mindanao. 

The tourist spots of Agusan del Norte are the Dagani 
Beach Resort in Cabadbaran, the Ata-atahon Beach Resort in 
Nasipit, the Bulihan Beach Resort in Carmen, and the Lake 
Mainit in Jabonga. 

A marker installed in Barrio Magallanes of Butuan City 
claims that the first mass was celebrated in that place; how- 
ever, Antonio Pigafetta, chronicler of Ferdinand Magellan's 
voyage, stated that it was Easter Sunday, the last day of March 
1521 when the first mass was held in Limasawa, an island 
off the coast of Southern Leyte. 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL NORTE 

The Province of Agusan del Norte was created under RA. 4979 on June 17, 1967 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Agusan del Norte 

Silhoutte of the Lower — lauan tree, symbolic of the lumber 

industry which propelled Agusan 
to development. 

-depict the old and still growing 
coconut industry. Center Level 

- stand for banana as the other up 
and coming major product of the 
province. 



Portion of a Tree 



Coconut Trees 



Banana Trees 



Bottom Level of Tree — an arrangement of a Manobo brass 

shield, two crosses Manobo spears 



Top Level 



against a multi-folded Manobo 
gai-ment, colored red, green, yel- 
low and black — symbolic of cultur- 
al beginnings of the province. 

a factory representing the thriv- 
ing wallboard, lumber and forest 
products industries. 



symbolic of mining operations 
along the rich lodes of Diwata 
Range. 



265 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR 



THE PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR, in the east central 
iwrtion of Mindanao, is bounded by the Province of Agusan 
del Norte on the north, Davao del Norte on the south, the 
mountain ranges of Surigao on the east, and the Bukidnon 
Plateaus on the west. 

It has a land area of 8,965.5 square kilometers, consisting 
of 13 municipalities. 

In 1970, the population of Agusan del Sur was 174,682. 
Sixty-seven percent of the populace speak Cebuano and the 
remaining in various dialects such as the Manobo, Hiligaynon, 
Samar-Leyte, Ilocano and Tagalog. 

Three-fourths of its working class are farmers, fisher- 
men, hunters and loggers engaged in agriculture, fishing, hunt- 
ing, and forestry. The other are draftsmen, laborers, and 
service workers. 

During the last decades of the Spanish colonial adminis- 
tration, the old province of Agusan was a politico-military 
comandancia of Butuan, a part of the Province of Surigao. 
The present sites of the two Agusan provinces were sometimes 
referred to as the land of the Manobos because these Muslims 
inhabited the northeastern portion of Mindanao. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, the 
people of Agusan also took up arms against Spanish rule. They 
were led by Lieutenant Colonels Comte, Gumersiendo Flores, 
Andres Atega, Francisco Martinez, Luis Cassion and Timoteo 
Calo. 



Under Act No. 1306, passed by the Philippine Legislature 
in September 1914, the former province of Agusan was made 
independent. The first appointed provincial governor was Fre- 
derick Johnson and the first elected, in' the provincial elections 
in March 1922, was Apolonio Curato. 

During the Second World War, a unit of the Philippine 
and the United States defense troops was located at Namot, 
Talacogon, in the interior of the Agusan Valley. The site was 
provided with installations, one of which was a library which 
furnished the much-needed information concerning the progress 
of the war in Europe and the Pacific. 

In 1966, Congressman Jose C. Aquino drafted House Bill 
No. 727 which eventually became Republic Act No. 4979, ap- 
proved on June 17, 1967. The law divided Agusan into two, 
Agusan del Norte and Agusan del Sur, in order "to extend 
equal attention to all portions of the province and to hasten 
the economic, social and educational development of the vast, 
rich province. . . ." 

Agusan del Sur was finally proclaimed independent on 
January 5, 1968. The municipalities of the province are Ba- 
yugan, San Francisco, Sta. Josefa, Talacogon, Loreto, Bunawan, 
^^eruela, La Paz, and the capital town of Prosperidad. 

The province has a high literacy rate. In Prosperidad, 
a branch of the Philippine Normal College serves as training 
ground for teachers. A fast growing region, Agusan del Sur 
still deserves to be a part of the land "where the water flows." 




(Ixora Finlaysoniana) 



Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF AGUSAN DEL SUR 

The Province of Agusan del Sur was created under 
RA. 4979 on June 17, 1967. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Agusan del Sur 

Malayan Letter-Style — symbolizes cultural linkage with 

the Malayan Race. 

Thirteen Yellow Stars — represent the thirteen (13) munic- 
ipalities of the province. 



Two Blue Stars 



■peaceful co-existence between the 
natives and the christians. 



represents the mighty and navig- 
able Agusan River. 

■ primary product of the province. 

-signifies the tribal wars during 
the pre-hispanic times among the 
natives commonly known as 
Manobos. 

-depicts logging potential of the 
province. i 

Wheel and Factory — the vast natural resources of Agu- 
san del Sur. 



Body Dividing 
Coat-of-Arms 

Com 

Shield and Spear with 
Red Background 



Trees 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON 



BUKIDNON, a landlocked region, is the fourth largest province 
in Mindanao. It is bounded on the north and northwest by 
Misamis Oriental, on the east by Agusan del Norte and Agusan 
del Sur, on the south by North Cotabato, and on the west by 
Lanao del Sur. 

Composed of 19 municipalities, Bukidnon has a land area 
of 8,293.8 square kilometers and a population of 414,762 in 
1970. 

Before the Spaniards colonized Misamis Oriental in northern 
Mindanao, the Visayan settlers had already established them- 
selves in the province. As the settlers kept coming, the tribes 
who originally inhabited the area were driven inland toward the 
rugged and mountainous territory. They were eventually called 
"Bukidnons," meaning "people of the mountains," from which 
the place derived its name. 

In 1849, at the time of Governor Narciso Claveria, about 
fifteen settlements were formed in the Tagoloan Valley and 
Plateau districts. In 1880, the Jesuits conducted a program 
of resettlement and Christianization of the inhabitants. The 
missionaries supplied them with tools and taught them how to 
cultivate coffee, cacao, corn and hemp. 

At the end of the Spanish rule, the districts of Misamis, 
of which Bukidnon was formerly a part, was ruled by an army 
officer with the rank of lieutenant colonel. Bukidnon came 
under the control of the revolutionary government in December 
1899. 

During the Filipino-American War, the remnants of the 
Filipino revolutionary forces who retreated from Misamis 
under the command of Gen. Nicolas Capistrano were reactivated 



in the jungles of Bukidnon. In 1901, Bukidnon finally surren- 
dered to the American forces. 

^In 1907, after the establishment of the American civil 
government, the Province of Agusan was created, and Bukid- 
non became its subprovince. Frederick Lewis was appointed 
lieutenant governor of the subprovince. With the help of 
Manuel Fortich, Sr., Lewis reestablished old villages, developed 
agriculture, opened schools, and introduced a new idea of 
government. 

In 1909, Lewis was appointed governor of Agusan and 
Fortich, Sr., lieutenant governor of Bukidnon. When the 
Department of Mindanao and Sulu was created in September 
1914, Bukidnon became an independent province with Fortich, 
Sr., as its governor. 

In 1942, during World War II, guerrilla forces were 
organized in the province. Lt. Col. Robert Bowler formed the 
109th Division in Bukidnon and Cagayan de Oro. Salipada 
Pendatun led the 117th Infantry which exercised authority 
over the Bukidnon-Cotabato area. 

After the war, government resettlement areas were estab- 
lished to accommodate people from the different regions. The 
settlers were primarily from Cebu, the Ilocos region, and Panay. 

Aside from the vast lands planted with millions of pine- 
apples located in Sankanan, Damilag, Libona and Tankulan, 
the scenic spots are the seven plateaus of varying heights — like 
huge tables separated from one another by seven deep canyons 
and the three valleys; the seven mountains that rise from 
plateaus; the winding roads in Mangima; and the Kulaman 
Canyon. 



268 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF BUKIDNON 




The Province of Bukidnon was created under Act 2711 
on March 10, 1917. 



Two Big Trees 
Three Orchids 
Bull and Cow 
Rice Paddies 

Mountain Range 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Bukidnon 

— picture the thick forests of the 
province. 

— symbolize the rich flora of Bukid- 
non. 

— represent the cattle industry of 
the province. 

— symbol of the lowland rice prod- 
uction in the central part of the 
province. 

— stands for the many mountain 
ranges and the high elevation of 
the province. 



Iron Crosses 



RUBIA 

Provincial Flower 



— symbol of Christianity that has 
been embraced by its people. ' 



269 



fflSTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF CAMIGUIN 



Camiguin is separated in the south by Gingoog Bay and Ma- 
cajalar Bay from the coast of northern Mindanao, and in the 
north by the Mindanao Sea from Bohol. 

The island was once a part of the vast empire of Sultan 
Cachil Corralat, known today as Sultan Dipatuan Kudarat (or 
Kudrat), the powerful ruler of Mindanao and Sulu during the 
seventeenth century. 

Guinsiliban was its first known settlement ruled by Datu 
Salampang. The original inhabitants were the Bukidnons who 
retreated to the hinterlands of Mindanao or settled in the other 
parts of the island when the Visayans came. 

On March 11, 1565, Legazpi's men found the people of 
Camiguin already trading cinamons and other native products 
for Oriental goods with merchants of the neighboring Asian 
countries. Thus, when the Recollects arrived in Cagayan de 
Oro in 1622, Guinsiliban was already a flourishing settlement. 

From the 18th century to the early 19th century, Camiguin, 
as a part pf Misamis, was governed from Cebu. By 1818, 
Misamis gained its provincial status with Camiguin island as 
one of the divisions of the Misamis territory called Partido de 
Catarman, composed of Catarman and the villages of Guinsi- 
laban, Mambajao and Sagay. 

On January 4, 1855, a special decree separated Mambajao 
from Catarman and on July 6 of the same year, it was made a 
municipality, with Father Valero de Sebastian as the first parish 
priest. Mambajao was destroyed three times by fire (April 
1865, September 1868, and 1881). In October 1869, then 
Spaniards founded the town of Mahinog which became a part 
of Mambajao in 1902. 

The towns of Partido de Catarman were frequently sub- 
jected to natural calamities. Catarman and Tupsan were de- 
stroyed by lava, hot rocks and volcanic ashes due to the eruption 
of Mt. Vulcan on October 10, 1870; and Catarman, Guinsiliban 



and Sagay were overflowed with lava when Mt. Hibok-Hibok 
erupted in 1951. 

In 1899, an American gunboat bombarded Camiguin. 
After a brief skirmish with the Los; Libertados under the com- 
mand of Ricardo Reyes, the inhabitants readily submitted to 
the American rule. Sporadic clashes, however, continued 
against the remaining elements of the revolutionary forces, one 
of which was led by a certain Balero. In September 1901, 
Balero and his followers were completely annihilated in the' 
Battle of Manduaw which ended the resistance in the island. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces under 
Lt. Kuburi attempted to establish a government in Camiguin. 
The Japanese did not maintain a garrison and no political 
machinery was firmly setup. The island then became an 
evacuation center of the families from Cagayan de Oro and 
the other towns of northern Mindanao. 

The American landing in Leyte on October 20, 1944, led to 
the liberation of Camiguin from the Japanese patrols which 
used to visit the island. 

Camiguin remained a part of Misamis Oriental until June 
22, 1957, when Republic Act No. 2021 made the island a 
sub-province of Misamis Oriental. 

Finally, by virtue of Republic Act No. 4669, approved on 
June 18, 1966, the island was created as a regular and inde- 
pendent province from Misamis Oriental with the seat of the 
provincial government in Mambajao. 

Camiguin has five municipalities, namely, Catarman, 
Guinsiliban, Mahinog, Mambajao and Sagay and a population 
of 36,160 in 1972. The province has a rough terrain planted 
with abaca and coconut. Its continuous rainfall is heaviest 
from November to January. 

Camiguin Province is ringed with volcanoes, one of which 
is the active Mt. Hibok-Hibok, a tourist attraction in the south. 




CADENA DE AMOR 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF CAMIGUIN 

The Province of Camiguin was created under R.A. 4669 
on June 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Camiguin 

Five Stars — represents the five (5) municipal- 

ities of the province; big star at 
center stands for the capital tovs?n. 

Forty-Eight Oakleaves — symbolize the forty-eight (48) 

barrios of the province. 

Coconut Trees — symbolic of coconut as the major 

crop of the island province. 

Falls — the Katibawasan Falls, main 

tourist attraction of the island. 

Lanzones Bunch — Camiguin lanzones, noted for its 

sweetness. 

J 968 — formal inauguration of Camiguin 

was in 1968. 



^1 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF LAN AO DEL NORTE 



Lanao del Norte is bounded on the north by Iligan Bay, on 
the west by Illana Bay, on the south by Lanao del Sur, and 
on the east by Bukidnon. 

The province, with a land area of 3,092.0 square kilometers, 
is composed of 18 municipalities and one city — Iligan, the cap- 
ital. In 1970, its estimated population was 349,942 persons. 

The first attempt of the Spanish forces to control the ter- 
ritory took place during the administration of Governor General 
Hurtado de Corcuera. In 1637, Corcuera led an expedition ag- 
ainst Sultan Corralat, ruler of Mindanao and Sulu. He arrived 
in Zamboanga in February 1637 and attacked Corralat's strong- 
hold at Lamitan, on the coast of Lanao. The Spaniards cap- 
tured the Muslim stronghold. Two years later, a decisive cam- 
paign was launched into the interior by General Pedro de Al- 
monte, with the cooperation of Alcalde Mayor Francisco de 
Atienza of Caraga (Surigao). 

Spanish power, however, was never established in Lanao. 
After Corcuera's rule, the Maranaws were left to themselves — 
practically an independent people — constituting several Mo- 
hammedan states almost to the end of Spanish rule. 

Under the administration of Governor General Valeriano 
Weyler, a series of campaigns was started to bring the Lanao 
region under government control. In 1891, the Spanish forces 
occupied Malabang and the other towns along the south coast. 
Governor General Eulogio Despujol continued the campaigns, 
but it was later left to Governor General Ramon Blanco who 
established the Spanish power in the region. The governor 
landed in 1894 in Iligan with a force under the immediate com- 
mand of General Parrado who captured, among other Muslim 
cottas, the stronghold at Marawi, reputed to be the strongest 
of its kind in Lanao. 

On October 8, 1895, in pursuance to a gubernatorial decree 
at Marawi, Lanao was organized into a district of Mindanao and 
Sulu. 



In 1896, a few members of a battalion of disciplinarios re- 
belled in Iligan, then a part of Misamis. 

In 1903, the Moro Province was established, with Lanao as 
one of its districts. Even with an established government, the 
datus at Bacolod and other cottas were more defiant than be- 
fore. Thus, General John J. Pershing ordered all his soldiers 
at Camp Vicars to seize Cotta Bacolod under Datu Panunda- 
ngan. In the bloody encounter, the fort was razed at the cost 
of hundreds of Muslim warriors, including nine of their datus. 
In 1914, a civil government was established in the province 
under the Department of Mindanao and Sulu. 

In June 1942, after the Japanese Imperial Forces occupied 
the Philippines, several guerrilla units under Lt. Col. Luis Mor- 
gan of the Philippine Constabulary were organized all over 
Mindanao. In the area comprising Lanao, Zamboanga and Mi- 
samis Occidental, Col. Wendell W. Fertig accepted the overall 
command of the guerrilla units from Morgan in Kolambugan, 
Lanao, on October 7, 1942. 

On January 1, 1944, Fertig created a sub-command of 
Western Mindanao under Lt. Col. Bowler, with headquarters in 
Lala, Lanao. Later it was transferred to Misamis Occidental. 

Under Republic Act No. 2228, approved on May 22, 1959, 
Lanao was divided into Lanao del Norte and Lanao del Sur. 
The City of Iligan was proclaimed as the capital of Lanao del 
Norte. 

In Lanao del Norte, the famous Maria Cristina Falls on 
the Agus River, generates electricity for Iligan and Marawi 
Cities. The hydroelectric power plant also supplies the indus- 
trial needs of the fertilizer plant at Iligan City. 

Lake Lanao, the deepest and the second largest lake in the 
Philippines, is also in the province. 



SANTAN 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL NORTE 

The Province of Lanao del Norte was created under 
R.A. 2228 on May 22, 1959. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Lanao del Norte 

Cross and Crescent — symbolize the union of two faiths 

and religious beliefs of its people 
which Christianity and the Mus- 
lim or Islamic Faith, respectively. 

— courage and blood in struggle for 
co-existence. 



Red Background 



Falls 



Hydro-Electric Plant 

Yellow and Green 
Colors 



-iDeautiful and majestic Maria Cris- 
tina Falls, source of power and 
progress upon which the province 
and other neighboring provinces 
depend. 

-symbol of man's cultural and 
economic progress. 

-reflect the ambitions and hopes 
of the new generation. 



A- 



^4 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR 



Lanao del Sur, in the southern portion of the former province 
of Lanao, centers around the basin of Lake Lanao. It is 
bounded by Lanao del Norte on the north, the Illana Bay on 
the west, Cotabato on the south, and Bukidnon on the east. 

The province has a land area of 3,872.9 square kilometers. 
It had a population of 455,508 in 1970, composed mostly of Mus- 
lims and Maranaws (or "lake dwellers"), and many Christians. 

Francisco de Atienza and the Portuguese Recollect Friar 
Agustin de San Pedro with the Spanish troops were the first 
to set foot on Lanao soil, reaching the lake region on April 4, 
1639, in the course of their campaign against Sultan Kudarat, 
known as Sultan Cachil Corralat, ruler of Mindanao and the 
Visayas. 

The conquest of Lanao, however, started two years after 
Governor General Hurtado de Corcuera captured Lamitan on 
the coast of Mindanao in 1637. In 1639, General Pedro Al- 
monte marched towards the interior region, near Lake Lanao, 
and captured the Marawi fortress after heavy fighting. Until 
the end of the Spanish rule, Lanao del Sur constituted several 
Mohammedan areas each ruled by a datu. 

During the administration of Governor General Valeriano 
Weyler, several campaigns were made to bring Lanao del Sur 
under the Spanish rule. In 1891, Malabang was occupied, but 
the area was never fully controlled. In 1894, Governor Ramon 
Blanco, with 3,000 warriors, marched through hostile terri- 
tories towards Marawi. 



In 1895, in pursuance to a gubernatorial decree, Lanao was 
made a politico-military government, as the seventh district 
of Mindanao and Sulu. 

In 1903, the Moro Province was established, with Lanao as 
one of its districts. General John J. Pershing, at Camp Vicars, 
thus seized Cotta Bacolod under Datu Panundangan. In 1914, 
the Americans established a civil government under the De- 
partment of Mindanao and Sulu. Lanao became one of the 
seven provinces of the department. 

Several guerrilla units were formed all over Mindanao un- 
der Lt. Col. Luis Morgan of the Philippine Constabulary in 
June 1942. Later, on October 7, 1942, he handed the command 
to Col. Wendell W. Fertig. On January 1, 1944, Fertig created 
a sub-command in Western Mindanao with Bowler as leader 
of the sub-command in Lala, Lanao. Later, it was transferred 
to Misamis Occidental. 

Under Republic Act No. 2228, approved on May 22, 1959, 
the Province of Lanao was divided into two provinces: Lanao 
del Norte and Lanao del Sur. Marawi City became the capital 
of Lanao del Sur. 

Some of the tourist and educational spots in Lanao del Sur 
are Lake Lanao, the second largest lake in the Philippines and 
the source of the Maria Cristina Falls; the Muslim mosques 
(churches) along the lake; an agricultural school in Lumbatan; 
and the Mindanao State University. 




KALACHUCHI 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF LANAO DEL SUR 

The Province of Lanao del Sur was created under E.A. 
2228 on May 22, 1959. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Lanao del Sur 

Design — depicts the Maranao culture: up- 

per portion shows the Sarimanok, 
the legendary royal bird; lower 
portion shows outline of Lake 
Lanao, a mosque and the green 
vegetation as the background. 

Colors — gold stands for royalty; red, for 

courage and bravery; green, for 
abundance of vegetative plants; 
blue, for peace; silver, for purity. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL 



MiSAMis Occidental is bounded on the north by the Mindanao 
Sea, on the east by the Iligan Bay, on the south by the Panguil 
Bay, and on the west by the eastern portion of the Province 
of Zamboanga del Sur. 

With a land area of 1,939 square kilometers, the province 
had a population of 319,855 in 1970. 

The word "misamis" was derived from "kuyamis," a variety 
of sweet coconut, the staple food of the early settlers of the 
place. "Kuyamis" was corrupted to Misamis when the Spanish 
colonizers came. 

The first Spaniards to arrive in Misamis were the Recol- 
lect missionaries. In 1574, Fr. Jose Ducos, S.J., built the fort 
of Misamis (now Ozamiz City) as a base for further offensive 
against the Muslims. 

Misamis used to be a part of the bishopric of Cebu. In 
1818, it became a corregimiento, comprised of four partidos, or 
divisions: Partido de Misamis; Partido de Dapitan; Partido de 
Cagayan and Partido de Catarman. 

During the latter half of the 19th century, Misamis was one 
of the six districts of Mindanao, and later, one of the seven 
districts of Mindanao and Sulu at the close of the Spanish era. 

At the outbreak of the Philippine Revolution in 1896, most 



of the Recollect missionaries left the place. By December 1898, 
they completely abandoned their missionary activity in Misamis. 

From 1901 to 1930, a majority of the people of Misamis 
became followers of the Philippine Independent Church. 

The civil government was established by the Americans 
in Misamis on May 15, 1901. Jose Ozamiz was the first elected 
governor of the province. 

During the Second World Wai% in 1943, the Japanese forces 
mercilessly killed the inhabitants of the town of Calamba, 
resulting in the so-called Calamba Massacre. As a consequence, 
guerrilla xmits were organized in the province. 

After the war, Gideon Quijano was appointed governor of 
Misamis by President Manuel Roxas. 

The main products of the province of rolling hills, low 
mountains, and fertile coastal area are abaca, coconut, coffee 
and rice. The people are engaged in fishing, salt-making and 
pottery. The province has also rich deposits of silica, magnetic 
iron and sand. 

In 1929, Legislative Act No. 3537 divided the old Province 
of Misamis into Misamis Occidental and Misamis Oriental. The 
Occidental comprised the towns of Baliangao, Lopez-Jaena, Tu- 
dela, Clarin and Misamis (now Ozamiz City). 



Provincial Seal 




GUMAMELA 
Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF MISAMIS OCCIDENTAL 

The Province of Misamis Occidental was created under 
Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 



Meaning of the Official Seal of Misamis Occidental 

Upper Left Portion 



Coconut Tree, Nut 
and Bolo 

Ricefields and 
Mountain 

Sea and Sailboat 



Diagonal Line 



stands for the provincial seat of 
government of the province. 

■symbol of the coconut as a pri- 
mary product of the province. 

signify that rice is a principal 
staple crop; at the background is 
Mt. MaUndang. 

•tells that the province is a rich 
fishing ground particularly at 
Mindanao Sea, Iligan Bay and 
Panguil Bay. 

- shows corn and banana, principal 
staple crops of Misamis Occiden- 
tal. 



> 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL 



MiSAMis Oriental used to be one province with Misamis 
Occidental. It is bounded on the north by the Mindanao Sea, 
on the south by Lanao and Bukidnon, on the west by Misa- 
mis Occidental, and on the east by Ag-usan. 

The province, with a land area of 3,570.1 square kilome- 
ters, is composed of two cities (Cagayan de Oro, the seat of 
the provincal administration, and Gingoog), four islands (Ca- 
nauayan, Puluc, Medano and Mantiqui) and 24 municipalities. 
It had a population of 300,072 in 1948, 348,898 in 1960, and 
472,756 in 1970. 

Its original inhabitants were the Bukidnons and the Ma- 
nobos; but they were driven into the interior when the Visa- 
yans arrived. Although Misamis is a part of Mindanao, the 
dialect spoken by the natives is Cebuano. 

The Recoletos inherited the ministration of Misamis 
Oriental from the Jesuits in 1768. The mission was under 
the diocese of Cebu. 

In 1818, Misamis was divided into four districts: (1) Par- 
tido de Misamis, which included the forts of Misamis and 
Iligan, besides Loculan and Initao; (2) Partido de Dapitan, 
including Dapitan, Lobungan and a number of villages; (3) Par- 
tido de Cagayan, which included Cagayan and a number of 
villages, like Iponan, Maligan, Hasaan, and Salay; and (4) the 
Partido de Catarman, on the island of Camiguin. 

In 1850, Misamis included the present Province of Bukid- 
non and the northern part of Cotabato. 

At the close of the Spanish era, Misamis constituted one 
of the seven districts of Mindanao, with Cagayan de Misamis 



(now Cagayan de Oro City) as its capital and the towns of 
Dapitan, Dipolog and Lobungan as its dependents. 

The revolutionary forces held Misamis for three months. 
In May 1901, the Americans established a civil government 
in the province. 

In 1907, Bukidnon was placed under the jurisdiction of 
the newly created Province of Agusan. Later, in 1914, the 
Department of Mindanao and Sulu was organized, and Bukid- 
non was separated from the Province of Agusan. 

On November 2, 1929, Act No. 3537 divided the Province 
of Misamis into two: Misamis Oriental (with the capital at 
Cagayan de Oro) and Misamis Occidental. Its implementing 
amendment. Act No. 3777, was adopted on November 28, 1939. 

During World War II, in Balingasag, Captain Pedro Colla- 
do, a Philippine Constabulary officer, merged all the guerrilla 
units in Misamis Oriental under the 110th Infantry Division, 
10th Military District. The division held the unique distinc- 
tion of being a heterogenous unit — composed of Americans, 
and Christian and Mohammedan Filipinos — all working for the 
defense of the area and in guarding the northern supply routes 
of the military district. 

Prior to June 22, 1957, Camiguin was one of the islands 
of Misamis' Oriental. Under Republic Act No. 2021, the island 
was created as a subprovince until June 18, 1966 when Re- 
public Act No. 4669 made it as an independent province. 

Misamis Oriental is primarily dependent on its farms for 
livelihood. Its most important crops are coconut and corn. 
There are four (4) mining concessions in the province which 
also improve the economy of the province. 



.278 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF MISAMIS ORIENTAL 

The Province of Misamis Oriental was created under 
Act 2711 on March 10, 1917. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Misamis Oriental 

Coconut, Pineapple and — connotes that Misamis Oriental is 
Logs an agricultural province. Major- 

ity of the people derive their 
income from agricultural pro- 
ducts, namely, copra, rice and 
corn. 



Fruits and Vegetables — crops raised in the province either 

for local market or export. 



HISTORY OF THE 



SXJRIGAO DEL NoRTE, in the northeastern part of Mindanao, is 
bounded on the north by the Leyte Gulf; on the south by Surigao 
del Sur and Agusan del Norte; on the east by the Pacific Ocean; 
and on the west by the Surigao Strait. It is composed of a 
portion of the old Surigao Provin.ce and the islands of Dinagat, 
Siargao, Bucas, Grande and many other islets. 

The province has a land area of 2,739.0 square kilometers 
and a population of 238,714 in 1970. 

The Port of Loreto in Dinagat Island and the Port of 
Numancia in Siargao Island are ideal anchorage for vessels. 

Although Surigao del Norte faces the Pacific Ocean, it is 
seldom visited by typhoons. Abaca, coconut, rice and corn are 
grown in the province. Its important industries are lumbering, 
fishing and mining. An iron rnine operates in the Municipality 
of Mainit. The largest deposit of nickel in the Philippines is 
found in Nonoc Island. 

Surigao, earlier known as "Siargo" or "Sidargo," was re- 
ferred to as "Caraga," "Caragha" or "Carhaga" during the 
Spanish occupation of that portion of Mindanao. It was derived 
from the Caragas who inhabited the place. In 1543, Ruy Lopez 
de Villalobos landed on the eastern coast of Mindanao. Bernardo 
de la Torre, a member of the expedition, named the place Cesarea 
Caroli, in honor of the reigning monarch of Spain, Charles I, 
also known as Charles the V of the Holy Roman Empire. 

On March 1, 1621, the Recollects administered the districts 
of Butuan, Sampongan, Caraga, Bislig and Cateel, and the in- 
terior of Agusan. On January 29, 1655, Sgt. Manuel Sanchez 
de la Costa with two priests was given the charge of Sapaso, 
Cabuntog (now General- Luna), Bacuag, Higaquit, Bohor and 
Surigao. 

For sometime, Tandag became the seat of the government 
until 1848, when the capital was transferred to Surigao. In 
1849, the towns of Tandag, Tago, Lianga, Mision de San Juan, 
Bislig, Hinatuah, Quinablengan, Dapa and Banganga became 
parts of Davao. These municipalities were later returned to 
Surigao. 



28P 



OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE 



In 1860, Surigao became one of the six districts of Minda- 
nao and Sulu or the East District. As Surigao District in 1870, 
and one of the seven military districts of Mindanao and Sulu at 
the close of the 20th century, it included the politico-military 
comandancia of Butuan which was made a part of the Province 
of Agusan in 1911. 

During the Philippine Revolution in 1896, Ramon Visier, 
the last Spanish governor of Surigao, turned over the govern- 
ment to Manuel Ballori, a gobemadorciUo of Surigao who re- 
signed a few days later. Juan Gonzales succeeded him. How- 
ever, General Prudencio Garcia, who earlier took up arms 
against the Spanish authorities in Banganga, seized the gov- 
ernment. Garcia later unconditionally surrendered the govern- 
ment to the Americans. Civil government was established in 
Surigao on May 15, 1901. 

In 1924, the Colorums under the leadership of Francisco 
Bornales, alias "Lantayug," fortified Tubod and Timama-an. 
However, a strong force under Captain Bowers shelled and razed 
Socorro where hundrejis of rebels died. 

During World War II, the Japanese Imperial Forces occu- 
pied Surigao on May 23, 1942. Later, in September 1945, the 
Americans bombed Bilang-bilang Harbor. This was followed 
by the landing of troops at Desolation Point in the Dinagat 
Island on October 17, 1945. With the operations of the 110th 
Division, a guerrilla unit under Colonel Ernest McClish, Surigao 
was liberated before October 20, 1945. 

By virtue of Republic Act No. 2786, approved on June 12, 
1960, Surigao del Norte was created. It consists of 27 munic-. 
ipalities with Surigao City as the capital. 

The historic and beauty spots of Surigao del Norte are the 
Casa Real in Surigao City, the Nonoc nickel quarries on Nonoc 
Island, and the Desolation Point on the northern tip of Dinagat 
Island where the American trftops first landed during the libera- 
tion on October 17, 1944. v^n^ 

^ 




ORCHID 

Provincial Flower 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCF OF SURIGAO DEL NORTE 

The Province of Surigao del Norte was created under 
R.A. 2786 on June 19, 1960. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Surigao del Norte 

Map — outline of the map of the province. 

Mining Tools and —mountains colored yellow, white 
Three Mountains and gules colors and tools re- 
present the gold, silver and iron 
resources of Surigao del Norte. 



281 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUR 



SURIGAO DEL SuR, located on the northeastern fringes of Min- 
danao, is bounded on the north by Surigao del Norte, on the 
east by the Philippine Sea, on the south by Davao Oriental, 
and on the west by Agusan del Norte. With a land area of 
4,552.2 square kilometers, it had a population of 258,680 in 
1970. 

Surigao del Sur produces abaca, coconut, rice and corn. 
Timber and rattan are its important forest resources. The 
province has enormous deposits of iron, chromite, gold, silica, 
sand, pyrite and limestone. Point Tugas is said to be the largest 
iron reservation in the world. 

The present Province of Surigao del Sur was originally in- 
habited by the Tagabaloyes, a tribe closely associated with the 
Mandayas of eastern Mindanao. 

In 1528, the Spanish expedition led by Alvaro de Saavedra 
reached the eastern coasts of Mindanao, including the present 
site of Surigao del Sur. In 1543, Ruy Lopez de Villalobos also 
reached the place, Bernardo de la Torre, a member of the ex- 
pedition, named the region Casarea Caroli, in honor of King 
Charles I of Spain. 

Attempts were made by the Spanish administration to 
colonize the vast region of Surigao. In 1597, Captain Juan 
Mendez Poras, with Fray Lorenzo de Facundo and Fray Diego 
Sta. Ana, conquered the villages of Bislig, Cateel and Banganga. 
Juan Nicolas and Jacinto de Fulgencio later occupied the regions 
north of Bislig. 

The settlements in Tandag and Ygaquit were established 
by Father Miguel de Sta. Maria. In Tandag, a fort was built 



to(safeguard the place against occasional Muslim raids. 

Ml 1674, Bislig and Banganga became one of the largest 
Recollect mission centers, but these missions were turned over 
to the Jesuits on May 19, 1864. 

Surigao was one of the six districts that formed the District 
of Surigao in 1870. 

At the close of the Spanish era. General Prudencio Garcia, 
Sr., rose as a prominent political figure in Surigao after the 
wrested the power from Juan Gonzales and his two sons, Simeon 
and Wenceslao. In 1901, Garcia unconditionally turned over 
the government to the Americans. 

The American administration established a civil govern- 
ment on May 15, 1901. The resistance movement, however, 
continued until General Adriano Concepcion was captured in 
Tubod in 1903. 

At the outbreak of the Second World War, an evacuation 
center was organized at Cortez. In 1944, the Japanese built 
garrisons, but these were destroyed by the Americans when 
the latter reoccupied the province during the liberation. 

Surigao del Sur was a part of the old Province of Surigao 
up to June 12, 1960, when Republic Act No. 2786 made it into 
a separate and independent province. 

As a coastal province, Surigao del Sur is noted for its fine 
beaches: the Bon-Ot beach in Carrascal, the Dalahican and Ta- 
moyas beaches at Point Tugas, the Tambis beach at Cantilan, 
the Tandang (sic) beach in Tandag, and the Lanuza-Cortez 
seaside. 



282 




Provincial Seal 




Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF SURIGAO DEL SUE 

The Province of Surigao del Sur was created under 
R.A. 2786 on June 19, 1960. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Surigao del Sur 



Map 



Right Portion 



String of 17 Beads and 
one Star 



■ map of the province etched against 
the Pacific Ocean. 

- the three major industries of the 
province, namely, rice production, 
logging and mining. 

-represents the eighteen (18) mu- 
nicipalities of the province. The 
star stands for the capital town 
of Tandag. 



283 



Region XI 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF NORTH COTABATO 



North Cotabato, formerly a part of the old Province of Cota- 
bato, is bounded on the north by Lanao del Sur and Bukidnon, 
on the east by Davao del Sur, on the south and southwest by 
Sultan Kudarat, and on the west by Maguindanao. 

About 1515, Shariff Muhammad Kabungsuwan with the 
SamalSj a seafaring people, arrived on the shores of Mindanao. 
He introduced the Islamic religion and founded the Sultanate 
of Maguindanao. 

In the 16th century, the Spanish conquistadores occupied 
Cotabato and periodically sent expeditionary forces to subdue 
the Muslims in the surrounding regions. Nevertheless, the 
Muslims were never completely conquered by the Spaniards. 

When the American Forces came, the inhabitants of North 
Cotabato also fought the new enemy. Peace was restored in 
the province after Datu Ali was killed at the forest of Dama- 
doiian in the district of Buluan, and Datu Alamada surrender- 
ed to the American forces. 

In 1913, the settlers from Cebu went inland as far as Pikit. 
In 1918, with the help of Datu Dilangalen, the government 
established the Bual Settlement Farm School in Midsayap. 
With the continuous flow of settlers to the province, more 
settlements, which eventually became municipalities, were or- 
ganized. Like other nameless settlements. Carmen, north of the 
Pulangi River, was designated as Lot No. 217 of the Maridagao 



Cadastral Survey of 1924, and named after its surveyor, Del 
Carmen. 

Between 1922 and 1937, under the administration of Gov- 
ernor Dionisio Gutierrez, the population increased due to the 
construction of national highways connecting North Cotabato 
with the adjoining provinces. 

During World War II, the forces of Salipada Pendatun, 
under Wendel W. Fertig of the 117th Infantry, 10th Military 
District, United States Forces in the Philippines (USFIP), 
operated in the Cotabato-Bukidnon area. 

On August 18, 1947, Executive Order No. 82 created the 
municipalities of Kabacan and Kidapawan; on September 29, 
1949, Executive Order No. 270 created Pikit; and on August 3, 
1951, Executive Order No. 462 created M'lang. 

On June 18, 1966, under Republic Act No, 4849, South 
Cotahato was created into a separate province from the old 
Cotabato. Later, on November 22, 1973, under Presidential 
Decree No. 341, the provinces of North Cotabato, Maguinda- 
nao and Sultan Kudarat were created out of the remaining old 
Cotabato. North Cotabato is composed of 14 municipalities, 
with Kidapawan as the capital. 

Two of the natural attractions in the province are the Rio 
Grande de Mindanao, the second largfest river in the Philippines, 
and the Lanzones Forest at Kidapawan. 




Provincial Seal 





MILLION FLOWERS 
(Milf lores Hydrangea Macrophyla) 

Provincial Flower 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF COTABATO 



The Province of Cotabato was created under R.A. 4849 
on July 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Cotabato 



Stone Fort 
(Kota Wato) 



— fortress built by the Maguihda- 
naos at the Celina Hill (now PC 
Hill). 

Kampilan and Kris — symbolizing leadership and brav- 
ery, both are Haded weapons 
which the natives used in warding 
off all foreign invaders. 



Two Stars 



Half-Moon 



■ represent the two islaaids of Min- 
danao and Sulu (Cotabato was 
once a capital of these two 
islands). 

- the Moon, representing one su- 
preme power — flight — for the 
two regions. 



V 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO 



The Province of South Cotabato, in the southern portion of 
Mindanao, is bounded on the north by North Cotabato, on 
the south and west by the Celebes Sea, and on the east by 
Davao del Sur. 

The province has a land area of 7,468.8 square kilometers 
and a population of 466,110 in 1970. It has a very fertile 
and highly productive soil planted with corn, rice, banana, 
pineapple and coconut. At Palomolok, and around the base of 
Mount Matutum, are vast pineapple plantations while in the 
mountains are the finest and hardest timber. 

South Cotabato was visited by the Spaniards early in the 
16th century. In 1525, an expedition from Spain led by Garcia 
Jofre de Loaisa anchoi-ed at Pollok, in the Illana Bay, and 
remained in Cotabato for about ten days. 

It was however late in the century that the first attempts 
were launched to conquer the Mindanao Muslims. Rodriguez 
de Figueroa led an expedition and succeeded in occupying the 
town of Tampacan in 1596. Hardly had they settled when 
the brave chieftains. Malaria, Silongan and Buhisan attacked 
the invaders, killing Figueroa and forcing his men to abandon 
the place. 

In 1639, General Pedro de Almonte led another expedition 
to the Cotabato territory. They were able to establish a small 
presidio at Bunayen. Like the former explorer, Almonte was 
forced to withdraw. 

It took two more centuries before another expedition in 
June 1851 was launched against the Maguindanaos. The 
Spaniards occupied Pollok which was later converted into a 
naval base. Three years later, the district was elevated to a 
politico-military status, under the jurisdiction of Zamboanga. 

By 1861, three campaigns were launched simultaneously 
against the natives. The first, led by General Juan de Salcedo, 
"Comandante politico-militar" of Mindanao, sailed up the 
Cotabato River and reached as far as South Cotabato; the 



second, conducted by Enrique Carillo, politico-military governor 
of Davao (with an objective to acquire Lake Buluan region), 
reached Mailad where a fort was built; the third, led by Cap- 
tain Castro Mendez Nunez, sailed via the Cotabato River, 
and succeeded in occupying Pagalungan. As a result of this 
three-pronged offensive, the Spanish authority was finally 
recognized by the natives of the region. 

The next year, a military base was established at 
Tamontaka, followed by the occupation of the interior towns 
and the establishment of military posts. By the end of Spanish 
rule, the old Cotabato province (then the fifth district of 
Mindanao) was composed of the politico-military comandancia 
of Pollok and the military district of Malabang, Reina Regente, 
Taceran, Babia, Illana, Baras and Libac. 

In 1899, the Spaniards evacuated the province. A local 
government under Ramon Vilo was established and a rival 
Muslim government was also organized under Datu Ugalingan 
Piang. 

When the Moro Province was created under the American 
government, Cotabato became one of its districts in 1903. Five 
years later, in 1908, Cotabato became an independent province. 

During the Commonwealth period, President Manuel L. 
Quezon established a settlement project under General Paulino 
Santos at Dadiangas, later called Buayan, and finally General 
Santos City. 

In 1944, the allied forces landed at the Sarangani Bay 
from where sorties were launched against the Japanese Imperial 
Forces in Central Mindanao. 

Under Republic Act No. 4849, approved on June 18, 1966, 
the old Cotabato Province was divided into two provinces, 
North and South Cotabato. The South consists of the munici- 
palities of Banga, Glan, Kiamba, Koronadal, Maasim, Maitum, 
Malapatan, Norala, Polomolok, Surallah, Tantangan, Tupi and 
General Santos City, the provincial capital. 



Provincial Seal 




WALING-WALING 

Provincial Flower 





Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF SOUTH COTABATO 

The Province of South Cotabato was created under 
R.A. 4849 on July 18, 1966. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of South Cotabato 

Mountain Matutum — Mt. Matutum, the majestic land- 
mark of the province. 

Factory Building — represents the industrial potential 

of South Cotabato. 

Products — rice, com, pineapple, coconut and 

banana, principal products of the 
province. 

Plow — an indispensable implement of the 

Filipino farmer. 

Rice Stacks — represent rice as the principal 

produce of the individual farmer. 

Cattle —represents the vast pasture and 

grazing lands of South Cotabato. 

Shield-Shape of Coat —shape of the official seal of the 
of Arms Republic of the Philippines. 



287 



HISTORY OF THE 



Davao is one of the biggest and richest provinces in the 
Philippines. It lies in the southeastern part of Mindanao, 
bounded on the north by the Agusan Valley, on the west by 
Bukidnon, on the south by Davao del Sur, and on the east by 
Davao Oriental. 

It has a land area of 8,129.8 square kilometers and a 
population of 442,543 in 1970. Some of the indigenous tribes 
of the province are the Calagones, Tagacaoles, Aetas, Samalese, 
Bagobos and Mandayas. 

Although it is one of the southernmost regions of the 
Archipelago, Nueva Guipuzcoa (now Davao Province) was also 
one of the earliest provinces explored by the Spanish conquista^ 
dores in the Philippines. As early as 1528, seven years after 
the arrival of Magellan, Alvaro de Saavedra visited the island 
of Sarangani on his way to the Moluccas. Several years later, 
in 1543, the province was again visited by a Spanish expedition 
headed by Ruy Lopez de Villalobos. This expedition reached 
several towns along the eastern coast. 

In 1844, hoAvever, Governor Figueroa of Zamboanga and 
Agustin Bocalla, a Brigadier General in the Spanish Army, 
obtained from the Sultan of Mindanao the cession of this vast 
region to the Spanish government. 

Immediately after the cession of Davao, Jose Oyanguren, 
a native of Vergara of the province of Nueva Guipuzcoa, Spain, 
visited the place. He was so impressed with the region so that 
on his return to Manila, he sought permission to lead an expe- 
dition. Governor Narciso Claveria granted the request after 
Oyanguren proposed to bring the region under Spanish sov- 
ereignty and to expel or pacify the Muslims. The first settle- 
ment visited by the expedition in 1847 was the village of Davao. 

Two years later, the neighboring regions, including the 
strip of land from the then province of Caraga (now Surigao), 
were organized into a new province named Nueva Guipuzcoa, 
in honor of Oyanguren's home province. Davao town which 
became the provincial capital, was renamed Vergara, also in 
honor of Oyanguren's hometown. Oyanguren was the first 
governor of this province which originally included the region 
bordering the Gulf of Davao. 

After its creation, in 1858, the province of Nueva Guipuz- 



OF DAVAO 



coa was abolished and two politico-military comandancias, — 
Bislig and Davao — were created. Bislig was incorporated two 
years later into the District of Davao, one of the six districts 
into which Mindanao was divided in 1860. At the end of the 
Spanish rule, Davao was still a district with an army major at 
the head of its government. Within its jurisdiction were the 
politico-military comandancias of Mati and Clan. Each coman- 
dancia was under a captain of the Spanish army. 

Eventually, during the Philippine Revolution, the Spanish 
government collapsed and it was replaced by a short-lived 
revolutionary government. A few years later, the Americans 
came. 

Because of the fertile soil and fine climate, agriculture has 
been encouraged in Davao. Large abaca plantations have been 
cleared on the plains around Davao Gulf and thousands of 
coconut trees have been planted along the shores. 

Before the war, much of the iJind in the province were 
owned by Japanese individuals or Japanese corporations. Only 
a few Christian Filipinos from the Visayas and Luzon and a 
few Muslims owned farms in Davao. 

The province is exceedingly mountainous, with dense 
forests that yield excellent hardwoods for construction purposes. 
One of its peaks, Mount Apo, is the highest mountain in the 
Philippines. ' 

Davao is also known for its rich natural resources. Coal 
is found near the Mayo River, and sulphur, almost in a pure 
state, covers the top of Mt. Apo. Pearls and fishes likewise 
abound off the coasts of the province. 

On May 8, 1967, with the approval of Republic Act No. 
4867, Congress divided Davao into three provinces, namely; 
Davao del Norte with Tagum as the capital; Davao del Sur 
with Digos as the capital; and Davao Oriental with Mati as 
the capital. 

The Province of Davao del Norte comprises the municipal- 
ities of Babak, Samal, Tagum, Sto. Tomas, Asuncion, Kapalong, 
Panabo, Nabunturan, Monkayo, Mawab, Mabini, Compostela 
and Pantukan. A month later, on June 17, 1972, Congress also 
approved Republic Act No. 6430, changing the official name of 
the Province of Davao del Norte to the Province of Davao. "^^t^ 

^ 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF DAVAO 

The Province of Davao was created under R.A. 4867 on May 8, 1967. 
Meaning of the Official Seal of Davao 

Star — represents the North Davao be- Coconut, Lumber — three major crops of Davao. 

ing in the northern portion, and Com 

Nineteen Rays of — represents the nineteen (19) mu- Vinta — sailboat Vinta is symbolic of the 

The Star nicipalities of the province. Mindanao Region. 



1 



289 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF DAVAO ORIENTAL 



Davao Oriental lies on the southeastern section of Min- 
danao. Its boundaries are the Pacific Ocean on the east, Agusan 
del Sur and Surigao del Sur on the north, Davao del Norte on 
the west, and the Davao Gulf and the Celebes Sea on the south. 

Davao Oriental consists of the Municipalities of Banayba- 
nay, Banganga, Boston, Caraga, Cateel, Governor Generoso, 
Lupon, Manay, Mati, San Isidro and Tarragona; all are situated 
along the coastline. Mati, the capital town, is the seat of the 
provincial government. 

In 1970, the population of the province was 247,995. It has 
an estimated land area of 543,808 hectares. 

Of the ten dialects that the inhabitants speak, Cebuano is 
predominant, although the province is mostly populated by 
Davaoeiios. The Calagones inhabit the southeastern slopes of 
Mount Apo, including the lower portion which extends toward 
the headwaters of Digos River. The Tagacaoles settled on the 
west coast of the gulf, from the coastal plains toward Malaen 
and the Peninsula of San Agustin; the Aetas lived along the 
Libaganon River which empties into the gulf ; and the Samalese 
on the island of Samal and Talikud. The better-known of these 
tribes are the Bagobos and the Mandayas. 

This rich area was originally controlled by the Mindanao 
Sultanate who, as overlord, exacted tributes from its subjects. 
In 1844, the region was ceded to Spain through then Zamboanga 
Governor Figueroa and Brigadier Genei-al Agustin Bocalla. 
After the cession, Jose Oyanguren visited the place and found 
that it was rich in natural resources. Upon his return to Manila, 
Oyanguren convinced Governor Narciso Claveria to send an 
expedition, which left in 1847, with Oyanguren himself as its 
leader. 

Two years later, he organized the region into what is now 
Davao. The place, however, had not been entirely unknown to 
the Spaniards. As early as 1528, Alvaro de Saavedra, on his 



expedition to the East, passed through Davao and stopped for 
a while in the gulf ; Villalobos followed him in 1543. 

From the time Oyanguren founded the province, many 
Christian Filipinos moved into Davao — building new homes, 
cultivating the fertile plains, and harnessing its resources to 
meet their needs. Later, as the Christians increased, the tribes 
which inhabited the area slowly retreated uphill; many wei"e 
converted into Christianity when the missionaries came. By 
1918, a little less than half of the inhabitants of Davao were 
already Christians. 

Between 1930 and 1939, many Japanese settled in Davao 
Oriental and developed the agricultural products and scienti- 
fically exploited the fishing erounds. The Visayan settlers also 
saw the promise of the land anu. as a consequence, its population 
further increased. From 1945, Lhe economic growth of Davao 
Oriental was noted with the increase of abaca plantations. 

Logging is another major dollar-earning industry in Mati. 
With 18,760 hectares of commercial forest, Mati, a leading log 
exporter in Southern Mindanao, is considered as one of the 
richest in timber resources in the Davao-Cotabato region. 

The "dulian" or "durian" also abounds in Davao. Its fruits 
are usually used in the manufacture of candy or sweets. 

Davao Oriental is one of the three provinces (the others 
are Davao del Norte and Davao del Sur) created on May 8, 1967 
under Republic Act No. 4867. Prior to the approval of the 
law, the former province of Davao was considered the second 
largest province in the Philippines. 

By virtue of a presidential directive in 1967, Davao Oriental 
became the first province in the Visayas and Mindanao to conduct 
a police in-service training program. 

The principal tourist spots in the province, besides Mt. Apo, 
are the Mayo River and the beautiful beaches of Dahican and 
Briton in Mati. 




DAISY FLOWER 

Provincial Floiver 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF DA VAO ORIENTAL 

The Province of Davao Oriental was created under 
R.A. 4867 on May 8, 1967. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Davao Oriental 



Citadel-Shape of 
Heraldry 

Colors Red, White and 
Blue 

Azure Blue 



Green Background 



Rippling Waves 



Fish at Center 



— reminiscent of the Spanish times. 

- symbolic of the supremacy of the 
Republic. 

-represents the Philippine skies, 
the sphere of liberty and freedom. 

- signifies the fertility of the soil 
of the province. 

■ symbolic of the three great bodies 
of water lacing its shores, the 
Pacific Ocean, Davao Gulf ai^d 
Celebes Sea. 

- tuna fish, symbolic of the rich sea 
resources of the province. 



291 



HISTORY OF THE 



Davao del Sur is one of the three provinces which originally 
comprised the vast Province of Davao. Under Republic Act 
No. 4867, approved on May 8, 1967, Davao was divided into 
Davao del Norte, Davao del Sur and Davao Oriental. Situated 
in the southeastern portion of Mindanao, the new province is 
bounded by Davao del Norte on the north, Cotabato and South 
Cotabato on the west, the Davao Gulf on the east, and the 
Celebes Sea on the south. 

Like its sister provinces, Davao del Sur is traversed by 
mountain ranges, but its land features are generally smooth 
in appearance. Of the mountain ranges in the province, the 
highest and largest is Mount Apo in the western border, separat- 
ing the region from the Cotabato provinces. It is the highest 
mountain in the entire country. Wide valleys are found between 
these mountain ranges. The Davao River and its tributaries, 
which for centuries have deposited silt on the plains, empty into 
the Davao Gulf. 

In 1970, the province had a land area of 6,377.6 square 
kilometers with a total population of 785,398. 

Davao has an ideal climate and its rainfall is abundant. 
Typhoons seldom visit this verdant land where corn, rice, 
coconut, abaca, coffee and other farm products yield bountiful 
harvests. The duHan also abounds in Davao. 

The province is the home of various tribes of the Philip- 
pines, such as the Bagobos, Calagones, Tagacaoles, Mandayas, 
Samalese and Aetas. Some of these tribes have resettled in the 
hinterlands when the Christian settlers establish themselves in 
this province. Because of the rich resources of the land, the 
Tagalogs, Pampangos, Visayans, Ilocanos and Japanese contri- 
buted much to the ever-increasing economy of Davao. 

As early as 1528, Alvaro de Saavedra, on his expedition to 
the East, passed through Davao and stopped for a while in the 
Sarangani Island; Villalobos followed him in 1543. 

By 1830, the Muslims had already established a trading 
post in Sigahoy in Cape San Agustin where the Spaniards 
traded with them. 

In 1847, Datu Bago, ruler of Sigahoy, detained Antonio 
Azaola for ransom and killed him after the Spaniards failed 
to meet their conditions. Equipped with superior arms under 

292 



OF DAVAO DEL SUR 



the command of Jose Oyanguren, the Spaniards stormed and 
smashed Sigahoy, after a bitterly fought encounter. Datu Bago 
abandoned the fort, and its "Lantakas," and only a few men 
were left to surrender. 

Consistent with the policy of conquest, Comandante Oyan- 
guren immediately began building a nucleus of what was to 
become a big city. With 800 people, he built Davao and named 
it "Nueva Vergara." When the surrounding area was conquered, 
the province was called "Nueva Guipuzcoa," a name given after 
Oyanguren's Iberian home province of Guipuzcoa in Spain. 

In 1858, Davao, as it was called later, was made as a 
political comandancia with Bislig. Two years later, in 1860, 
it became a part of the Sixth District created for the island 
of Mindanao. In 1884, Governor Figueroa and Comandante 
Agustin Bucalla got concessions at Tagum from the Sultanate 
of Sulu; thus increasing their commercial relations with the 
Muslims in Davao. 

On June 1, 1903, Act No. 787, created the Moro Province 
which incorporated Davao as one of its districts in 1905. The 
province was later abolished and the Department of Mindanao 
and Sulu, with office in Zamboanga, took over the jurisdiction 
of the region. By virtue of Act No. 2408, dated July 23, 1914, 
a provisional government was established for the territory under 
the Department. Davao was made a special province, with the 
town of Davao as its capital. Under Act No. 2878, in 1920, the 
Department was also abolished and the Bureau of Non Christian 
Tribes gained control of Davao. Finally, in 1922, a civil gx)vern- 
ment was established in the province and the residents were 
granted the right to elect their own officials. 

From 1920 to 1939, the Japanese were granted concessions 
for the agricultural development of the province. Extensive 
coconut and abaca plantations were opened. Thus, before the 
outbreak of World War II, there were many Japanese in Davao. 
In 1941, after bombarding Davao City, the Japanese forces 
landed in Digos. The Imperial Army of Japan easily occupied 
Davao after brief skirmishes at Digos and the few strategic 
coastal areas. 

In 1944 and 1945, the war activities in Davao left the 
countryside in ruins. However, the province slowly recovered 
such that from 1950 to 1969, Davao once more became one of 
the richest provinces in Mindanao 

\ 




Provincial Seal 




Provincial Flag 



Year 1907 
Shield Shape 

Thirteen Stars 

Mountain Peaks 
Moslem House 



PROVINCE OF DAVAO DEL SUR 

The Province of Davao del Sur was created under 
R.A. 4867 on May 8, 1967. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Davao del Sur 



• the year of the province' birth. 

■ represents the region of Mindanao 
where the province is located. 

- represents its thirteen (13) muni- 
cipalities. 

-the triple peak of Mt. Apo. 

- represents the summer capital at 
the foot of the mountain. 



Flat land 
Cattle Head 



Com, Fish Coconut, 
Rice and boat 

Canned Goods 



■ symbol of the wide plains. 

■ signifies that cattle is raised 
among rice, coconut, com and 
fishing communities of the 
province. 

-symbols of the main sources of 
livelihood of the province. 

-represents the prospects of can- 
ning industry in Davao del Sur. 



293 



fflSTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO 



Maguindanao is bounded on the north by Lanao del Sur, on 
the east by North Cotabato, on the south by Sultan Kudarat, 
and on the west by the Illana Bay. 

The name "Maguindanao" formerly referred to the old 
Cotabato province which occupied the entire southwestern 
portion of Mindanao. Islam was introduced in the area by Sharif 
Mohammed Kabungsuwan at the end of the 15th century. 

In 1596, the Spanish forces led by Esteban Rodriguez de 
Figueroa and Pedro de Almonte attacked the Muslims of Min- 
danao. The attempt of the Spaniards to subdue them aroused 
the ire of the Maguindanaos. This resulted in the occasional 
raids of towns and Spanish mission sites in Luzon and the 
Visayas. The Maguindanao Muslims were never actually con- 
quered by the Spaniards up to the middle of the 19th century. 

Towards the end of the Spanish rules, Cotabato was one 
of the provinces of the fifth district of Mindanao. 

The Spaniards completely evacuated the area at the out- 
break of the Philippine Revolution against Spain. 

With the establishment of the American colonial govern- 
ment in the Philippines, Cotabato became one of the districts 



of the Moro Province established in 1903. In 1914, Cotabato 
was one of the provinces of the Department of Mindanao and 
Sulu. 

During the second World War, the Mindanao Guerilla Force 
was organized into four divisions under the command of Colonel 
Wendell W. Fertig. 

Since the establishment of the Republic of the Philippines 
in 1946, the life of the Maguindanao Muslims who compose 
the majority of the population of Maguindanao has been char- 
acterized by an intense degree of Islamic consciousness. 

Maguindanao was made a regular province by Presiden- 
tial Decree No. 341 on November 22, 1973, 

As an agricultural province, it has been granted financial 
aid m agricultural development. The educational uplift of the 
inhabitants is being undertaken by the government and some 
Protestant educational institutions, like the Southern Christian 
Service Foundation. And, with the establishment of the Min- 
danao Development Authority, it is hoped that Maguindanao 
will be transformed from a peasant agricultural economy to 
an agro-industrial one. 




Provincial Seal 




EVERLASTING 
Provincial Flower 



k 



.'.'■jfciiii'SiM-'. 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF MAGUINDANAO 



The Province of Maguindanao was created under Presi- 
dential Decree 356 on November 22, 1973. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Maguindanao 



Figure of Man 



Plow Carried by 
the Man 



— the man wearing turban symbol- 
izes royalty. His barefootedness 
signifies his deep-rooted conserv- 
ative nature. 

— signifies that Maguindanao is ba- 
sically an agricultural province 
and that its people depends upon 
agriculture as their main source 
of livehhood. 

Kriss, Spear and Shield — signify bravery and patriotic na- 
ture of the Maguindanaons to 
any foreign intruders that threat- 
en to disturb their peace and 
tranquility. 



Mountain 



mountain at the background with 
flowing spring signifies the natu- 
ral potential of the province for 
development. 



HISTORY OF THE PROVINCE OF SULTAN KUDARAT 



Sultan Kudarat is bounded on the north by North Cotabato 
and Maguindanao, on the east by Davao del Sur, on the south 
by South Cotabato, and on the west by the Moro Gulf. 

Although the province is out of the path 'of strong typhoons 
and destructive floods, the rainfall is evenly distributed through- 
out the year. The main crops are rice, corn, coconut, abaca, 
sugar cane, ramie, coffee* cabbage, potato, cotton, citrus, avocado 
and durian. Different kinds of orchids, especially the waling- 
waling, are found in its forests. 

Kudarat was formerly a part of the old province of Cota- 
bato. During the Spanish period, it was heavily forested and 
undeveloped. Not until the American colonization period did the 
Visayan settlers came in droves to live in the province, especial- 
ly in the town of Isulan and the barrios of Tacurong and Lebak. 

In 1940, ramie, an important Chinese weed (very much 
stronger than cotton and better in quality than silk and flax), 
became an agricultural product of Kudarat, especially in Ta- 
curong. It was then in great demand. However, the second 
World War brought an end to the economic boom of the 
province. 

During the Japahese occupation, the guerrilla forces com- 
manded by Salipada Pendatun, under Wendell W. Fertig of the 
117th Infantry, 10th Military District, United States Forces in 



the Philippines (USAFIP), also operated in the province. 

Some of the municipalities of the province earlier created 
were Lebak (formerly of Kiamba, South Cotabato), by virtue 
of Executive Order No. 195, dated December 31, 1948; Tacu- 
rong (a barrio of Buluan), under E. O. No. 462, dated August 
3, 1951; Columbio (from Buluan, Maguindanao), through E.G. 
No. 439, dated August 6, 1961; Kalamansing (from pehak and 
Palimbang), by E.G. No. 459 on December 29, 1961; Lutayan 
(from Buluan, Maguindanao), by virtue of Republic Act No. 
4868, passed on May 8, 1967; and Bagumbayan (from Isulan) 
under R.A. No. 5960, re-created on June 21, 1969. 

After the creation of South Cotabato from the old prov- 
ince of Cotabato, the many conflicting political, social and 
economic interests had still limited the development and pro- 
gress of the old province. Hence, the need to divide Cotabato 
for effective administration and development. 

By virtue of Presidential Decree No. 341, dated Novem- 
ber 22, 1973, the remaining territory of Cotabato was divided 
into three provinces— North Cotabato, Maguindanao and Sultan 
Kudarat. 

Sultan Kudarat, named after the great ruler of Mindanao 
and Sulu in the 17th century, is composed of 11 municipalities 
with Isulan as the capital. 



Provincial Seal 



Provincial Flag 



PROVINCE OF SULTAN KUDARAT 




WALING-WALING 
Provincial Flower 



The Province of Sultan Kudarat was created under 
Presidential Decree 341 on November 22, 1973. 

Meaning of the Official Seal of Sultan Kudarat 

HandcUisp — portrays the unity of the Muslims 

and Christians as they work hand- 
in-hand for the progress and de- 
velopment of the province. 

Palm Tree — the African palm oil tree, leading 

product of the province and a pro- 
mising dollar-earner of the coun- 
try. 

Sorghum Plants — another major product of Sultap 

Kudarat. 



297 



THE PHILIPPINE NATIONAL FLAG 



Provision in the New Constitution 

Article V, Section: "It should be 
the duty of the citizen to be loyal 
to the Republic and honor the Phil- 
ippine Flag, to defend the State and 
contribute to its development and 
welfare, to uphold the Constitution 
and obey the laws, and to co- 
operate with the duly constituted 
authorities in the attainment and 
preservation of a just and orderly 
society." 



Reverence for the Flag 

The flag should be displayed in all 
public office buildings, official residences, 
public squares and institution of learning 
every day of the year. 

It should be raised at sunrise and low- 
ered at sundown. 

Important Rules 

• When flown from a flagpole, the flag 
should have its blue stripe on top in time 
of peace and the red on top in time of 
war. 

When not ffown from a flagpole or 
staff, the flag should be displayed either 
vertically or horizontally. 

• When displayed vertically, the 
triangle should be on top. The blue field 



should be to the right (left of the ob- 
server) in time of peace, and the red field 
to the right (left of the observer) in time 
of war. 

• When displayed horizontally, the 
blue stripe should be on top and the 
triangle at the left of the observer. In 
time of war, the red stripe should be on 
top. 

• When the flag is flown half-mast to 
symbolize mpurning, it must be first 
raised to full mast, allowing it to fly there 
for a moment before bringing it down to 
half-mast. To lower the flag at sunset or 
at any other time when ordered, it must 
again be raised to full mast before it is 
brought down. 

Flag Ceremonies 

• All members of the Armed Forces 
and those belonging to semi-military and 
police organizations in uniform should 
adopt the military salute provided in their 
regulations. 

• Civilians if outdoors should stand at 
attention, and if wearing hats should un- 
cover and held the hats over their hearts. 
Complete silence should be observed and 
no person should be allowed to walk 
while the ceremony is going on. 

• The flag should be displayed only 
from sunrise to sunset, or at such times as 
may be designated by the proper author- 



ities. It should be displayed on national 
holidays and on historical and special 
occasions. 

• When the national flag is borne in a 
parade with those of foreign nations, it 
should always be in front of the center of 
the line of the other flags. 

When the flag is displayed on a small 
staff as in a parade, mourning is indicated 
by attaching two small streamers of black 
crepe to the spearhead, allowing the 
streamers to fall naturally. Crepe stream- 
ers may thus be used by order of the Pres- 
ident of the Philippines. 

• When a number of flags are grouped 
and displayed from staffs, the Philippine 
flag should be in the center at the highest 
point. 

• When used to cover a casket, the 
triangle should be over the head and the 
blue stripe over the right side of the 
body. The flag should not touch the 
ground. The casket should be carried foot 
first. 

When flown with flags or pennants of 
organizations on the same hallyard 
(rope), the Philippine flag should always 
be at the peak. 

• When mounted on a platform, the 
flag should be placed on the presiding 
officer's right and a bit in front, as he 
faces the congregation. Other flags should 
be on his left. 

• When displayed with another flag 
against a wall from crossed staffs, the 



Philippine flag should be on its own right, 
and its staff should be in front of the 
staff of the other flag. Two Philippine 
flags should never be thus displayed. 

• When used on a speaker's plaftform 
without the staff, it should be displayed 
horizontally and placed above and behind 
the speaker. It should never be used to 
cover the speaker's desk or to drape over 
the front of the platform. 

• The flag should be flovyn from a 
staff when displayed on a float 

• The flag should not be embroidered 
on clothes, or on any piece of cloth. It 
should not be used as a part of a costume. 

• The flag should not be used as un- 
veiling material in unveiling ceremonies. 

• The flag should not be displayed in 
cockpits, dance halls and centers of vice. 

• Discard all old and tattered flags. 
Worn-out flags should be destroyed pri- 
vately, preferably by burning. 

• When displayed over the middle of a 
street, as between buildings, the flag 
should be suspended vertically with the 
blue stripe to the north in an east-and 
west street, or the east in a north-and- 
south street. 

• The flag should not be used for 
decorations. Use buntings. In using the 
colors of the flags, the blue color in the 
bunting should be at the top. The correct 
order of the colors is blue-whijrred. 



298 



EDITORIAL BOARD 



Consultants: 

Prof. Esteban C. de Ocampo 

Chairman, National Historical Institute 

Dr. Galo B. Ocampo 

Technical Adviser on Heraldry, Office of the Preisident 

Mr. Gaudioso C. Sosmena, Jr. 

Director, Bureau of Local Government 

Mrs. Flordeliza K. Militante 

Executive Director, National Historical Institute 

Editors: 

Carmencita R. Velasco 

National Media Production Center 

Rosauro G. Untivero 

National Historical Institute 

Artist: 

Lideo A. Mariano 
Chief Artist 

Roberto Dumlateza 

Bureau of Local Government 

Staff: 

Judith R. Ipac 

Geminiano B. Encarnacjon 

Milagros I. Molon 

Dominador R. Marquez 

Bureau of Local Government 



Antonio T. Conmigo 

National Historical Institute 



EDITORIAL STAFF 

National Historical Institute 



Writers and Researchers 
Belen Bautista 



MANUSCRIPTS 



Genaro Dahiroc 



Araceli Iturralde 



Eulogio Leaiio 



-Provinces of Davao del Norte, Davao 
del Stir, Davao Oriental, Eastern Sa- 
mar, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos Stir, Lanao del 
Norte, Lanao del Sur, Leyte, Northern 
Samar, Palawan, Western Samar, South 
Cotabato, Soiithem Leyte and Zam- 
boanga del Norte 
-Subprovhice of Aurora 



■ Provinces of Ifugao, 
Zambnles 



Quezon and 



— Cities of Oroquieta, Ozamis, Pagadian, 
Palayan, Pasay, Puerto Princesa, 
Quezon, Roxas, San Carlos (Negros 
Occidental) and San Carlos (Pangasi- 
nan) 

— Provinces of Basilan, Isabela, Laguna, 
Nueva Ecija and Niieva Vizcaya 

— Cities of Angeles, Bago, Bais, Basilan, 
Buttian, Cabanatuan, Cagayan de Oro 
and Manila 



Zenaida Tan 



Emelita Verano 



— Provinces of Mountain Province and Oc- 
cidental Mindoro 

— Cities of San Jose, San Pablo, Silay, Su- 
rigao, Tacloban, Tagaytay, Tagbilaran, 
Tangub, Toledo, Trece Martires and Zam- 
boanga 

— MalacaHang Palace 

— Cities of Bacolod, Baguio, Cadiz, Cnl- 

bayog, Caloocan, Cebu, and Danao 
— Subprovince of Biliran 



300 



Writers and Researchers MANUSCRIPTS 



Lucinda Mercado 



Emiterio Moreno 



Leandro Perez 



Myrna Plagata 



Alicia Sison 



— Provinces of Marinduque, Masbate, Mi- 
satnis Oriental and Oriental Mindoro 

— Cities of Cotabato, Dapitan, Davao, Di- 
polog, Dumaguete, General Santos, Gi- 
ngoog, Iligan, Iloilo, Iriga and La Car- 
lota 

— Baro and Saya 

— Provinces of Camiguin, Iloilo, La Union, 
Misamis Occidental, Negros Occidental, 
Negros Oriental, Pampanga, Romblon, 
Siquijor, Sulu, Surigao del Norte, Suri- 
gao del Sur, Tarlac, Tawi-Tawi and Zam- 
boanga del Sur 

— Cities of Batangas, Canlaon and Cavite 

— Subprovince of Guimaras 

— Provinces of Bukidnon, Biilacan, Caga- 
yan, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, 
Capiz, Catanduanes, Cavite, Cebu, North 
Cotabato, Rizal and Sultan Kitdarat 

— Barong Pilipino 

— Province of Quirino 

— Cities of Laoag, Lapu-Lapu, Legazpi, Li- 
pa, Lucena, Ma7idaue, Marawi, Naga, 
Olongapo and Onnoc 

— Provinces of Abra, Agusan del Norte, 
Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Albay, Antique, 
Bataan, Batanes, Batangas, Benquet, 
Bohol, Kalinga-Apayao, Maguindanao 
and Pangasinan 

— City of Dagupan 

— Philippines 



