JMR 




"Tsinelas Leadership: the pragmatic and more 
demonstrative version of servant leadership that 
Sec. Jesse always talked about." 



— SEC. RENE ALMENDRAS 



ISBN 978-971-95551-0-0 



All rights reserved. 

No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means 
without the written permission of the publisher. 

Published exclusively by the 
Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning Office 
Office of the President of the Philippines 
3/F New Executive Building, 
Malacanan Palace, San Miguel, Manila 
Tel.: 736-0719, 736-0718 
Fax no.: 736-6167 

Website: http://www.pcdspo.gov.ph 

Book design by Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning Office 

First Edition 

Published in the Philippines, 2012 



BENIGNO S.AQUINO III 

President of the Philippines 



COMMITTEE FORTHE FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL 
OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. ROBREDO 

MEMBERS: 

PAQUITON.OCHOAJR. 

Executive Secretary 

JULIA R.ABAD 

Secretary of the Presidential Management Staff 

RAMON A. CARANDANG 

Secretary of Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning 

EDWIN LACIERDA 

Presidential Spokesperson 



MANUEL L.QUEZON III 

Undersecretary of Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning 

GEN JESSIE DELLOSA 

Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces of the Philippines 

PDG NICANOR A BARTOLOME 

Director General of the Philippine National Police 

AMB. MIGUEL PEREZ-RUBIO 

Chief of Presidential Protocol 

SUSAN D. REYES 

Social Secretary 

ROCHELLE R.AHORRO 

Appointments Secretary 

BGEN RAMON MATEO DIZON 

Commander of the Presidential Security Group 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



SECRETARY RAMON A. CARANDANG 
Editor in Chief 

UNDERSECRETARY MANUEL L. QUEZON III 
ASSISTANT SECRETARY MA. CARMEN G. MISLANG 
Associate Editors 

MIKEMENDOZA 

Art Director 

JONATHAN CUEVAS 
Production Manager 

MARAMENDOZA 

Copyeditor 

GIAN PAOLO LAO 
SASHA MARTINEZ 
Writers 

JOI MARIE ANGELICA INDIAS 
ALEXIS TORIO 
CAMILLE DEL ROSARIO 
Graphic Designers 

JUSTIN GATUSLAO 
YSA LLUISMA 
ANGELICA BELLA MISA 

Researchers 



PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT AND STRATEGIC PLANNING OFFICE 

MALACANANG PHOTO BUREAU 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 
RUDY LI WAN AG 
Photography 



JESSE M.ROBREDO 

1958-2012 



INTRODUCTION 



THIS book honors a dedicated public servant, in the hope that his life and career will serve 
as an inspiration and challenge to the Jesse M. Robredos of the future. Just as the death of 
Ninoy Aquino inspired Jesse to enter public life, we hope that Jesse's story, and the manner 
in which the nation came together to pay tribute to him, will inspire future generations to 
pursue what has memorably come to be known as tsinelas leadership. 

The Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo 
presents this book to the Filipino people, in fulfillment of President Benigno S. Aquino Ill's 
instructions— that the Republic should render the highest and most meaningful honors to 
one of its most faithful sons. 

Jesse Manalastas Robredo. Mabuting ama. Mapagmahal na asawa. Mapagkalingang anak. 
Tapat na kaibigan. Lingkod bayan. Nagueno. Bicolano. High sa lahat, Pilipino. 



Ramon A. Carandang 

Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning Office 



"Our country is in dire need of servant leaders 
whose sense of compassion and service is truly 
awakened. We cannot bring the Philippines to 
lasting greatness without leaders of this caliber 
working in government." 



— SEC. JESSE M. ROBREDO 






\ 



y 






For the 2000 Ramon Magsaysay Award for Good Governance 
conferred upon Jesse M. Robredo, Lorna Kalaw Tirol wrote a 
biography detailing Jesses family life, the awakening of his desire 
to serve the country, and the reforms he instituted for Naga City. 

THE 2000 RAMON 
MAGSAYSAY AWARDEE FOR 
GOOD GOVERNANCE 

His baptismal name came from the Bible, and his family name was borrowed from the 
priest who had baptized his grandfather. Jesse M. Robredo is a second-generation Chinese 
Filipino. Born in Naga City on May 27, 1958, he is the third of five children, two sons and three 
daughters, of Jose Chan Robredo, Sr. and Marcelina Manalastas. 

Robredo's paternal grandfather was a full-blooded Chinese named Lim Pay Co who 
arrived in the Philippines at the turn of the twentieth century. Among Chinese immigrants 
who became Christians, it was the custom to adopt the name of their godparents at baptism. 
Lim Pay Co instead chose the name of the priest who baptized him; thus, Juan Lim Robredo. 
Jesse's father acquired the middle name Chan from his mother; it was her maiden surname. 

Marcelina Manalastas, unlike her husband, was not originally from Naga. She was from 
the fishing town of Navotas in the province of Rizal. She moved to Naga in the early 1950s to 
work in a grocery store owned by her relatives. She completed only an elementary education 
and learned to read English-language newspapers from her husband, who had finished high 
school. Jose was not the typical businessman who was concerned only with numbers and 
profits: he spoke English well, and loved books and literature. He once had an article published 
in the Philippines Free Press, the most respected national weekly magazine at the time. 



24 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Jose spoke the Fukien dialect, but only to the other Chinese in the community. His children 
understood a little Fukien, but spoke Tagalog, their mother's language, at home. Unlike many 
other Chinese Filipinos, Jose preferred to send his children to Filipino Catholic schools rather 
than to Chinese schools because he wanted them to be integrated into the Filipino community. 

In the early years of their marriage, Jose Robredo owned a timber concession. His company, 
Timber Wealth, supplied lumber to a number of hardware and lumber stores in Naga. Jesse 
says timber concessionaires had to contend with foresters and forest guards whose rules "were 
designed in such a way that they were difficult to comply with." Rather than have to "wheel 
and deal" in order to keep his business, Robredo's father decided to chose up shop. Marcelina, 
on the other hand, was an enterprising woman who bought and sold fish and other seafood in 
partnership with her sister Felisa, whose base was the sprawling Divisoria market in Manila. 

In 1962, Marcelina convinced Jose to go into the trawling business so that she would no 
longer have to deal with trawl operators. Jose agreed. Still fascinated with the word wealth, 
he christened his new enterprise Fishing Wealth. 

As a result of retinitis pigmentosa (night blindness), however, Jose was gradually going 
blind. At thirty-nine, he completely lost his eyesight. Jesse was only four years old at the time 
but he remembers that what might have been a tragedy became, instead, a source of motivation 
for his father and an inspiration to the rest of his family. Years later, Jesse's older brother also 
fell victim to the disease. 

There being no marine engineers or architects at the time, Jose set about designing his 
own trawlers. His children and nephews and nieces served as his eyes. He asked them to read 
aloud from instruction manuals while he visualized the layout of fishing trawler. He himself 
oversaw the business. He even repaired his boat engines himself. He also taught himself to 
move around unaided, and to help out in the kitchen and with the laundry when necessary. 

The enterprise proved true to its name. With their earnings, the Robredos sent all their 
children to private schools in Naga. But in the 1970s, trawl fishing faced new regulations. 
For example, trawl fishing was allowed only at depths of seven fathoms; fishermen needed 



15 



bigger boats if they were to operate profitably and at the same time comply with the rules. The 
cheaper boats available were second-hand vessels from Japan. Jose could not afford to acquire 
the bigger boats, and so decided it was time to close shop again. He was a peaceable man who 
did not wish to break the law, and a sensible entrepreneur who would not risk pouring all 
his earnings and even his savings into the business. Besides, he told his family, they already 
had as much as their modest lifestyle required and could not ask for more. They had become 
moderately prosperous and could afford to keep two, sometimes three, househelp and a driver 
as well. Marcelina, meanwhile, went into rice and copra trading. (Jose's relatives owned a 
copra-oil mill near Naga.) 

Home to the Robredos was the old house of Jose's parents in the family compound, where 
his sister also had her own place. The compound was situated near the commercial district 
as well as a slum area. As a boy, Robredo became streetwise and, having made friends with 
children from both sides of the tracks, got to know how both the relatively well-to-do and 
the very poor lived. Despite his blindness, Jose was the family disciplinarian but his children 
always understood why he was very strict with them. Out of respect for his father, Robredo 
neither smoked nor drank, and never tried. Jose also demanded much from his children in 
terms of academic performance. He valued education and promoted a competitive spirit 
among the children. Being number two in class wasn't good enough for him; his children 
had to be number one. "There is no place for second honor, only first honor," Jesse Robredo 
remembered him saying. 

From both his parents Robredo learned the virtues of caring for others and frugality and 
the value of a modest lifestyle. From his father in particular he learned that protecting the 
integrity and honor of one's family is of highest importance, and the children were expected 
to contribute their share in doing that. Marcelina, for her part, was a devout Catholic who 
instilled the precepts of her faith in her children. She took them to Mass every Sunday, and 
although Jose went along only on Christmas Day, he, too, says Robredo, was a religious man 
who prayed every day and encouraged his children to do the same. 

Robredo began his formal education at Naga Parochial School, a private Catholic school 
with fewer than one thousand boys located behind the cathedral and run by the archdiocese. 



2fi JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



The language of instruction was English, and Robredo recalls that although he and his siblings 
did their homework on their own, they would ask their father to help them with their English 
compositions. 

If there was one lesson elementary school taught Robredo, it was that "sometimes your 
best is not enough." Naga Parochial School had established a record for winning Bicol's annual 
province-wide chess tournament and Jesse's own brother had been among its champion 
competitors. When his turn came to represent his school, however, Jesse garnered only second 
place. (He was nevertheless his school chess champion in both elementary and high school.) 

The grade school teacher Robredo remembered most was the one who encouraged students 
to outdo themselves. Mrs. Carmen Ojeda taught mathematics and was like a second mother to 
him. She often told him that she hoped he would someday make a name for himself. Years later, 
when he was mulling a run for the mayorship of Naga, Robredo visited her and asked her what 
she thought of his chances. She replied that she wasn't sure, but that she would be glad to help 
him. 

In 1970 Robredo entered high school at Ateneo de Naga. The only Catholic high school for 
boys in the city, it is run by the Society of Jesus and is therefore highly regarded for its emphasis 
on personal discipline and academic excellence. Ateneo was not the small, intimate school that 
Naga Parochial was; it drew students from other provinces and from higher socio-economic 
classes. To the young Robredo, however, Ateneo offered much more; it was training him for the 
future, particularly for a life of civic involvement. "At Ateneo," he says, "I learned to deal with 
people and I learned to deal with the external environment." But it was not until after he had 
left Ateneo that he began to appreciate fully its motto of shaping "men and women for others." 

At Ateneo de Naga Robredo met two Jesuit priests who made a tremendous impression on 
him. One was Fr. Jack Phelan, his father confessor. The other was Fr. James O'Brien, a tall and 
lanky Irish American Jesuit who spent his years in Bicol deepening the people's love for their 
region by making them aware of the richness of its culture. Father O'Brien spoke Bicol fluently, 
and in his talks with Bicolanos he tirelessly encouraged them to "love Bicol, think Bicol, learn 
Bicol." 



17 



Among Ateneo's lay teachers, Robredo remembers English teacher Greg Abonal for having 
taught not only English but, more important, the art of living. How clearly Robredo recalls Mr. 
Abonal's constant reminders: "the process is more important than what you learn"; "grades, 
while important, are not your life"; "faith is important, as is honesty, and exams are a means 
not only to test what you've learned but to test your character as well." 

Robredo entered high school during a period of emerging political turbulence in Philippine 
history. The communist New People's Army was gaining ground against the government of 
President Ferdinand Marcos and drawing sympathizers even among the students at Ateneo 
de Naga. In September 1972, when Robredo was in the middle of high school, Marcos declared 
martial law. Robredo remembers the day the Prefect of Discipline called all the students to an 
assembly and warned them against getting involved in anti-government activities, lest they 
expose the school to the risk of closure. 

Although Robredo himself was never drawn to activism, he was neither ignorant of, nor 
indifferent to, political issues. His father was a sympathizer of the Liberal Party, which at the 
time was the opposition party, and openly expressed a dislike for martial law. Jose Robredo 
had always encouraged his children to speak their minds and, at mealtimes when everyone 
was required to be present, he encouraged lively discussions including politics. 

Like other children of provincial families of moderate means, Robredo was sent to Manila 
for his college education. Filipino parents believe that their children will have better career 
opportunities if they have diplomas from the best-known schools in Manila. Robredo wanted 
to be an engineer. Like his father, he excelled in science and math. He applied and was accepted 
at the state-run University of the Philippines in Los Banos, for its agricultural engineering 
course, but he chose to enter De La Salle University, which was widely acknowledged to have 
the best engineering school. His older brother and sister were already enrolled in Manila 
schools by then. 

Robredo entered La Salle in 1974. He was 16 years old. He lived with his aunt, Juanita Hao 
Chin, his father's sister, and her husband, Vicente, during most of his six years of college. He 
had for a roommate his cousin, Pablito Hao Chin, who graduated a year earlier than he from 



2g JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



the University of the Philippines. Pablito was a voracious reader and deep thinker; he engaged 
Robredo in spirited nightly discussions on everything from politics to management issues. 
Robredo always remembered and valued them. 

It was the intellectual challenge Robredo liked most about La Salle. He also found time for 
sports and played basketball with the engineering school's intramural team. But he shunned 
parties and nights out with his peers, although he allowed himself an occasional movie. He 
preferred to stay home to study or to watch television. 

Robredo's hard work paid off. Six years later, he graduated with two bachelor of science 
degrees, one in mechanical engineering and another in industrial management engineering. 
He had hoped to take over the family business after graduation but his father discouraged 
him since the business was not thriving. Jose suggested instead that he try his luck in Manila. 

He did not have to look far. With two degrees from De La Salle, he immediately received 
job offers from some of the country's biggest companies. From among the offers he decided 
to accept the one from San Miguel Corporation, the blue-chip beer and food conglomerate. It 
was a dream job for aprovinciano (province-bred person). 

Robredo's first assignment at San Miguel was in the Physical Distribution Technical 
Services department of the General Services Division. Having learned the value of hard 
work from his father, he thought nothing of working extra hours; promotions came quickly. 
Within six months he had hurdled two of the three levels in the division and was then sent 
to the finance division for another six months. When his immediate superior was moved to 
Magnolia, the ice cream division of San Miguel, he was invited to come along. He was assigned 
to logistics planning and concurrently functioned as staff assistant to the physical distribution 
director. 

While in that position, twenty-six-year-old Robredo was dispatched to the northern 
town of San Fernando, La Union, to investigate reports of two anomalies at the Magnolia 
Dairy Products Plant there. Relatives of Magnolia employees had won the major prizes in a 
promotional contest and there were also reports of warehouse pilferage. To determine what 



19 



went wrong with the contest, Robredo made an assessment of its rules and procedures and 
analyzed the company's control measures. He traced the theft to tampered documents. To 
eliminate any recurrence, he streamlined the flow of documents and instituted an efficient 
system of controls. At the same time, he upgraded the plant's entire warehousing system by 
improving the use of resources, cutting down on overtime, and improving productivity. 

The move to La Union came at a difficult time for Robredo since he was enrolled in a 
graduate program in business administration at the University of the Philippines in Diliman, 
Quezon City. Once a week, immediately after his night classes, he would take the bus from 
Quezon City to La Union, a tiring five-hour trip. Arriving at midnight, he would sleep for 
about five hours and then report for work. His sacrifices paid off when he finished at the top 
of his class in 1985 and named the Graduate School and Faculty Organization awardee for 
scholarly excellence. 

For almost a year after La Union, Robredo was assigned as area physical distribution head 
for Visayas and Mindanao in the southern Philippines, based in Mandaue, Cebu Province. 
That stint over, he moved back to the warehousing unit of Magnolia in Manila. 

Robredo looks back today on these early years with San Miguel as good preparation for 
being mayor. During this time, San Miguel propagated the slogans "The best resource of this 
company is its people" and "Profit with honor." It emphasized product excellence. Whether in 
sports or in generating profits, being number one was the rule. 

"San Miguel gave me the experience to deal with all types of people. When you are in 
charge of a warehouse, you deal with managers as well as with people who have not had 
much of an education, the laborers and the labor leaders. It was a fairly good exposure," says 
Robredo. Having also learned about human relations from his parents, who taught him that 
"you must give a sense of importance to everybody if you expect them to work well for you," he 
organized a basketball tournament in La Union, as a way of building camaraderie among the 
warehousing employees, and took pains to be present at the wakes of his employees' relatives. 

Political turbulence surfaced again just as Robredo's corporate career was taking off. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



On August 21, 1983 Sen. Benigno Aquino Jr., a charismatic opposition leader whom Marcos 
had jailed for years, was assassinated as he returned to the Philippines from self-exile in 
the United States. Robredo heard the news on his car radio and confirmed it with his cousin 
Pablito upon reaching home. Two days later, Robredo joined thousands of grieving Filipinos 
in a queue outside Aquino's house, for a chance to view his bloodied body and to pay his 
respects. Robredo recalls talking briefly with Aquino's widow, Cory, and telling her he was 
with San Miguel Corporation. (At the time, San Miguel Corporation was led by Mrs. Aquino's 
estranged cousin, Eduardo Cojuangco, a well-known supporter of Marcos.) 

How could this happen in my country, was Robredo's anguished question. On the day of 
Aquino's funeral he was among the huge throng that gathered for Mass at the Sto. Domingo 
Church and joined the march to the cemetery. He remembers that day clearly because in the 
evening he had an examination to take at the University of the Philippines. 

Robredo's intuition told him that Benigno Aquino's assassination would spell the 
beginning of the end for Marcos. He himself, however, was in a delicate situation. He had 
become politicized almost overnight but his company was openly and proudly pro-Marcos. 
Robredo would not be daunted. He even dared to display a yellow ribbon on his car as a sign of 
sympathy for Aquino and of protest against Marcos. 

After the Aquino assassination, the anti-Marcos protest movement penetrated the 
Magnolia dairy products plant where Robredo worked, just as it penetrated many other 
sectors of Philippine society. Robredo and four others formed a chapter of the Society for 
the Professional Advancement of Democracy and Enlightenment (SPADE) at the plant. 
They joined the movement's noise barrages and marches down Ayala Avenue'in Makati, the 
country's premier business district. And after the snap election of 1986, they attended the 
massive rally organized by the followers of presidential candidate Cory Aquino, who believed 
she had been cheated of victory by the dictator Marcos. During the rally, Mrs. Aquino called 
for civil disobedience and a boycott of companies owned by Marcos's friends, including San 
Miguel. 

There was a personal dimension to Robredo's opposition to Marcos. His uncle, Luis 



21 



Villafuerte, the governor of Camarines Sur, had served in the Marcos cabinet but had joined 
the opposition following the Aquino assassination. Villafuerte subsequently invested in a 
weekly magazine, Mr. & Ms., which in September 1983 spawned an underground edition that 
chronicled the growing anti-Marcos protest movement. With Villafuerte on the opposition 
side, his family and relatives now felt they were free to express the political sentiments they 
had previously suppressed. 

Robredo's participation in the protest movement placed an additional burden on what 
little time he had for his MBA program. But he persisted, because he realized that graduate 
studies gave him a background in economics which he had not acquired from his engineering 
courses. Attending night classes, he took seven trimesters to finish the program. 

In February 1986, when the anti-Marcos four-day People Power revolution broke out, 
Robredo was among the hundreds of thousands who camped out on E. de los Santos Avenue 
(EDSA). On the night Marcos fled with his family, Robredo and his cousin Pablito were among 
the first curious Filipinos to arrive in Malacanang, the presidential palace in Manila. They 
found styrofoam boxes with uneaten food, and photographs of the deposed dictator and his 
family. 

The successful People Power revolution and Cory Aquino's assumption of the presidency 
gave Robredo hope that the new government would bring about a new and better political 
order. In March 1986, a month after the revolution, he took a year's leave from San Miguel and 
returned to Naga upon the invitation of his uncle, the governor. Villafuerte wanted his young 
nephew to be the program director of the Bicol River Basin Development Program, which was 
preparing feasibility studies and monitoring and coordinating infrastructure projects in three 
contiguous provinces. It was funded jointly by the United States Agency for International 
Development, the Asian Development Bank, and the European Economic Community (EEC). 

Robredo planned to work briefly in Naga and then return to San Miguel. The company 
had reverted to its original owners, the Soriano family, and Eduardo Cojuangco had joined 
the Marcoses in exile in the United States. Robredo was confident that the company would 
restore a professional working climate based on the merit system. By November, however, he 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



had decided to stay in Naga. Inspired by the success of People Power at EDSA, he wanted to 
heed President Corazon Aquino's call to service. 

His first months in government service were disappointing and they taught him a painful 
lesson about politics. The Bicol River Basin Development Program was directly under the 
office of Vice President Salvador H. Laurel. Laurel wanted to appoint the nephew of Senator 
Edmundo Cea, one of his political allies, to be Robredo's deputy. He summoned Robredo to his 
office in Manila. Robredo tried to explain that the deputy program director's post had been 
filled but that another position was vacant. He returned to Naga believing he had convinced 
Laurel. Two weeks later, however, Robredo was informed that Laurel had appointed the Cea 
nephew as program director, replacing Robredo. 

Refusing to buckle to pressure, even after Mrs. Aquino's executive secretary Joker Arroyo 
took Laurel's side, Robredo decided he would sue, not for himself (because he had his San 
Miguel job waiting for him), but to prove that "this was a different time and a different world." 
The court rebuffed Laurel and Robredo remained in office a full year. 

It was through his job at the Bicol River Basin Development Program that Robredo met 
the woman who would become his wife. Maria Leonor "Leni" Gerona was also from Naga and 
had returned there in search of a job after graduating from the University of the Philippines 
College of Economics. Her father was a judge and a friend of the Villafuertes. She applied for 
work at the Program and was interviewed by Robredo himself. She struck him as a very bright 
young woman who did not need a politician's recommendation to land a job. That is not the 
way we run this office, Robredo assured her. After she passed the examination for applicants 
and the interview, he hired her to join his staff. 

Unknown to Robredo, the governor had bigger plans for him. Villafuerte's father, Mariano, 
had been a congressman and governor of Camarines Sur, and his older brother, Mariano 
Jr., was vice mayor of Naga. Luis himself started to rise as his province's political kingpin 
after Marcos declared martial law. He had earlier drawn Marcos's attention as a brilliant 
investment-bank lawyer. So impressed was Marcos with Villafuerte that he was invited to be 
a candidate of the administration party, Kilusang Bagong Lipunan, for the Interim Batasang 



23 



Pambansa (Interim National Assembly) in 1978. He won, and even before warming his seat in 
the Assembly, was appointed minister of trade in 1979. 

Just before the elections for the regular Batasang Pambansa in 1984, however, Villafuerte 
suddenly defected to the opposition party, the United Nationalist Democratic Organization. 
He won a seat in the Batasang Pambansa and, with the fall of Marcos and the ascension of 
Aquino, found himself on the right side of power. As a leader of the new ruling party, he was 
appointed chair of the Presidential Commission on Government Reorganization and officer- 
in-charge/governor of Camarines Sur. 

At this time, two groups were jockeying for political power in Camarines Sur. Villafuerte's 
supremacy was threatened by Raul Roco, who had defeated Villafuerte's candidate in the 1987 
congressional elections. Roco had gained a reputation in the province as a local boy who made 
good, having reaped success first as a national student leader and legal scholar, then as a young 
delegate to the Constitutional Convention of 1971, and then as a corporate lawyer in Manila. 
Now he was back home testing the political arena and finding it to his liking. In the local 
elections the following year, Roco fielded his brother, Ramon, for the mayoral post in Naga. 
Villafuerte, needing a winnable candidate to challenge Ramon Roco, convinced Robredo to 
run. The incumbent mayor stepped aside and pledged his support to Robredo. 

Robredo was not interested in running at first. But after having campaigned extensively in 
Naga when its former vice mayor, Virginia Felipe Perez, ran for Congress against Raul Roco, 
he realized that he could do something for his city. He was very naive at the time, he says. "I 
didn't know what politics was all about." 

To campaign, Robredo mobilized his supporters and went from house to house around 
the city not just once but three times. Like all politicians, he became fair game for anyone 
who wanted money for anything from tuition to basketball to medicine. His relatives proved 
more than generous with their contributions to his campaign fund. One of his godfathers 
at marriage, who owned the biggest athletic goods store in Naga, donated basketballs and 
uniforms. 

Early in the campaign, Robredo told himself that if he won he would change the rules for 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



running for public office. Philippine elections have become notorious for awarding victory 
to candidates loaded with "guns, goons and gold," even at the local level. Robredo himself 
estimates that he must have spent from PI. 5 million to P2 million on his campaign. But to his 
credit he combined the traditional politician's tactics with a sound development plan for Naga. 
He assured the people that, if they would give him a chance, he could get foreign funding for 
his projects. 

There were six candidates for mayor. Robredo garnered 24 percent of the votes, leading 
his closest rival, Ramon Roco, by only 947 votes. Winning along with him were his partner for 
vice mayor and three of the councilors on his ticket. The seven other councilors were from the 
opposition. Villafuerte himself was elected governor of Camarines Sur. 

Robredo was tweny-nine when he took over City Hall in 1988. The challenges he faced were 
formidable, not least among them a tradition of old politics that eschewed change and sought 
to retain the status quo. Nor did he need reminding that he was the minority mayor of a third- 
class town with a one-million-peso budget deficit. There were other serious problems: the 
central business district was overcrowded and the volume of traffic had become unmanageable; 
the local economy was sluggish and employment scarce; basic services, particularly in health 
and education, had deteriorated; theaters and nightclubs offering smut films and lewd shows 
were prospering; illegal gambling was rampant, encouraged by "untouchable" syndicates; and 
the number of homeless urban poor had become alarming. 

At the time, Naga, with a land area of 77.4 square kilometers and a population of 130,000, 
ranked forty-fifth among sixty Filipino cities in terms of size and thirty-ninth in terms of 
population. It had a proud history as a royal city named Ciudad de Nueva Caceres during the 
Philippines' three centuries of Spanish colonization. But it had long ceased to be the premier 
city and religious, educational, commercial, and political center of the Bicol region. Instead, it 
had deteriorated into a third-class rural city with no money in its coffers. 

The new mayor was aware that there were many among his constituents who thought him 
too young and too raw for the job and that his only credential was his being the governor's 
nephew. "To a certain extent," he says on hindsight, "my ignorance of what government is all 



25 



about helped. You don't have those conventions and traditions to comply with." 

Right from the start, Robredo resolved to make Naga the most outstanding city in Southern 
Luzon, the most progressive, and the best governed. Bolstered by his strong management 
background, he formulated a mission and a vision for his city. The mission: "Through a well- 
defined development plan and a corps of honest and dedicated public servants working hand 
in hand with the people, we shall pursue economic growth with equity." The vision: "A city 
with an economy considered as the most progressive in Southern Luzon, the impact of which 
will be felt even by the lowliest Naguenos now sufficiently empowered to chart their own 
future." 

Robredo launched his term with a challenge to his fellow Naguenos that was at once a 
slogan and a question: "Progress for Naga, if not now, when?" Along with that he presented 
them with a Medium-Term Development Plan. He was determined to be a mayor who was a 
manager rather than a politician. 

At City Hall itself, employee morale was low; the work force of 400 had become passive 
and lethargic. Banking on a strong political will, Robredo introduced the first of a number 
of measures to build a culture of excellence in the local bureaucracy and to inspire public 
confidence in his administration. He would reorganize City Hall on the basis of employee 
aptitude and competence, to be determined by a skills test and rewarded with a salary 
adjustment and a transparent, merit-based system of hiring and promotion. 

On his first week on the job, Mayor Robredo called all City Hall employees to a meeting 
and told them that henceforth he wanted them to report for work on time; just one instance 
of tardiness would mean dismissal from office, he warned them. He then asked them two 
questions: Did they want to stay in their jobs? If they did, could they promise him that they 
would succeed in their jobs? If they answered yes to both questions, they were to take an 
examination that would determine their capabilities and aptitudes and match their skills with 
appropriate positions, as well as reveal something of their personality and general disposition 
and level of creativity. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



The Sangguniang Panlunsod (City Council) promptly filed a resolution questioning the 
constitutionality of such a test. Robredo was unfazed. If they did not want to take the test, 
or if they believed it was unconstitutional, he said, that was fine with him. But they could 
not expect any promotion. At the same time, in a gesture that showed his keen sensitivity 
to people's reaction to any drastic change, he assured the employees that the results of the 
examination would not jeopardize their jobs. 

Having established a merit system in City Hall, he proceeded to implement a two-pronged 
Productivity Improvement Program or PIP, targeting employee empowerment (people 
change) and improvements in systems and procedures (systems change) to improve the quality 
and quantity of the city's delivery of services. The objective of the PIP was to transform local 
government employees into "partners in development" who would be driven not by rules and 
regulations but by a vision and a mission. 

The PIP worked to meet the following goals: to set the response time in the delivery of 
city services to its barest minimum; to achieve peak productivity levels in all departments 
and offices; to encourage employees themselves to submit ideas for improving productivity; to 
upgrade the skills and competence of employees through regular seminars, workshops, and 
other training activities; to reduce costs; and to set up a feedback mechanism for the public. 

To prepare employees for the PIP, Robredo either hired local consultants or accepted the 
services of volunteers. The human resources unit of City Hall also conducted orientation and 
reorientation workshops to immerse individuals in the culture of City Hall and to acquaint 
them with its systems and procedures. Additional training programs were designed to 
enhance employees' computer skills and to teach them quality and customer orientation and 
other directly applicable skills. 

Drawing once more on his experience in the private sector, Robredo adapted techniques 
in human resource management to measure and reward his employees' performance. He 
instituted a "Contract of Deliverables" that specified the service an individual sought from 
City Hall, the person responsible for it, and the response time. It is not surprising that since 
1990, when the Civil Service Commission in Manila launched a Dangal ng Bayan award for 



27 



outstanding public service, city employees of Naga have invariably been among the honorees. 

To eliminate the old system of political patronage, Robredo issued an executive order 
reconstituting the membership of the Personnel Selection Board. He followed this up with 
other executive orders creating administrative units that would expand and strengthen 
service delivery. Among the units were an anti-vice squad, a senior citizens league, a day care 
board, task forces for water and cleanliness, and an Urban Poor Affairs Office. In 1990 the 
Merit Promotion Plan and the System of Ranking Positions was amended. 

Robredo depoliticized the system of appointments by vesting the Merit and Promotions 
Board with almost full authority over promotions and permanent appointments. Previously, 
the Board had been required to submit to the mayor's office three nominees for a position. 
Robredo simply asked the Board to rank the nominees and the first-ranking individual was 
appointed. 

Among Robredo's first acts when he assumed office was to determine how much money the 
city government had. The city treasurer told him that the government had incurred a budgetary 
deficit of one million pesos from the previous year. In conversations with some City Hall employees, 
Robredo learned how poorly they were being compensated. For example, a guard at the public 
market was earning P18 a day, with no allowance. Where would he begin, Robredo asked himself. 

With the help of an assistant whom he had brought over from the Bicol River Basin Development 
Project, he realized that Naga's niche was as a center for trade and education and that he needed an 
accurate economic profile of the city. 

Next, he told his tax collector that it was time to tell Naga's businessmen to pay their taxes 
conscientiously and honestly. It was an unpopular move, but the mayor was adamant. He 
reminded his people that the real beneficiaries of an improved collection of taxes would be the city 
employees. He recalls, "We were not that tough, but we were firm enough to make people believe 
that we meant what we said." 

Tax collection did improve, and in his first year in office Robredo was able to implement a 10 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



percent across-the-board salary increase for City Hall employees and a 200 percent raise in their 
cost-of-living allowance. The following year, their salaries were fully standardized. 

Maximizing revenues was an integral part of the PIP. A homegrown computerization program 
helped to improve collection dramatically. The three components of the program - a management 
information system, a geographic information system, and a minimum basic needs database - 
integrated revenue generation and social development and thus enabled the city to improve its 
delivery of services to the populace. Over a ten-year period, the city registered an astounding 1,020 
percent increase in total income and a 573 percent rise in locally generated revenues. Given these 
remarkable figures, the national Department of Finance was only too happy to restore Naga to 
first-class city status. 

True to a promise he made during the campaign, Robredo closed down the city's gambling 
joints and nightclubs, which were actually fronts for drug dens. These, he said, were the symbols 
of what government should not be. It was not an easy task to close the gambling places. The usual 
practice in the appointment of the chief of police was for the mayor to choose from among three 
nominees submitted by the provincial command of the Philippine National Police. Villafuerte 
wanted the new mayor to appoint a man who had been his classmate. Robredo refused, knowing 
that the man did not share his position on gambling. Villafuerte then got the support of the Office 
of the President in Manila, and his protege was appointed. Refusing to buckle, Robredo went to the 
archbishop of Caceres, Monsignor Leonardo Z. Legazpi, who had earlier written him to express 
pleasure over the mayor's refusl to accept money from gambling. The archbishop in turn appealed 
to President Aquino for help and two weeks later the chief of police was unseated. 

Villafuerte's disagreement with Robredo's tough stance against jueteng, an illegal numbers 
game popular among provincial Filipinos, spelled the beginning of a falling out between them. 
Robredo had proven that he was his own man and that he meant to stay that way. But the same 
willfulness boosted his stock among his constituents who realized he really meant business. 

Robredo waged his crusade against drugs (marijuana and, later, shabu), gambling and other 
forms of vice with only four policemen, who comprised his anti-vice squad. They were members 
of the regular police force but were assigned to be his bodyguards during the campaign. Now they 



29 



were the mayor's police force based in City Hall, as distinguished from the city's regular 110-person 
contingent. When a drug dealer was arrested, for example, Robredo made it a point to call in the 
media. The resultant publicity served two purposes: first, to inform the people that something was 
being done against vice lords; and second, to show the regular police force what they should be 
doing. 

While his administration did not completely eliminate drugs, it did stop jueteng - although, 
with active support from the police, this popular vice did occasionally resurface. Robredo was 
aware of this, and confronted the regional commander at the office of Interior Secretary Rafael 
Alunan. Once Robredo had made his position clear, the jueteng joints disappeared from Naga but 
moved to its fringes. 

Another of Robredo's early priorities was relieving the traffic jams that had become a major 
headache in Naga. His solution was to ask the Sanggunian Panlunsod to pass an ordinance that 
would move the bus and jeepney terminals outside the business district. The Sanggunian did so, 
and when the ordinance was about to be implemented, the city government found itself facing 
eighteen legal cases, mainly from the terminal operators but also from some of the new mayor's 
supporters. The chief of police, the governor's former classmate, refused to enforce the ordinance. 
The complainants won a 15-day restraining order. Summoned to appear in court, Robredo was 
able to convince the judge that the ordinance was legal. It was the City Hall police who had to 
implement the ordinance. (Among those who were adversely affected were Robredo's own siblings, 
who owned a grocery store near the terminal.) 

All the court cases were eventually dismissed. Robredo looks back on that traffic ordinance as 
the most important decision he ever made as mayor. It was also a creative response to a nagging 
problem. In time, Naguenos realized its benefits to them: it expanded the commercial area, brought 
about new development in the city, and made people realize that, with political will, anything is 
possible. 

Along with relocating the bus and jeepney terminals, the city administration began to develop 
a new commercial and business district in a neglected area along the railroad tracks. The project 
was made possible by private capital and cost the city government virtually nothing. Satellite 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



markets soon rose in key urban districts to complement the public market. 

Robredo took pains to woo big business, includingfood franchises like Jollibee and McDonald's 
and food manufacturing giants such as Swift's and Purefoods, to set up shop in Naga. Knowing 
they needed the right climate for business-meaning no red tape and no graft-he told them that 
the peace and order situation was good and that City Hall had close working relationships with 
the water district and the electric cooperative. He also invested greatly in infrastructure. (In his 
second term it helped that Robredo was among the very few politicians who gambled on Fidel 
V. Ramos in the 1992 presidential election. When Ramos won, Robredo was assured access to 
national government resources, particularly for infrastructure.) 

In 1993, two years after the Local Government Code which granted greater autonomy to 
local governments took effect, Robredo conceptualized a Metro Naga Development Council, 
or MNDC. He realized that the Code could engender fierce competition among adjoining local 
government units, which would work to their mutual disadvantage, but that Naga could not afford 
to either isolate or insulate itself from its neighboring municipalities. On the contrary, Robredo 
recognized that Naga itself would benefit in the long term from the growth and development of its 
neighbors. Already, Naga's increasing prosperity was drawing migrants from the less progressive 
municipalities, thus adding to its already large urban poor population. It would also be cheaper 
and more convenient for Naga to rely on its neighbors for its growing need for goods, services, and 
even physical space. 

Robredo invited the mayors of twelve adjoining towns to an informal meeting and broached 
his idea. He informed them that the MNDC could address their common concerns on transport, 
water supply, investments, and resource mobilization. It was the latter concern that most appealed 
to the mayors. It meant combining their resources and efforts to secure grants from the national 
government and other sources. They agreed to do so, as well as to define their individual strengths 
and capacities and to develop these. Naga, for example, is a trading-and-services city, and so the 
next town could be developed into a warehousing center, and another into a housing or industrial 
town. Through the MNDC, poorer local government units could count on the assistance of their 
more affluent neighbors. 



31 



As Robredo pointed out, "Naga should not be greedy. We should let each town become a center 
of specific activities. By improving the economy in adjacent municipalities, we will minimize 
[population] movement to the city." 

In the beginning, some people suspected the motives behind Robredo's proposal. Some 
said he had a political agenda, to run for congress, for example. But they were eventually 
convinced that the MNDC was a wise concept, and today fifteen out of Camarines Sur's thirty- 
seven towns are members of the Council. 

President Ramos issued an executive order granting official recognition to the MNDC 
and providing funding for it as well. Naga and the other towns contributed counterpart funds 
amounting to 1.5 percent of their individual economic development funds. Naga accounted for 
the biggest contribution. Robredo was elected the Council's first chairperson and remained 
chairman until the end of his third term as mayor. He forsees the Council's role growing larger 
over the years as it begins to tackle such problems as consolidating solid waste management 
and the water supply. 

A major breakthrough during Robredo's tenure was land ownership for heretofore landless 
urban squatters. His efforts in this direction began during his first term. Leaders of the Naga 
City Urban Poor Federation went to see him soon after he assumed office. They wanted to 
know whether the urban poor would be a priority of his administration. In response, he gave 
them an office and appointed the first urban poor affairs officer. 

There was a personal reason that Robredo assigned such a high priority to housing for 
Naga's urban poor. Behind his parents' old house was a two-hectare lot where squatters had 
been living even before he was born. He had assured them that he would not leave City Hall 
until he was able to give them the property. 

From a management perspective, Robredo also saw that, over the long haul, quick action 
on housing for the poor entailed lower costs (since the cost of urban land was constantly 
rising) and also higher productivity (since workers with a stake in the city would likely work 
harder); this, in turn, would lead to accelerated economic growth. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



The result was a program called Kaantabay sa Kauswagan, or Partners in Development, 
which sought to "provide permanent solutions to all land tenurial problems involving the 
poor." City Hall explained it as "the city government's primary response to the mass housing 
problem of the urban poor." The program focused not only on improving the living conditions 
of squatters and slum dwellers but also on empowering them through the provision of home 
lots, basic infrastructure, and services as well as livelihood opportunities. Robredo hoped that 
the program would also awaken the urban poor to their political rights. 

Partners in Development entailed four main activities: on-site development, focusing 
on the improvement of existing urban poor communities; off-site development, focusing on 
creating relocation sites for victims of eviction and demolition; capability building, providing 
training in community organization, leadership, and values reorientation; and support 
services, including land surveys, legal assistance, mediation in land disputes, and help moving 
one's belongings from one site to another. 

The city government made idle public land available for the program. In a significant 
move, the Catholic Church expressed itself willing to place a five-hectare prime commercial 
property under the program; people had been squatting on this property since the 1950s. 
Previous negotiations with the Church had broken down, however. Robredo spoke with the 
archbishop directly and agreed to pay the Church's below-market asking price. The Church 
agreed, and the city government secured the money to buy the land. The success of Robredo's 
negotiations with the Church proved to other landowners that the local government was 
sincere in its dealings and had the capacity to pay in cash. 

Robredo tried other means of acquiring land from property owners, including proposals 
for land sharing, land swapping, and relocation. Under the land-sharing scheme that was used 
with commercial property owners, the government got one landowner to sell his property 
on the condition that the squatters would move to the back of the property to enable the 
landowner to make use of the prime land for commercial development. Another property 
owner agreed to a land swap, that is, an exchange of similarly sized properties in different 
area, thus preventing the demolition of already existing houses on his property. 



33 



Aware that the program could draw more poor migrants into the city, the city government 
made sure it would deal only with legitimate urban poor organizations. Inventories were made 
of qualified recipients so that the program would benefit only genuine residents of the city. 

A State of the City Report issued in 1997, the year before Robredo left office, estimated the 
number of Naga's squatters and slum dwellers at 5,500 families, about 25 percent of the total 
number of families in the city. As a result of Kaantabay sa Kauswagan, the report said, a total 
of 49.6 hectares of government and privately owned land had been distributed since 1989 to 
some 4,688 urban poor families. The report added that the government had also acquired 25.4 
hectares for future housing projects. 

Squatters who were awarded land under the city government's program were supposed to 
pay for it but not all of them had the capacity to do so. Robredo sees no logic in insisting that 
the poor pay when they have no means to do so. Today he suggests that a minimal amount of 
ten pesos a month might be more realistic. 

It was also mainly for his poor constituents that Robredo sought to improve health 
services and the quality of education. The city built the Naga City Hospital, which became 
the first of its kind in Southern Luzon to be owned and maintained by a local government 
unit. Additional health centers were established in the barangays. With their focus on child 
nutrition programs, they enabled Naga to become the most consistent top performer among 
sixty-two cities in terms of child welfare, according to the United Nations Children's Fund 
and the League of Cities of the Philippines. 

The Naga City Hospital serves as headquarters of Emergency Rescue Naga or ERN, an 
emergency response service begun in 1991 and patterned after the United States' Rescue 911. 
ERN provides 24-hour quick medical and protective services and aims to democratize access 
to services during emergencies. It coordinates the resources of the city and the various agencies 
— police, fire department, association of barangay councils, the media, and private medical 
volunteers — in providing emergency rescue and transfer, first aid, ambulance service, quick 
police response, traffic control, fire fighting, safety promotion, and disaster preparedness and 
control. At least twenty-three private associations participate in the program, which has been 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



honored by the Gantimpalang Paglingkod Pook, or Galing Pook Awards, which recognize 
"innovation and excellence in local governance." 

In education, Robredo introduced a program for preschoolers that represented an enduring 
investment in his city's future. Called Naga Early Education and Development (NEED), it has 
as its most important component a Montessori-based day-care system in all the twenty-seven 
barangays. The day care centers not only prepare children to enter and succeed in grade school, 
but also ease the integration of handicapped children into the mainstream education system. 
Children who are found to have congenital and developmental abnormalities are provided a 
learning center equipped with facilities for physical and mental therapy. On the other hand, 
bright and promising children are placed in a school that emphasizes early education and 
development. 

Robredo did not forget to provide for illiterate and semiliterate adults and out-of-school 
youth. For them he drew up a nonformal education program. 

When Robredo assumed office in 1988, the Sanggunian was controlled by the opposition 
party. He knew that the only way he could promote his agenda was to develop and mobilize 
his own supporters. Early in his first term, he forged a strong partnership between his 
administration and civil society. This partnership was institutionalized in 1995 with the 
passage by the city council of a landmark legislation that has been described as "Robredo's 
enduring legacy to the cause of local autonomy." Called the "Empowerment Ordinance of 
Naga City," it provides that the city government "hereby declares itself open to a partnership 
with duly accredited Naga-based people's organizations and nongovernment organizations in 
the conception, implementation, and evaluation of all government activities and functions." 

To operationalize it, a "people's council" composed of duly accredited NGOs and POs in 
the city was set up. The council was tasked to appoint NGO representatives to special bodies of 
the local government; to observe, vote, and participate in the deliberation, conceptualization, 
implementation, and evaluation of projects, activities and programs of the city government; to 
propose legislation, participate and vote at the committee level of the Sangguniang Panlunsod; 
and to represent the people in the exercise of their constitutional rights to information on 



35 



matters of public concern and of access to official records and documents. 

Robredo explains the need for the ordinance in these words: "We (city council) realized 
we would not be forever in City Hall, so we felt the need to institutionalize the role of NGOs. 
The ordinance was needed so that if a mayor is not inclined to support NGOs, they have the 
legal basis to ask to participate." The ordinance, he reports, has made NGOs more vigilant 
and more supportive of government initiatives. 

A year after the ordinance took effect, a network of NGOs and other civil society 
organizations formed the Naga City People's Council, the first functional people's council 
in the Philippines. In June that year, representatives of Naga City, the NCPC and other key 
stakeholders met and identified three areas of priority concern: clean-up of the Naga River, 
solid waste management, and upgrading Naga City Hospital. These issues were submitted 
to the national government for technical assistance under the auspices of the Naga City 
Participatory Planning and Development Initiatives or NCPPI. 

In previous years, the city government and the NGOs had performed their roles in 
relative isolation insofar as local development planning was concerned. Within a year after 
the NCPPI was launched, twenty-eight consultations were held at the village, city, and task- 
force levels; thirty strategic management plans were developed, including the Naga River 
Watershed Strategic Management Plan and the Naga City Solid Waste Management Plan, 
a City Health Plan, and twenty-seven village-level health plans; and the City Health Board 
was revitalized. 

In 1998 the NCPPI was cited by the United Nations Center for Human Settlements as 
one of the ten best practices worldwide in improving the living environment and given the 
Dubai International Award. 

But it was not only the support of civil society that Robredo sought to win. He also 
set about organizing everyone from tricycle drivers to newsboys. He held monthly group 
consultations with them, during which he would inquire into their problems and hear out 
their proposed solutions and offer his own. Some of these organized groups, like the Naga 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



City Urban Poor Federation, already existed before Robredo's time, but his predecessor had 
largely ignored them. Robredo gave them a voice. In time these organizations became part 
of the distribution system for social services. Robredo describes this strategy as "a good 
blend of politics and service delivery." It was a way of facilitating the work of City Hall, but 
it also gave the people a sense of community and belonging. 

With the support of City Hall employees, Leni Robredo started a women's organization 
for training and livelihood enhancement called Lakas ng Kababaihan ng Naga Federation 
(Power of Women in Naga Federation). Using a top-down recruitment process, she picked 
the leaders from each barangay who in turn chose the leaders at the lower level. In Naga, 
barangays are divided into seven zones each, and each zone is the unit of the chapters of Lakas. 
Each chapter has its own president and set of officers. A barangay coordinator coordinates 
the seven chapters within its jurisdiction. At the city level, they form a federation, which 
has its own set of officers. Starting with 5,000 members in 1989, Lakas grew to 15,000 by 
1997. Its organizing process became the model for similar sectoral organizations later on. 
Leaders were picked from each barangay and they in turn chose leaders at the lower (zone) 
level. Zone-level leaders invited their neighbors. 

Robredo also organized election watchers into the Barangay People's Organization (later 
called the Barangay People's Foundation in 1995). Their main function was to inspect the 
counting of votes during elections. Members were recruited through the recommendation 
of Robredo's leaders at the barangay level. 

Quasi-government bodies were also created to coordinate delivery of sector-specific 
services by national and local government bodies. These were the Naga City Senior Citizens 
League, Naga City Anti-Drug Abuse Council, Naga City Sports Council, City Complaints 
and Assistance Team, and the City Development Information Council. 

More than efficiency, entrepreneurship and equity, however, Naga's NGOs and people's 
organizations demanded high moral ethics from their public servants. This placed pressure 
on the local government to develop internal systems for monitoring and encouraging 
ethical behavior by all employees. Robredo initiated a multiple feedback system whereby 



37 



employees gave anonymous feedback to their superiors, and superiors gave feedback to 
their subordinates. The public gave feedback directly to the mayor on the quality of the 
delivery of basic services by the City Hall employees. Individuals, teams, and departments 
were rewarded in informal and formal ways for outstanding performance. Rewards 
included "employee of the year" and "group achiever of the year" citations, which were 
accompanied by cash awards, a two-step salary increase, certificates and plaques of merit, 
and an automatic nomination for a national award. 

Under Robredo, the incidence of graft and corruption in City Hall was reduced to a 
minimum. He made sure that procurement for public works projects, a major source of 
graft, was done through open and transparent bidding and that the estimates were made 
as realistic as possible. Aware of the opportunities for taking shortcuts, Robredo instituted 
good project management and project monitoring. Not one to curry favor or to dispense it 
to his constituents, he earned a reputation as "kuripot" (tightfisted) on money matters. His 
philosophy, as far as doling out money was concerned, was "I can give you my talent, I can give 
you my time, but I do not like to give you my money because if I do that, then we will probably 
have problems later on." He set up a system whereby all charitable expenses, in the Philippines 
usually distributed as though they were being made personally by politicians, were charged to 
City Hall. For example, medicine for the indigent was charged to the City Health Office, and 
expenses for the burial of poor Naguenos to the City Social Welfare and Development Office. 

City Hall employees who were caught in the act of bribery or any other anomaly were 
either suspended or fired. In a case of tampering with receipts in the treasurer's office, which 
Robredo learned about because someone at the office reported it, some of those involved 
resigned out of shame, while those who did not were fired. 

The year 1992 was reelection year for local officials, including Robredo. This time, he could 
no longer count on his governor-uncle's political support. In fact Villafuerte fielded his own 
sister, Pura Luisa V. Magtuto, a former high school principal, to run against Robredo. The Rocos 
aligned themselves with the Villafuertes. Villafuerte himself sought reelection as governor 
and Raul Roco made a run for the Senate. Both belonged to the Laban ng Demokratikong 
Pilipino party or LDP (Fight of Democratic Filipinos). Robredo had left the party following 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



his rift with Villafuerte and had joined the newly formed Lakas-NUCD party of Fidel Ramos. 

The Villafuerte-Roco alliance had funds on their side. Robredo had the organizations 
which he set up during his first term and which now formed his political machine. Villafuerte 
in turn set up Bunyog Banuaan (Unity of the Town) and provided loans to grass-roots leaders, 
assuring them that if his sister won, these debts would not have to be paid back. Vote-buying 
was also said to have been rampant during that campaign, with estimates of from P10 million 
to P12 million spent for that purpose. 

Desperate to win the election against an incumbent who had established an outstanding 
track record, the Villafuertes raised the issue of citizenship against Robredo. In a case for 
deportation filed with the Bureau of Immigration, they claimed that the mayor's father was a 
Chinese citizen. In the first of what would have been a series of debates between the candidates 
for mayor, the Villafuertes brought in hecklers to chant "Chinese! Chinese!" Immigration 
Commissioner Leandro Verceles, however, dismissed the case in 1994, and the debates never 
went beyond the first one. The Villafuertes also took to calling Robredo an ingrate, a grave 
offense in Philippine culture, particularly when it is committed against one's relatives. Most 
of the city's print and radio media were loyal to the Villafuertes, who owned a radio station. 

Despite the odds, and to his surprise, Robredo won by a landslide (33,487 or 80 percent of 
the votes, to Magtuto's 9,056), and his candidates for vice mayor and councilors likewise swept 
the polls. Only one of the Sanggunian candidates was an incumbent; the others had allied 
themselves with the Villafuertes. Even Robredo's candidates for Congress won. Villafuerte 
himself lost, but Roco was elected to the Senate. It was an easier campaign, but a bitter 
election for Robredo. That victory, he says, was a defining moment in his life: "That election 
clearly manifested the desire of the people of the city that this is the type of leadership and 
management they would like to have." 

If his first term was devoted to an inward look at the city, Robredo and his team could 
now focus their attention on ways of projecting Naga to the rest of the country. The intention 
was not to boast about their achievements, but to inspire other local governments to aspire 
to greater heights. The second term, says Robredo, "was the breakthrough that allowed us to 



39 



move ahead more quickly." 

Having a city council whose members he had handpicked and who owed their loyalty to 
him, he could now look forward to a relatively trouble-free term. In a significant institutional 
change, he gave each of the councilors executive assignments. One had wanted to be chief of 
police, and so Robredo put him in charge of police affairs. Another, a former university dean, 
was assigned to education. A third, an engineer, was given responsibility for the water supply 
infrastructure. A fourth, a leftist lawyer, took care of free legal assistance. 

It did not worry Robredo that he had placed the councilors above the heads of bureaus or 
agencies. The latter's word, he assured, would still prevail in day-to-day operations and the 
councilor's ideas would be taken into account on special concerns and projects. For instance, 
when a councilor proposed a Montessori program for day- care centers in all the barangays, 
Robredo allowed her to bring in a Montessori-school expert from Manila to train day-care 
workers. The councilor felt that the level of education should be improved starting at the 
preschool level, and the day-care system would be an ideal venue for preparing children for 
elementary school. 

Another councilor proposed a public high school that would be on a par with private high 
schools in the city. The result was the Naga City Science High School. From having only one 
high school, Naga now has six. 

Robredo also turned over the reins of his anti-vice police squad to the councilor who had 
dreamed of becoming a police officer. The councilor turned out to be overzealous in his new 
job and was soon facing a court suit for having towed one vehicle too many. 

During his second term, Robredo improved on the productivity circles he had 
institutionalized during his first term. These could be as simple as the light patrol, which 
encouraged the people to look at the street lamps in the evening and report to City Hall if any 
of them were not functioning. Or the rut patrol, to see that the streets were being properly 
maintained and to report problems to the city engineer's office. The message was that everyone 
should not only take an interest but also be concerned with and feel responsible for everything 



40 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



that the local government was doing. The mayor also instituted a quick-response program. 

PIP-related activities were documented through close monitoring and evaluation of the 
target clientele's satisfaction level. Frontline patrol groups were created to monitor, report, 
coordinate, and follow up for immediate action problems on roads, water, environment, 
garbage and sanitation, streetlights, and billboards. In addition, public perceptions were 
measured through mid-year and year-end citywide surveys and zone-level consultations. 

Robredo says that it was during his second term that he truly enjoyed being in City Hall. 
"There were a lot of ideas and a lot of experiments," he says. He had earned the people's 
trust and no longer felt he had to dazzle them with programs. This time he sat down to the 
serious business of governing. He had already adapted many of the management strategies 
he had learned at San Miguel and in graduate school. One of San Miguel's programs was the 
very innovative person (VIP) program. Applied to City Hall, it yielded more cost-effective 
suggestions, such as the pharmacist taking time to make an inventory of her stock of medicine 
and coming up with a procurement formulary that saved the city government a million pesos a 
year. A clerk in Robredo's office realized that the written forms for travel orders for employees 
did not have to be accomplished in four copies. 

Cash rewards awaited the employees who could come up with innovative programs, and 
the Commission on Audit allowed the city government to give a percentage of the savings 
from the new programs to their proponents as a bonus. 

It was also during Robredo's second term that the Sanggunian voted to conduct the very 
first referendum in the country, which is provided for in the Local Government Code. The 
people were consulted on development issues in the city, such as: Should they float funds? 
Should they put up a new commercial district? Should the tricycles be color-coded? It was 
another instance of people empowerment at the local level. 

Robredo installed a performance evaluation system in 1990 and the employee suggestion 
and incentive award systems in 1992. Among the new features of the performance evaluation 
system was a focus on outputs rather than on activities or processes. Employees were now 



41 



given appropriate recognition for their performance and contributions. And there was a 
two-way feedback system whereby the staff rated even the department heads. The employee 
suggestion and incentive awards system encouraged employees continuously to look for 
ideas to make city services faster and better and that would also result in improved working 
conditions. 

In another innovative move, Robredo set up ten quasi-official organizations in City Hall, 
most of whose members came from the urban poor. To handle them, he set up a special 
office in City Hall, the Lingkod Barangay Office. Another office, the Development Office for 
Livelihood, Employment, Cooperatives and Manpower, provided loans of up to P15,000 to 
medium- and small-scale enterprises in the city without collateral. Among the beneficiaries 
were street vendors and watch repairers. 

Robredo does not deny that the Barangay People's Organization (BPO) he set up in 1988 
was designed to provide the watchers for himself and his candidates during elections. His 
political philosophy, he explains, has always been that "we should rely equally on non- 
elected members of the community to help us." Philippine election laws allow candidates 
to have their own watchers who, aside from the formal function of inspecting the counting 
of votes, also do surveillance and other tasks. Robredo maintained watchers in every one 
of Naga's 321 precincts. Members of the BPO were recruited through the recommendation 
of Robredo's leaders at the barangay level, such as the barangay chiefs and councilors. The 
unit of organization is based on barangays. Robredo, however, emphasizes that the BPO 's 
resources are marshaled not only during elections; members should feel they are part of an 
ongoing process of advocacy. The BPO has expanded its reach to cooperatives which extend 
loans provided by the city government. 

In 1991, when the Congress of the Philippines passed the Local Government Code, 
which granted mayors greater autonomy and more power over the administrative and 
fiscal structure of city governments, Robredo made changes in internal human resource 
management practices, programs, and structures. He also augmented and strengthened the 
Office of the Mayor to make it more responsive to his administration's priority programs, 
adding several new departments: the Urban Poor Affairs Office; the Development Office for 
Livelihood, Employment, Cooperatives and Manpower; the Electronic and Data Processing 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Unit; the Lingkod Barangay Office; the City Nutrition and Population Office; and the Human 
Resource Management. The Office of the Civil Registrar, which previously had been attached 
to the City Health Office, also became autonomous. 

Under Robredo's leadership Naga underwent nothing less than a renaissance in 10 
years. In trade and commerce there was a 96 percent increase in the number of commercial 
establishments from 1988 to 1996 and a 159 percent increase in the number of market stalls . 
The Naga City public market was completely rehabilitated and augmented with four satellite 
markets and three community markets. Other indicators of rapid development included the 
entry of fifteen new banks, a 195 percent increase in the number of other financial institutions, 
and a doubling in the number of city hotels and motels. 

New jobs were created annually as business expanded and as the city government 
introduced various livelihood programs and opportunities for enhancing employability. 

In real estate development, a 100 percent increase in building construction was noted 
over a six-year period; a new subdivision was developed every year for eight years; and four 
shopping malls rose where there used to be none. 

In sustainable agriculture, there was a marked increase in agricultural and livestock 
production and in livestock population. 

A UN-funded study on shelter strategies found that in terms of family income the average 
monthly take-home of Naguenos rose by 62 percent from P3,532 in 1988 to P5,710 in 1991The 
same study placed their monthly income at least 34 percent higher than other Bicolano urban 
dewellers among the lowest income earners, and 132 percent higher than other Bicolano urban 
dwellers among the highest income earners. 

Naga's status as a model local government unit was affirmed by three international awards 
and more than 30 national and regional forms of recognition for outstanding performance in 
various fields of governance. Robredo himself was honored as one of the 1991 The Outstanding 
Young Men of the Philippines for government service and as one of the Ten Outstanding 



43 



Young Persons of the World in 1996 by the Junior Jaycees. His peers in local governments 
around the country elected him president of the League of Cities of the Philippines in 1995 and 
in the region, chair for two terms of the Bicol Regional Development Council. 

The sweetest reward was his people's overwhelming support of him and his candidates 
in three elections. He won a huge majority in 1992 despite the well-oiled machinery of the 
Villafuertes and he did even better in 1995, when he captured 97 percent of the votes. In 
1998, barred by law from running for a fourth term, he nevertheless carried the team he had 
handpicked to a record victory. All his candidates — for congressman to mayor to vice mayor 
and the entire city council — swept the polls. 

Looking back on the achievements of Robredo's three terms as mayor, Jean Llorin, an NGO 
leader in Naga, says that he ran the city as if it were a corporation. His decisive management 
style was appropriate for government, adds Miles Arroyo, another NGO leader who is now 
in the city council. Both Llorin and Arroyo believe that Robredo was effective because he 
had moral authority. They point to many instances when their mayor displayed leadership by 
example, especially to City Hall employees. No job was too small or demeaning for him. He 
was the first to show up at a disaster area, and he would direct traffic, clean up debris, and do 
whatever else needed to be done. He sat in barangay assemblies and listened to the people. 

Archbishop Legazpi, summing up the impact of Robredo's leadership on the city, once 
said that the mayor gave ordinary people hope that there are government officials who are 
determined to serve rather than be served. 

"People felt that he was someone who could truly attend to their needs," Arroyo and Llorin 
recall. "Those who did not vote for him he tried to win over, giving more attention to areas 
where he lost. As a result, the voters themselves decided they would not be bought; hence, his 
victory despite his opponents' almost limitless resources." 

Robredo, however, still worries about the damaging effects of what he calls "dirty politics." 
He says, "Running a local government is one thing; winning an election is another. The gains 
of the city might be lost if we make the wrong choice of leaders. It is always more difficult to 



44 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



build than to destroy. Despite our successes, we are not very certain that people will choose 
the kind of leaders we feel can best serve the city." 

But he asserts his confidence in the people of Naga, who have seen that good government 
is possible if they choose their leaders well. Other candidates, past and present, have deceived 
the people with their empty promises, but Robredo believes that with the middle class 
comprising a substantial portion of Naga's electorate, vote buying and dole-outs and promises 
of free land will not bring about victory for a candidate who is unfit. 

In a study titled "Political Machine in an Alternative Perspective: A Case of Naga City," 
political scientist Takeshi Kawanaka of the Institute of Developing Economies in Japan 
concludes that it is clear from the case of Naga that "political power derives from neither 
land ownership nor other kind of personal wealth." He points out that Robredo is neither a 
landowner nor a big-time businessman, and that even Luis Villafuerte did not rise to power 
by his own wealth but with the support of former president Marcos using state resources. 
Kawanaka cites the contined support or loyalty of the grassroots leaders for Robredo even 
after his rift with Villafuerte, his patron. 

In trying to explain the source of Robredo's political strength, Kawanaka cites his "moral 
appeal" and "his good performance." But these and his other qualities — his being progressive, 
innovative, clean, and efficient — are not enough to keep a leader in power, Kawanaka writes. 
He thus turns to Robredo's own explanation in an interview with him: "I guess our secret 
really is not just our performance. I think it's our organization... . even if I perform excellently, 
if I don't have a good organization, I cannot win on a straight ticket." 

After returningto private life, Robredo has been asked repeatedly if he had further political 
plans for himself. He said he would like to return to politics, either as mayor of Naga or as 
congressman of Camarines Sur. But sometimes he spoke of abandoning politics altogether. 
The mayorship was a personal sacrifice for Robredo in more ways than one. When he left San 
Miguel, he was earning P12,000.00 a month as a junior executive. The mayor's salary in 1988 
was P8,000.00. He and his wife lived with his parents during his first two terms. His parents 
were supportive of him, and Robredo jests that since he had to abide by his father's rules. Leni 



45 



Robredo is a lawyer with an NGO called Saligan which provides legal services to the needy. 

After leavingCity Hall, Robredo worked for a master's degree in public administration at the 
John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
After returning to the Philippines, he served as a consultant on local governance for a local 
democracy project and at the offices of Senators Raul Roco and Bias Ople and as a local 
government advocacy specialist of COPE (Community Organizers of Philippine Enterprises) 
Foundation, which specializes in urban poor housing and governance issues. He also found 
time to teach public administration at the Ateneo de Naga University Graduate School and at 
the University of Nueva Caceres and in the doctoral program of Colegio de Sta. Isabel. 

Jesse Robredo never seems to have as much time for his young family as he would like to 
have. He and Leni have three daughters: Jessica Marie (born in 1988), Janine Patricia (1994) 
and Jillian Therese (2000). When he was mayor, he would be at City Hall by eight in the 
morning, even earlier when there were management meetings, and by seven on Mondays for 
the flag-raising ceremony. Upon his wife's insistence, he made it a rule to be home for lunch, 
and was home for dinner at seven. He accepted no social invitations between 6:00 and 7:30 
p.m. Leni has proved herself to be a supportive politician's wife as well as an astute and highly 
principled adviser. She has made it clear to her husband that "if our children cannot inherit 
anything material, at least they will inherit a good name." • By LORNA KALAW TIROL. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



In 2011, Jesse M. Robredo gave an interview to Michael Scharff 
of Innovations for Successful Societies, an initiative of the National 
Academy of Public Administration, and the Woodrow Wilson School 
of Public and International Affairs and Bobst Center for Peace and 
Justice of Princeton University. Scharff produced a case study called 
Building Trust and promoting Accountability: Jesse Robredo and 
Naga City, which we excerpt below: 

Looking back on his early attempts to build trust, Jesse Robredo said, "Initially, I was a 
novelty, reporting to work early and getting out in the city and interacting with people. But later 
on, it became the standard." Robredo suggested that his style of management set a precedent 
for future mayors. "I think anyone who becomes mayor and deviates from that standard will 
cause people to begin to look for somebody else for the job." 

Robredo credited many successful reforms to the citizens of Naga, who he said took the 
time to demand more from their government. 

Moreover, he emphasized that there were avenues for revitalizing the city that he failed to 
explore. "The other thing that I was not very concerned with, but where we should have focused 
some resources and attention, was with history, arts and culture," he said. "But sometimes 
with these things, when you pass on the opportunity, it's gone." 

Gabriel Bordado Jr., Robredo's public information officer and later the acting city 
administrator, described Robredo's first nine years in office as "building the mechanisms and 
institutionalizing the systems" of representative government. 

"They were new, they were innovative," Bordado recalled. "There was really this transformation 
of a sleepy little city. Naga was thrust into the national consciousness as a city with innovative 
programs and practices." 

In 1998, as the end of his third term as mayor neared, Robredo sought to endorse a candidate 



47 



who he believed would help sustain his reforms. Robredo and his team persuaded Sulpicio 
"Cho" Roco to run for mayor. Roco had been planning to retire from his job as head of technical 
resources at a local arm of the U.S. Agency for International Development, the foreign aid arm 
of the United States government. Naga received USAID funds for various projects, including the 
People's Council, and Robredo had come to know and trust Roco. With Robredo's endorsement, 
Roco was elected mayor and served a three-year term. 

Meanwhile, Robredo enrolled in a master's program at the John F. Kennedy School of 
Government at Harvard University. He returned to Naga in 1999, and decided to run again 
for mayor. He was elected in 2001 and served another three consecutive terms, during which 
he instituted a number of reforms including an i-governance initiative, a major part of which 
consisted of refurbishing the city's website and Internet offerings. The new website displayed 
city ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council. Also on the site, constituents could 
view the city's budget, see all bid notices and results related to the procurement of items, and 
access a directory of city officials' phone numbers and email addresses. 

Another of Robredo's major reforms focused on the education sector. The Ford Foundation— a 
major international donor— approached Robredo in 2001 with the idea of stimulating citizen 
involvement in the decisions made by local school boards, which had the final say on most 
local education matters, including spending. Until that time, school boards had been small, 
insular groups led by superintendents who were appointed by the Department of Education 
in Manila. With the assistance of the Ford Foundation, Robredo broadened the membership 
of the school boards to include parents and teachers and educated the community about the 
most pressing needs in the schools. As a consequence, communities played a greater role in 
prioritizing the needs at each school and deciding where to target funds. This in turn led to, 
among other things, better quality textbooks and improved student performance, as measured 
by standardized test scores. 

In 2010, President Benigno Aquino III appointed Robredo to be secretary of the Department 
of Interior and Local Government, a position that gave him oversight of many local government 
functions. John Bongat, a former city councilor whom Robredo endorsed as his successor as 
Naga's mayor, won handily in the 2010 elections. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



THE SECRETARY OF THE 
INTERIOR AND LOCAL 
GOVERNMENT 

It is a sad fact that many of Secretary Jesse Robredo's achievements only became common 
knowledge after his death. Then again, he had never been overly concerned with claiming 
credit. The main thing was, and always had been, to serve the people and to serve them well. 

For 18 years, he devoted his life to transforming Naga from a third-class city with a 
one-million-peso budget deficit to a first-class city, with citizens proud to call themselves 
Naguenos. And since 2010, he had the opportunity to replicate Naga's gains across the 
country. 

The Department of the Interior and Local Government consistently exceeded expectations 
under the leadership of Jesse Robredo, with his adherence to the tenets of good governance, 
his determination to encourage the rest of the country follow those same tenets, and, perhaps 
most importantly, his leadership by example. Indeed, among the key accomplishments of the 
DILG while he was at its helm was institutionalizing transparency and accountability to the 
public. Replicating what proved so successful in Naga City, Secretary Robredo encouraged 
citizen engagement, as evidenced by the increase in the number of LGUs that allow NGOs to 
participate in local governance. 

One of Secretary Robredo's foremost achievements in local governance was the Full 
Disclosure Policy, which requires disclosure of 12 key financial documents on fund utilization 
and implementation of projects in public places. Another is the institution of the Seal of Good 
Housekeeping, which tests the performance of local government units in four key governance 
areas: good planning, sound fiscal management, transparency and accountability, and the 
valuing of performance monitoring; and the institution of the Performance Challenge Fund, 
an incentive fund for LGUs to put a premium on transparency and accountability in order to 



49 



qualify for and avail themselves of financial support for local development initiatives. 

Secretary Robredo was also credited withwidespread reforms and capability enhancement 
in the Philippine National Police. Under his leadership, the PNP made progress in closing 
the pistol-to-police ratio gap, instituted a housing program for uniformed personnel, and 
initiated moves to increase combat duty pay. These reforms likewise cover the Bureau of Fire 
Protection and the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology— the two attached agencies 
have benefited from programs geared toward capability building (the acquisition of fire 
trucks, for the BFP), and the construction of additional jail facilities and the much-needed 
digitization of inmates records. 

Acclaim, power, or retaining his position— these did not worry Jesse Robredo. What was 
on his mind, as he told his wife Leni, was that his efforts at the national level might have 
been all for naught. "Things were different at the national level," Leni Robredo shared. "He 
worked so much harder, but he often wondered if his efforts were appreciated. 'Hindi ko 
alam kung may patutunguhan ang lahat ng ito,' were his exact words." 

As evidenced by the anecdote he'd shared with his official family in the Department 
of the Interior and Local Government at the start of the year: His first job was a materials 
controller for Carnation Philippines, Inc. "Although it sounds important," Robredo said, "my 
role was to count milk cans. Ang trabaho ko po ay magbilang ng lata." Nonetheless, Robredo 
insisted that the important thing— no matter one's role, be it can counter or career officer or 
City Mayor or Cabinet Secretary— was to do one's best in fulfilling one's responsibilities. No 
need for fanfare, no need for self-aggrandizement. For Jesse Robredo, it was the bottom line: 
You do your job well. 



51 



Secretary Jesse M. Robredo salutes the colors as he inspects 
the troops at the arrival honors given to him by the Philippine 
National Police during his first visit at its headquarters in 
Camp Crame on July 14, 2010. 




Jesse M. Robredo as Secretary of the Interior and Local Government 



55 



Task Force Kalihim 



In the late afternoon of August 18, 2012, the news reports were coming in: The Piper 
Seneca carrying Secretary of the Interior and Local Government Jesse M. Robredo and his 
two companions— pilot Captain Jessup Bahinting and flight student Kshitiz Chand— had 
crashed into the waters off Masbate. There was one lone survivor: Jun Abrazado, an aide 
to the Secretary. The names and the details resonated in radio broadcasts; a flip through 
the channels showed newscasters struggling to keep commentary going given the lack of 
information. Social media was filled with the same bits of information, with questions, and 
with prayers. It was a surreal occurrence in what could have been a quiet weekend: An 
airplane had crashed, and it carried a Cabinet Secretary. For the longest time, this was all 
anybody knew. 

Secretary of Transportation and Communications Manuel Mar A. Roxas, who oversaw 
the Philippine Coast Guard, soon clarified the news reports. The Piper Seneca had been en 
route to Naga City from Cebu to take Secretary Robredo home, when it crashed off the coast 
of Masbate. He calmly explained the situation and repeated himself across channels and 
across media. They had a plan, he said, and it was underway— they would find Jess. 

"Jess," Secretary Roxas had called Secretary Robredo, and all of us who heard him, 
were reminded that this man now missing was someone's colleague, someone's friend. Soon 
enough, we remembered that he was someone's husband, someone's father; someone's son, 
someone's brother. 

Near the end of an interview with DZMM TeleRadyo, after repeating, once again, what he 
had no doubt been telling other news outfits, Mar Roxas paused— and when he spoke again, 
his voice had changed: "Si Jess po ang isa sa mga pinakamabuting taong kilala ko. Hahanapin 
po natin siya." Those paying close attention noticed: Mar Roxas's voice had broken— it was 
more quiet, more urgent. 






Vigils for the safe rescue of Secretary Jesse Robredo and his pilots were held at the 
National Shrine of the Divine Child inside the La Salle Greenhills campus. These 
were organized by the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson (OPS), the Office of the 
Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process (OPAPP), and the Presidential Communications 
Development and Strategic Planning Office (PCDSPO). These vigils were held from August 
18 to the morning of August 21, from daybreak and well into the night. The wide dome of 
the church stood witness to the unyielding faith of the people, from all walks of life. Prayers 
were offered and hymns were sung; for the faithful that gathered at LSGH, Jesse Robredo 
would find a way to finally come back home. 




fiO JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



In the meantime, beginning August 18, the search and rescue operations for Secretary 
Jesse M. Robredo and his companions were under way. The OPS— in close coordination with 
the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) and the PCDSPO— assured 
the public of the rescuers' continued efforts. President Benigno S. Aquino III, together with 
DOTC Secretary Manuel Mar A. Roxas, DBM Secretary Florencio B. Abad, and Congressman 
Joseph E. Abaya, went to Masbate City the next day to lead the search and rescue operations, 
and inform the public of the progress of Task Force Kalihim. 

By the second day of the search and rescue operations for Secretary Jesse M. Robredo, 
helium tanks arrived on site and tech-certified divers from Cebu were deployed to support the 
subsurface rescue efforts for Secretary Robredo and company. Together with the Philippine 
Navy divers, they were on hand for the search and rescue operations. 

Nearly a month later, President Benigno S. Aquino III would lead the ceremonies 
recognizing Task Force Kalihim: "Nagpamalas kayo ng 'di matatawarang dedikasyon at 
katapangan sa pagtulong sa mga kababayan nating nalugmok sa mga nagdaang kalamidad 
at trahedya. Mulat kayo sa halaga ng pagsisilbi sa kapwa at sa bayan, lalo na sa mga panahon 
ng pagsubok." The President would tell them, "Sampu ng sambayanang Pilipino, sumasaludo 
ako sa alay ninyong sigasig at kagitingan." 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



On August 21, 2012, Jesse M. Robredo's body would be retrieved from the waters off 
the coast of Masbate, and he— after days of grueling search and rescue operations— would 
finally be brought home to Naga. Many noted the significance of the date: Twenty-nine 
years ago, almost to the day, opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr. was assassinated as 
he was returning home after years of self-exile. 

It was fitting, perhaps. Jesse M. Robredo's life was set on a nonpolitical route— a 
responsible son and brother of a tight-knit family, a diligent student, an ambitious 
professional in the private sector— until that day, when he heard news of Ninoy's 
assassination on the car radio. 

He would stand in the long queue outside the Aquino home, joining the thousands 
who grieved, who paid their respects to the fallen hero. For the martyr's funeral, he was 
in the crowd that marched across Manila, alongside Ninoy's remains. He would tie a 
yellow ribbon on that car to signal his support of the widowed Cory, his grief over Ninoy's 
martyrdom, and his empathy with the Aquino movement. He would attend the rally in 
support of Cory Aquino after the snap election of 1986. And when the nation marched to 
Malacanang to overthrow the dictator, he marched with them. 

Jesse Robredo's patriotism had awakened; his belief in democracy took root. That 
August day signaled for Jesse a turning point in his life, toward serving the Filipino 
people— because the man the nation believed in had turned martyr— because Ninoy had 
been stopped from coming home. 

Twenty-nine years later from that pivotal day, Jesse Robredo himself would at last be 
found: Early morning of August 21, divers and other members of the search and rescue 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



operations— from the Philippine Navy and volunteer technical divers led by Matt Reed, 
Danny Brumbach, Shelagh Cooley, and Anna Cu Unjieng— retrieved the body of Secretary 
Jesse M. Robredo from the wreckage of the Piper Seneca. They carried the body to shore, 
but not before the Navy divers gave the late Secretary one last salute in the waters. The 
Secretary's remains were brought to La Funeraria Eternas in Masbate City. Task Force 
Kalihim had found Jesse M. Robredo. 

As soon as news reached him that his trusted colleague's body had been retrieved, the 
President flew back to Masbate to personally oversee the transport of Jesse M. Robredo's 
body back to Naga City on the same day that he was to lead the commemoration of his 
father's death. 

The President called Leni Robredo, informing her that her husband had at last been 
found. In Masbate, Jesse Robredo's body was placed in a metal casket and from there was 
carried by a C-130 plane of the Philippine Air Force. The President stood with the casket 
bearing Secretary Robredo's body— from the plane, traversing through Naga City, and to 
Funeraria Imperial— where he met with Atty. Leni and Secretary Robredo's daughters 
Aika, Patricia, and Jillian. 

Twenty-nine years ago, Noynoy Aquino served as his father's pallbearer, marching 
alongside Ninoy's remains as they were brought from the church, across Manila, to 
his final resting place. A young Jesse M. Robredo was among that defiant crowd that 
escorted Ninoy's casket. On August 21, 2012, it was Noynoy Aquino, now President of the 
Philippines, who took Jesse M. Robredo home— back to his family, back to the city he had 
served for so long. 



67 




JO JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 





LEFT: The remains of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo 
arrive at Naga Airport, carried by members of the Philip- 
pine National Police. 

ABOVE: The President talking with Atty. Leni Robredo 
and Social Welfare and Development Secretary Corazon 
"Dinky" Soliman. Beside them are the daughters of the 
late Secretary. 



71 



A nation in mourning 



The remains of Secretary Robredo were moved from Funeraria Imperial to the 
Archbishop's Palace, Naga City, at around 11 p.m. of August 21, 2012. The people of Naga City 
flocked to the church to pay their respects and bid farewell to the man that had dedicated 
so much of his life to their hometown. Back in Manila, within offices of the DILG and its 
attached agencies, masses were held in honor of the late Secretary. 

The President, after escorting Secretary Jesse Robredo's remains back to Naga City, 
returned to Manila and signed Proclamation No. 460, declaring national days of mourning 
for the late Secretary of the Interior and Local Government. "The nation has lost one of its 
great leaders and public servants," read the proclamation. "His many virtues as a public 
servant have permanently earned for him the gratitude of the City he led, and the Republic 
he served." 

In line with the President's proclamation, Executive Secretary Paquito N. Ochoa 
issued Memorandum Circular No. 36, creating an inter-agency committee in charge of the 
funeral arrangements for the interment of the late Secretary. The committee, chaired by 
the Presidential Communications Development and Strategic Planning Office, was tasked to 
oversee the conferment of official honors and the state funeral for the late Secretary Robredo, 
in keeping with protocol, our laws, and the wishes of the bereaved family. 

President Benigno S. Aquino III offered, and the Robredo family accepted, a state funeral 
for the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo. On August 24, 2012, the remains of Secretary 
Robredo were transferred from the Archbishop's Palace in Naga City to Kalayaan Hall of 
Malacanan Palace, for the lying in state. 



PUBLIC VIEWING AT THE ARCH I BISHOP'S PALACE, NAGA 




OPPOSITE PAGE, TOP: Vigil guards from the Philippine National 
Police stand alongside the casket bearing the remains of the 
late Secretary. 

OPPOSITE PAGE, BOTTOM: Members of the Philippine National 
Police carry the late Secretary's casket, as Naga City looks on. 

BELOW: Students bid farewell to the former Mayor of Naga 
City. 




77 



The Philippine flag flown at half-mast for the late Secretary 
Jesse M. Robredo before Kalayaan Hall in Malacanan Palace, 
where the late Secretary would lie in state. 





83 



ARRIVAL HONORS AT VILLAMOR AIRBASE 




g/[ JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




85 




gfi JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 





87 




91 




ARRIVAL HONORS AT MALACANAN PALACE 





92 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




99 




100 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




101 




102 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




2Qfi JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




107 




2Qg JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




109 



DEPARTURE HONORS AT MALACANAN PALACE 




August 26, 2012: Departure honors for the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo, which includes a 19-gun salute 
rendered by members of the Presidential Security Group. The remains of Secretary Robredo would be flown 
back to Naga City for the state funeral. 



110 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




Ill 




112 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




113 




The Armed Forces of the Philippines rendering departure honors for the late Secretary Robredo. The casket, 
being carried onto the plane, is flanked by honorary pallbearers and the family of the late Secretary. 



X14 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




115 



PUBLIC VIEWING AT NAGA CITY HALL 




JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




117 



THE REQUIEM MASS 




120 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




The concelebrated Requiem 
Mass officiated by Fr. 
Manuel Nicolas, SDB and 
Fr. Kulandairaj Ambrose of 
the Missionaries of the Poor 
(MOP) for the late Secretary 
Jesse M. Robredo, at the 
Basilica Minore de Nuestra 
Senora de Penafrancia. 



122 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




President Aquino and the Robredo family during the 
concelebrated Requiem Mass for the late Secretary at the 
Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia. 



123 



CONFERMENT OF THE PHILIPPINE LEGION OF HONORS 




124 jessemrobredomemor|alboo| < 



President Aquino confers upon the late Secretary Jesse 
M. Robredo the Philippine Legion of Honor with the rank 
of Chief Commander. Atty. Leni Robredo accepts the 

conferment. 

The Philippine Legion of Honor is considered the highest 
award the President can bestow without the need for approval 
of Congress. Secretary Robredo was conferred the Philippine 
Legion of Honor for life achievement as Secretary of the 
Interior and Local Government, and as Mayor of Naga City. 



125 





Atty. Leni Robredo, as she 
delivers her response to the 
conferment of the Philippine 
Legion of Honor. 



126 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




127 




1J0 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



The funeral cortege for the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo, from the Basilica Minore to 
Funeraria Imperial. Alongside the hearse were members of the Cabinet on foot serving as 
the honorary pallbearers. Following the hearse were the President, Mrs. Robredo, and her 
children; followed by the late Secretary's brother and sister, relatives, government officials, 
and attendees. 





X34 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




The national flag is taken off the casket and folded by the 
PNP-AFP casket bearers, and was then handed over to the 
President. The President then presented the folded national 
flag to Atty. Leni Robredo. The presentation of the flag 
concluded the state funeral. 

BOTTOM RIGHT: Atty. Leni Robredo holding the flag that had 
been draped over the casket bearing her husband's remains; 
she is flanked by her daughters Patricia, Jillian, and Aika. 



135 



EULOGIES 



Papuring binigkas ng 

KAG ALAN G-G ALAN G BENIGNO S. AQUINO II 

Pangulo ngPilipinas 

PARA SA YUMAONG KALI HIM NG INTERYOR AT LOKAL NA PAMAHALAAN JESSE M. ROBREDO 



Salamat po, maupo ho tayong lahat. Tinuruan po tayo ni Kasamang Jess ng kaunting Bicol: 
Marhay ba udto sa indo gabos ... Mali na naman ho yata. 

Atty. Leni Robredo, Aika, Tricia, Julian; Mr. Butch Robredo; Dr. Jocelyn Austria; Mr. Penny 
Bondoc; Ms. Jeanne Tang; relatives and friends of Secretary Robredo; Fr. Ambrose; members of 
the clergy; members of the Cabinet; members of the Senate and the House of Representatives; 
officials and staff of the Department of the Interior and Local Government and its attached 
agencies; fellow workers in government; mga minamahal ko pong kababayan: 

Bilang kawani ng gobyerno, tanggap na po dapat natin: Darating ang araw na bababa rin 
tayo sa puwesto— sa madaling salita, magreretiro. Ngayon pa lang po, nai-imagine ko nang 
magkikita-kita kami, ng ating Gabinete at iba pang mga kasamahan, sa isang restaurant, 'pag 
nagretiro na, nang may kani-kaniyang senior citizen card na nakasilid sa pitaka. Magkakainan 
kami, magtatawanan, at pagkukuwentuhan kung ano ang mga pinagdaanan namin. Rung ano 
ang mga nagawa namin. 

Hindi na po makakasama si Jesse sa mga kuwentuhangiyon. Hindi na po natin makakabiruan 
si Jesse tungkol sa pagkilatis sa mga manliligaw ng anak niya, at sa mga susunod pong taon, 
wala na rin siya para makipaglaro sa magiging apo niya. 

Hindi madaling tanggapin ang biglaang pagkawala ni Jesse. Hindi po natin inasahan ang 
pangyayaring ito, ngunit sa kabila ng ating kaba at pagkabigla nang unang marinig ang balita, 
ginawa natin ang lahat ng ating magagawa upang mailigtas siya kung papalarin, at kung hindi 
man, upang mabigyan ng angkop at marangal na pagwawakas ang trahedyang sinapit natin. 
Habang humahaba po ang panahon, umasa tayo na isang minuto ay darating siya at sasabihing, 
"Pasensya na kayo, naabala ko kayong lahat sa tagal ng pagdating ko." 



240 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Ngayon po, kaisa ako sa pagluluksa ng sambayanang napagkaitan ng isang tunay na lingkod- 
bayan. Kung mayroon pong Diyos na nagmamahal sa atin at bukal ng katarungan, sigurado 
akong kapiling na niya ngayon si Kalihim Jesse Robredo. Nawalan po ng asawa at ama ang 
kanyang pamilya; nawalan po ang bayan ng isang tapat at mahusay na pinuno. Nawalan po ako 
ng isang kapatid sa opisyal na pamilya sa Gabinete, ng kasangga sa mga ipinaglalaban, at ng 
kapartido. Nawalan po ako ng isang mabuting kaibigan. 

Sino po ba si Jesse Robredo? Talaga pong huwarang lingkod-bayan si Jesse: nakatuon 
palagi sa kapwa at handang magsakripisyo. Sa lahat ng mga nakakausap ko, siya ang taong 
walangkapase-pasensya sa bola. Kay Jesse, 
what you see is what you get. Tahimik at 
masipag siyang nagtatrabaho. Hindi siya 
nagpapadala sa kapangyarihan. Sa kabila ng 
naabot niya, nanatiling simple ang kanyang 
pamumuhay, hindi nalalayo sa karaniwang 
taong napakalapit sa kanyang puso. 

Si Jesse po ang tipo ng tao na batid 
ang kanyang mga kakayahan at limitasyon. 
Halimbawa po: sa kantahan. Kadalasan, kung may kasiyahan, kami-kami lang din ang nag- 
e- entertain sa sarili namin para makatipid. Si Jesse po, hahanap ng mga kasangga para may 
kasabay siyang kakanta ng chorus, at hindi na siya mag-i-individual performance. Pinakabuo 
ang kanyang ngiti kapag pasampa na siya sa entablado; tawa po siya nang tawa. Sa dami po ng 
mga talentadong nagkukumpol-kumpol, nakakapagtaka na halos wala kaming marinig sa mga 
boses nila bagama't may mikroponong tangan at kinakantahan. 

Dalawa raw po sa paborito niyang kanta ay "My Way" at "Impossible Dream." Tatak nga po 
siguro ito ng mga paniniwala niya. Hindi siya naging kuntento sa status quo; pinatunayan niya sa 
Naga na posible ang pagbabago. Posibleng madaig ang sistemang matagal nang nangingibabaw; 
posibleng madaig ang mga pulitikong napakatagal namayagpag at kinasangkapan ang pusisyon 
para sa pansariling interes. Trailblazer po si Jesse sa tuwid na daan. Pinatunayan niyang puwede 
palang magtagumpay sa pulitika nang hindi nagiging trapo. 

Hindi po madali ang pagtahak sa landas na ito, lalo na noong nagsisimula pa lamang siya sa 
serbisyong pampubliko. Malawak at malalim ang mga pagbabagong inasam niya, at sinimulan 
niya ito ng hindi nakakatiyak kung may patutunguhan nga bang tagumpay. Katambal ng kanyang 



Sino po ba si Jesse 
Robredo? Talaga pong 
huwarang lingkod-bayan 
si Jesse: nakatuon palagi 
sa kapwa at handang 
magsakripisyo. 



141 



mga pangarap ang napakaraming mga praktikal na konsiderasyon, ngunit pinili niyang lumihis 
sa mga nakasanayang pormula sa pulitika. Alam po ito ng mga taong malapit sa kanya. Mas 
pipiliin pa niyang makulong kaysa bumitaw sa mga causa na aming pinaniniwalaan. Nang nasa 
oposisyon po kami, hindi naman puwedeng suspendihin ganoon lang ang mga nasa lehislatura, 
pero sa katulad niyang mayor, laging nakabinbin ang banta ng pang-aapi o dineretso ngang 
inapi na. Mas marami at mas mabigat ang pagtatayang ginawa niya sa kanyang buhay pulitika. 
Ito pong isyu ukol sa kanyang citizenship, alam naman natin ang motibasyon. Pero hindi siya 
nagtanim ng galit sa mga nagsampa ng mga paulit-ulit na walang katuturang kasong ito. 

Alam po natin ang katotohanan sa pulitika; may ibang nakangiti kapag kaharap mo, pero 
kung tumalikod ka, pakiramdam mo sasaksakin ka. Napahanga talaga ako ni Jesse, dahil miski 
ang nagpakita sa kanya ng di-kagandahang 
ugali, kaya niyang harapin nang walang 
bahid ng galit at pagkayamot. 

Bukod sa mabait, matino, at mahusay 
si Jesse, mabilis din siyang umaksyon. 
Lahat, ASAP sa kanya; hindi niya ugaling 
patagalin sa mesa ang mga magagawa 
naman ngayon. Kung kayang simulan, 
sinisimulan agad niya. Naalala ko nga 
po, minsan may mga informal settler 
na kailangang ilipat dahil nakatira sa danger zone sila kapag bumabaha. Nag-text po sa atin 
na humihingi ng tulong at saklolo; kinakabahan sila sa paglilipat, at nagtatanong kung may 
kabuhayanba silangdaratnan. Kinausap po sila ni Jesse. Matapos angdalawangoras na meeting, 
ang mga SOS text, naging thank you text na po. Salamat muli Jesse! 

Iba po talaga si Jesse. Kapag mayroon tayong matinding problemang kinakaharap, palagi 
naman pong nandiyan ang mga taong sumusuporta at magsasabing, "Nasa likod mo kami." Pero 
si Jesse po, kabilang sa mga bibihirang tao na ang sasabihin, "Sir, ako na lang ang haharap, ako 
na lang po ang pu-pronta." Hindi po nasa likod; handang-handa pong nasa harapan. Talagang 
kasama sa pilosopiya niya sa buhay ang hindi maging pabigat sa kapwa; ang palaging mag- 
ambag ng pinakamalaki niyang maiaambag, o lagpas pa, para makahanap ng solusyon. 

Kay Leni at kina Aika, Tricia, at Jillian: Sa totoo lang, medyo nahihiya ako sa inyo. Kayo ang 
pamilya; sigurado akong pinakamabigat ang kalungkutang nararamdaman ninyo ngayon. Pero 



Napahanga talaga ako 
ni Jesse, dahil miski ang 
nagpakita sa kanya ng 
di-kagandahang ugali, 
kaya niyang harapin nang 
walang bahid ng galit at 
pagkayamot 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



talagang pinapahanga n'yo kami, dahil kayo pa ang nagbibigay ng lakas sa amin, kayo pa ang 
nagbibitbit sa amin. 

Leni, alam mo naman, hindi tayo masyadong nagkakakilala, dahil na rin pinilit ni Jesse 
na magkaroon siya palagi ng private time kasama ang kanyang pamilya. Alam ng Gabinete ito: 
Sa hirap ng aming mga pinagdadaanan, ang pinakagantimpala ko po sa kanila ay paminsan- 
minsan magpakain ng isang kaaya-ayang hapunan. Pero 'pag weekend ako nagyaya ng kainan, 
siguradong magpapaumanhin na si Jesse. Sagrado sa kanya ang oras kasama ang pamilya. Palagi 
siyang nagmamadaling makauwi sa Naga. 

Hindi lang ang mag-anak na Robredo ang nawalan ng padre de familia. Pati ang buong 
DILG, ang mga nagtatrabaho sa field, ang lahat ng natulungan niya, ang buong Naga, parang 
nawalan ng ama. Kaya nga po bukod sa kalungkutan, matinding panghihinayang din ang 
nararamdaman ko ngayon. Ang dami niyang mga piano, at talagang kitang-kita na po ang 
direksyon ng mga reporma. Namuno siya sa pagpapa-totoo ng mga teorya sa pamamahala na 
pinag-uusapan lang sa mga libro. Ginawa po niya iyan sa Naga, at iyan din po ang nasimulan 
na niyang gawin sa pambansang antas. Kayo na po ang mamili— sa Bureau of Fire Protection, 
kung saan nakakuha siya ng mga fire trucks na mas mura pero mas maganda ang kaledad at mas 
marami ang kakayahan; o sa BJMP; sa PNP; pati na ang mga informal settlers. Maraming mga 
lumang problema na, sa tulong ni Jesse, sa wakas, ay nakikitaan na natin ng solusyon. Sayang 
po talaga. 

Ngunit wala naman sigurong magsasabing may kulang pa sa mga inambag ni Jesse. Dapat 
po yata, tayong mga nakinabang sa kanyang buhay at pagsusumikap ang tumumbas sa kanyang 
mga nagawa at mag-ambag naman ng parte natin. 

Naalala ko pa po ang mga agam-agam namin nang biglaan ding pumanaw ang aking ama 
noong taong 1983. Marami po sa amin ang nagtanong: Paano na tayo? Sino ang magtutuloy? 
Parang ligaw na ligaw po kami; nawala ang aming pinuno. 

Pero sabi nga po ng aking ina, "If cowardice is infectious, then bravery is all the more 
infectious." Ang nag-iisa, dumami nang dumami hanggang nakamit na nga ng buong bayan ang 
pagbabago. Hindi mauubusan ng mga bayani ang lahing Pilipino. At kung si Jesse ay isa sa mga 
naging bunga ng sakripisyo ng aking ama, sigurado po akong may ibubunga ring mga bagong 
bayani ang pagpanaw ni Jesse. 

Sa ipinapakitang pagpupugay at pagmamahal ng taumbayan ngayon, sigurado ako, may 
isang henerasyon na naman ng mga Pilipinong mabibigyang-inspirasyon at mahihimok na 



143 



maglingkod sa ngalan ni Jesse. Sila po ang magdadala ng katiyakan: Katiyakang makikita natin 
ang piano ng Diyos sa likod ng pagkawala ni Jesse. Katiyakang makukuha natin ang gantimpala 
ng katarungang nagbubukal sa pagmamahal ng Diyos: Na lahat ng kagandahan at kabutihang 
naidulot at naipunla ni Jesse ay tunay at buong-buong mapipitas dahil sa dulot niyang 
inspirasyon. 

Ang sabi po sa pangalawang liham ni Paul to Timothy, Chapter 4, Verses 6 to 7: "For I 
am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith... ." Angkop na angkop po ito kay Jesse; 
mission accomplished na siya sa mundong ito. Marapat lang na matamasa na niya ang mga 
gantimpala ng isang buo at mabuting buhay, sa piling ng Diyos Ama. Nasa hanay na po si Jesse 
ng mga bayaning sumusubaybay sa atin mula sa kalangitan at nagbibigay-lakas sa atin upang 
ipagpatuloy ang kanilang mga mabuting gawain. Kaya't huwag na po tayong lumuha. Sa halip, 
magpasalamat tayo. Sa maikling panahong narito siya sa mundo, tayo pa ang nabiyayaan ng 
pagkakataong makapiling si Jesse Manalastas Robredo. 

Paalam, Jesse. Sa ngalan ng sambayanan, maraming, maraming salamat. 




JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



EULOGY BY THE SECRETARY OF BUDGET 
AND MANAGEMENT 

Florencio Abad 

Delivered at Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace, Manila, 
August 24,2012 

Mr. President, Mr. Vice President, ES Ochoa, my colleagues 
in Cabinet; Leni, Aika, Trisha, Jillian, mga kapatid at kamag- 
anakan ni Jesse; mga kababayan natin na taga-Naga; mga 
kasama ko pong naglilingkod sa Gabinete. Tutal ako naman ho 
ang kahuli-hulihang magsasalita, ginawa ko hong 30 pages itong testimonial ko. Ano naman po, 
12 pts, double-spaced. 

Yesterday, Sec. Cesar Purisima and I were discussing what Jesse's passing means for all of 
us here, and in a moment of levity, Cesar remarked, "Pare, mahirap itong nangyari kay Jesse." 
Sabi ko, "Bakit?" 

"Pare, 'pag tayo ang namatay at hindi ganito ang reaksyon ng taumbayan, baka sabihing 
wala tayong ginawa!" 

Ang sagot ko sa kanya, "Eh 'di magpa-cremate ka kaagad!" 

We laugh at this joke, of course, but Jesse is indeed a tough act to follow, not just in the way 
that the nation reacted to his death. He also set an extraordinary standard in the manner he 
lived his life— as a public official, as a family man, and as a servant of God. 

I'm sure that many of you in this room have been asked by the media and various other 
parties about how and why Jesse's death is such an enormous loss to our country. Why was his 
untimely passing a big blow to us, especially in view of our work as members of the Cabinet? 

I myself have been grappling with this question, and it's clear to me that Jesse's death isn't 
the loss of this administration alone: It is the entire country's. And our loss is defined, first and 
foremost, by Jesse's uncanny— almost unmatched— ability to navigate the delicate complexities 
of public service: the day-to-day demands that come with making our agencies simply 




X46 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



work; and while struggling with that, the much more demanding goal of reforming how our 
departments function so that we can achieve results efficiently and with greater transparency 
and accountability; and on top of all these, the even more wrenching demands of the politics of 
our work. 

To succeed in accomplishing all these is complex enough, but the challenges are magnified 
by the fact that we are living in a time of difficult and delicate transition, when elements resistant 
to change seek to undermine, if not altogether frustrate, our efforts. 

It doesn't end there. Throw in politics— especially the kind that we all have to deal with 
everyday— and our work in government is even more complicated. Although many of us would 
rather gloss over the political aspect of our duties or ignore it entirely, it is impossible to do so 
if we aim to set our priorities right and foster good and effective governance. This is because 
politics is inherent in our work, as well as a key component in our reform agenda of daang 
matuwid. 

And this, I believe, is where Jesse stood out: He deliberately immersed himself in the 
competing confluences of governance, politics, and development. Even more remarkably, he 
would emerge from these turbulent currents with his integrity intact, his optimism as boundless 

as when he began, and his actions a 
source of inspiration for everyone 
to follow in his footsteps. 

More important, he was 
able to produce concrete results, 
including his work in setting 
higher standards of performance 
among LGUs through the Seal of 
Good Housekeeping program. His 
efforts at introducing reforms in the bureaucracy— such as the culture of transparency he injected 
in procurement activities, especially in the PNP— spoke loud and clear for him. 

Many of our peers in development and politics were determined to do the same with 
utmost sincerity. Some of them began their terms with the most noble of intentions, only to 
find themselves consumed by the same corrosive culture of patronage they sought to change. 
Others who later recovered their bearings became embittered cynics, convinced that there is 
nothing anyone can do to transform this country. 



Even more remarkably, he would 
emerge from these turbulent 

currents with his integrity intact, 
his optimism as boundless as 

when he began, and his actions a 

source of inspiration for everyone 
to follow in his footsteps. 



147 



But Jesse? He managed to remain largely unscathed in a bureaucracy notorious for its moral 
casualties. He refined his political acumen without losing sight of his goal of widespread reform, 
showing his constituents what true leadership and public service were made of. 

He did all this without engendering acrimonious relationships with colleagues and 
stakeholders. In fact, he regularly dealt with people often deemed too dangerous: drug lords, 
crime syndicates, war lords, rogue policemen, among others. He calmly mediated between the 
government and urban informal settlers facing eviction, even as tempers rose and violent clashes 
broke out. In fact, in the last meeting he had with Alice Murphy, Capitana, and the UPA, Jesse was 
firm and unequivocal in directing them to dismantle structures built over esteros. 

He brought his mediation talents to bear on the difficult process of establishing peace and 
development in conflict-ridden communities in the ARMM. Furthermore, he dealt with political 
opponents squarely, with astounding skill and candor. 

In other words, he could talk to just about anybody with absolute sincerity. The doors to his 
heart were swung wide open to practically anyone: from state leaders to government staff, all the 
way to the lowliest of people in Naga, whom he dutifully served. 

How was Jesse able to do this? What made it possible for Jesse Robredo to accomplish so 
much without compromising his ethical and political responsibilities? I am sure Leni is in the best 
position to give us an explanation. 

Still, we try to answer these questions without realizingthat Jesse's work is exactly what public 
office requires. The principles he remained faithful to, the unique way he empowered Filipinos all 
over: These are precisely what effective public service— and what daang matuwid— is all about. 
And this is even clearer when we 
see Jesse's qualities that formed 
his work and his decisions: his 
humility and compassion, the 
way he pursued excellence, and 
the way he was passionately 
driven to make this country a 
better place for us. 

In the end, however, the sum 
of his achievements is founded on 
a basic truth: Mabuting tao si Jesse. Jesse was a good man. This may seem an oversimplification, 



The principles he remained 
faithful to, the unique way he 
empowered Filipinos all over: 
these are precisely what effective 
public service— and what daang 
matuwid— is all about 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



but oftentimes, we fail to recognize how hard it is to be good, to remain honorable in the face of 
unrelenting challenges. This is especially true when one has to work and survive— as we must— in 
a political environment that does not always embrace the values we promote. 

And here is another story about Jesse that I learned from Leni herself. Unknown to many, the 
assassination and death of Ninoy Aquino on August 21, 1983 was a critical turning point in Jesse's 
life. This event triggered in him an overwhelming sense of duty to the country, and he soon left his 
quiet and predictable life in the private sector to venture into the uncertain, rough-and-tumble 
world of public service and politics, ready and willing to serve. 

And as though fate commanded it, August 21 this year struck at us with a heavy blow, when 
Jesse's remains were recovered from Masbate's waters. 

Is it coincidence that both tragedies took place on the 21 st of August? Perhaps, perhaps not. 
But judging from the grief that swept the nation, judging from the public clamor for a new hero 
like Jesse, his passing invoked in us a renewed sense of commitment, in much the same way that 
Ninoy's death became Jesse's impetus for public service. 

And here we are now, at the very cusp of a revolution that the unprecedented election of 
President Aquino into office catalyzed, and which Jesse's narrative further enhanced: a movement 
for effective, transparent, and accountable governance, and a call for the empowerment of all 
Filipinos, especially the poor and disadvantaged. 

Although we continue to wrestle with Jesse's untimely death, this nation's grief is tempered by 
a renewed sense of hope: that Jesse's legacy of reform and integrity will prove timeless, sustained 
by a new culture of honest, compassionate, and competent governance that he championed in his 
lifetime. That Filipinos will honor the choice of right over wrong in the face of adversity. That there 
will be no shortage of good men and women in this country. 

In ending this tribute to a dear friend and colleague, the words of the late President Vaclav 
Havel of the Czech Republic in his "Summer Meditations" come to mind, words which I believe 
eloquently and aptly describe Jesse and his liberating politics: 

"If your heart is in the right place and you have good taste, not only will you pass muster in 
politics, you are destined for it. 

"If you are modest and do not lust after power, not only are you suited in politics, you absolutely 
belong there. 

"The sine qua non of a politician is not the ability to lie; he only need be sensitive and know 
when, what, to whom, and how to say what he has to say. 



149 



"It is not true that a person of principle does not belong in politics; it is enough for principles 
to be leavened with patience, deliberation, a sense of proportion, and an understanding of others. 

"It is not true that only the unfeeling cynic, the vain, the brash, and the vulgar can succeed in 
politics; such people, it is true, are drawn to politics, but, in the end, decorum and good taste will 
always count for more." 

Even as we bid you farewell, Jesse, we know you will always be here to guide us: you in your 
signature polo jack, with your eyes disappearing into your smiling face. Sige na, Sec. Jesse. Sige na. 




JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



PAPURING BINIGKAS NG KALIHIM NG 
TRANSPORT ASYON AT KOMUNIKASYON 

Manuel Mar A. Roxas 

Inihayag sa Bulwagang Kalayaan, Palasyo ng Malacanan, Lungsod ng Maynila, 
noong ika-24 ng Agosto 2012 

Ma'am Leni; Aika, Tricia, Jillian; sa mga kapatid at kamag- 
anakan ni Sec. Jesse; mga kapatid sa partido; friends, ladies and 
gentlemen. 

Wala na si Jesse. Isang linggo na po, almost to the hour, mula 
nang nag-crash ang eroplano. Hanggang ngayon, mahirap pa ring tanggapin, parang kailangang 
ulit-ulitin para lang masanay. 
Wala na si Jesse. 

Times like these make me question everything. Ano ba? What's the point? Anong dahilan 
na nawala sa amin ang isang matino at disenteng tao tulad ni Jesse? What lesson does God or 
the universe think we need to learn, such that they burden us with this loss? 

Wala akong sagot. But I do know a few things. 

Every interaction with Jesse always had, "Sige na, sige na, ako na." With these words, and 
with his real-time action, binalikat niya ang lahat ng mga maliliit, malalaki, kumplikadong mga 
problema na masabi natin sa kanya. Oftentimes, hindi pa natin alam na may problema, na- 
solusyunan na n'ya. Napakababa at simple ng kanyang kalooban. 

Alam natin angkarakter ni Jesse— laging nakangiti, hindi umiinit angulo, napaka-simpleng 
tao. He was so unassuming, so unaffected. He was more concerned with authenticity, with 
being true to himself. 

He was the first on the ground to clear the mud after a flood. He was at the forefront when 
a fire would raze a community. He would demonstrate frugality and proper responsibility in 
public spending. He was the first in the battle line for every cry, or plea, or struggle for a worthy 
cause. He was a pathfinder in our collective journey towards "Matuwid na Daan." 




151 



Kailangan siya sa Zamboanga, nandoon siya. May illegal na troso sa Agusan, nandoon siya. 
May unexploded IED sa isang bahagi ng Mindanao, nandoon siya. Pati 'yung convoy n'ya, 
natamaan din nitong IED na ito. May baha sa Manila, nandoon siya. 

These very real and everyday images and stories best embody, for all of us, Jesse's leadership, 
which was by example. 

He often said: "I will not ask of you what I'm not willing to do myself." 

Lahat tayo dito, lahat, hindi lang iisang kwento ang masasabi tungkol sa ating encounters 
kay Sec. Jesse at sa mga buo at wagas na tulong na ipinamahagi n'ya sa atin. 

Kaya nga masakit para sa atin ang pagkawala n'ya. Nawalan tayo ng isang tapat at totoong 
kaibigan. Nawalan tayo ng isang masipag at masinop na ka-trabaho sa gobyerno, at sa partido. 
Nawalan tayo ng isang maaasahang kasangga sa mga laban na ang tagal na nating isinusulong. 

Si Jesse, true believer— true believer sa mga ipinaglalaban n'ya at natin. Hindi lang tsaleko 
sa kanya o mga salita 'yung "Kayo ang Boss" o "Matuwid na Daan." 

Kasama na natin siya sa LP during the days when being a Liberal posed a real threat to one's 
life and liberty, let alone political career. 

As we look around us, we see the blossom of all his hard work: mga urban poor; mga 
biktima— mga biktima ng krimen at pang-aabuso; mga walang mapupuntahan; mga governors; 
mayors; LGUs; mga kabataan. 

Kung mayroon mang "take-away" lesson mula sa pangyayaring ito, it was that Jesse was 
willing to give his all for what is right. 

To his wondering about, "May epekto ba KtLtlg mayrOOtl matlg 

lahat ng trabaho ko?" Ma'am Leni, palagay "take-away" lesson mula 
ko, kitang-kita. Quotang-quota na po siya, SCI patlgyayaritlg itO, it 
sobrang boundary na ang pinunla n'ya. WaS that Jesse was willing 

And punla is the proper word here, dahil tO give his all far what IS 
itong nakikita nating blossoms ay siyang right. 



magsisilbing binhi, na tayo na ang mag- 

aalaga— papatubigan at babantayan, hanggang sa magbunga ng mga kabutihan na ipinaglaban 
ni Sec. Jesse. 

Tatapusin ko itong mensahe by recalling another feature of any meeting anyone of us would 
have with Sec. Jesse. "Mabalos," Bicolanos say this, where it literally means to make "bawi" not 
in the sense of kickback, though we know JMR is truly "kuripot." But in the nature of "to repay, 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



to reciprocate, to respond." Sec. Jessie, 'yan na lang siguro ang masasabi ko. "Mabalos kami," 
for all the goodness, generosity of spirit, patience, commitment, devotion, respect, and dignity 
that you unselfishly showered upon us, by paying it forward to all those who needed the most 
in our country. 



ang panahon natin dito sa goodness, generosity of spirit, 

mundong ito, and there's so patience, commitment, devotion, 
much to do Kaiiangan nating respect, and dignity that you 

gawin ang lahat ng kaya nating unselfishly showered upon us, by 

gawin para ayusin ang kayang paying itforWOVd tO all tllOSe wllO 

ayusin, hanggang kaya pa natin, needed the most in our country. 



hanggang nandito pa tayo. 

Finally, bago mawala sa isip ko, to use another Jesse-ism, perhaps the answer to all those 
questions I talked about earlier is the simple truth: that the way Sec. Jesse lived his life is God's 
gift to us. 

Maraming salamat Sec. Jesse. Noon at ngayon, Liberal ka, marangal. 

Sec. Jesse, tuluy-tuloy lang kami. Alam naming hindi mo rin kami pababayaan. 

You're home now, rest well. Sige lang, sige lang. 

And now, I'd like to ask our leader to lead us in another Liberal original, community singing 
of'BayanKo". 

Bayang Barrios will lead us and the President will join us. 



Sandali lang naman talaga 





153 




EULOGY BY THE SECRETARY OF ENERGY 

Jose Rene Almendras 

Delivered at Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace, Manila, 
August 24,2012 



Mr. President, Mr. Vice President, Atty. Leni, the whole 

JRobredo family: Magandang gabi po. I think Jesse would have 
wanted also to acknowledge many people here tonight. They are 
the PSG, the Malacanang Engineering, PMS, pati ho 'yung m S a 
pulis, AFP personnel na tumulong sa lahat ng pagpapasok dito. Jesse always said we need to 
make sure that the ordinary person is acknowledged. So sa inyong lahat po na nakikinig, to my 
fellow workers in government: Magandang gabi sa inyong lahat. 

Mr. President, magsusumbong lang po ako. Umiyak po si Ma'am Dinky n'ung nagsi-speech 
siya. Alam ni Atty. Leni 'yun, from the Saturday afternoon when it happened, the Cabinet made 
a decision, you will not be left alone without a Cabinet member by your side. But the President 
had very clear instructions: "Walang iiyak sa harap ni Atty. Leni at sa mga bata." Kaya po n'ung 
nasa Naga, bigla na lang po nawawala ang mga Cabinet members dahil hindi po sila puwedeng 
magpakitang umiiyak sa inyo so nagtatago po sila. 

We figured Sec. Jesse would have wanted tonight's tribute to be as informal, as casual 
because that was Sec. Jesse. So ang pamagat po ng kwento ko ngayong gabi ay: "Ang Tsinelas" 
(bow). Sabi ni Sec. Lou, 'pag si Jesse [ang] tinanong, hindi tsinelas— "sinelas"— 'di ba Sec. Lou? 
OK. 

Nasa NDPvRMC po kami, on the first day of the floods, mga nine o'clock in the morning. 
Karamihan po ng Gabinete nandoon na. 'Yung ground floor po ng NDRRMC, nandoon lahat 
ng monitors, lahat ng— ang gulo-gulo po 'nun. Mayroong round table doon sa right side ng 
entrance. Pagpasok ko, nakaupo si Sec. Jesse, naka-dekwatro. Lo and behold, naka-tsinelas— 
naka-sinelas— si Sec. Jesse. 



2S4 JESSE M.ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Sabi ko sa kanya: "Nakakainggit ka naman, Sec, relax na relax." Sabi niya sa akin: "Pare, ito 
ang tamang pambaha footwear. Karamihan sa mga kababayan nating nababaha naka-tsinelas." 
Sabi ko: "Oo nga eh. Sinabi nila magdala daw ng botas." "Hindi, botas, mainit, mabigat. 'Pag 
nabasa na 'yung paa mo, mas masarap naka-tsinelas. Huhubarin mo pa rin 'yung botas mo." 

Scene 2: Nasa helicopter po kami, namamasyal kami sa Central Luzon. Kinabahan po 
ako n'ung nakita ko 'yung pilot ng chopper namin; n'ung pakanan na kami nang paglampas 
ng Arayat, biglang bank to the left. Sabi ko: "Oops, may problema." Kasi alam ko nandoon ang 
Paniqui, ba't kami papunta dito. Nakita ko rin 'yung ulap. Tumutungo po si Sec. Joel dahil pati 
siya kinakabahan. Tung piloto po namin biglang bank to the left; nang nahanap 'yung SCTEX, 
bank to the right at sinundan na namin 'yung SCTEX. Sabi ko: "OK, tagilid na 'yung visibility." 
Bigla pong nag-zero visibility that's why we had to do an emergency landing. Lahat n'ung five 
helicopters landed within less than five minutes, I think. Paglapag na paglapag po namin, sabi 
ko— katabi ko po si Sec. Jesse— sabi ko: "Pare, kinabahan ako d'un." Hinawakan niya po 'yung 
tuhod ko. "Pare, kung hindi pa natin panahon, hindi pa natin panahon. Hindi pa natin panahon." 

I spent the rest of that day beside Sec. Jesse. We traveled to four provinces at the back of a 
coaster na napakatagtag, na hindi po kami makatulog. Ang sarap po ng tulog ni Sec. Mar at ni 

Sec. Babes Singson na nasa harap; kami po sa 

likod, hindi makatulog. Pero kaming dalawa "SeC, mayrOOtl peVO Hindi 
lang po ni Sec. Jesse ang nakapagmeryenda pCLtlgmeryeTldcL itO eh." 

ng alas-kwatro ng hapon. Sabi ni Sec. Jesse: "Ano ba 'yan?" Chickenjoy 
"Pare, gutom na ako. May pakain ba tayo with rice. Sabi ni Sec. Jesse: 
diyan?" Sabi niya: "Sec, mayroon pero "Puwede na 'yan." 



hindi pangmeryenda ito eh." "Ano ba 'yan?" 

Chickenjoy with rice. Sabi ni Sec. Jesse: "Puwede na 'yan." 

Alam n'yo ba po kung bakit dalawa lang kami ni Sec. Jesse ang kumain? Hindi po sa dahil 
kami lang ang gutom, lahat po kami [ay] gutom. Ang problema po kasi walang pantulak, walang 
maiinom so lahat sila hindi na kumain. Kaming dalawa ni Sec. Jesse, kumain po kami kasi gutom 
kami. May isangbote ng mineral water galing sa harap, inabot po ni Joel, so naghati po kami ni 
Sec. Jesse doon. 

That day that I spent with Sec. Jess was a very fruitful day. We talked so many wonderful 
topics that day. We talked about leadership; we talked about governance. We said: When you go 
to a flooded area, you will see the quality of leadership by the situation of the flooded people— 



155 



and totoo po 'yun. [At a] certain point, we talked and said some leaders, pang-picture taking; 
some leaders, tunay na leaders— willing to serve the people and you will see them very clearly. 

When we were going around dahil po sa panic at takot ko noong aming exciting na 
landing, naiwan ko po 'yung boots ko sa helicopter. Noong dumating po kami sa Valenzuela, 
nang papasok na sa eskwelahan— 'yung labas po ng eskwelahan baha. Isang talampakan 'yung 
tubig. Nakapasok po 'yung sasakyan ng Pangulo pero 'yung coaster na sinakyan namin, hindi po 
magkasya sa gate. Napilitan po kamingbumaba. Lahat po kami— si Ma'am Dinky naka-boots eh, 
si Sec. Mar— basa po kaming lahat. Noong nandoon na kami sa eskwela, tumutulo na po lahat ng 
mga pantalon at nanlalamig na po kami. Sabi ko kay Sec. Jesse: "Sana mayroon tayong tsinelas." 
Sabay ngiti siya sa akin: "Sec, magpabili ka." Sabi ko: "Sec, malaki ang problema ko. Mahirap 
maghanap ng tsinelas na size 12." 

Noong bumalik po sa coaster, hindi na sumabay si Sec. Jess sa amin. Nagtaka ako [kung] 
bakit. Pagdating namin sa Paombong, umakyat na po kami sa stage, magsisimula na po ang 
talumpati ng Pangulo, medyo na-late si Sec. Jesse. Noong paakyat po siya sa stage, nakatingin 
siya sa akin. Nang pumatong po siya sa stage, kumakaway siya sa akin. So tumingin naman ako 
sa kanya. Sabi niya sa akin— pinakita niya po sa akin, naka-tsinelas na siya. Inggit na inggit po 
ako. 

The real topic I want to share with you tonight is Sec. Jesse's brand of "tsinelas leadership." 
I have come to define tsinelas leadership as the pragmatic and more demonstrative version of 
servant leadership that Sec. Jess always talked about. I will tell you; I will explain to you four 
features of tsinelas leadership— Jesse Robredo version. 

Tsinelas leadership is about the willingness na lumusob sa baha, [to be] willing to go where 
you normally do not go— to the most remote areas just to be with the most disadvantaged people. 
We all know Sec. Jesse rarely said "no" that's why he was one of the most well-traveled Cabinet 
members. He went to many places where some of us could not go to. Last night, I stood here for 
several hours. Ang dami pong taga-Mindanao na pumunta dito to honor Sec. Jesse. Lahat po 
sila, pagdating sa amin, nakatayo kami doon: Maraming salamat po. "Sir, taga-Mindanao kami; 
Sir, taga-ano." It was just amazing that he has been to many places in the Philippines just to 
reach people. 

A second characteristic of tsinelas leadership is breaking down the barriers between us 
and the people we serve. Many years ago, a young architect told me: "I will design it so nicely 
na mahihiya pumasok ang naka-tsinelas." Nandito po tayo sa Malacanang, nandito po tayo sa 



2$ JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Kalayaan Hall. Look around you. This place was not designed for tsinelas. And yet last night, and 
throughout most of today, how many thousands of slippers came into this room to pay tribute, 
to pay homage and honor to Sec. Jesse? Naiilang lumapit ang naka-tsinelas sa naka-barong. 
Leaders must be acceptable, accessible to those they serve. That was Sec. Jesse Robredo. 

Third point about tsinelas leadership: Personally po, mayroon akong relaxation trigger. 
When I go home, I start relaxing when I take off my shoes and put on my slippers. Marami 
pong miyembro ng Gabinete ng Pangulong Aquino ang hindi nakakatulog na naka-sapatos. 
Tuwing bumabiyahe po kami, naghuhubaran po lahat 'yan ng sapatos sa eroplano. Hindi ko po 
pinapatamaan si Sec. Cesar Purisima. Pero the minute pong maghubad ng sapatos si Secretary 
Cesar Purisima sa eroplano, within five minutes, tulog na po 'yan. Alam po 'yan ng Pangulo kasi 
'yan ang sinasabi ng Pangulong "the concert starts." But really, wearing slippers is the most 
casual form. Being casual is being warm. Leaders must be casual with the people they serve so 
that they can listen, hear, and empathize with the people that they serve. That was Secretary 
Jesse Robredo in his truest form. 

Tsinelas leadership is about back to basics— base-level transformation. Sec. Jesse and I 
share the same problems. He was pushing for good governance in local government. I am still 
trying to push good governance in electric cooperatives. In the last two weeks of Sec. Jesse's 
life, I talked to him or texted with him everyday because of common problems that we shared. 

He believed and I shared in his belief 
that good leadership and governance 
structures in the barangays will naturally 
result in good leadership and governance 
structures in the whole republic. It's about 
transforming the expectations of people 
from their leaders so that the next set of 
leaders will be better than the good ones 
we now have. Tsinelas leadership is about 
working on the basics— no frills, no kaartehan; something as uncomplicated and casual as the 
tsinelas but with a very, very clear vision. That was Secretary Jesse Robredo. 

My last conversation with Sec. Jesse was on Friday morning. He called me up at about eight 
o'clock in the morning. Sabi niya: Sec. Ren— Rene po ako but tinanggal niya 'yung "e." So tawag 
ko rin sa kanya Sec. Jess. Binawian ko rin po siya. Sabi niya: "Wala na ba talaga tayong puwedeng 



"Tsinelas leadership is 
about back to basics— base- 
level transformation. Sec, 
Jesse and I share the same 
problems. He was pushing 
for good governance in local 
government" 



gawin tungkol sa baha sa Bulacan?" And the reason for that was Sec. Jess, Sec. Singson, and 
myself at the back of that coaster kept on looking for ways and means to mitigate and bring 
down the water levels as fast as we can. We talked about Angat Dam, we talked about changing 
some protocols, and I said: "Sec. Jess, ako na bahala. Tatawagan ko si Sec. Babes, mag-uusap 
kami then we'll update you." The very last line that Sec. Jess told me was: "Sige, pare. Kawawa 
talaga ang taumbayan." That is tsinelas leadership— a genuine concern and care for the people 
that we serve. That is Sec. Jess Robredo in its true context. 

These five characteristics and many more is Sec. Jesse Robredo and his legacy to all of us. 
Many years ago po, the tsinelas was fashionably unacceptable to high society. Sabi nga nila, 
"tsinelas crowd" o "bakya crowd." Then came flip-flops and Havaianas, and the whole fashion 
trend ensued— mas mahal yet basically tsinelas pa rin po. 

My wish, my prayer: Sana po maging uso din ang sinimulan ni Sec. Jess na tsinelas 
leadership. Atty. Len, fashion trendsetter din po pala si pogi. Malamang po next year, 2013, may 
mga kandidato na mangangampanyang naka-tsinelas. Sana naman po hindi lang pang-picture 
taking ang tsinelas nilang suot. Sana po they will step up to the standards that have been set by 
Sec. Jess Robredo, and sana po, they will be worthy to wear the tsinelas. Maraming salamat po 
sa inyo. 




2$ g JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



EXCERPTS OF 
EULOGIES 



EULOGY OF MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
CHAIRPERSON LUALHATI ANTONINO (REPRESENTING THE 
NATIONAL SECURITY CLUSTER): 

During the Cabinet Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"Just like the President, Jess saw the potential of Mindanao and its different leaders all over 
the archipelago. Sec. Jess was most admired by many of our Mindanao leaders across the 
political spectrum even during his stint as [a] local executive himself because of his unselfish 
effort in sharing governance's best practices, his patience in mentoring young local officials, 
and his sincerity in living and serving." 

EULOGY OF SENATOR FRANCIS PANGILINAN: 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"It was therefore a distinct honor and privilege to meet the man who symbolized a kind of 
people-centered governance and political leadership that, I believe, was desperately needed 
by our nation... I am not ashamed to admit today that I have nothing but admiration and the 
highest respect for Jesse. Isa akong fan. Kung may mga Noranian o Vilmanian o Sharonian, sa 
larangan ng pamamahala sa gobyerno, isa akong Jessinian." 



"Let us not weep for a true warrior for change who, had he lived, would have been instrumental 
in ushering the transformation of the nation he so truly loved. Instead, let us rise up men and 
women of conviction, let us rise up Liberal Party, pick up from where Jesse left off so that 
we may— in the manner Jesse would have had it— as one people, finally fulfill his dream of a 
transformed Filipino nation." 



IfiQ JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



EULOGY OF HOUSE SPEAKER FELICIANO "SONNY" BELMONTE: 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"No words can fully describe the tragedy in losing Jesse. He was a kind, humble, noble, zealous 
advocate of reform, and effective and efficient leader... He hardly stood out because he was not 
one to trumpet his success or really vie attention to himself. Pagka-magkakasama kayo eh hindi 
mo masabi na ito pala ay leading hero, itongkasama natin dito ha, dahil sa [kapag] kausap natin 
siya, parang pareho lang— problema niya, problema natin, pareho lang. And, yes, we know now 
that he had done so much more than what we hear from just talking with him." 

"To the family whom he dearly loved— Leni, Aika, Patricia, Jillian— our deepest condolences; 
our prayers are with you. Thank you for sharing Jesse with us. To the City of Naga and the DILG 
family, while you have lost a great leader, the grand legacy of your mayor, our secretary shall live 
on. From the fire of passionate, selfless public service that he started that it may further spread 
among you, I am certain that someday, not a few who are inspired by Jesse will step up and 
carry on the mission he had set out to do." 

"With love I bid you, Jesse, a fond farewell. You have done us proud and you will be greatly 
remembered [not only] by us here who are your party mates but, in fact, by everybody in this 
country who value good governance; who have ambitions; and who want to uplift the love of 
the great majority of our people. Kaya paalam, Jesse. Gusto ko sanang sabihin 'Mabuhay ka!' 
and I'd like to say 'Mabuhay ka, Jesse!'" 



161 



EULOGY OF NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER CESAR GARCIA 
(REPRESENTING THE NATIONAL SECURITY CLUSTER): 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"Secretary Robredo will always be remembered as a man for others. He sought political power 
not [for] himself but for the betterment of his country and his countrymen. He always believed 
that corruption is selfishness... Secretary Robredo lived in the enduring belief that to be a good 
political leader is not to be corrupt and not to be corrupt is to be selfless. Indeed, the President 
made the right decision in appointing this very selfless public servant to lead one of the most 
important and highly sensitive government positions." 

"Watching and observing the people who came to visit, it is clear that he touched them in a way 
that gives us hope that our people still recognize and yearn for [a] high standard of decency, 
integrity, and dedication in public service. And that they had not grown cynical of our political 
culture, but instead expect us to serve them by the same standard that our colleague and friend, 
Secretary Robredo, did. Indeed, his life's legacy had such its lifetime, and his seeds of hope and 
reform are now planted in many of us." 

EULOGY OF BATANES REPRESENTATIVE HENEDINA ABAD: 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"Ang buhay ni Sec. Jesse ay pagpapatunay na puwede pala ang makabuluhang pulitika sa 
pamamagitan ng mahusay at matinong pamumuno. Binigyan niya ng mukha ang uri ng pulitika 
na makabuluhan. Paggamit ng kapangyarihan na magpapabago sa sambayanan. Pagbabago na 
magbibigay ng dignidad, katarungan, maayos na pamumuhay sa lahat lalo't higit para sa mga 
taong pinagkaitan ng mga ito ng ating kasaysayan at balangkas ng ating lipunan." 

"Naipakita ito ni Sec. Jesse nangbuongpagpapakumbaba. Puwede pala, puwede palangmaging 
isang matino at mahusay na pulitiko, at manatili sa poder sa gitna ng masalimuot, makasarili, 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



at magulong pulitika sa ating bansa. Ipinakita ni Secretary Jesse kung paano magagamit ang 
pulitika at kapangyarihan sa pagsulong ng isang matinong pamamahala na kumikilala ng 
kapangyarihan ng mamamayan." 

"He sought to establish a method and a system to ensure that competence, honesty, citizens' 
involvement, especially of the marginalized, become standards in the conduct of public service 
and our politics. Hindi sapat ang maging matino, kailangan may sistemang magtutulak at magdi- 
disiplina sa iyo upang maging matino. Tan ang madalas bigkasin ni Sec. Jesse. It's not enough to 
be good. There has to be a system that forces you to be good." 

"Huwag po nating sayangin ang inspirasyon ng buhay ni Secretary Jesse. Bilang mga kasama 
niya sa partido Liberal, tulungan natin siyang tuparin ang kanyang misyon. Ituloy, isulong, at 
paigtingin ang mga gawain at programa para sa pagbabago. Higit sa lahat, pagbabago ng ating 
pulitika at pamamahala. Sec. Jesse, sobra-sobra na ang quota mo. Bumabawi lang kami sa'yo. 
Kaya kami naman angmagsasabi sa'yo: sige na, sige na. Kami na angbahala. Babantayan namin 
ang mga nakamit na tagumpay ng iyong mga nagawa at isusulong ang iyong mga nasimulan. 
Isang karangalan na maging kasama ka sa pagsulong ng matuwid na daan. Secretary Jesse, 
paalam." 

EULOGY OF SECRETARY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES RAMON PAJE (REPRESENTING THE CLIMATE CHANGE 
CLUSTER): 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"Si Jesse po— I was watching Atty. Leni [a] few days ago— naninindig 'yung balahibo ko 
kasi sinasabi mo doon 'di ba, exactly 'yan din po ang sinabi ni Jesse sa akin: "Hindi ba, Mon, 
napakasarap magsilbi sa bayan ngayon? Alam mong suportado ka, alam mong may nasa likod 
ka." Tama kako, Jess. Alam niyo po kungbakit? Dati po, dito sa Malacanang, ang patakaran iba. 
Kapag hinarass [harass] ka, pagbigyan mo. Kapag nagka-kaso ka, sagutin mo. Ngayon po, gawin 
mo lang ang tama, 'pag hinarass ka, sigurado kang may Pangulo ka sa likod mo." 



163 



"So, as I've said, Jesse was my sounding board in governance. I have not seen [in] my entire 
career life the purity of public service other than Jesse's. Doon ko po nakita kung gaano ka- 
pure ang pagsilbi ni Jesse sa bayan. Kaya po, Jesse, definitely, we will mourn for your untimely 
departure. We will miss you. We will miss your company. We will miss your friendship, laughter, 
and, to me, my armor." 

EULOGY OF SECRETARY OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND 
DEVELOPMENT CORAZON "DINKY" SOLIMAN (REPRESENTING THE 
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT POVERTY REDUCTION CLUSTER): 

During the Liberal Party Memorial Service. 

August 25, 2012 

"Jesse believed in the human capacity to undertake and institutionalize positive change. As a 
public servant, he invested time and energy, and resources to build productive relationships 
with the citizens and citizens from all walks of life and government. With the citizens of Naga, 
the citizens of Bicol— across income class, across political beliefs, across faiths, across ethnicity, 
across different faiths— Jesse brought to life a democracy: The government that is one of the 
people, by the people, and for the people. And I think all of us here can do no less in making 
sure that that lives on." 

"So Jesse, alam mo, ito naman 'yung palagi mong sinasabi so sige na, sige na, pahinga ka na. Sige 
na, sige na, itutuloy namin ang pagpapanday ng demokrasya. Sige na, sige na, tutulungan namin 
sila Leni, huwag kang mag-alala. At sige na, sige na, itutuloy namin ang matapat, mahusay at 
matuwid na paglilingkod sa sambayanan. Paalam." 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



HOMILIES 



Mass for Sec. Jesse Robredo 
and Companions 

XAVIERLOLIN.SJ 

La Salle Greenhills Chapel, Mandaluyong City 

We are all familiar with this scene from the Old Testament: The Israelites are hungry after 
fleeing Egypt. They find nothing to eat in the dry and desolate desert. And God sends them 
bread from above, manna, to feed them. We are just as familiar with this scene from the New 
Testament: The crowds on top of the hill are hungry as they listen to Jesus. There is nothing to 
eat except a few loaves of bread and a few fish. And Jesus multiplies bread and feeds them all, 
and there is more than enough bread for the crowd, the leftovers filling even several baskets 
full. 

In today's Gospel from John, Jesus tells us: 

I am the living bread that came down from heaven; whoever eats this bread will live forever. 
And the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life of the world... (6:51) whoever eats this bread 
will live forever (6:58). 

My sisters and brothers, the truth is: We are hungry for bread. We long to be filled. And 
God who knows our deepest needs and hungers sends us bread, not just ordinary bread, not 
just manna, but his very son, the True Bread that comes down from heaven, to fill our deepest 
hungers, and to be the answer to our deepest needs. 

It is most meaningful, most beautiful that we gather around the Lord's table today as we 
break bread— we with our many hungers both physical and many times spiritual. We hunger 
for answers, we hunger for direction, we hunger to know that one spot where the aircraft and 
Sec. Jesse Robredo and his companions are. We hunger for the bread of hope, of consolation, of 



167 



courage, of trust, of faith. It is only right and just that we, as one community, one family, come 
together, praying with all our hearts to Jesus, our One and True Bread. 

We can hear, in the first reading, the timely words from Proverbs: Come, eat of my food, and 
drink of the wine (Prov. 9:5). 

And how we wish to find answers. How we long to hear good news. How we want to see 
more— beyond that one piece of wreckage, to see Secretary Jesse Robredo all in one piece, alive, 
with his companions. But we can find comfort and consolation in the truth that Jesus is with us 
here and now as we break bread. He who comes down to earth, sent by the Father, our Bread of 
Life, is present to us— pained by our pains, suffering with our suffering, troubled by our many 
troubles. 

In the letter to the Ephesians, Paul tells us: ... make the most of every opportunity... be filled 
with the Holy Spirit... singing and playing to the Lord in your hearts, giving thanks always and 
for everything... (Eph. 5: 9-20). But how can we sing and play in our hearts? How can we give 
thanks at this time of sadness and confusion and doubt? 

Perhaps we can still give thanks as we remember how we have been sent bread in the person 
of Secretary Jesse, how he has been bread of life to us. We are told that yesterday, he rushed 
home to attend the ceremony where her daughter received an award. I have seen pictures of 
him on Facebook, attending her daughter's swimming competition, finding time for his family 
amid his busy schedule. He has been bread of life to his family. 

We who are his constituents when he was mayor in Naga have benefitted from his serving. I 
remember when storms struck the city, Mayor Jesse was there ahead of everyone, cutting trees, 
clearing roads. I have seen for myself how once, early in the morning after a storm, he cleans 
up our street with his men— even before we in the neighborhood start to do so. (I remember 
this with some embarrassment.) Naga is a poor city when he starts his term— a third class city, 
I think. Naga becomes a first-class city as he ends his years as mayor. Secretary Jesse has been 
bread to us in Naga. 



2 fig JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



I cannot continue without mentioning Our Lady of Penafr ancia and his deep devotion to 
her whom we Bikolanos call INA. Every year, we see the familiar scene of the voyadores during 
the Penafrancia fiesta. The voyadores are the men who carry the image of Ina. Among them, 
we always see a familiar face— Secretary Jesse who is a voyador. Many photos of him have 
been posted on Facebook, a number of them showing him with Ina. One picture stands out in 
particular. It is that of him as one of the voyadores. Like the other voyadores, he walks barefoot 
as he walks with Ina and as he accompanies her to the Naga River, to the procession that takes 
her home to the Basilica. Amid our sadness and our many questions, I find much comfort and 
consolation in this image: Jesse walking and accompanying Ina to take her home. I know that 
Ina walks with him now as accompanies him home. 

I would like to end with two things: a prayer quote from St. Augustine and a prayer that all 
the churches in the Archdiocese of Caceres in Naga are praying today. 

From St. Augustine: 

God of our life, there are days when the burdens we carry chafe our shoulders and 
weigh us down; when the road seems dreary and endless, the skies grey and threatening; 
when our lives have no music in them, and our hearts are lonely, and our souls have lost 
their courage. Flood the path with light, run our eyes to where the skies are full of promise; 
tune our hearts to brave music; give us the sense of comradeship with heroes and saints of 
every age; and so quicken our spirits that we may be able to encourage the souls of all who 
journey with us on the road of life, to Your honour and glory. 

We thank the Lord for our hero. 

And the prayer to the Father, through the intercession of Ina: 

Father, as one family here in Naga City and the entire country, 

hear our prayer for the safe and immediate rescue 

of our fellow Nagueno, DILG Secretary Robredo. 

Grant skill, strength, and sharp eyes to the rescuers. 

Send your holy angels to guide them and to protect those men. 



169 



Grant comfort, peace, grace, and strength to all who love him. 

Bring him home to a joyful reunion. 

O Mary, Our INA, Our Lady of Penafrancia, 

you know Sec. Jess to be your ardent devotee, 

intercede for him to your Son Jesus. 

We ask this through Christ our Lord. Amen! 

Our Lady of Penafrancia, comfort us 

and come to help your devotee and son, Sec. Jess Robredo. 

Amen. 



2 JO JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Homily during the funeral Mass 
of Sec. Jesse M. Robredo 

REV. FR. KULANDAIRAJ AMBROSE, MOP 

Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia, Naga City. 
August 28, 2012. 

His Excellency, President Benigno S. Aquino III; Mrs. Leni Robredo, wife of the late 
Secretary; their children Aika, Trisha, and Gillian; family and relatives; Cabinet Secretaries; 
Hon. John Bongat, Mayor of Naga City; national and local government officials; members of the 
clergy; people of Naga; my dear Filipino people. 

In an uncanny coincidence, the lifeless body of Sec. Jesse was found on the same day of the 
death anniversary of a great Filipino, Ninoy Aquino. Ninoy once said, "The Filipino is worth 
dying for." And he proved it with his own death. Today, another great Filipino, Secretary Jesse 
Robredo, has shown by his life and his death that every Filipino is worth dying for. To this great 
man, let us put our hands in applause! 

Why me? That's what came to my mind when Atty. Leni asked if I would celebrate and 
preach at this funeral Mass of her late husband. Why me? A simple missionary priest working 
among the most forgotten ones in society, why me? Then she added: "Father, that's what Jesse 
would really want." Yes, in death as in life, Secretary Jesse is a man of the ordinary people. I'm 
humbled and honored to do this for a friend, a great man and a champion of the poor. 

I am a priest of the Missionaries of the Poor from Jamaica. Our mission is to shelter and 
care for abandoned children, special children, the disabled, and elderly who are homeless. We 
also provide nutrition, health care, and spiritual care for the indigent. For the past six years, I 
have worked in the Philippines, in our mission center, which is not far from here on this same 
road. I want to thank the family for including the Missionaries of the Poor as one of the favored 
charities of the late Secretary to which donations can be made. We will establish a free clinic 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



for the poor in his honor. 



Ten days ago, when we heard the news about Secretary Jesse's plane crash, followed by 
the discovery of his body three days later, like you, I was shocked by the suddenness and the 
seeming cruelty of it all. My mind was racing to find some logic in what seemed a senseless 
tragedy. Words simply seem to fail us in such situations. 

But we take comfort that the word of God never fails. And so we read in the Book of Wisdom 3: 

The souls of the just are in the hand of God, and no torment will ever touch them. In the 
eyes of the foolish they seemed to have died, and their departure was thought to be an affliction, 
and their going from us to be their destruction, but they are at peace... 

They will receive great good, because God tested them and found them worthy of himself; 
like gold in the furnace he tried them, and like a sacrificial burnt offering he accepted them... 

They will govern nations and rule over peoples, and the Lord will reign over them forever. 

I stand here before you today, not as a representative of government or politics, not as an 
official representative for the Church, not as a spokesman for the family, but I speak on behalf 
of the countless poor and indigent, the tsinelas people to whom Secretary Jesse was a true 
friend and a big brother. Allow me to share about the man we're honoring today from that 
personal perspective. 

I first met Jesse Robredo 20 years ago on a rainy day in June 1992. I had accompanied our 
Founder, Fr. Ho Lung, from Jamaica on our first visit to the Philippines. We were looking at the 
possibility of our ministry among the poor and needy in the Philippines. Archbishop Leonardo 
Legaspi welcomed us to Naga and introduced us to then Mayor Jesse Robredo, because the 
good Archbishop knew, that like himself, Robredo had a heart for the poor. 

We met at the urban poor relocation site in San Rafael. With Robredo was his young 
beautiful wife, Atty. Leni, and their eldest daughter, Aika. Aika, I doubt you'll remember this 



173 



because you were still a tiny tot then. Two things impressed me about Mayor Jesse in that first 
meeting: He was a man of family and a man of the poor. 

Next day, we met again, this time at the Mayor's office. I was surprised by what I saw as the 
mayor's office. His office was simply a large table— more like a family dining table. The Mayor 
was seated at one end of the table, and there were several people of all sorts seated or standing 
around in the room. They were all seeking the mayor's attention or assistance with some need. 
He was their father, and they were his children. 

And in the last six years that I have been in the Philippines, Mayor and, later, Secretary 
Jesse and I have met so many times either at his office or more often than not, at our mission 
center in San Rafael. Jesse was there at every occasion we had. Sometimes, he would simply 
drop by just to find out how we were doing and if he could help in any way. 

One of the images of Secretary Jesse that I would carry with me to my grave happened at 
the height of typhoon Reming in 2006. When the winds were howling and the roofs were flying 
and the trees were falling, I was shocked when the mayor's car drove into our center. Mayor 
Jesse came to find out if everyone was safe. I couldn't believe he would risk his own life to make 
sure the poor were safe and well! I later found out that this was something Mayor Jesse did 
every time there was a typhoon. 

Then, he was there at my place every August 7, to wish me Happy Birthday! He was there 
during our free medical missions. He was there with his wife and three girls every December 
25 for the Christmas party and gift giving for the indigent, before proceeding to his parents' 
home for Christmas dinner! 

Secretary Jesse was there whenever we needed him, and he was there even when we didn't 
need him! He felt comfortable with us and we felt comfortable with him— maybe because we 
wear sandals! You can call it the tsinelas friendship if you want. When he became Cabinet 
Secretary, I thought we wouldn't see him anymore because of his busy schedule and high 
position. But he still found time to visit us now and then. And it was the still same Jesse Robredo, 
with his casual nature and boyish smile. 

JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Secretary Jesse Robredo was a man with a golden heart, a brilliant mind, and a steely will! 
He was a humble man. He was a man of compassion for the poor and needy, and for everyone. 
Leaders must have vision and will. A vision without a will remains a fairy tale and a will 
without a vision can be disastrous. Secretary Jesse Robredo had both vision and will, and thus, 
he fulfilled his mission. He was a man of the masses, the real Pinoy Big Brother to the countless 
nameless and faceless persons who make up the bulk of our society. 

Secretary Jesse also had a great sense of humor. One time, he said to me: Father, all my life, 
I've been after girls and women. I was a bit stunned. Then he continued: You see, when I was 
a boy, it was my mother and my sisters. Now, it's my wife and my three daughters! Then I said 
to him, ok, but it is the talk of the town that you also have another woman in your life. Puzzled, 
he asked who it was. I said, INA, Our Lady of Penafrancia! We both had a good laugh. I'm told 
that since the age of 16, he has been a devotee of INA, a voyador, year after year without fail. 
He'll be there next month for the Penafrancia fiesta— look for him. 

Secretary Jesse was a devout Catholic and a God-fearing man. We have now heard that he 
frequented the confessional two or three times a month. He was a regular Sunday Mass goer 
and communicant. I was told by a mutual friend that quite often, you could see him slip into 
the adoration chapel at the basilica early in the morning! Again, no fanfare, no blowing his own 
trumpet. 

Another quality that endeared Secretary Jesse to everyone— the elite and the lowly, the 
powerful and the weak, the VIPs and the VOPs (Very Ordinary People)— is his inclusive attitude. 
At a time when people think with an exclusivist attitude, when human life is treated as a matter 
of choice, and people are considered as wanted or unwanted based on personal convenience 
or the availability of resources, Jesse made everyone feel wanted. He simply treated everyone 
with respect. He never complained that he didn't have enough time or resources for so many, 
but always found time for everyone. He might not have satisfied everyone's needs, but he 
made everyone feel that he cared. For Jesse, every human life was sacred and a gift from God. 
Perhaps, that's why he loved our work so much— the deformed children, the disabled, the 
rejected ones— whom society considers unwanted and a burden to development. Yes, every 
Filipino is worth dying for! 



175 



Secretary Jesse had time for everybody, except himself. He will drop by a barangay fiesta, 
then go over to a meeting with some business people, then stop at someone's birthday party or 
wedding or a wake or whatever. He could take breakfast in Manila, have lunch in Cebu, and be 
back home in Naga for dinner with his family— except on that last day. He was there for you, for 
me, for everyone. We all felt appreciated and accepted by Jesse. 

In his presence, we felt no worry. He gave hope to many in hopeless situations. He was not 
afraid to walk the talk. He painted schools, scrubbed floors, cleaned drains— all while he was 
the chief executive of this city and one of the highest officials in the land! And he did all this 
without fanfare, without publicity. 

Secretary Jesse not only shared the name of our Lord Jesus, but in his own humble way, 
he strived to live like him. He was truly poor in spirit because he desired nothing for himself. 
As his wife said during the interview last week, he felt his cup was overflowing. He didn't 
even dream the things that have come to him. He was satisfied with whatever he had. He 
sympathized with those who mourned. He hungered for justice and righteousness. He was 
humble and meek even when raised to one of the highest positions in the country. 

Secretary Jesse was not a perfect human being, but he was a true human being who treated 
every other human being as true as himself. 

Let me here speak to the family of the late Secretary. Ate Leni, Aika, Trisha and Jillian, 
siblings of Sec. Jesse, thank you for sharing Jesse with us. You had to make sacrifices to let your 
husband, your father, your brother to serve other people. For this, we all thank you. In you, 
we see Sec. Jesse's true spirit of humility and courage. Let me assure you also of the sincere 
condolences of the entire MOP family around the world. As you know, Sec. Jesse was a good 
friend of our Founder, Fr. Ho Lung, in Jamaica. Fr. Ho Lung sends the assurance of his prayers 
for you now and always. 

Seldom do people pass away doing what they loved doing. Secretary Jesse passed away 
doing what he loved most— going home! 



2 J fa JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Secretary Jesse, you liked to surprise people. But not in my wildest dream did I ever imagine 
that my last Mass in Naga before I leave for my next assignment in Jamaica will be your funeral 
Mass. 

Jesse Manalastas Robredo— devoted son, responsible brother, loving husband, caringfather, 
humble servant of the people, champion of the poor— FAREWELL. Indeed you have fared well 
in this life. Now, farewell in the next. 

Maraming salamat po Secretary Jesse for being a true friend of the common people, the 
tsinelas people! Ingat po! Dios Mabalos! 



177 



PHILIPPINE 
LEGION OF HONOR 



Jilalacanaii |ialate 

&ir Jt t fciiouiu Co .111 iilni ill n Clirsr ^irsnils 



Unit I. 



ifclcniguo &. aqumo 31113. 

/'resident of the f\c\mbfi( of the I'liiftppmes 

by virtue of llie pouvrs vested in me t<y HM . 

far being an advocate, as Mayor of \ aga ( Uy from I9«S to MS and again from 2001 to 
2010. and ai Secretary of the InU-norand Local (jovenimenl. of true and traiisformatnv change 
ubuh led (to a revitalized .Uy and a vibrant cull ureal trantpareuey. accountability, and people 
empoweiment: 

•for being a mentor to pubtn tenants who are likgiuse \uppartive of i bange, 
■forchoostng to Head the straight and righteous path, iwu at the nslc_oJjhdilual persecution, 
instead oj ' taHjng the easy and . roofed road oj the unprincipled; 

'fat itutitutioualuing a virtuous cycle in the -Department ''/the Interior and Cshat 
government by establishing a full disclosure policy and teals oj good housekeeping in to* at 
goivnimenU; 

for being a leader ulto set asule the osU ntatious oj potirr. choosing the umpfuity and honctty 
oj genuine sertant leadership. 

■for his dedication to public service, utueh earned him the respect and acclaim of his peers and 
llie public, m manifested tit the Camillas accolades he received, tuch as the Kamou Magiaysay Awatd 
for (jen emment Sen-tee tit 2000. the Konrad Adenauer Medal oj CyfeOetue as Most « Outstanding ( tty 
Mayor of the fhtdppmeMii /»•'.">' the tint eier '.Daitgal n.j Utard ol Hi, ;{ n it. Sen ue 

( ammiuion, and inclusion in the -leu Outstanding -Young Men of the eAtlippines /lOVMi among 
mailt oilier auard's; and 

tor thing an evmptai ol principled, commuted leadership, reg.udlest oj perianal iOsl 01 
danger llieitby making '»'" « «*•>» •'/ outstanding life achievement deserving of the highetl recognition 
the President oj the riitlipptius >un confer 

hate caused to be inscribed in the toilet oj 

ftljihppmc ILrgion of Jl)onor 

the name of 

3fesse 0L &obrebo 

.Secretary of lite Interior and l.oeat ijovernntent 



wild the tank .<i Cbief Commander t'unong fynandnuj 
(■Posthumous) 

Mine 111 the ( uy ol \aga. ( amanttes .Sin 
Uiu JXtti day of August 
tit the year of Our L.ord'luv Ifiousand and luetic 




Response ofAtty. Ma. 
Leonor "Leni" Robredo to the 
conferment of the Philippine 
Legion of Honor upon Sec. Jesse 
M. Robredo 

Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia, Naga City 

In behalf of my children, my brother- and sisters-in-law, and our entire family, I accept 
this Legion of Honor award with deep and respectful gratitude. This award recognizes my 
husband's achievements in public service, an affirmation of his life and work. I am honored. 
Our entire family is honored. If Jess were here with us today, I know he would shy away from 
excessive praise. He might find all the fuss, pomp, and pageantry a little uncomfortable. But 
Jess, just this one time, allow us to celebrate your life in the way we think you deserve to be 
honored. 

Mr. President, I know that my husband would have felt deeply touched, not only with the 
award you have bestowed on him today, but with what you have done. From the time we were 
all still hoping that he was still alive somewhere in Masbate until we learned that he was indeed 
gone, and up until now, when we are about to lay him to rest, is way beyond what we expected. 
If we could hear Jess speak, I know he would be saying, "Sobra-sobra na ito." We have felt your 
care and commitment to Jess in the very personal way that you have ensured that my children 
and I can grieve and not worry about anything. Thank you from the bottom of our hearts. 

My heartfelt gratitude also goes to Secretary Mar Roxas, Secretary Butch Abad, and 
Congressman Jun Abaya who were always with Jess not just in death but also in life. Thank you 
for dreaming with him. Thank you for walking with him. Thank you for staying with him until 
the very end. To Secretary Dinky Soliman, who stayed with us and made sure that during those 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



dark moments when we learned Jess was missing, the children and I were eating and sleeping 
and not worrying too much: thank you. Thank you also to Secretaries Ricky Carandang, Edwin 
Lacierda, Rene Almendras, Ging Deles, and Leila de Lima, who rescued us and took charge of 
all the preparations for the wake. You really made things very easy for us. To the other members 
of the Cabinet, the search and rescue teams, the local government officials of Masbate, the 
Naga City officialdom, the divers, and everyone involved in finding Jess, you pushed yourselves 
beyond your limits of your physical and mental capabilities to rescue him. The intensity of your 
dedication became a beacon of hope, and then comfort for those of us waiting for him to come 
home. 

His death was unexpected, and we have to deal with the searing grief of losing him. But I 
believe that, for Jess, it was not tragic and he was not taken before his time. He was never fearful 
of his life. He was always ready to face his Creator. He often said, "Kung panahon mo na, kahit 
anong gawin mong pagtatago, panahon mo na. Kung ano ang nakatakda siyang mangyayari." 
Maybe for him, it was the perfect end to a life well lived. Jess often told me he felt he would 
die young. During our moments together, he would always say that between the two of us, he 
would be the first to go. I never believed him then. 

When he became a member of the Cabinet, I was always nervous whenever he would take 
a private plane or a helicopter. We constantly argued about the necessity of it all. But he made 
me understand that sometimes, this could not be avoided because of his work. He promised me 
that he would take commercial flights whenever possible. But, sometimes, he still did not heed 
my request. He shielded me from the fear by simply not telling me about it. 

Last Saturday, the day of the crash, I was already on the phone with him early in the 
morning. There was a flurry of calls and text messages between us throughout the day. Early in 
the afternoon, I told him not to hurry home because my daughter's competition finished early. 
I thought he would just be taking the bus bound for Naga that same night. But in true fashion, 
he still decided to fly home. He just wanted to surprise us and make us happy. 

When I first learned that he was pushing through with the trip, I texted him, and he 
confirmed that he boarded the plane already. I was already very near the airport to pick him up 



183 



when he texted me again that his plane was going back to Cebu. He never told me why. I was 
able to reach him at 4:40 in the afternoon, just before the plane plunged into the sea. He told me 
in the calmest voice that he would call me later. He said he was just taking care of something. 
He never called me back. When the body bag carrying his remains was opened before my eyes, 
I was not at all surprised to see that he was wearing his DILG uniform, the same uniform that 
he wore in that picture in front. That was Jess to the very core. He was always working so hard 
but at the same time always rushing home to be with his family. 

When Jess was still mayor of Naga, we both worked hard in making sure that the children 
will not feel any sense of entitlement because of his position. He always told us that the greatest 
gift he could give our children is a good name. In death, he gave my children that gift, and the 
best way we can all honor him is to guard that name and make him proud. My husband was 
always cautious not to enjoy the perks of his position because he was always afraid that he'd 
get used to it and be tempted to do all means just to stay in power. He used to tell me, "Mahirap 
nang masanay at baka hanap-hanapin ko." He was conscious not to spend beyond our means. 
He felt that if our needs and wants become unreasonable, he would be more vulnerable to 
temptations. He was never attached to material things. During one of his recent birthdays while 
he was already Secretary of the DILG, he received a number of signature shirts as gifts. He piled 
them up inside his closet and told me, while looking at those gifts, "Magagalit na nito sa akin 
ang Diyos." When he became DILG Secretary, coming home to Naga every weekend kept him 
grounded and made him stronger against temptations. The weekend before that fateful crash, 
he fixed everything in the house: busted lights, broken doorbell, leaking faucets. He always 
looked forward to feeling like a regular man of the house. He said these simple tasks made him 
feel important to his family and strengthens him. 

Much has been said about how great Jess was as a public servant. But to us, his family, 
we will remember him most as an exceptional husband and father. He died with nothing left 
unsaid. He constantly showered us with "I love you's." He always told me he was lucky that he 
married me. He constantly told my children he was proud of them. On a normal day, he would 
text or call me several times. His first text message of the day would always be, "Ma, gising 
na ako." Between us, there is a constant narrative of, "in the car already," "going to the office 
na," "proceeding to the next appointment," and so on and so forth. Sometimes, when he was 

284 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



in the middle of a difficult conversation, he would text me, "hirap naman nitong kausap ko." 
Or sometimes, when attending a formal function at some flashy hotel, he would text me, "Bok, 
fine dining na naman, siguradong gutom na naman ako nito." Often, he is home early enough to 
eat dinner with Aika and Tricia. After dinner, he would often text me, "Tapos na kaming mag- 
dinner ng mga anak mo. About to start my evening ritual." By this, he meant that he would now 
start signing the voluminous office documents that are brought home for his signature. Before 
he sleeps, he would call and talk to Jillian and me. 

He would drop everything for our girls. He wasn't there just for the big events but also for 
the small ones. He would badger many people, Secretary Mar included, just to ask for UAAP 
tickets for Aika, who almost never misses an Ateneo basketball game. Whenever Tricia had an 
upcoming exam, he would text me, "Ma, please go to the Blessed Sacrament, Trish has exams 
today." He tutors Jillian in math by telephone and he would even do sample math problems for 
her to solve while attending important meetings. He was never too busy for all of us. 

2012 was supposed to be a banner year for us. Two months ago, we celebrated our silver 
wedding anniversary. The day of our anniversary fell on a weekday. Although we already 
celebrated the prior weekend, he still came home for a few hours to surprise me, bringing with 
him a hodgepodge of flowers he got along the way. This loving gesture was all that was needed 
for our last anniversary to be memorable. In a moment of reflection, we agreed that we have 
been truly blessed, not only because we have three wonderful children, but also because life has 
generally been good to us. That was when he first told me that he had already fulfilled all his 
dreams for himself. 

People would remember my husband as a hardworking and dedicated public servant who 
made a difference in the lives of people. He had his own brand of leadership and preferred to 
keep everything simple. His heart always cries out to the poor and the marginalized. When 
he talks to me about his work, he would always tell me, "Kawawa talaga ang mahihirap," 
and hope that he could do more to make life easier for them. He found fulfillment when 
he worked as mayor of Naga City because outcomes could be seen and felt quickly. Things 
were different at the national level. He worked so much harder, but he often wondered if his 
efforts were appreciated. '"Di ko alam kung may patutunguhan ang lahat na ito," were his exact 



185 



words. But the immensity of the public's response to his death and the collective grief being 
displayed gives us comfort that his efforts have made their mark. We did not expect this kind 
of reaction. I am sure Jess did not expect this either. I am amazed to see big burly man crying 
over his death. When the funeral cortege passed by the streets of Manila and Naga, there 
were as much cheers as there were tears. So many people have said very kind and inspiring 
words to us, and tell us how Jess touched their lives. It seems that everyone had a personal 
encounter with him and had a story to tell. During his last Sunday with us, he told me in the 
car while I was driving him to the airport, "Quotang-quota na ako. 'Di ko na pinangarap ang 
lahat na ito. Sobra-sobra na ang ibinigay sa akin ng Diyos." His cup was indeed overflowing, 
his dreams for himself were simple, and God gave him so much more than he asked for. 

Sa gabos pong taga-Naga: An samong pa-Dios Mabalos saindo gabos. Sa halawig na panahon 
na paganduyog nindo sa sakuyang agom. Sa saindong suporta. Sa saindong pagpadangat. Ipinuli 
mi po siya digdi sa saiyang maogmang lugar ta panatag siya pirmi sa saindong pagkamoot. 
Ilulubong ta po siya harani sa kandungan kan satong Inang Birhen de Penafrancia. Naghahagad 
po kaming pamilyang dispensa na dai nindo siya masadiri ngonian. Arog po saindo, gulpi man 
palan ibang nagpapadangat saiya. Pero pagkatapos po kan aldaw na 'ni, dai po kamo maghadit, 
ta solong-solo nanaman nindo siya. (To all Naguenos: Our deepest gratitude for supporting my 
husband all these years. For your help. For all your love. We've brought him home to his happy 
place, where he is truly at peace, surrounded by those who love him. We shall lay him to rest near 
our mother, the Virgin of Penafrancia. We never realized how many people loved him as you all did. 
On behalf of my family, I apologize. Today, we want to keep him for ourselves. But do not worry; 
tomorrow, he will be yours again.) 

Jess, thank you for the gift of your life. How lucky we are that you shared your life with 
us. We are truly blessed to have been loved by you. As my daughter said, "You may have been 
prepared to die, but we were not prepared to lose you." We are devastated by your loss, but even 
if we are grieving, we will continue to live because your spirit lives in us. I will make sure that 
your dreams for our children will be fulfilled. I will not say goodbye because I know that you 
will never leave us and will always be in our midst. You are home now. You are back where you 
truly belong. Rest well. We will love you forever. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



QUEZON SERVICE 
CROSS 




nun 



KKUS NG SIRBISYO Nl QUEZON 
Qllf /.ON SERVICE CROSS 

n» rXaxon tarvic* C«)ai a fa) oiana *"a) K n fr— en .4 lan <Jac*w*<to o* *ta Kap^'>c o4 tn« n».! 1 p ¥ wo« blkAiMn 1«46. 
> a ■» Urn o* in* Ititfpm a«h 9i* concurranc* of Do Confm ol tn* ■**)*»?«*■ on Filtpino ounm 

*» n pl»Y Mia la Ha Milan m *uo< I nannj* *nrf audi • i inj I a to add gran preaua* X> «*» Kcpubtic ol In* 

PHu>b*.Mn. ar M t» cnmribu** ta 'h» la* na b*naS>l ai -i poopW. tarf^r *»4# nih lha national hanafaxlion of Pnt^M 

•Ml I Onwsn 

*aaa» al (joana tamo* Cram emu aj < Man*** <ro» o» ana* arn*«a< 1»anten*J w«i gnajn anarra* *nd oudinad 
101 t i» i «i l >ry ««unnw>»l ojranlw*. a H »aj » ) tax rar> >n (tk. Thacatutaj madaMian hi gnwn mama] a* lha una baan 

*■ an*-** man. a) >i« lt * n Manwal 1 " ■■ ■ -■«-.-■ , - -*^-**-"|| ■- - ri ' I J I I lit flOmT 

KW.IiiM « 1>u W t» faaal« .« f» W»»n an -v»* n m -m t O. a* anr* at *» baaa* n »» coal <rf am, ■ 

' «■>» * .» ■ »»^ y ia»i « »»>»iaanwa<^«ma»a»an TK, »*da* a n !««■ ItaJ taw * apnpaf. 
Qaimanittai <n*rta^a<«ai C >a *ao tarvlo.Cn.avlaiaa<. «»<aja)a»i .l*»j pmm ^ Mk 



▼"•aaa. a» »v% » '.at *na VX „ , rt „ t. n ian**- w } a -4am aaw Tna rttooa « al 

'*»*' " » *« »* ■ ■" wtiwii . mi.Hik tWinta la «an*ian> u*an TW»aa w 

.•*•>•»>■ 

Hftan X a a - a. aw*a wa a- *- ■ •— -* - ■ - 1 _ i. n»< 







HUH; 




P. S. Res. Ko S&l 



Senate 



t£I}tr& Regular jtessffl* 



Resolution No. 125 

RESOLUTION CONCURRING IN THE POSTHUMOUS 
CONFERMENT OF 'THE QUEZON SERVICE CROSS TO 
JESSE M. ROBREDO 

WHEREAS, the Late Jesse M. Robredo was 
nominated by His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino 111 for 
conferment of the Quezon "Service Cross, the highest 
recognition of the Republic of the Philippines; ■ 

WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of Joint 
Resolution No. 4 s. 1946, entitled "Joint Resolution to 
create the Quezon Service Cross for exemplary service to 
the nati.cn in memory of the late President Manuel L. 
Quezon", His Excellency has requested the concurrent* and 
approval of Congress for the posthumous conferment of the 
Quezon Service Cross upon the late Jesse M. Robredo; 



189 



: > 



WHEREAS as Mayor of Naga City, he established a 
brand of public service that was fueled by humili^ 
selflessness, and dedication - which earned ham the Ramon 
Magsaysay Award for Good Governance m 2000 and a 
number of other accolades: 

WHEREAS, as Secretary of the laterior and Local 
Government, he continued Ms commitment to genuine 
transformative change, and institutionalized a virtuous cycle 
rTJfee agency - establishing a full disclosure policy and 
awarding seals of good housekeeping to local governments 
that performed well; 

WHEREAS, he showed his countrymen, not just 
through words, but through actions, how true public 
servants must act - with the Filipino people foremost m 
mind, regardless of personal cost or danger: 

WHEREAS, the values, ideals and service 
demonstrated by Secretary Robredb ^\^ffj.^ t 
standard exemplified in public service by the late Fieadent 
Manuel L. Quezon: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the Senate, as it hereby resolves, To 
concur in the posthumous conferment by the 
the Philippines of the. Quezon Service Cress on the late 
Jesse. M. Robredo. 

Resolved, further, That copies of this Resolution be 
^ P now of the President, and the family ol me 
late Jesse M. Robredo. 



Adopted, 




This Resolution was adopted by the Senate on 
September 3. 2012. 





EMMA LIRIO-RKYTS 
Secretarv of the Senate 



190 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



H. Res. No. 2739 



^public of tt|e jJifUippmea 
(Eongregg of t\\t |JIjiitpptnag 

^iffeenfl] (Eangress 
©rrirb ^giilarj&egsion 



Begun and held in Metro Manila, on Monday, the twenty-third 
day of July, two thousand twelve. 

Resolution no. 281 

RESOLUTION CONCURRING WITH THE POSTHUMOUS 
CONFERMENT OF THE QUEZON SERVICE CROSS TO 
JESSE M. ROBREDO 

WHKRKAS, the late Jesse M. Robredo was nominated by 
His Excellency Benigno S. Aquino III for conferment of the Quezon 
Service Cross, the highest recognition of the Republic of the 
Philippines; 

WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of Joint Resolution 
No. 4 dated October 21, 1946, entitled "Joint Resolution to Create 
the Quezon Service Cross for Exemplary Service to the Nation in 
Memory of the Late President Manuel L. Quezon", His Excellency 
has requested the concurrence and approval of Congress for the 
posthumous conferment of the Quezon Service Cross upon the 
late Jesse M. Robredo; 

- 



191 



2 



WHEREAS, as Mayor of Naga City, he established a brand 
of public service that was fueled by humility, selflessness and 
dedication, which earned him the Ramon Magsaysay Award for 
Good Governance in 2000 and a number of other accolades; 

WHEREAS, as Secretary of the Interior and Local 
Government, he continued his commitment to true transformative 
change, and institutionalized a virtuous cycle in the agency, 
establishing a full disclosure policy and awarding seals of good 
housekeeping to local governments that performed well; 

WHEREAS, he showed his countrymen, not just through 
words, but through actions, how true public servants must act, 
with the Filipino people foremost in mind, regardless of personal 
cost or danger; 

WHEREAS, the values, ideals and service demonstrated by 
Secretary Jesse M. Robredo compare favorably to the standard 
exemplified in public service of the late President Manuel L. 
Quezon: Now, therefore, be it 

Resolved by the House of Representatives, To concur with 
the posthumous conferment by the President of the Philippines of 
the Quezon Service Cross on the late Jesse M. Robredo. 

Adopted, 



This Resolution was adopted by the House of Representatives 




FELICIANO BELMONTE JR. 

Speaker 



on September 3, 2012. 





' / 



Marilyn B/BARUAt# 

Secretary General 




O 




192 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



OFFICIAL 
DOCUMENTS 



MALA CAIMAN PALACE 

MANILA 



BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 



PROCLAMATION NO. 460 



DECLARING NATIONAL DAYS OF MOURNING OVER THE PASSING OF SECRETARY 
JESSE M. ROBREDO FROM 21 AUGUST 2012 TO THE DATE OF HIS 
INTERMENT 

WHEREAS, Secretary Jesse M. Robredo was appointed as the Secretary of the 
Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) and as a champion for good 
governance, was instrumental in the implementation of far-reaching reforms in local 
governance; 

WHEREAS, Secretary Robredo served with utmost dedication as Mayor of Naga City 
from 1988 to 1998 and from 2001 to 2010; 

WHEREAS, his outstanding performance as Mayor of Naga earned him numerous 
awards such as the Magsaysay Award for Government Service in 2000, the first Filipino 
mayor to be conferred the distinction: 

WHEREAS, the nation has lost one of its great leaders and public servants; and, 

WHEREAS, his many virtues as a public servant have permanently earned for him the 
gratitude of the City he led. and the Republic he served. 

NOW, THEREFORE, I, BENIGNO S. AQUINO III, President of the Philippines, by 
virtue of the power vested in me by law, do hereby proclaim 21 August 2012 to the date of 
his interment as National Days of Mourning. 

As provided for by law, for a period of six (6) days, the national flag shall be flown at 
half-mast from sunrise to sunset in all government buildings and installations in the 
Philippines and in our posts abroad. 

Further, from 21 August 2012 until the date of interment, the flags shall be lowered to 
half-mast in Malacanan Palace, the City of Naga, and in all offices and installations of DILG, 
Bureau of Fire Protection (BFP), Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP), Local 
Government Academy (LGA), National Police Commission (NAPOLCOM). Philippine 
National Police (PNP), and Philippine Public Safety College (PPSC) 

Done in the City of Manila, this 21* 1 day of August, in the year of Our Lord. Two 
Thousand and Twelve. /~\ 




Sy the President: 
PAQUITO pi. OCHOA JR. 





CERTIFIED COPY 



Executive Secretary 




"V V V» lop.. 



OIKELTOR IV 
^ t. i3-»MflLAC ANANG RECORDS Of Flt r- 



_/Q^ JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Office of t\)c its i bent 
of ttje ^liilippmrs 

fflnlacanang 



MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 36 



CREATING AN INTER-AGENCY COMMITTEE TO TAKE CHARGE OF THE FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND INTERMENT OF THE LATE JESSE M. ROBREDO 
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

WHEREAS, Jesse M. Robredo, Secretary of the Interior and Local Government, tragically 
died on 18 August 2012. to the deep sorrow of the Philippine Nation; 

WHEREAS, it is fitting and proper that the State renders honor to the late Secretary of the 
Interior and Local Government, commensurate with the peoples' affection and admiration for him; 
and, 

WHEREAS, these honors and all forms of official recognition must be done in accordance 
with law, wishes of the bereaved family of the late Secretary, and the fullest participation of the 
agencies he headed and the people he represented. 

NOW THEREFORE, I. PAQUITO N OCHOA. JR, Executive Secretary, by authority of the 
President of the Philippines, do hereby create a Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial, 
composed of the following offices/entities: 

Office of the Executive Secretary 

Presidential Management Staff 

Department of the Interior and Local Government 

Presidential Communications Development and Strategic Planning Office 

Office of the Presidential Spokesperson 

Armed Forces of the Philippines 

Philippine National Police 

Office of Presidential Protocol 

Malacaftang Social Office 

Appointments Office 

Presidential Security Group 

The Committee may call on any government entities and enjoin the support of concerned 
non-government organizations (NGOs) and the private sector as may be necessary to assist in 
the performance of its functions. 

DONE, in the City of Manila, this 21st day of August in the year of Our Lord, Two 
Thousand and Twelve. 




195 



STATEMENTS OF 
PRESIDENTIAL 
SPOKESPERSON 
EDWIN LACIERDA 



ADVISORY FROM THE PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON, 
AUGUST 18, 2012 



At the present time, search and rescue operations are ongoing for the aircraft carrying Secretary 
of the Interior Jesse Robredo, an aide, and the pilot of the plane. The aircraft was off the coast 
of Masbate when contact was lost earlier today. We will be updating the public as details are 
confirmed: Speculation is not useful at this point. 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIALSPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON THE SEARCH AND RESCUE EFFORTS FOR SECRETARY JESSE 
ROBREDO 



Released on August 18, 2012 

As search and rescue efforts for Secretary Jesse Robredo and party continue, we ask the Filipino 
people to join the President and the Cabinet in prayer for his successful rescue. We ask that the 
efforts be allowed to continue unimpeded and without speculation on the part of the public. We 
must remain focused on the task: to find Sec. Robredo and his companions, and to bring them 
to safety. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON THE VIGIL FOR SECRETARY JESSE ROBREDO 



Released on August 18, 2012 

A vigil has begun in the National Shrine of the Divine Child inside the La Salle Green Hills 
(LSGH) campus in Mandaluyong City for the intention of the successful rescue of Secretary of 
the Interior and Local Government Jesse Robredo and others missing from his flight. We ask 
those who wish to join our fellow citizens in prayer to go to LSGH and join their fellow citizens 
at this time of deep concern. We ask that you keep the families of Secretary Robredo and those 
still missing, and those engaged in rescue efforts in your prayers as well. 



ADVISORY FROM THE PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON ON THE 
CONTINUING SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS FOR SEC. JESSE 
ROBREDO AND PARTY, AUGUST 19, 2012 



Throughout the night, search and rescue operations for Secretary Jesse Robredo and party 
continued. More assets are being deployed this morning to intensify the search. In the meantime, 
the President, along with Secretaries Roxas, Abad, Gazmin, and Representative Abaya flew to 
Masbate at 5:45 a.m. to personally observe the search and rescue effort. We will be issuing more 
updates as they become available. 

The vigil for the successful rescue of Secretary Robredo will resume at 3 p.m. this afternoon at 
La Salle Green Hills, with a Mass scheduled at 5 p.m. Both will be open to the public. 




199 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIALSPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON THE CONTINUING VIGIL FOR THE RESCUE OF SECRETARY 
JESSE ROBREDO 

Released on August 19, 2012 



Tonight, concerned citizens continue their vigil in the National Shrine of the Divine Child in 
La Salle Green Hills, Mandaluyong City. The vigil began at 3 p.m. and Mass was celebrated at 
5 p.m. The vigil will continue until 12:30 a.m. 

Tomorrow, the vigil resumes at 8 a.m. in La Salle Green Hills. Mass will be celebrated at 9 a.m. 
As was the case yesterday and today, tomorrow's vigil will be open to the public. 

We continue to hope and pray for the successful rescue of Secretary Jesse Robredo. The 
nation's unity— in concern, in faith, and hope for Secretary Jesse Robredo, Jessup Bahinting, 
and Kshitiz Chand— is a source of strength for the families of the missing, and all those 
engaged in search and rescue operations. Let us continue to refrain from speculation and 
focus on the task at hand. Let us remain steadfast in our compassion, our sense of community, 
and our resolve. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON THE OPERATIONS AND ACTIVITIES OF THE DILG 



Released on August 20, 2012 

We advise the public that the priority of the authorities at this time is the ongoing search and 
rescue efforts for Secretary Jesse Robredo and his companions. We assure the public that the 
normal operations of the Department of the Interior and Local Government, and its attached 
agencies, continue and are unhampered by the ongoing rescue effort. The President will be 
making further announcements concerning the Department at the proper time. 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON THE CONTINUING VIGIL FOR THE RESCUE OF SECRETARY 
JESSE ROBREDO AND COMPANIONS 



Released on August 20, 2012 

The vigil for the rescue of Secretary Jesse Robredo and companions continues at the National 
Shrine of the Divine Child in La Salle Green Hills, Mandaluyong City. There will be a Mass at 
5 p.m. and the vigil will continue after. As with previous days, the vigil is open to any member 
of the public who wishes to attend to express solidarity with the families of those still missing. 




201 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ADVISORY ON THE CONTINUATION OF THE VIGIL FOR THE 
RESCUE OF SECRETARY ROBREDO AND COMPANIONS 

Released on August 20, 2012 



Tonight's vigil continues and there will be a Mass at 10 p.m. The vigil will then continue until 
12:30 a.m. 

The vigil resumes tomorrow at 10 a.m., with Mass celebrated at 11 a.m. and at 4 p.m. 
As always, the vigil at the National Shrine of the Divine Child in La Salle Green Hills, 
Mandaluyong City, will be open to the public. After the 4 p.m. Mass, the vigil will conclude. 

There will also be a Mass at 5 p.m. at the Saint Peter Parish: Shrine of Leaders, 
Commonwealth Avenue, Quezon City. That Mass will also be open to the public. 

Tomorrow is the 29 th anniversary of the martyrdom of Ninoy Aquino. We invite the public to 
join the vigil, in memory of Ninoy and his faith in the Filipino and faith in God; and in hopeful 
solidarity with concerned citizens who remain hopeful of rescue for Secretary Jesse Robredo 
and his two companions. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



STATEMENT OF SECRETARY EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 36 



Released on August 21, 2012 

Today, the Executive Secretary issued Memorandum Circular No. 36, creating a committee to 
take charge of the funeral arrangements and interment of the late Jesse M. Robredo, Secretary 
of the Interior and Local Government. This committee is composed of representatives from 
the DILG, Office of the Presidential Spokesperson, PCDSPO, Presidential Management Staff, 
Presidential Appointments Office, AFP, PNP, PSG, Office of Presidential Protocol, Malacanang 
Social Office, and the city government of Naga. 

Executive Secretary Paquito Ochoa has assigned the PCDSPO to chair the meetings of the 
committee. Its task will be to make all the necessary arrangements for the official honors 
and state funeral for the late Jesse M. Robredo, in keeping with protocol, our laws, and the 
wishes of the bereaved family. The committee will, from time to time, be updating the public 
of arrangements through the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson as they are finalized and 
determined. 



203 



STATEMENT OF SECRETARY EDWIN LACIERDA: 

ON THE UNIFIED HASHTAG AND THE JESSE ROBREDO 

TRIBUTE PAGE 

Released on August 21, 2012 



On August 18, 2012, a plane carrying DILG Secretary Jesse Robredo crashed off the coast of 
Masbate. Three days later, the remains of Secretary Jesse and the two pilots were recovered. 
The nation is united in grief and gratitude to one of her finest and most honorable servant- 
leaders. 

We invite everyone to pay tribute to the exemplary life and work of Secretary Jesse through 
testimonials and remembrances. In consultation with the media, we encourage our fellow 
citizens to use the unified hashtag #salamatjesse for their Twitter messages. We also invite all 
those who wish to share their thoughts, memories, and messages of sympathy for the Robredo 
family to please visit www.gov.ph/salamatjesse, which has been established by the Official 
Gazette in partnership with the DILG and Team Robredo. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



STATEMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON EDWIN LACIERDA: 
ON PROCLAMATION NO. 460, S. 2012, DECLARING NATIONAL DAYS 
OF MOURNING OVER THE PASSING OF 
SECRETARY JESSE M. ROBREDO 

Released on August 21, 2012 

Upon his return to Manila, President Benigno S. Aquino III signed Proclamation No. 460, s. 
2012, which provides for the following: 

1. August 21, until the day of the interment of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo are 
proclaimed National Days of Mourning. 

2. As provided for by law, the national flag shall be lowered to half-mast from sunrise to 
sunset in all government buildings and installations in the Philippines and in our posts 
abroad, for a period of six days. 

3. Furthermore, from today, August 21, 2012 until the date of internment, the national flag 
shall be lowered to half-mast in Malacanan Palace, the City of Naga, and in all offices and 
installations of the DILG, BFP, BJMP, LGA, NAPOLCOM, PNP and PPSC. 

The Committee on Funeral Arrangements and Burial created by virtue of MC 36 s. 2012, 
shall issue bulletins through the Office of the Presidential Spokesperson, as arrangements are 
finalized in consultation with, and in accordance with the wishes of, the bereaved family of 
the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo. This includes announcing when the six-day period of the 
national flag flying at half-mast nationwide will commence. 

Let us allow the Robredo family time to grieve; let us refrain from engaging in any effort to 
pressure them as to any details concerning the funeral and accompanying ceremonies. These 
will be announced at the proper time. 



205 



Advisory from the Presidential Spokesperson: August 18, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/l8/advisory-from-the-presidential-spokesperson- 
august-18-2012/ 

On the search and rescue efforts for Secretary Jesse Robredo: August 18, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/l8/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the-search- 
and-rescue-efforts-for-secretary-jesse-robredo-august-18-2012/ 

Vigil for Secretary Jesse Robredo: August 18, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/l8/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the-vigil-for- 
secretary-jesse-robredo-august-18-2012/ 

Advisory on the continuing search and rescue operations for Sec. Robredo: August 19, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/l9/advisory-from-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the- 
continuing-search-and-rescue-operations-for-sec-jesse-robredo-and-party-august-19-2012/ 

Statement on the continuing vigil for the rescue of Sec. Robredo: August 19, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/l9/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the-continuing- 
vigil-for-the-rescue-of-secretary-jesse-robredo-august-19-2012/ 

On the continuing vigil for the rescue of Sec. Robredo and companions: August 20, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/20/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the- 
continuing-vigil-for-the-rescue-of-secretary-jesse-robredo-and-companions-august-20-2012/ 

On the operations and activities of the DILG: August 20, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/20/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the- 
operations-and-activities-of-the-dilg-august-20-2012/ 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



On the continuation of the vigil for the rescue of Sec. Robredo and companions: 
August 20, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/20/advisory-on-the-continuation-of-the-vigil-for-the-rescue-of- 
secretary- robredo-and-companions-august-20-2012/ 

On the Jesse Robredo tribute page: August 21, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/2l/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-the-jesse- 
robredo-tribute-page-august-21-2012/ 

On Memorandum Circular No. 36: August 21, 2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/2l/statement-the-presidential-spokesperson-on-memorandum- 
circular-no-36-august-21-2012/ 

On Proc. No. 460 declaring national days of mourning over the passing of Sec.Robredo: 
August 21,2012 

http://www.gov.ph/2012/08/2l/statement-on-proclamation-no-460-declaring-national-days- 
of-mourning-over-the-passing-of-secretary-robredo-august-21-2012/ 



207 



COMMITTEE 
BULLETINS 



BULLETIN NO. 1 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



I. Schedule of public viewing of the remains of Secretary Robredo in Naga City 

As Secretary of Communications Ramon A. Carandang announced in Naga City today, the 
following is the schedule for the public viewing of the remains of the late Secretary of the 
Interior and Local Government, Jesse M. Robredo: 

August 21, 2012, Tuesday 

• 11:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. - The remains of Secretary Robredo will be moved from 
Funeraria Imperial to the Archbishop's Palace, Naga City, at around 11 p.m. 

August 22, 2012, Wednesday 

• 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. - Mass 

• 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. - wake 

• 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. - Mass 

• 6:00 p.m. onward - wake 

August 23, 2012, Thursday 

• 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. - Mass 

• 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. - wake 

• 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. - Mass 

• 6:00 p.m. onward - wake 

August 24, 2012, Friday 

• 9:00 a.m. - Remains to be transported from Naga City to Malacanan Palace. 
*Note: The wake is open to the public 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



II. Masses to be held in Metro Manila 

The following is the tentative schedule of Masses to be held in honor of Secretary 
Robredo: 

Philippine National Police Chapel, Camp Crame 

• 6:30 a.m., 12:15 p.m., and 5:15 p.m., daily 

National Police Commission Office, Makati 

• 9:00 a.m., Wednesday 

Department of the Interior and Local Government Central Office 

• 8:00 a.m., Wednesday 

• 12:00 nn, Thursday to Friday 

Department of the Interior and Local Government Regional Offices 

• Starts tomorrow morning; exact schedules to be published tomorrow 

III. National flags will be flown at half-mast for six days starting tomorrow 

In accordance with law, the President signed Proclamation No. 460, s. 2012, today, 
commencing the Days of National Mourning that will continue until the date of Secretary 
Robredo's interment. 

The proclamation also states that "for a period of six (6) days, the national flag shall be 
flown at half-mast from sunrise to sunset in all government buildings and installations in the 
Philippines and in our posts abroad." 

Today, the City of Naga, Malacanan Palace, the Department of the Interior and Local 
Government, its attached agencies, and the Philippine National Police have lowered the 
national flag to half-mast. However, in accordance with law, the six days that the national flag 
will be flown at half-mast nationwide begins tomorrow, August 22, 2012, as the proclamation 
was signed after sunset of August 21, 2012. All government offices are enjoined to comply. 

Released on August 21, 2012 



211 



BULLETIN NO.2 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 

Today, all government offices flew their flags at half-mast by virtue of Proclamation No. 460, 
s. 2012, which declared the National Days of Mourning over the passing of Secretary Jesse M. 
Robredo from August 21, 2012 to the date of his interment. 

Today is the second day of National Mourning for the late Secretary of the Interior and Local 
Government. 

I. State funeral for the late Secretary of the Interior and Local Government 

The President has offered, and the Robredo family has accepted, a state funeral for the late 
Secretary of the Interior and Local Government. A state funeral entails that all expenses be 
defrayed by the State in addition to fullest honors rendered to the deceased, including military 
honors. 

At present, vigil guards from the Philippine National Police (PNP) are at the Archbishop's 
Palace in Naga City, where the remains of the Secretary will be until Friday, August 24, 2012. 
As announced yesterday, Secretary Robredo's remains will be brought to Malacanan Palace on 
Friday. The various uniformed services will be rendering honors as follows: 

The PNP will render departure honors in Naga City and escort the remains from the 
Archbishop's Palace to the Pili (Naga) Airport. 

Departure honors will be rendered by the PNP, prior to departure from Pili Airport en route 
to Villamor Airbase in Metro Manila. 

Arrival honors at Villamor Airbase will be rendered by the Armed Forces of the Philippines 
(AFP). 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



The escort from Villamor Airbase to Malacanan Palace will be provided by the Presidential 
Security Group (PSG). 

The PSG will render arrival honors, which will include a gun salute, in Malacanan Palace. 
The remains of Secretary Robredo will lie in state in Malacanan Palace starting Friday, August 
24, 2012, where vigil guards will be provided by the PSG, until the morning of Sunday, August 
26, 2012, when the PSG will render departure honors and solemnly escort the remains to 
Villamor Airbase. 

The various uniformed services will be participating in the return of the remains to Naga 
City, as follows: 

Departure honors at Villamor Airbase to be rendered by the AFP; 

Arrival honors at Pili (Naga) Airport to be rendered by the PNP; 

Escorting the remains from Pili (Naga) Airport to the Naga City Hall will be the PNP. 

* Details on the activities in Naga City from Sunday to Tuesday will be announced at a 

later date. 

The interment is scheduled for Tuesday, August 28, 2012. During the state funeral, the 
following honors will be rendered: 

A band; 

Funeral cortege; 

Interment honors at the cemetery; 
Gun salute; 
Three-volley salute; 
Playing of taps; 

Handing of the national flag to the widow. 

II. Opening of the Book of Condolence in Philippine Consulates and Embassies 

As of today, the Department of the Foreign Affairs (DFA) has opened a Book of Condolence 
for the members of the Diplomatic Corps. The DFA has likewise instructed all Philippine 
Consulates and Embassies overseas to the same. 



213 



III. Tribute page and hashtag 

Everyone is invited to pay tribute to the exemplary life and work of Secretary Jesse Robredo 
online through testimonials and remembrances. In consultation with the media, people are 
encouraged to use the unified hashtag #salamatjesse for their Twitter messages. We also 
invite all those who wish to share their thoughts, memories, and messages of sympathy for the 
Robredo family to please visit www.gov.ph/salamatjesse, which has been established by the 
Official Gazette in partnership with the DILG and Team Robredo. 

Released on August 22, 2012 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



BULLETIN NO. 3 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



I. Schedule of Masses for Secretary Robredo in Naga City 

Secretary Ramon A. Carandang announces that in addition to the 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. Masses 
previously announced, there will be an additional Mass at 12:00 noon at the Archbishop's 
Palace in Naga City today, August 23, 2012. On Friday, all Masses are cancelled because 
Secretary Robredo's remains will be brought to Manila at 9 a.m. However, there will be a 6:30 
a.m. Mass on Friday in Naga City. 

The revised schedule will be as follows: 

August 23, 2012, Thursday 
9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. - Mass 
10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon - Wake 
12:00 noon to 1:00 p.m. - Mass 
1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. - Wake 
5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. - Mass 
6:00 p.m. onward - Wake 
August 24, 2012, Friday 
6:30 a.m. to 7:30 a.m. - Mass 

9:00 a.m. - Remains to be transported from Naga City to Malacanan Palace 

II. Media advisory 

Atty. Leni Robredo, widow of Secretary Jesse M. Robredo, will be speaking to reporters 
tomorrow after the 9:00 a.m. Mass. 

Released on August 23, 2012 



215 



BULLETIN NO. 4 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



The remains of the late Secretary Jesse Robredo will lie in state in Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan 
Palace 

On Friday, August 24, 2012, the remains of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo will be brought 
to Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace. A wake will be held there for two days before the remains 
are returned to Naga City. 

A quarter century ago, President Corazon C. Aquino renamed the edifice, formerly known 
as Maharlika Hall, to "Kalayaan Hall" to commemorate the restoration of democracy in the 
Philippines. As part of the generation inspired to enter public service by the EDSA People 
Power Revolution, it is only fitting that the late Secretary lie in state in Kalayaan Hall, 
Malacanan Palace. 

Kalayaan Hall is the oldest extant section of Malacanan Palace, having been built in the 
American Era. It is likewise one of the most intact pre-war buildings in the Philippines 
wherein Governors- General and, later on, Presidents of the Philippines prior to Martial Law 
held office. Situated amid sprawling grounds, it is most accessible to the public that would 
wish to pay final respects to the late Secretary. 

The Committee shall be releasing further details in the next Bulletin. 
Released on August 23, 2012 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



BULLETIN NO. 5 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



I. Schedule for ceremonies, memorial services, Masses, and state funeral for the late 
Secretary Jesse M. Robredo 

On Friday, August 24, 2012, the remains of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo will be brought 
to Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace, where the President will receive the family and the 
remains of the late Secretary. 

The remains of Sec. Jesse M. Robredo will be lying in state in Kalayaan Hall until Sunday, 
when his remains will be brought back to Naga City. 

During the public viewing, access for the public to Kalayaan Hall will be through Gate 7. For 
family and friends, access will be through Gate 6. For food and other donations, please send 
them to Gate 4. 



The following is the schedule of the public viewing and ceremonial services from Friday to 
Tuesday: 





FRIDAY 




(August 24, 2012) 




Transfer from Archbishop's Palace to Pili (Naga) Airport 




■ Departure honors will be rendered in the Archbishop's 




Palace by the Philippine National Police (PNP) 


7:45 


■ Police host: Police Chief Superintendent Jose Arne de los 


a.m.-9:00 


Santos, Regional Director, PRO 5 


a.m. 


■ Six honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family 




Route: San Francisco - Penafrancia - San Felipe - Balatas - Cararayan - Del 




Rosario - Pili 



217 



9:00 
a.m.-10:30 
a.m. 


Transfer from Pili (Naga) Airport to Villamor Airbase, Metro Manila 

■ Departure honors will be rendered at the Naga Airport by 
the PNP. 

■ Arrival honors will be rendered at Villamor Airbase by the 
Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP). 

■ Military host: Gen. Jessie Dellosa, Chief of Staff, Armed 
Forces of the Philippines. 

■ Honorary pallbearers (6): 

■ Secretary Florencio B. Abad 

■ Secretary Manuel A. Roxas II 

■ Rep. Jun Abaya (Liberal Party) 

■ Harvey Keh (Kaya Natin Movement) 

■ Alice Murphy (urban poor groups) 

■ Joan dela Cruz (Chief of Staff of Secretary 
Jesse M. Robredo, DILG) 


10:30 
a.m. -11:00 
a.m. 


Transfer from Villamor Airbase to Malacanan Palace 

■ Arrival honors will be rendered at Villamor Airbase by the 
AFP. 

■ Escort will be provided by the Presidential Security Group 
(PSG) and the 250 th Presidential Airlift Wing. 

■ Arrival honors in Malacanan Palace will be rendered by 
the PSG. 

Route: Villamor Airbase - Andrews Road - Airport Road - Roxas 
Boulevard - Padre Burgos Street - Finance Road - Ayala Boulevard - Ayala 
Bridge - Solano Street - Malacanan Palace 


11:00 
a.m.-12:00 
n.n. 


Reception ceremony with the President in Malacanan Palace 

■ The casket bearing the remains will be solemnly brought 
down from the hearse by the eight casket bearers (mem- 
bers of the PSG) and six honorary pallbearers. 

■ Thereafter, arrival honors led by the President will be ren- 
dered for the late Secretary. 

■ The six honorary pallbearers will be escorted to their 
respective positions. 

■ Military host: Col. Nestor Herico. 

■ After the arrival honors, the President will follow the six 
honorary pallbearers as the casket is brought to Kalayaan 
Hall where it will lie in state until Sunday morning. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



1:00 p.m. - 
3:00 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by the Department of the Interior and Local 
Government (DILG), attached agencies, League of Provinces of the Philip- 
pines, League of Cities of the Philippines, League of Municipalities of the 
Philippines, and Liga ng mga Barangay. 


3:15 p.m- 
4:15 p.m. 


A /Te» m r\ v*i o 1 conned c n c/"iv£J/l \-\-it nrnon nnnr rrv/"*iiT"\c 

iviemoiidi sei vice sponsoieu oy uiDan pooi gioups. 


4:30 
p.m. -5:30 
p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by Kaya Natin Movement. 


6:00 
p.m.-7:00 
p.m. 


Mass 


7:00 
p.m.-11:00 
p.m. 


Public viewing 


SATURDAY 
(August 25, 2012) 


8:00 
a.m.-5:00 
p.m. 


Public viewing 


6:00 
p.m.-7:00 
p.m. 


Public Mass 


7:00 
p.m.-8:00 
p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by the Liberal Party of the Philippines. 


8:15 p.m.- 
10:00 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by fellow Cabinet members. 


SUNDAY 
(August 26, 2012) 


6:00 
a.m. -7:00 
a.m. 


Departure of the funeral hearse bearing the casket of the remains of Secre- 
tary Robredo from Malcanan Palace to Villamor Airbase. 

■ Departure honors to be rendered by the Presidential Secu- 
rity Group in Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace, which will 
include a 19-gun salute. 

■ Departure honors to be rendered by the AFP in Villamor 
Airbase. 

■ Same honorary pallbearers as Friday 

Route: Malacanan Palace - J. P. Laurel Street - Nagtahan Bridge - Quirino 
Avenue - Osmena Highway- Skyway - Villamor Airbase 



220 





Departure from Villamor Airbase for Naga Airport 

■ Departure honors will be rendered by the AFP. 

Arrival at Pili (Naga) Airport 

■ Arrival honors at Naga Airport will be rendered by the 
PNP 

■ Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 

■ Escort from Pili (Naga) Airport to Naga City Hall will be 
provided by the PNP. 

Transfer from Pili (Naga) Airport to the Naga City Hall 

■ Arrival honors at the Naga City Hall will be rendered by 
the PNP. 

■ Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 


MONDAY 
(August 27, 2012) 


8:00 
a.m.-10:00 
a.m. 


Departure of the casket bearing the remains of Secretary Robredo will be 
transferred from Naga City Hall to the Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora 
de Penafrancia. 

■ Departure honors will be rendered by the PNP in Naga 
City Hall. 

Route: City Hall - Miranda Avenue - Panganiban - Diversion - Tabuko - 
Gen. Luna St - left to Abella - Bayawas Street - Sta. Cruz Proper - pass 
through back of Alfonso - Queborac - Basilica 

■ Arrival honors will be rendered by the PNP at the basilica. 

■ Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 


TUESDAY 
(August 28, 2012) 


10:00 a.m. 


Funeral Mass 


11:00 a.m. 


Start of the state funeral Response of the family The President will deliver 
a eulogy for Secretary Robredo. The casket is brought out of the basilica 
by pallbearers, accompanied by the designated honorary pallbearers of the 
family; with accompanying departure honors and a 19-gun salute rendered 
by the AFP. The casket will be loaded onto the hearse, where the funeral 
cortege will proceed to the Funeraria Imperial with accompanying military 
band and the participation of the PNP. At the Funeraria Imperial, a three- 
volley salute, given by a company of 21 soldiers, followed by the playing of 
Taps, will take place. 

Following Taps, the national flag is taken off the casket, folded, and pre- 
sented to the widow by the President. 

The presentation of the flag concludes the state funeral. The remains are 
then brought inside Funeraria Imperial for cremation. After the cremation, 
the PNP shall provide an escort for the family as they undertake the private 
interment of the ashes. 



* A subsequent Bulletin shall be issued providing details on the ceremony and traditions of a 
state funeral. 

II. Donations to charities in lieu of flowers 

Atty. Leni Robredo requests the public that in lieu of flowers, a donation to her late husband's 
preferred charities be made. These are the following: 

Physicians for Peace Philippines, Inc., particularly for their Walking Free and 
Resource Center for the Blind programs 

Contact person: Dr. Josephine Robredo-Bundoc 
Account details: BDO-lntramuros Branch #004508004757 

Missionaries for the Poor 

Contact person: Fr. Joseph M. Ssali, MOP 

Account details: Metrobank, Naga, G. Luna Branch #4183418131358 
Address: Heart of Mercy Monastery San Rafael, Cararayan, Naga City 
Telephone number: (054) 475-4730 or 475-4754 
Email: mopnaga@gmail.com 
Project Jose (details to follow) 

Those who still wish to send flowers to Malacanan Palace may send them to Gate 6 starting 
Friday, August 24, 2012. 

Released on August 23, 2012 



221 



BULLETIN NO. 6 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



I. Ceremonial activities and protocol 

Who is entitled to a state funeral? 

The following are entitled to a state funeral: 

■ The President 

■ Former Presidents 

■ The Vice President 

■ Former Vice Presidents 

■ The Senate President 

■ The Speaker of the House 

The above is based on the precedence observed by the Philippine government, which closely 
adheres to the protocol of the government of the United States. 

Additionally, the following have the right to be given a state funeral by virtue of law: 

- National Artists 

■ National Scientists 

The President, in his capacity as head of state and commander in chief, has the prerogative of 
ordering a state funeral for any citizen who is deemed of sufficient stature to deserve such an 
honor. 

The last state funeral was held on July 4, 2012 for the late National Scientist Perla Santos- 
Ocampo. The last state funeral for a former President was for the late President Diosdado 
Macapagal in 1997. 

A state funeral involves the following: 

1 . Expenses for funeral services are defrayed by the state; 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



2. A Book of Condolence is opened for dignitaries in the Philippines and in 
foreign posts of the Philippines; 

3 . The term lying in state is used, which is a term used for public viewings 
during state funerals; 

4. Arrival, departure, and final military honors are rendered. 

Military honors involve the following elements 

1. A flag-draped casket - the national flag is draped on the casket, which is 
later folded and presented by the President to the widow. 

2. Vigil guard detail - two members of the uniformed service stand guard by 
the casket. 

3. Firing detail 

- Cannon - a 19- gun salute, rendered to officials of Secretary 
rank 

■ Musketry - a three-volley salute 

4. Taps - a musical piece sounded during funerals involving the trumpet and 
bugle. 

Honors in Naga and Villamor 

Upon transportation of the remains of Secretary Robredo, the Philippine National Police will 
render honors in Pili (Naga) Airport prior to the departure of the casket. When the plane 
arrives in Villamor Airbase, honors will be rendered once again by the Armed Forces of the 
Philippines. (Please refer to Diagram A.) 



223 



FUNERAL HONORS 

(Battalion Size) 



IUUIKI.U HO«M>UO»aWlV 



mm Hoanioo - 



m 

Aft . 



(M lUigAl Airjwvf - (Tip Iteq^nx fxto«f» 



Vtomof MfefM ■ Owl oi Slat 
Ann«o F<ytM of If* Pt^cprM 



MUIIAKYVOUC* HOSI 



CASKET SHOE HI* 
HONORARY PAU.BIARIR& 



CASKET BEARERS 
HONORARY PAllSlARlfti 



IHO0CC0MUAN04H 



MM 




? Upon placing fwc 
3 » »il tanU 



AT THE AIRPORT 



2 Uponooptonrg tio lomfy «■ aftghl 



«a>ln.inlb» 

ottxamcp 

g K C flu w lor tunyo* honori 



«• M PMKM <rv. lofcWWl by 
Sntf w m to bo propoottonBd not* 



Ml) nt oc-.'.rv Ml nvmni plUM U»*»l 



dosjonojofj poMtm kr ttio 'uui 



DIAGRAM A 



Honors in Malacanan Palace 

The remains of Secretary Robredo will lie in state in Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace. This 
will be the first time that a wake will be held in Kalayaan Hall. 

Traditionally, only the President and former Presidents have laid in state in Malacanan Palace, 
specifically in Rizal Hall. There have been cases though, when wakes have been held at 
Heroes Hall. 

In Malacanan Palace, arrival honors are rendered by the Presidential Security Group. 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



II. Public Viewing 

IV. PUBLIC VIEWING 




DIAGRAM B 

Public viewing will start Friday, August 24, 2012, at 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. It will continue the 
next day, Saturday, August 25, 2012, at 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Above is a diagram of the flow of 
public viewing. 



225 



III. Routes of the cortege 




AIRPORT 



DIAGRAM C 

Route of the cortege from the Archbishop's Palace to Pili (Naga) Airport: Elias Angeles Street 
- Penafrancia Avenue - San Felipe Road - Balatas Road - Cararayan San Isidro Road - Del 
Rosario Cararayan Road - Pan Philippine Highway - Pili Airport. (Map courtesy of maps. 
google.com) 



Diagram D: Route of the cortege from Villamor Airbase to Malacanan Palace: Villamor 
Airbase - Andrews Road - Airport Road - Roxas Boulevard - Padre Burgos Street - Finance 
Road - Ayala Boulevard - Ayala Bridge - Solano Street - Malacanan Palace. (Map courtesy of 

maps.google.com) 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Presidential communications development 
and Strategic planning office | gov.ph 




'.'Jo 

MALACANAN 

PALACE T*" 



■1 / 



QUIRINO 
AVENUE 



\ 



OSMENA 
HIGHWAY 



« L *"n 



t 



ROUTE: MALACANAN TO VILLAMOR 
FOR: AUG 26, 2012 



Makati City 



vi n; 



SKYWAY 



LEGEND: 
f ORIGIN 
f DESTINATION 



VILLAMOR 
AIRBA5E 



1 * 



DIAGRAM E 

Route from Malacanan to Villamor: Malacanan Palace - J.P. Laurel Street - Nagtahan Bridge 
Quirino Avenue - Osmena Highway - Skyway - Villamor Airbase. 
(Map courtesy of maps.google.com) 
Released on August 23, 2012 



BULLETIN NO. 7 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 

Earlier today, the casket bearing the remains of Secretary Jesse M. Robredo departed Naga 
City via chartered airplane en route to Metro Manila. Upon arrival at the Villamor Airbase 
in Pasay City, the President and members of his Cabinet escorted the remains to Malacanan 
Palace where military honors, including a 19-gun salute, were rendered to the late Secretary. 

The late Secretary Robredo now lies in state in Kalayaan Hall, Malacanan Palace, where 
memorial services will be held from 1:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. A mass will follow at 6:00 p.m. and 
public viewing will ensue from 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 

During the public viewing, access for the public to Kalayaan Hall will be through Gate 7 of 
Malacanan Palace. For family and friends, access will be through Gate 6. For food and other 
donations, please send them to Gate 4. 



The following is the schedule of the public viewing and ceremonial services from Friday to 
Saturday: 



FRIDAY 

(August 24, 2012) 


1:00 p.m. - 3:00 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by the Department of the Interior 
and Local Government (DILG), attached agencies and local 
government leagues 


3:15 p.m. - 4:15 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by urban poor groups 


4:30 p.m. -5:30 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by Kaya Natin Movement 


6:00 p.m. -7:00 p.m. 


Mass 


7:00 p.m. -11:00 p.m. 


Public viewing 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



SATURDAY 
(August 25, 2012) 


8:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. 


Public viewing 


6:00 p.m. -7:00 p.m. 


Public Mass 


7:00 p.m. - 8:00 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by the Liberal Party of the Philippines 


8:15 p.m. - 10:00 p.m. 


Memorial service sponsored by fellow Cabinet members 



BULLETIN NO. 8 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 

Today, the President signed Proclamation No. 461, s. 2012, declaring a special (non-working) 
day in the City of Naga, Camarines Sur, on August 28, 2012. 

Earlier, the City Government of Naga issued a resolution requesting the Office of the President 
to declare August 28, 2012, the day of Secretary Robredo's interment, a non-working day. This 
is to allow the people of Naga to participate in the state funeral and pay their last respects to 
their beloved former mayor and Secretary of the Interior. 

At 10:00 a.m. on Tuesday, August 28, 2012, the funeral Mass for the late Secretary Robredo 
will take place in the Basilica Minore de Nuestra Sefiora de Penafrancia. This will be followed 
by the rendering of full military honors at 11:00 a.m. and by the conclusion of the state funeral 
at Funeraria Imperial, where the remains of the late Secretary will be cremated. 

Released on August 24, 2012 



229 



BULLETIN NO. 9 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



On Sunday, August 26, 2012, the remains of Secretary Jesse M. Robredo will be brought back 
to the City of Naga. The following is the updated schedule for the transfer and necrological 
services for August 26. 

5:30 a.m. - 6:30 a.m. 

Mass celebrated by His Excellency Luis Antonio Tagle, Archbishop of Manila 

6:30 a.m. - 7:00 a.m. 

Breakfast for the family 

Closed for viewing. The family may have time for reflection and preparation. TV coverage of 
the Presidential Broadcast Studio will stop at 6:30 and resume only for the departure honors. 

7:00 a.m. - 7:20 a.m. 

Departure honors will be rendered by the Presidential Security Group 

■ The President will arrive at Kalayaan Hall at 6:55 a.m. 

■ The same military casket bearers and honorary pallbearers during arrival at 
Malacanang will assist in the ceremonies. 

7:25 a.m. 

Departure of the funeral hearse bearing the casket of the remains of Secretary Robredo from 
Malacanan Palace to Villamor Airbase. 

*The Presidential Airlift Wing will provide an aerial escort from Nagtahan to Villamor. 
Route: J. P. Laurel - Nagtahan - Quirino - Skyway - Villamor 

7:55 a.m. 

Arrival at Villamor Airbase 
7:55 a.m. - 8:15 a.m. 

Departure honors will be rendered by the AFP 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



8:20 a.m. 

Departure from Villamor Airbase for Naga Airport 

9:20 a.m. - 9:40 a.m. 

Arrival at Naga Airport 

■ Arrival honors at Naga Airport will be rendered by the PNP. 

- Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 

- Escort from Naga Airport to Naga City Hall will be provided by the PNP. 
9:40 a.m.-10:10 a.m. 

Departure from Naga Airport for Naga City Hall 

Route: Pili Airport - National Highway - Concepcion Grande - Concepcion Pequena - Panganiban - 
Blumentritt - Dayangdang - del Pilar - Bulusan- Taal - J Miranda - City Hall 

10:20 a.m. 

Arrival of the casket bearing the remains of Secretary Robredo at the Naga City Hall. 
10:30 a.m. - 10:45 a.m. 

Arrival honors at the Naga City Hall will be rendered by PNP. 

10:45 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. 

Liturgical Ceremony 

■ Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 

11:00 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. 

Mass 

■ Atty. Leni Robredo and Ms. Aika Robredo will participate in the offertory. 

■ No public viewing during the mass 
12:00 p.m. - 12:30 p.m. 

Reading of MNDC Resolution of Condolences by Miss Sieflinde B. Bulaong, MNDC 



12:30 p.m. - 2:00 p.m. 

Break 

2:00 p.m. - 3:00 p.m. 

Necrological service by the Camarines Sur/Naga pastors and ministry leaders 

3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. 

Public viewing and vigil 

5:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. 

Mass 

Celebrant: Rev. Fr. Edgardo F. Adversario 

Sponsored by: City Government of Naga/ Liga ng mga Barangay/ KSBK ng Naga/ NGOs and 
POs 

6:00 p.m. - 7:00 p.m. 

Break/preparations for the necrological service 

7:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m. 

Necrological service 
Invocation/doxology: UNC Glee Club 

Song: UNC Glee Club 

Eulogies 

■ Hon. Gabriel H. Bordado Jr., City Vice Mayor for the Sangguniang 
Panlungsod 

■ Mrs. Socorro Felix, Lakas ng Kababaihan 

■ Rev. Msgr. J. Nelson Tria, PC, Naga City People's Council 

■ Kgd. Tita Orete, Barangay People's Council 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Special number 

■ Hon. Salvador M. del Castillo, Executive Director of Finance, Bureau of Local 
Government Finance 

■ Hon. James Jacob, Chairman, LTFRB 

■ Hon. Esteban R. Abonal, Senior Citizen and long time friend and city 
councilor 

■ Mr. Adolfo L. Olivan, Filipino- Chinese Community 

■ Hon. Elmer Baldemoro, Liga ng mga Barangay sa Pilipinas 
Note: Ms. Tricia Robredo will respond for the family. 

9:00 p.m. - 12:00 a.m. 

Public viewing and vigil 

Released on August 25, 2012 



BULLETIN NO. 10 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



The following is the schedule for the public viewing, ceremonies, and transfer of the remains 
of Secretary Jesse M. Robredo from Naga City Hall to the Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora 
de Penafrancia in Naga City, Monday, August 27, 2012. 

12:00 a.m. - 7:00 a.m. 

Public viewing and vigil 

8:00 a.m. - 10:00 a.m. 

Transfer of the remains of Secretary Robredo from Naga City Hall to the Basilica Minore. 

■ Honorary pallbearers to be designated by the family. 

■ Departure honors will be rendered by the Philippine National Police (PNP) at 
the Naga City Hall. 

■ Arrival honors will be rendered by the PNP at the Basilica. 

Route: Miranda Ave. - left Panganiban - Rotonda - right Roxas Ave. (Diversion) - Tabuco Bridge - Gen. 
Luna - left Abella - right J. P. Rizal - right Queborac - M.T. Villanueva - Magsaysay Bridge - left Balatas. 

10:00 a.m. - 5:00 p.m. 

Public viewing and vigil 

5:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. 

Mass of the whole archdiocese 

Main celebrant: His Excellency Leonardo Zamora Legaspi, OP, Archbishop of Nueva Caceres 

6:00 p.m. - 12:00 a.m. 

Public viewing and vigil 

Released on August 26, 2012 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



BULLETIN NO. 11 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 



Today, August 27, 2012, the casket bearing the remains of the late Secretary Jesse M. Robredo 
departed Naga City Hall for the Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia. Departure 
honors were rendered by the Philippine National Police (PNP) at City Hall. The funeral 
cortege went around Naga City en route to the basilica where the PNP rendered arrival 
honors. 

Public viewing and vigil is ongoing until 5:00 p.m. when a Pontifical High Mass will be 
officiated by His Excellency Leonardo Zamora Legazpi, OP, Archbishop of Nueva Caceres. 
After the Mass, public viewing and vigil will resume, until 8 a.m. tomorrow, August 28. 

August 28, 2012, is the eighth and final day of National Mourning for the late Secretary 
Robredo by virtue of Proclamation No. 460, s. 2012. 

After the concelebrated Requiem Mass, the President will confer on Secretary Robredo 
the Philippine Legion of Honor with the rank of Chief Commander. The Philippine Legion 
of Honor is considered the highest award the President can bestow without the need for 
approval of Congress. Secretary Robredo is being conferred the Philippine Legion of Honor 
for life achievement as Secretary of the Interior and as Mayor of Naga City. 
The late Secretary Robredo will then be honored with a state funeral, after which his remains 
will be cremated in Funeraria Imperial, Naga City. 

The following is the schedule for the final public viewing, the conferment of the Philippine 
Legion of Honor, and the state funeral. 

12:00 a.m. -7:00 a.m.[l] 

Public viewing and vigil at the Basilica Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia 



235 



7:00 a.m. - 10:00 a.m. 

Preparations for the concelebrated Requiem Mass 

10:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. 

Concelebrated Requiem Mass 

11:00 a.m. 

Conferment by the President of the Philippine Legion of Honor with the rank of Chief 
Commander (posthumous) on Secretary Jesse M. Robredo. 

Ceremony: 

■ The citation will be read by Secretary of Budget and Management Florencio 
B. Abad. 

■ The insignia will be presented by the President to Atty. Leni Robredo, widow 
of the late Secretary. 

■ Atty. Leni Robredo or a member of the family will give a response. 

■ The President will deliver a eulogy for Secretary Robredo, after which 
the casket will be brought out of the basilica by casket bearers from the 
Philippine National Police (PNP) and the Armed Forces of the Philippines 
(AFP), accompanied by members of the Cabinet as the designated honorary 
pallbearers of the family. 

After the conferment ceremonies, Secretary Robredo's remains will be transported to the 
Funeraria Imperial for the state funeral. The ceremonies will go as such: 

■ Departure honors and a 19-gun salute will be rendered by the AFP while the 
national anthem is played at the basilica. 

■ The casket will be loaded onto the hearse, after which the funeral cortege will 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



proceed to Funeraria Imperial. 

■ A PNP band and four platoons (from the PNP and the three service branches 
of the Armed Forces of the Philippines) will accompany the funeral cortege, 
preceding the hearse. 

■ Alongside the hearse will be members of the Cabinet on foot serving as the 
honorary pallbearers. 

■ Following the hearse will be the President, Mrs. Robredo, and her children; 
followed by the late Secretary's brother and sister; with other relatives, 
government officials, and other attendees, following, respectively. The distance 
to be covered by the funeral cortege is 750 meters, with an estimated marching 
time of 40 minutes. 

- At the crematorium, a three-volley salute will be rendered by the PNP. 

■ It will be followed by the playing of taps rendered by the AFP. 

■ After playing of taps, the national flag will be taken off the casket and folded by 
the PNP -AFP casket bearers, after which the casket bearers will hand over the 
flag to the President; the President shall then present the folded national flag to 
Atty. Leni Robredo. The presentation of the flag will conclude the state funeral. 

Released on August 27, 2012 

Footnote 

[1] Updated from 8:00 a.m. as per this special advisory. 



BULLETIN NO. 12 FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 

Tuesday, August 28, 2012, marks the last day of National Mourning for the late Secretary of the 
Interior and Local Government Jesse M. Robredo per Proclamation No. 461, s. 2012. 

At 10:00 a.m., a Concelebrated Requiem Mass will be officiated by Fr. Manuel Nicolas, SDB, 
and Fr. Kulandairaj Ambrose of the Missionaries of the Poor (MOP). 

The Concelebrated Requiem Mass will be followed by the conferment of the Philippine 
Legion of Honor (posthumous) on the late Secretary, and then followed by the eulogy of the 
President. After this, the State Funeral proper begins. 

The casket bearing the remains of Secretary Robredo will be escorted from the Basilica 
Minore de Nuestra Senora de Penafrancia to the Funeraria Imperial. The Armed Forces of the 
Philippines and the Philippine National Police will render departure and arrival honors. 

Music for the funeral cortege will be rendered by the PNP Band with the following playlist: 

1. In Memoriam by Antonino Buenaventura 

2. Funeral March by Frederic Chopin 

3. Himlayan by Lucio San Pedro 

4. Nearer My God to Thee by Lowell Mason 

There will be eight honorary pallbearers who will escort the casket bearing the remains of 
Secretary Robredo: 

1. Secretary of Justice Leila M. De Lima 

2. Secretary of Public Works Rogelio Singson 

3. Secretary of Social Welfare and Development Corazon Juliano-Soliman 

4. Secretary of Energy Rene Almendras 

5. Presidential Spokesperson Edwin Lacierda 

6. Presidential Adviser on the Peace Process Teresita Quintos-Deles 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



7. Chairman of the Metro Manila Development Authority Francis Tolentino 

8. Chairperson of the Mindanao Development Authority Luwalhati R. Antonino 



Released on August 28, 2012 




SPECIAL URGENT BULLETIN FROM THE COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL 
ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. 
ROBREDO 

Advisory on the proceedings for the funeral procession at Naga City tomorrow, August 28, 
2012. 

1. For those joining the procession tomorrow, please note that the crematorium is not open to 
the public. You may, however, proceed to Eternal Gardens, where an area is allotted for those 
who may want to view Secretary Robredo's tomb. 

2. Public viewing is now until 7:00 a.m. tomorrow. Assembly time at the church is 9:00 a.m. 
for the Cabinet and other guests. 

For more details on the schedule and proceedings, please read Bulletin No. 11. 



239 



DIAGRAMS 




242 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




Presidential Communications development 
and Strategic planning Office i gov.ph 



B-norxJo 



□ 



AYALA 
BRIDGE 



FINANCE 
ROAD 



Bf» 403 

MALACANAN 
PALACE 

SOLANO X 
STREET 



lRT 7 

Pu>e» BfBV ^ 

a 0 



PADRE BURGOS STREET 

Nrtorw ~.rx*M*r — . Br gy 825 

*i n OdP*co 



O Ik 



n*y»o 



ROUTE: VILLAMOR TO MALACANAN 
FOR: AUG 24, 2012 



91 *S2 



' V*o CruJ 



ROXAS BOULEVARD 

\ 



Makati 



MKTS* 



5 1 



PUR E 



MrjiiV — i 



ANDREWS 
AVE 



OLD AIRPORT 
ROAD 

LEGEND: 
f ORIGIN 
f DESTINATION 

LATEST AS OF: 9:00 PM, AUG 23, 2012 





T 

VILLAMOR 




AIRBASE 


+ 






Presidential Communications Development 
and strategic planning office i gov.ph 



J. P. 
LAUREL ST. 



□ 



MALACANAN 
PALACE 



NAGTAHAN 
BRIDGE 



4* Ermit» 
LRT 1 Un»d n 



Brjy 6*4 Pko 



V 



9 



BrjY 692 Andre* 



F? .*>■■■■ i • 



Ourr» 



QUIRINO 
AVENUE 



Bffly 714 



VtroCnu 



Brgy 7Sli 



/ 



OSMENA 
HIGHWAY 



'Sol. 



LRT, Q 



B»f MMf 49 



Makati City 



LRT-i p. uwwl 



San Lor«nzo 



f! 



I 



! 



□ 



PUR EC 



ROUTE: MALACANAN TO VILLAMOR 
FOR: AUG 26, 2012 



! 



c 



LEGEND: 
^ ORIGIN 
f DESTINATION 



SKYWAY 



3 



/ 



V 



VILLAMOR ^ 
AIR BASE 



\ 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




245 



Ill MOVEMENT OF CASKET TO VENUE 

WHERE THE LATE SECRETARY ROBREDO WILL LIE IN STATE 



MUSEUM 

(KALAYAAN HALL) 




246 JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




t 



< UJ 

LU CC 

z < 

=> ^ 




LU 
DC 
Z) 
I- 
DC 

£ 

LU 
Q 

CO 
DC 
O 



< 
DC 
LU 



< 
x 

z 
< 



TO 
C 



D) £ Uj 

3 £ w 
< 2 -r 

00 



5 



o 

Q 

LU 

cc 

DQ 
O 

cc 



LU t 

O _ 

2 



< 

O 
< 



UJ 

q 

c/j 

UJ 

cc 
a. 

UJ 

x 



5g 

m ° 
2 UJ 

31 f 



m 

w 
O 

Q 
UJ 

cc 
m 
O 
tr 



e/j 

CC 
UJ 

I 

O 

< 
Q 

Q 
Z 
< 

o 

Q 
UJ 

CC 
CO 
O 
CC 

g 



<N f» 



0 




247 




t 



< UJ 

DC Cfl 

UJ DC 

z < 

=> Hi 

u. X 



°= UJ S 

uj Si Q >, 

« J: cc s 

< DC CO < 

o p o 2 
o cc 



Ms 

DC J < 




24$ JESSE M.ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




LU 

DC 



DC 

LU 
Q 



LU 

CO 

DC < 
O 01 



< 
DC 
LU 



S 1 

■D 



<0 

3 « » 
< 12 *t 




< 
O 



LU 
Q 
-I 

LU 
Z 
LU 

O 



</) 

DC 
LU 
DC 
< 
LU 
DO 



2 

>- 

DC 
< 
DC 
O 

z 
o 



cc 

LU 
Q 



O 
O 
> 

z 

o P 

O 0) 



Li. Y 



</5 
Cl 
O 
O 
DC 



t 



o 
o 



-ottS? 



o 

Q 
LU 
DC 

m 
o 

DC 
LU 

Q 
LU 



</5 
DC 
LU 

X 

o 
< 

Q 
Q 

z 

< 

O 
Q 
LU 
DC 
CO 
O 
DC 

</5 
DC 



</5 
DC 
LU 
DC 
< 
LU 
CO 



2 
>- 

DC 
< 
DC 
O 

z 
o 



cc 

UJ 
D 
Z 
< 

s 
s 
o 
o 

1 it 

O P 

O 0) 



DC 
LU 
Q 
Z 
< 



o 
o 

Cl 

o 
o 

DC 



t 



o 

Q 





O LT 
O LU 

5 < 
-I LU 
0- _l 




249 




250 JESSEM - 



ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 




251 



® 




252 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



28 August, Tuesday 

FROM BASILICA MINORE 
DE NUESTRA SENORA 
DE PENAFRANCIA TO 
FUNERARIA IMPERIAL 



TROOP COMMANDER 



FUNERAL CORTEGE 

NAGA CITY 

• (PA) 

► T 



MM 

(2 pr> 

t 



(PA) (2 PNP) (PAF) 



PLATOON 
LEADER 



TROOP STAFF 



COLOR BEARER 
AND GUARD 

(NATIONAL FLAG AND 
DILG COLORS) 



THE PRESIDENT - 



PRESIDENTIAL 
CONVOY 



UNIFORMED PERSONNEL 



PNP BAND 

mm 

iiiMiiii 



-COMPANY COMMANDER (PA) 
- STAFF 

ARMY 

MARINES (NAVY) 

COMPANY COMMANDER (PNP) 
STAFF 



AIRFORCE 



PNP 



HONORARY PALLBEARERS >- ) f 

(MEMBERS OF THE CABINET) 



{ 



g < PRIEST 



•< HONORARY PALLBEARERS 

jlj'J (MEMBERS OF THE CABINET) 



tt i n m n 



MRS ROBREDO 
AND DAUGHTERS 



ROBREDO SIBLINGS 



OTHER RELATIVES 



OTHER OFFICIALS 



MAMA . 



\ug 27, 2010-B:39am 



PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT AND STRATEGIC PLANNING OFFICE • WWW.GOV.PH 



253 



LAYOUT OF THE BASILICA 
(outside) 







D 




Z 


tr 


<t 


LU 


MM. 


ENT 


O 


O 


U 



TO NAGA CITY/BALATAS ROAD 

Elevated Walkway 




t 



CC 

£ 



Closed to traffic; 
maybe used as 
waiting area 
for visitors; 
provide chairs 



< 

LU 
CC 

< 

CD 



BASILICA MINORE 



ALTAR 



en 

£ 




Tent for Fai lily 










Z 






LU 






H 






Q 




CC 
LU 


O 




Z 


FO 




LU 

CD 




£ 





t 



ALTERSHEM BLDG. 
(Residence of retired priests) 

I 



Gate which the President may access 



Presidential Communications Development and Strategic Planning Office • www.gov.ph • www.pcdspo.gov.ph 



254 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



LAYOUT OF THE BASILICA 
(inside) 




15 rows (8 seater) 



DILG 
AFP 
PNP 



ALTAR 



CONFERMENT 
CEREMONY 



□ 



PLATFORM 



DILG 
AFP 
PNP 



STEPS | | 

LECTEfllN 



OOO 

ooo 

OOO 



< 
I 



XXX 

I I I 



ooo 
ooo 
ooo 



EXIT 



MAIN DOOR 



< 
I 



ENTRANCE 



PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS DEVELOPMENT AND STRATEGIC PLANNING OFFICE • WWW.GOVPH • WWW.PCDSPO.GOVPH 



255 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 



COMMITTEE ON FUNERAL ARRANGEMENTS AND BURIAL OF THE 
LATE SECRETARY JESSE M. ROBREDO 



EXECUTIVE OFFICE 

Executive Secretary Paquito Ochoa Jr. Director Katherine G. Adraneda 

Undersecretary Lucille P. Ortile Director Ma. Teresa Arreola 
Assistant Secretary Jed M. Eva III 

STAFF 

Dale B. Ador Evangeline M. Fabul 

Atty. Gregorio Rafael P. Bueta Juanito A. Melo Jr. 

Carmina Anne I. Calderon Atty. Darwin G. Tambago 

Lorna S. Espinosa Anne Marie C. Walse 

PRESIDENTIAL MANAGEMENT STAFF 

Secretary Julia R. Abad 



MARSHALS: 




Office of the Secretary 




Director Herminio Bagro III 


John Kevin Benico 


Katrina Manahan 


Jezza Blastique 


Basil Castano 


Jaime A. Bondal Jr.. 


Cedrik Forbes 


Ana Jane Calar 


Rafael Ignacio 


Ana Belinda Dacio 


Daniel San Jose 


Norable Del Cerojano 


Atty. Nancy Quimpo 


Jasper Ryan dela Cruz 


Director Clemencia Cabugayan 


Rose Arden Dela Cruz 


Director R. M. Gosiengfiao 


Dona Riz Dionisio 


Annblyth Tia 


Erniel Martin P. Enrile 


Ma. Kristine Yulo 


Joana Micah Eufemio 


Paul Maravillas -Team Leader 


Venice Felix 


Mary Ann Succor Abano 


Rosally Funclara 


Nadia Abcede 


Christa Gualberto 


Fiona Amatorio 


Bernadette Gutierrez 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Edward Heshan 
Karlo Honoridez 
Maylin Jemena 
Jemimah Landicho 
Ryan Lazo 
Placida Lunasin 
Erlyn Macarayan 
Juanita Macario 
Ronnel V. Maruquez 
Melissa Nanette Matias 
Norman Matienzo 
Angelito F. Oda Jr. 
Marietta Ortiz 
Anna Cecilia Padillo 



Ma. Elena D. Palabrica 

Mark Panganiban 

Estelita Quitain 

Maribel Raynes 

George Michael Regino 

Cheryl Rentino 

Arnel R. Reola 

Mark Alleister Roa 

Barbie Jane L. Rosales 

Camille Genevieve M. Salvador 

Joaquin Santiago 

Jo Marie Linn S. Santos 

Jonathan Sto. Tomas 



PMS ORC 

Director Susan M. Solo 
Henry T. Abella 
Victor B. Lorenzo 
Diona Aquino- Javate 
Mary Josephine B. Arenas 
Ruel A. Casino 
Seth B. Florendo 
Glezel Mae D. Galenzoga 
Patricia F. Guioguio 



Diona Javate-Aquino 
Mary Ann V. Lucero 
Maribel D. Montana 
Robina M. Morandarte 
Cesar C. Pablo 
Shiela Mae Sabalburo 
Evelyn C. Villacorte 
Jocelyn B. Villegas 
Rex D. Yurong 



STAFF: 
Janice Santos 
Michelle Cudiamat 

RFU 5/ORC Staff 

Audry Manly 
Amber Merandilla 



Rei Lana Maranda 
Flaureen Dacanay 



Vivian Vargas 

Cesar Contreras (ORC) 



259 



Voltaire Palana (RFU 7) 
Evelyn Clarin (RFU 8) 



Ma. Tita Rodriguez (RFU 10) 
Marites Cabuenas (RFU 11) 



DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT 

Undersecretary Austere Panadero Assistant Secretary Rollie Acosta 

Undersecretary Rico E. Puno Assistant Secretary Ester Aldana 



STAFF: 




Eirene Jhone E. Aguila 


Bong Mangahas 


Mae Berdin 


Benjie Navea 


Joan M. Dela Cruz 


Atty. Angel Oj astro 


Ma. Salve Ambe Duplito 


Atty. Domnina Ranees 


Philip "Boyet" Dy 


Atty. Ariel Tanangonan 


Bernice Dy 


Elnora Velasco 


MARSHALS: 




Susan H. Abad 


Jesseboy P. Gata 


May Aznar 


Alberto L. Manipon Jr. 


Darlina B. Barrameda 


Vlademir Manzanilla 


Cesar C. Basco 


Arnold Mendoza 


Hazelle E. Belamide 


Roly C. Mutia 


Damian R. Canillas 


Shiela A. Palma 


Chiquet Cartagena 


Allan Ronald C. Pedrano 


Arnel C. Castor 


Jasmin E. Querejiro 


Nestor Tonje Consul 


Romeo B. Rolle 


Pacholo Corcodia 


Liliosa G. Temporosa 


Maximo Ronaldo V. Corpus 


Zacarias Z. Varon 


Linda M. De Guzman 


Jocelyn I. Villaflor 


Kristine M. Dela Pena 





Bureau of Fire Protection 

Insp. Joyce H. Grant Insp. JL Aaron F. Caro 

Insp. Levi L. Cerillo Insp. Romie Tungpalan 



2()0 JESSE M.ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Insp. Jay Efren U. Baawa 
SF01 Ma. Jindra C. De leon 
FOl Mark Anthony T. Lopena 
FOl Jan Chester E. Tapia 

Bureau of Jail Management and 

J/SInsp. Jacklord B. Carino 
J/Insp. Julius C. Langcay 
J/Insp. Gerald Francis Orias 
J/Insp. Delight S. Mamilig 
J/Insp. Reizabelle Gumaru 
J/Insp. April Joy Bueco 
S J03 Anthony R. Parrocha 
J03 Frederico DC Dizon 



FOl Jovylyn D. Paler 

FOl Michael B. Geonzon 

FOl Edward A. Felix 

FOl Adonis Dapig C. Sumedla 

J02 Orlando Dante L. Chun Jr. 

JOl Kristan Joy L. Taruma 

JOl Ivy Christine T. Manigos 

JOl Edmund F. Pagharion 

JOl Godfrey C. Boado 

JOl Arlie F. Angeles 

JOl Harold James Ramiterre 



PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS 
DEVELOPMENT AND STRATEGIC PLANNING OFFICE 

Secretary Ramon A. Carandang Assistant Secretary Ma. Carmen G. Mislang 

Undersecretary Manuel L. Quezon III Assistant Secretary Mikael de Lara Co 



MARSHALS: 




Krizia Almenario 


Sybhel Cordero 


Pancho Alvarez 


Jessie Cruz 


Ednathan Andrada 


Christina del Rosario 


Jean Arboleda 


Katherine Aira Espino 


Nathalie Baldonido 


Alex Estor 


Gisela Banaag 


Sherina Fernando 


Gino Bayot 


Kristine Galang 


Mark Blanco 


Grace Guiang 


Reyna Bugna 


Maria Anna Gumapac 


Claire Capul 


Joi Marie Angelica Indias 


Joseph Casimiro 


Kristina Javier 


Gilbert Cacuyog 


Marylane Juico 



261 



Gian Lao 


Beverly Navarra 


Marilyn Laurio 


Carlo Nebria 


Jennifer Lazo 


Emmanuel Roldan 


Ysa Lluisma 


Hermund Rosales 


Roderrick Macutay 


Allison Sangalang 


David Manaois 


Christian Soqueno 


Sasha Martinez 


Alexis Torio 


Mara Mendoza 


Maria C aria Vidal 


Arvin Montalvo 




Joanna Kristine Mostajo 




SUPPORT STAFF: 




Narceso Banania 


Maricris Madolora 


Anthony Cu 


Raymond Maymay 


Paolo Cu 


Mike Mendoza 


Jonathan Cuevas 


Armil Ordiales 


Justin Gatuslao 


Atty. Sarah Sison 


Joel Haber 


Charles Tuvilla 


Erwin Llamado 


Nastasia Tysmans 


OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL SPOKESPERSON 


Secretary Edwin Lacierda 




Undersecretary Abigail E Valte 




MARSHALS: 




Kristine Basa 


Angelica Misa 


Camille del Rosario 


Magel Ordonez 


Mary Jane Milo 


Cherie Lynn Tan 


STAFF: 




Nestor Alarcon 


Rizal Espino 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



ARMED FORCES OF THE PHILIPPINES 

OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY CHIEF OF STAFF FOR OPERATIONS, Js 

BGEN NESTORA ANONUEVO O - 8271 AFP TSgt. Rommel M. Ramos PAR 

COL RENE GLEN O PAJE O - 9575 GSC (INF) PA TSgt. Domingo O. Torno PA 

MAJ EMERSON V SUMILANG O - 12572 (INF) PA TSgt. Nestor C. Domingo PA 
TSgt. Hermogenes G. Lucillo PA 

9TH INFANTRY (SPEARHEAD) DIVISION 

COL Anthony B. Purugganan O - 9772 GSC (FA) PA MAJ Jose Felix S. Pepito H O - 12704 (CAV) PA 
LTC Ericson V. Rosana O - 11571 (INF) PA 

GENERAL HEADQUARTERS AND HEADQUARTERS SERVICE COMMAND 
LTC GEORGE M DOMINGO O - 127501 (INF) PA Sgt Joel P. Calmita 815815 PA 
MAJ LAZARO C BALNEG JRO - 129485 (INF) PA Sgt Zeus L. Penarubia 849757 PAF 



MAJ RICHIE JAY ABISCO O - 131547 (FS) PA 

1LT.MARCEL0PPASCUAJR0435975(INF)PA 

1LT. ORLANDO B PAALA 046333 PAF 

SSgt. Felizardo D. Gazzingan 783311 PA 

Sgt. Rodel R Recuerdo 836011 PAF 

Sgt. Joselito S. Ambida 835966 PAF 

Sgt. Ronaldo L. Delos Santos Jr. 837055 PA 

Cpl. Anthony R Nolasco 837067 PA 

Cpl. Percival S. Masambique 837069 PA 

Pfc. Noel A. Felizardo 893934 PA 

Pfc. Piccolo P. Dela Cruz 865482 PA 

Pfc. Mark Anthony B. Quisora 893949 PA 

Pfc. Francisco M. Macabangon 893896 PA 

Pfc. Jurey B. Medina 893937 PA 

SSgt. Dennis G. Umali 797274 PAF 

YN2 Amando I. Sogoni Jr 824268 PN 

ET2 Mario F. Masaoy 820663 PN 

Sgt. Alexander P. Sicat 791924 PN (M) 

SPOl Joselito M. Bacuitis 135759 PNP 



Sgt. Mark Anthony B. Castillo 853197 PAF 
P03 Ronaldo B. Castillo 098741 PNP 
P03 Benigno Y Robedillo Jr 002172 PNP 
Cpl. Wilson Q. Lingamen 798832 PA 
SN1 Roel J. Gadon 797177 PN 
Cpl. Danilo P. Hernandez 828193 (Inf ) PA 
Cpl. Salvador J. Montarial Jr 840157 PA 
AIC Jay P. Flores 849843 PAF 
A1C Edmar G. Castillo 852783 PAF 
AIC Gilbert O. Andaya 862546 PAF 
AIC Glenn MarkH. Areola 864602 PAF 
AIC Patrick Erwin A. Galapon 867311 PAF 
A2C Ernesto P. Tigue 852959 PAF 
Pfc. Renante M. dela Pena 856126 PA 
Pfc. Norben S. Cabang 875665 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Goldwin M. Magundayao 891400 PA 
A2C Vincent A. Lagrimas 892822 PAF 
A2C Ryan C. Enriquez 892876 PAF 
Pfc. John Kenneth Ga 893917 PA 



263 



Pfc. Jonie G. Meneses 893932 PA 
Pfc. Allen Jay A. Tobias 893933 PA 
Pfc. Jerico V Reyes 893952 PA 



Pfc. Frederick A. Lawagan 895386 PA 

Pfc. Jordan C. Elias 895388 PA 

AM James Kin H. Bastida 900463 PAF 



GENERAL HEADQUARTERS AND HEAL" 
COL ROBERT C DAUZ 0-9917 CAV (PCSC) PA 
LTC REX P MACOGUE 0-125758 (INF) PA 
MAJ JEZREEL J DIAGMEL 0-130417 (INF) PA 
Cpt Narciso P. Fenequito 0-127261 (FS) PA 
Cpt. Homer A. Estolas 0-13449 (INF) PA 
Cpt Jacon S. Cordero 0-13434 (INF) PA 
Cpt Joseph C. Kinado 0-136816 (Fa) PA 
lLt. Clyde Lemuel M. Fortunate) 0-136904 (INF) PA 
lLt Jonathan L. Francisco O-14760 (INF) PA 
lLt Ron Michael M. Soriao 0-14721 (INF) PA 
lLt Peterson Y Acosta 0-140024 (INF) PA 
lLt Michael P. Gesulga 0-140043 (CE) PA 
lLt Michael F. Espiritu 0-14662 (Inf ) PA 
lLt Kenneth J. Pangcoga 0-16453 (INF) PA 
MSg Carlos S. Sagnip729001 (FA) PA 
TSgt. Pablito N. Alcantara775973 (FA) PA 
TSgt Jessie G. Flormata 704018 (Inf) PA 
TSgt Alfredo B. Molina Jr 78403l(FA) PA 
TSgt. Edilberto G. Velasco776014 (FA) PA 
TSgt Robert D. Malitao 752365 (AGS) PA 
TSgt. Gerry L. Jimenez 776224 (Inf) PA 
TSgt. Conrado G. Magnaye 780154 (QMS) PA 
TSgt. Alexander R Marzan 737573 (SC) PA 
SSgt. Hermie F. Adolacion763625 (FA) PA 
SSgt Pablo B. Jose 763608 (Inf) PA 
SSgt. Jaime B. Corpuz 764009 (Inf) PA 
SSgt. Diosdado M. Cordero 752531 (QMS) PA 



QUARTERS SERVICE COMMAND 
SSgt. Arnold A. Defacto 804918 (QMS) PA 
SSgt Ariel B. Rafon 806760 (Inf) PA 
SSgt. Eric B. Balignasay 817261 (Inf) PA 
SSgt. Mark A. Garcia 811141 (FS) PA 
SSgt. Jojo N. Abuel 806743 (FA) PA 
SSgt. Pedro A. Carbonel II 781359 (CE) PA 
SSgt. Ulysses H. Castromayor 811169 (FA) PA 
SSgt Arnel F. Lagarto 811355 (FA) PA 
SSgt. Presco G. Medenilla Jr 809495 (Inf) PA 
SSgt. Dominador B. Oriel 811111 (FA) PA 
SSgt. Eddie M. Samonte 780089 (FA) PA 
Sgt. Ricardo H. Samonte 794324 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Gerry Y. Urgente 810971 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Alfonso A. Quintana 764647 (Inf) PA 
Sgt Jamael P. Mindalano 806470 (MS) PA 
Sgt Rafael Jan G. Salas 810028 (AGS) PA 
Sgt. Rogie A. Almonte 828015 (Inf) PA 
Sgt Yancy B. Andaleon 832916 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Eufel M. Ares 811296 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Manuel S. Arellon 815814 (FA) PA 
Sgt Ernesto B. Anis 811282 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Genaro A .Deciar 796765 (Inf) PA 
Sgt Reynaldo S. Abalos 804780 (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Joseph C. Quilbio 815589 (FA) PA 
Sgt Noeberto V Conejar 811034 (FA) PA 
Sgt. Jeffrey C. Aquino 811209 (FA) PA 
Sgt. Leonille L. Labestre 720449 (Inf) PA 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Sgt. Romulo V Arenas (Inf) PA 
Sgt. Randy M. Castillo 834605 (OS) PA 
Cpl. Nilo Z. Nepomuceno 834592 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Norvel DC. Matematico 832917 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Aries G. Santos 834596 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Albert G. Cimanes 853452 (FA) PA 
Cpl. Rame S. de Asis 832315 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Sherwin A. Garcia 834597 (FS) PA 
Cpl. Michael E. De Leon 834601 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Walter V. Ga 843429 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Marvelous R. Puyal 856158 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Leo S. Pardico 856109 (FA) PA 
Cpl. Clarence L. Guieb 856129 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Arcadio B. Ayende 856120 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Abelardo M. Antazo 856132 (AGS) PA 
Cpl. Naldy C. Perina 856148 (AGS) PA 
Cpl. Denmark R Sampaga 863102 (Inf) PA 
Cpl. Rico P. Seno 863028 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Reginald P. Jensen 817757 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Eric A. Santuyo 834604 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Eugene C. Sota 856160 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Reden F. Ayroso 856097 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Ernie O .Diamante 863065 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Randolf A. Pascua 856175 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Ferdinand M. Serrano 863118 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Rey S. Babejes 863100 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. John Jover M. Balbin 863034 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Romeo E. Barreda 856166 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. MC Darylle B. Bobis 877282 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. JeckyP. Bernaldez 881424 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Wilber R Sequerra 863082 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Alexander T. Tresvalles 863045 (Inf) PA 



Pfc. Roderick C. Balingit 878072 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Jerald M. Anis 878712 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Johner B. Herbieto 881466 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Luther A. Sabiduria 877269 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Mark Anthony M. Ramos 878129 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Ralph Joemarie A. Francisco 878723 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Enrico C. Disimulacion 832924 (SC) PA 

Pfc. Francisco A. Baltazar 858557 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Ronilo T. De Roma 878481 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Perfecto M. Salvadora 875654 (Inf PA 

Pfc. Rafael L. Ronquillo Jr 877754 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Roger L. Dayacus 877872 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Gilbert R Refuerzo 891213 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Zaldy C. Dequilla 877293 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Jerickson L. Diemsen 878472 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Ferdinand G. Abiol 842231 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Jestoni Z. Alarcon 877523 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Jeffrey B. Murillo 863099 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Candido T. Bunagan 878131 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Rex D. Gagelonia 877895 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Jessie M. Cabauatan 863027 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Robert T. Macayan 881533 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Springy S. Delos Santos 884697 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Aries G. Ger 891383 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Ever B. Zalun 891292 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Robert D. Castillo 856113 (FS) PA 

Pfc. Emil bert B. Listor 882359 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Adonis S. Reforsado 877781 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Felomino G. Pontino Jr 878456 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Joseph M. Sano 878497 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Bryan Dave C. Estuesta 877949 (Inf) PA 

Pfc. Edmar H. Dugay 878587 (Inf) PA 



265 



Pfc. Sammy A. Zorilla 891166 (Inf) PA 
PfcMerlenetteAGuieb 876870 (EW) PA 
Pvt.. Mark Eduard E. Jimenez 899672 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Livy T. Indoyon 856105 (FA) PA 
Pfc. Aldrin O. Makalintal 891173 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Edmundo D. Bruno III 891366(Inf) PA 
Pfc. Bryan P. Guarin 891439 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Diany Mar C. Uban 891295 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Gilbert R Refuerzo 891213 (Inf) PA 
Pfc. Ever P. Pacionela 891388 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Ruel M. Maningas 898521 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Edgar C. Tadulan 899749 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Mark Joecel S. Aclo 899799 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Mark Angelo C. Cabras 899681 (Inf) PA 
Pvt MarkPalgie A. Bagayan 899680 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Gualberto D. Ayson Jr 899693 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Hernan Rey M. Villaranda 899786 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Bernardo Y. Basuel Jr 899797 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Raffy T. Ravena 899664 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Ed Aarone E. Garferio 899650 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Mark David John V. Abian 899659 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Rochelle B. Gutierrez 899714 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Mark S. Salupado 899762 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Emmanuel D. Tamayo 899710 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Michael Angelo C. Jacinto 899735 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Rogelio S. Dumlao Jr 899718 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Br M. Lumantam 899756 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Chester E. Co 899671 (Inf) PA 
Pvt Michael T. Dadan 899712 (Inf) PA 



Pvt. Aldo Rey M. Dagdag 899677 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Kelly James D. Barreo 899666 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Joel B. Benosa 899670 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Danzen J. Baldevarona 899649 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Ian A. Bolotano 899652 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jeson E. Calibozo 899734 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. RJ G. Esteban 899695 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jay P. Remigio 899767 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Reden M. Suguitan 899717 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Andres G. Binasoy 901550 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jenius M. Catiad 899707 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Aldreon M. Lamonio 899790 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Paulo Jorie V Delmo 899661 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Joel R. Ocsona 899792 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Arvin Mark A. Luna 899645 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Mark Eduard E. Jimenez 899672 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Enrique M. Dela Pena 899675 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Eddie Boy G. Torres 899755 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Noli C. Villarta 899752 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Sidny A. Alega 899771 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Restie C. Alonzo 899689 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Ronnel M. Anunciado 899728 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Dimbert M. Binauhan 899745 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jayson G. Nara 899763 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Racel S. Pardillo 899730 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jay-ar T. Bulahan 901571 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Lovito P. Berunio 899777 (Inf) PA 
Pvt. Jonard D. Tibio 899665 (Inf) PA 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



PHILIPPINE ARMY 

COL ROBERT C DAUZ 0-9917 CAV (PCSC) PA 



PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE 

NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS, PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE 



PDG NICANOR A BARTOLOME 
PDIRElpidio Z. De Asis Jr. 
PDIR Samuel B. Diciano 
PDIR Roque G. Ramirez 
PDIR Lina C. Sarmiento 
PSUPT Brian B. Castillo 
PCSUPT Victor P. Deona 
PSUPT Andre P. Dizon 
PCSUPT Bernardo C. Florece Jr. 
PCSUPT Alex C. Ignacio 
PCSUPT Edgardo C. Ingking 
PCSUPT Federico E. Laciste Jr. 
PSUPT Mannan C. Muarip 



PSUPT Samuel B. Pabonita 
PCSUPT Ronilo V Quebrar 
PCSUPT Diosdado G. Ramos 
PCSUPT Henry S. Ranola Jr. 
PCSUPT George T. Regis 
PCSUPT Tomas G. Rentoy II 
PCSUPT Catalino B. Rodriguez Jr. 
PCSUPT Noel Lazarus C. Vargas 
PCI Raymundo A. Train 
P03 Joenel B Belmes 
PSUPT Juan E Sindac Jr. (Ret) 
NUP Leonito C Navales 



HEADQUARTERS SUPPORT SERVICE 
PCSUPT Isagani Genabe, Director 

POLICE REGIONAL OFFICE 5 

PCSUPT Jose Arne M. Delos Santos, Regional Director 

PHILIPPINE NATIONAL POLICE ACADEMY 
Pcsupt Clarence V Guinto, Director 



DILG 

PSSUPT Francisco B. Penaflor Jr. 
PSINSP Erik D. Angustia 



PSINSPPaulLCabug 



267 



OFFICE OF PRESIDENTIAL PROTOCOL 

Ambassador Miguel Perez-Rubio Director Teddy Poul Datu 

Deputy Chief of Protocol Sulpicio Confiado Director Bernarditas De Jesus 



STAFF: 
Iryl Africa 
Bryan Balagtas 
Raymond Joseph Chan 
Anthony Cornista 
Brandon Daquiaug 
Shiella Ducay 
Joey Escalante 
Eizes Fulgencio 
Avram Irgett Jornales 



Kenneth Lagunilla 
Alicia Pangan 

Director Esperanza Quillopo 

Cheryl Sadiwa 

Monette Tolentino 

Abigail Ubando 

Director Zenaida Villanueva 

Emy Vitug 

Sharon Villanueva- Mutac 



MALACANANG SOCIAL OFFICE 

Assistant Executive Secretary Susan D. Reyes 



STAFF: 

Roberto Alcantara 
Ramil Atencio 
Jeremy Escubido 
Richard Guirigay 
Edelweiza Mabalay 
Marivic Manlapig 



Manuel Mercado 
Romanico Raza 
Girli Recinto 
Juan Sibolinao 
Renato Sumalinog 



APPOINTMENTS OFFICE 

Undersecretary Rochelle R. Ahorro 

MARSHALS: 
Susan Mogao 
Michelle Saquido 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



PRESIDENTIAL SECURITY GROUP 

Brigadier General Ramon Mateo Dizon 



RESOURCE PERSONS 

LT. COL. NESTOR HERICO MAJ. IAN NOEL IGNES 

LT. COL. ANTONIO NAFARRETE MAJ. SAMUEL YUNQUE 

LT. COL. RAUL PAYURAN CPT RAUL RUBANDO 
LT. COL. ROBERTO SIMARA 



WE WOULD ALSO LIKE TO THANK THE FOLLOWING: 



MEMBERS OF THE CABINET 

HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT COORDINATING COUNCIL (HUDCC) 
Vice President Jejomar C. Binay 

DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (DFA) 
Secretary Albert F. del Rosario 

DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE (DOF) 
Secretary Cesar V. Purisima 

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (DOJ) 
Secretary Leila M. De Lima 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH (DOH) 
Secretary Enrique T. Ona 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE (DA) 
Secretary Proceso J. Alcala 

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND HIGHWAYS (DPWH) 
Secretary Rogelio L. Singson 



269 



DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS (DOTC) 
Secretary Manuel Mar A. Roxas 



270 



DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION (DepEd) 
Secretary Armin A. Luistro 

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL WELFARE AND DEVELOPMENT (DSWD) 
Secretary Corazon Juliano-Soliman 

DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND EMPLOYMENT (DOLE) 
Secretary Rosalinda D. Baldoz 

DEPARTMENT OF BUDGET AND MANAGEMENT (DBM) 
Secretary Florencio B. Abad 

DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENSE (DND) 
Secretary Voltaire T. Gazmin 

DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (DOST) 
Secretary Mario G. Montejo 

DEPARTMENT OF AGRARIAN REFORM (DAR) 
Secretary Virgilio R. De Los Reyes 

DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM (DOT) 
Secretary Ramon R. Jimenez Jr. 

DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (DTI) 
Secretary Gregory L. Domingo 

DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (DENR) 
Secretary Ramon J. R Paje 

JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY (DOE) 
Secretary Jose Rene D. Almendras 



COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION (CHED) 
Secretary Patricia B. Licuanan 

NATIONAL ECONOMIC AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (NEDA) 
Acting Secretary Arsenio M. Balisacan 

PRESIDENTIAL COMMUNICATIONS OPERATIONS OFFICE (PCOO) 
Secretary Herminio B. Coloma Jr. 

NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (NSC) 
Secretary Cesar P. Garcia Jr. 

OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR GENERAL (SOLGEN) 
Solicitor General Francis H. Jardeleza 

OFFICE OF THE CHIEF PRESIDENTIAL LEGAL COUNSEL (OCPLC) 
Secretary Eduardo V. de Mesa 

METROPOLITAN MANILA DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (MM DA) 
Secretary Francis N. Tolentino 

NATIONAL COMMISSION ON MUSLIM FILIPINOS (NCMF) 
Secretary Mehol K. Sadain 

MINDANAO DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (MINDA) 
Secretary Luwalhati R. Antonino 



NATIONAL ANTI-POVERTY COMMISSION (NAPC) 
Secretary Jose Eliseo M. Rocamora 



OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENTIAL ADVISER ON THE PEACE PROCESS (OPAPP) 
Secretary Teresita Quintos-Deles 



PRESIDENTIAL LEGISLATIVE LIAISON OFFICE (PLLO) 
Secretary Manuel N. Mamba 

COMMISSION ON FILIPINOS OVERSEAS 
Secretary Imelda M. Nicolas 



PRIVATE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 

Undersecretary Rochelle R. Ahorro Assistant Secretary Jun Delantar 

Undersecretary Eloisa Sy Director Jo Anne Haber 

STAFF: 

Marilyn Ferrolino Emer Hernandez 

Jimlloyd Barcellano Joey Salvador 

Lorenzo Perez 

OFFICE OF THE SPECIAL ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT 

Undersecretary Ma. Lourdes A. Ong 

STAFF: Jerry B. Mosong 

Jeralyne H. Barnachea Ruth S. Salvana 



INTERNAL HOUSE AFFAIRS OFFICE: 

Karlo Miguel R Abelgas 

Ana Maria R Alonzo 

Joery Q. Amita 

Christian Anthony M. Ang 

Antiono L. Aragon 

Roel B. Aragon 



Russel N. Bararl 
Jeovy D. Battung 
Ramil R. Bermudo 
Vincent R Billones 
Roberto A. Buenaventura Jr. 
Gilbert F. Bugna 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Ady D. Cainday 
Eilene M. Calago 
Ferdinand N. Caliwag 
Jeferson S. Camantiles 
Mars V. Carlet 
Camil E. Casison Jr. 
Elmer C. Castillo 
Danilo Q. Casulla 
Mario H. Catolico 
Jose L. Correa Jr. 
Editha B. Correa 
Gaudioso A. Corasme Jr. 
Rian V. Cortel 
Alexis- John S. Cortes 
Robin S. Cruz 
Roberto B. Cuevas 
Paul John G. Dasmarinas 
Ruben T. De Asis Jr. 
Rolando M. Decena 
Ruel S. Del Mundo 
Karl Angelo C. Del Rio 
Gilbert D. Diaz 
Abraham E. Eclarinal 
Ma. Rosario L. Enriquez 
Josephine C. Eronico 
Lorele D. Espolong 
Rey A. Espolong 
Rogelio V. Farinas 
Ivy J. Fernandez 
Jose F. Fernandez 
Ian Romar G. Ferrer 
Leza L. Gatdula 



Maricel S. Guanzon 
Richard G. Gumboc 
Alberto I. Iturralde 
Henry S. James Jr. 
Cirspulo C. Jason 
Herbert C. Lacostales 
Emily A. Layderos 
Catalina D. Lee 
Fidel B. Lorbes 
Lana T. Lozano 
Romeo L. Mallari 
Gemma S. Marquez 
Amelita H. Martin 
Maria Luisa I. Martinez 
Jeaneza S. Mata 
Katrina Paula P. Matias 
Joel R. Mendoza 
Saturnino C. Mogado Jr. 
Hary Dick R. Moncillo 
Jocelyn V. Mones 
Oscar A. Montanez 
Dexter A. Nietes 
Anna F. Noma 
Jesus A. Notarte Jr. 
Cecilia L. Nunez 
Melanie C. Ochoa 
Lourdes U. Ortego 
Marnelli C. Pailago 
Crisostomo R. Pantoja 
Renante Y. Piloto 
May Velene G. Quesada 
Melchor V. Rubio 



Sharina C. Sabile Honorato Vladmir B. Tan III 



Gregorio T. Sadural Jr. 


Richard C. Tanguin 


Silverio V. Salarda 


Mariano B. Tejada 


Emmanuel SL. Salazar 


Raymond T. Tiu 


Girle H. Sanchez 


Josenilo M. Vallido 


Cheryl S. Sangreo 


Romeo C. Vasquez 


Cristy Amor L. Sedano 


Raquel S. Vergara 


Marivel Q. Silva 


Marinel R Vicente 


Darren M. Tabane 




RADIO TELEVISION MALACANANG 




Director Virgilio P. Nadal Jr. 




STAFF: 


Marianette Bernardino 


Luis Enrico Eleazar 


Ernesto Bernal 


Alvin Abaca 


Pedencio Bibar 


Danny Abad 


Faith Bombase 


Ritche Abad 


Marbo Bombase 


Ronaldo Adoremos 


Ely Burlaos 


Brando Aguilan 


Ben Butil 


Marcelo Alba 


Benny Cabaltica 


Rene Almacin 


Elvie Cabansag 


Frederick Apellido 


Leo Cabansag 


Dormel Axalan 


Orlando Camua 


Ronald Bacani 


Marby Candelaria 


Arnel Balasabas 


Renrey Carriaga 


Charls Basas 


Joel Castillo 


Jun Batayan 


Joven Castro 


Henry Baul 


Julius Catibog 


Aris Bautista 


Jeffrey Conti 


Godofredo Bautista 


Floriano Coranes 


Romer Belecina 


Junar Correa 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



Meng Cortez 


Efren Pananiban 


JV Cosico 


Mark Panganiban 


Lemuel Cruz 


Claire Pasumbal 


Joy David 


Fernando Pasumbal 


John De Vries 


Francis Pedernal 


Abelardo Dimarucut 


Job Pelayo 


Arvin Edrosa 


Elmer Petchoco 


Margarett Espaldon 


JC Prillo 


Fiel Espinoza 


Mark Vincent Quiambao 


Hernan Estimada 


Nick Quintana 


Gilbert Estoesta 


Danilo Ramirez 


Mitzi Fugnit 


Jose Rapis 


Michelle Geronimo 


Kate Rivera 


Antonio Go 


Ramil Salcedo 


Wred Herrera 


DJ Sales 


Larry Hilario 


Marco Santiago 


Willy Hugo 


Rene Sta. Maria 


Virgilio Indefenzo 


Vergel Tabasa 


Gerry Jordan 


Richard Tamayo 


Armand Lapitan 


Leonard Teodoro 


Noel Lascano 


Erwin Tolledo 


Vince Laserna 


Edward Velchez 


Robert Lineses 


Joel Vestudio 


Leoppoldo Lubid Jr. 


Rene Villaflor 


M. Ludangco 


Miguel Viloria 


*jrwen ivieurano 


juneui vvecungco 


Antonio Ong 


Rudy Yaneza 


Joey Ong 




Ferdinand Ongsing 





CITY GOVERNMENT OF NAGA 

CITY MAYOR'S OFFICE 
Mayor John G. Bongat 
Men L. Reondanga 
Jose A. Cuyo Jr. 



Arnel Labrador 
Delia Obana 

Jose A. Collerandyvic Villaflor 



OFFICE OF THE CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Florencio T. Mongoso Jr., CSEE Ruel Barrios 

Roberto V. De Asis Nicolas Motos 

Huberto Ursua Jose B. Perez 
Zayda Fe Sancho-Rifareal 



SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD 
Vice Mayor Gabriel H. Bordado Jr.. 
Councilor Cecilia Veluz-Asis 
Councilor Nelson Legacion 
Councilor Esteban Abnonal 
Councilor David Casper Nathan Sergio 
Councilor Ray-An Cydrick Rentoy 



Councilor Jose A. Tuason 
Councilor Joaquin Perez Jr.. 
Councilor Raoul Rosales 
Councilor Alex Nero 
Councilor Dan Paolo Morales 
Gil Dela Torre 



METRO PESO 
Reuel Oliver 



Roderick Reforsado 



OFFICE OFTHE CITY ENGINEER 
Engr. Leon Palmiano 



Engr. Rodolfo Fortuno 



SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT OFFICE 
Engr. Joel Martin 

CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE 

WilfredoB.PrillesJr. 

CITY HEALTH OFFICE 

Dr.VitoBorja Dr. JoframelPaz 



JESSE M. ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



CITY HOSPITAL 
Dr. Luningning Luciano 



RURFAU OF FIRF PROTFCTION 

u w \ \ \ r\ w v_y i i i r\ i_ r i \ \_/ i i v . i i — / 1 n 




FCI Rachel Verbo, PhD 




NAGA TITY POI ICF OFFICF 




PSSupt. Antonio N Gardiona Jr., PESE 


PSupt. Perfecto De Lima 


PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICE 




Joselito Del Rosario 


Ernesto Elcamel 


GENERAL SERVICES DIVISION 




Arthur Abonal 




LIBERAL PARTY OF THE PHILIPPINES 




LIBERAL PARTY NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS 


Director General Gladys Sta. Rita 


Rizalie Pinpinio 


Lambert Ramirez 


Amado Alberto 


Teddy Lopez 


BlessildaFajardo 


Lhan Marasigan 


Mark Kevin Tenorio 


Stephen Roy Cruz 


Zyril Mercines 


April Carlen Reyes 


Boyet Maclang 


Vanessa Putong 


Oscar Baluyot 


OrvilleTatco 


Vincent Nocellado 


Jessa Gonzales 


Austin Acojido 


PadjoValdenor 


Lino Pasion 


Melchor Cayabyab 


JoeyArguelles 



277 



KABATAANG LIBERAL GROUP 




Adrian Martinez 


Kenneth Mahusay 


Aiken Roush Lim 


Maria Jessa Tingting 


Ann Calixto Rubiano 


Maridel Davacol 


Aries Mamangon 


Mary Joy Balisi 


Cesar de Guzman 


Mary Shinn A. Ramos 


Christine Salazar 


Pamela Mata 


Ermarie Requiso 


Richelle Lignes 


JayArPinon 


Rosela Mata 


JedidiahAlatiit 


Rosemarie Ngo 


John Chester Jintalan 




FILIPINO LIBERAL YOUTH 




Aquillus Tamayo 


Jyleazar Dela Rosa 


Arianne Louise Cadiz 


Kane Errol Pascual 


Cathie Condor 


Kim Nava 


Crystal Labingisa 


KimberlyAnne Teodoro 


Danica Joy Dumalo 


Lourraine Alerta 


Danika Sarion 


Lyn-lynBernal 


Dwight Harold Calucag 


Maria Antonia Rosario Gonzales 


Francesca Ymata 


Mitch Hernandez 


Giles Dela Cruz 


Mohammad Dimaporo 


Janile Purisima 


Rhea Tuason 


Jeffrey Villa Reyes 


Robbie Dalanon 


Jonas Pampilon 


Rose Due 


Josefina Angelita Gonzales 


Yusoph Pangadapun 


Joshua Babasa 





CIVIL SOCIETY AND CIVIC GROUPS 



2J8 JESSE M.ROBREDO MEMORIAL BOOK 



SPECIAL THANKS FROM THE FAMILY 



Kaya Natin Movement 

Urban Poor Alliance and all urban poor groups 
Eternal Gardens Memorial Park Corporation and 

its Naga City branch 
Mr. Robert L. Obiedo and family 
Asog Garden Naga 
Naga City People's Council 

Archbishop Luis Antonio Tagle 

Archbishop Leonardo Z. Legaspi, OP, DD 

Rev. Msgr. Rodel Cajot, PC, ST 

Fr. Luisito Occiano 

Fr. Kulandaraj Ambrose 

Fr.XavierOlin,SJ 

Fr Angelo Silerio,S J 

Fr Jboy Gonzales , S J 

Fr.Alvin Paras, OFM 

Fr. JettVilarin 

Fr. Ben Nebres 

Fr. Xavier Alpasa 

Fr. Lito Malungabnan 

Fr. Domingo Florida 

Fr. Manny Zagaga 



Naga City Volunteers for Jesse M. Robredo 
Philip Imperial of Funeraria Imperial, Naga City 
San Miguel Corporation 
Dr. Lucio Tan 

Metro Naga Chamber of Commerce 
Naga Fil- Chinese Chamber of Commerce 
DBLG family 

Fr. Vera 

Fr. Florge Sy 

Fr. AlexBadiola 

Fr. Alvin Paras 

Fr. Randy Baluso 

Fr. Albert Alejo 

Fr. Catalino Arevalo 

Fr. Arnold Abelardo 

Fr. Emmanuel Alfonso, S J 

Fr Arnold Abelardo 

Sr. Nerissa Bandojo, RC 

Missionaries of the Poor, Naga City 

Christian churches and pastors of Camarines Sur 

Our Muslim brothers and sisters 



And to all our relatives,fi~iends, members of the media, and the people of Naga City. Thankyou. 



