SPEECH 



OF 



Honorable Sergio Osmena 

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

DELIVERED AT THE ROTARY DISTRICT 
CONFERENCE DINNER, BAGUIO 
COUNTRY CLUB, FEBRUARY 23, 1940 




43iJ08 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1940 



SPEECH 

OP 

Honorable Sergio Osmena 

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 

DELIVERED AT THE ROTARY DISTRICT 
CONFERENCE DINNER, BAGUIO 
COUNTRY CLUB, FEBRUARY 23, 1940 




43K08 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1940 



SPEECH DELIVERED BY HONORABLE SERGIO OS- 
MENA, VICE PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES, 
AT THE ROTARY DISTRICT CONFERENCE DIN- 
NER AT THE.BAGUIO COUNTRY CLUB, ON FRI- 
DAY EVENING, FEBRUARY 23, 1940. 

Governor Hall, Representative Romulo^ Ladies and 
Gentlemen: 

I deeply appreciate your kind invitation to address 
this Rotarians' Conference. I have always felt a warm 
admiration for the international and cosmopolitan char- 
acter of your organization. There is something in the 
spirit that moves you and in the ideals of your insti- 
tution which appeals to men of goodwill, to those 
who believe in the practicability of association and co- 
operation among peoples, regardless of race, creed or 
political professions. This something is embodied in 
the magnificent motto of the Rotary which is condensed 
in a simple but meaningful word: Service. This is the 
motto written on your flag, the motto which makes 
of Rotary one of the most efficient human instruments 
to foster the spirit of understanding, of harmony and 
of solidarity among men all over the world. Service 
to his fellow-being; service to mankind; service to pro- 
mote the common, vital interests in all climes; such 
lofty ideals make of Rotary one of the institutions of 
greatest utility to the cause of progress. 

As service is the high ideal of Rotarians, it seems 
that my remarks on this occasion could appropriately 
bear on what has been accomplished by the Com- 



4 



momvealth Government of the Philippines in so far 
as such accomplishments mean service to the people 
of these Islands. 

I propose to review the major problems of the 
Philippine Conmionwealth, setting them against the 
backgi'ound of the previous regime under the Jones 
Act, considering them in the light^ of the difficulties 
we have had to meet, indicating to what extent they 
have been solved, and briefly outHning what remains 
to be accomplished. 

The Commonwealth period was meant to bring into 
final fruition the plans that had been traced and partly 
carried out for the emancipation of the Philippines. 
Its purpose was to continue the work that has been 
undertaken toward this end and, if necessary, to ini- 
tiate new activities calculated to complete the prep- 
aration for the advent of the Republic. A mere de- 
cade in length, it was intended to afford the Filipino 
people a chance to gear themselves completely to the 
requirements and responsibilities of independence. Un- 
der the guidance of His Excellency, President Manuel 
L. Quezon, whose leadership, statesmanship and pow- 
erful personality have been the source of inspii'ation 
to us all, we have, I believe, acquitted ourselves cred- 
itably and in such a manner as to make perfectly 
clear om- determination to move forward and carry 
out the present fixed program of independence. 

Let me step back with you now to the period of our 
recent past so that we may view together the situa- 
tion towards the end of the year 1935 when the Phil- 
ippine Commonwealth was inaugurated. For this 
purpose, we can do no better than to view the scene 



' 5 

from the vantage ground held by the Hon. Frank 
Murphy, the last American Governor-General and the 
first United States High Commissioner to the Philip- 
pines. In his last addi'ess to the Philippine Legislature 
as Governor-General, he stated that in 1935 two-thirds 
of the children of primary school age were in the 
schools; tkat the country possessed "a modem system 
of courts and judicial procedure"; that ''the increasing 
homogeneity in the population is not a mere altruistic 
hope"; that in *'the steady advance in the art of dem- 
ocratic and constitutional government, toward the ulti- 
mate goal of complete independence," the Filipinos had 
achieved "the crowning event" of framing and adopt- 
ing "under the terms of the Tydings-McDuffie Act/' a 
"permanent constitution ..." 

This was the general result of Philippine— American 
collaboration of three and a half decades, during which 
the Filipinos* part gradually increased from a negligible 
measure at the inauguration of civil government in 
1901 to practical self-government in 1935 when the 
Legislature and almost the whole of the Judiciary were 
entirely in Filipino hands, and with the Governor- 
General remaining at the head of the government. 
The history of the gradual extension of self-govern- 
ment to the Filipinos is familiar to all of you and need 
not be dealt with here. 

The appraisal of Governor-General Murphy of the 
achievements up to that tune in the joint enterprise 
of nation-building was universally acknowledged, and 
President Quezon, in his inaugural address, announced: 
"We do not have to tear down the existing 
institutions in order to give way to a statelier 
structure. There will be no violent changes 

4W808 2 



6 



from the established order of things, except 
such as may be absolutely necessary to carry 
into effect the innovations contemplated by the 
Constitution. A new edifice shall arise, not 
out of the ashes of the past, but out of the 
standing materials of the living present." 
Faithful to this pledge, the President forthwith set- 
tled down to the task of accomplishing the purpose 
of the Commonwealth, **an instrumentality placed in 
our hands to prepare ourselves fully for the respon- 
sibilities of complete independence." The existing set- 
up, indeed, was not only sound but so devised as to 
be capable of further growth and development. Espe- 
cially was this true in the sphere of education, health, 
public works, justice, and in the maintenance of peace 
and order. 

In these particular fields of constructive states- 
manship, the policy of the Commonwealth has been 
generally one of further growth and expansion. Since 
the establishment of the Commonwealth no effort has 
been spared to increase and extend the educational fa- 
cilities specially those for primary instruction. At the 
close of the school year last March there were 1,746,452 
students in the public schools — ^the largest enrolment 
in the history of the Philippines. To accommodate 
all these students, it was necessary for the govern- 
ment to maintain about eleven thousand schools and 
to employ more than thirty-eight thousand teachers. 
F or the current school year, the Government has made 
available an additional amount of more than three 
miUion pesos with which to provide primary instruc- 
tion to numberless children who were heretofore un- 
able to gain admission to the public schools. At the 

43808 



t 



7 

same time that educational facilities for primary in- 
struction were being extended, the Government vigor- 
ously tried to solve the problem of illiteracy. With the 
help of nimierous volunteer workers almost 200,000 
men and women were taught how to read and write 
and to imderstand the simple duties which they, as 
citizens, have to perform in their respective com- 
mimities. The educational objective has been rede- 
fined. "Our system of public education," the Presi- 
dent urged in his message to the National Assembly 
on June 16, 1936, "must be inspu-ed in Filipino pa- 
triotism and consecrated to the formation of citizens 
of high moral character and civic virtues. It must 
equip om- citizens with social and vocational efficiency 
not only for their own benefit but that they may the 
better serve the State. We must provide everj^ child 
of school age the opportimity to receive primary in- 
struction." To insure the carrying out of at least 
the last objective, primary education was made the 
responsibility of the National Government. The Pres- 
ident created the National Council of Education to 
advise on educational problems and appointed the late 
Rafael Palma, an outstanding statesman and educator, 
to head this important body. With two eminent Amer- 
ican educators as consultants, he initiated the reorgan- 
ization and the transfer of the University of the Phil- 
ippines to a new site in Diliman. These fundamental 
reforms affecting the entire range of the educational 
system are now being carried out as fast as existing 
conditions and available resources will permit. 

A similar achievement has been recorded in the field 
of public health. Just as imiversality became the 
immediate educational objective, so the expansion of 

43808 



8 



the public health service to the remote barrios became 
a pressing urge. The high state of national health has 
been maintained by the extension of the public liealth 
administration inherited by the Commonwealth from 
the previous regime. Traveling clinics are now visit- 
ing with regularity even the most distant rural dis- 
tricts. Puericulture centers and maternity hospitals 
have increased. General hospitals have also been built 
in centers of population heretofore lacking in health 
facilities of this natiu-e. The service has been so ex- 
panded that upon the President's recommendation, the 
National Assembly recently passed a law authorizing 
the creation of an independent Department of Health 
and Public Welfare. To improve the diet of the 
masses and coordinate food crops and dietary needs, 
the establishment of a national nutrition institute is 
being contemplated. 

Public works have been accelerated in pace not only 
because more roads and bridges, especially in places 
like Mindanao, are among the most urgent needs of 
the country but also because the jobs thus created 
have helped to solve the problem of widespread im- 
employment. Travel has been greatly facilitated by 
the construction of eighty-three bridges at a cost of ap- 
proximately five and a half million pesos and by the 
addition of fifty-one hundred kilometers to the road 
system in which nearly thirty-eight million pesos have 
been invested. Three million pesos have been spent 
for one hundred sixty kilometers of concrete pavement 
on these routes subjected to heavy traffic. No doubt, 
you all are familiar with the work now in progress 
to improve traffic conditions in Manila by the con- . 
struction of additional bridges across the Pasig River 

43808 



9 

and new and wider streets and boulevards. Already 
some units of the long-projected government center 
are nearing completion. Commerce has been mate- 
rially benefited by the expenditure of nearly fifteen 
million pesos for the improvement of our ports and 
harbors. 

Considerable improvement in the administration of 
justice has been accomplished by the creation of the 
Court of Appeals and the Court of Industrial Relations 
and the appointment of more cadastral judges. Signif- 
icant reforms in the courts' rules of procedure which 
promise to simplify and speed up litigation have been 
promulgated by the Supreme Court. Special attention 
has also been given to the improvement of the justice 
of the peace courts not only by requiring that none 
but attorneys-at-law with sufficient experience may be 
appointed thereto but also by constant administrative 
check-up on the operation of inferior courts. 

In spite of the sporadic and isolated outbreaks in 
certain agrarian sectors, order has been maintained, 
and the state of public peace and tranquility today is 
better than at any other time during the last forty 
years. When and wherever necessary, vigorous action 
has been taken to maintain the supremacy of the law. 

These are but some of the accomplishments of the 
Commonwealth through the use of governmental in- 
strumentalities which were already existing at the 
time of its inauguration. I now wish to refer to the 
important innovations in the policies of the govern- 
ment, the reasons for their adoption, the difficulties 
that have been met, and the extent of their effectuation. 

First in importance is the program of national de- 
fense. You will recall that the first message of the 

43309 



) 



10 

President to the National Assembly was entirely de- 
voted to national defense. "In every other line of 
human endeavor", the President said in that message, 
referring to the Filipinos' uttermost lack of military 
preparation, "we have built, not only the foundations, 
but the framework and, in certain cases, even the edi- 
fice itself. But here, except for necessary law enforce- 
ment elements, not a stone has been laid." If the 
United States had trained some Filipinos for military 
service, it was only in an attempt to utilize some of 
the local men power in the maintenance of the Amer- 
ican mihtary establishment in the Islands. Think of 
the Philippines becoming independent after ten years 
with no defense establishment with which to guarantee 
her national integrity and security! 

Even before the estabUshment of the Common- 
wealth, the President had the foresight to discuss with 
President Roosevelt the possibility of sending an Amer- 
ican Military Mission to the Philippines and had ob- 
tained a promise from General Douglas MacArthur, 
then Chief of Staff of the American Army, one of 
America s outstanding soldiers of today, to head such 
a Mission. Under the plan that General MacArthur 
formulated and which is now in process of execu- 
tion, we have trained the nucleus of our army and 
set up the machinery for the continued military in- 
struction of officers and enhsted men. We have thus 
niade great progress in our preparation for the defense 
of our independence and our territorial integrity. As 
one more step in the direction of national security we 
have just established the Department of National De- 
fense with the Hon. Teofilo Sison as its first Secretary. 



13 



With the foundation of the national defense plan al- 
ready laid, the administration next directed its effort 
to the formulation and the caiTying out of a program 
of social justice. From the beginning it realized that 
the groundwork, the vital element in the national life, 
is the common man, and for this reason it has tried to 
elevate him to a higher level by all possible means. 
The objective of this pohcy is the dignification of the 
common man as a social unit by redeeming him fi'om 
injustices and inequalities which have their origin in 
remote and obscure times. We are committed to the 
estabhshment and maintenance of a republican form 
of government, but if republics are to survive and en- 
dm^e, we must take care of the conmion man as the 
ultimate factor. The government must not only go to 
the masses but must extend to them its protecting 
hand. 

The more fortunate portions of our people need 
not be alarmed at this policy. They have their own 
mission in the complex social machinery, which can- 
not be ignored. A genuine policy of social justice 
will never have the effect of favoring certain classes 
to the detriment of others. On the contrary, in rais- 
ing and dignifying the less fortunate, we shall improve 
upon the whole of society with the resulting fruitful 
collaboration among different social groups and the 
consequent peace and general contentment of all the 
people. 

So broad is the policy of social justice that its es- 
sence penetrates practically every governmental ac- 
tivity. Since the purpose is to elevate our masses 
educationally, socially, politically, and economically, 
every other governmental policy has been geared to 

43809 



12 



this objective. The messages of the President to the 
Assembly since 1936 iterate and reiterate his intense 
desire to enable the masses to reap their full share 
of the country's economic and social progress. "Sad 
to tell but it is none the less true . . he lamented 
in his message of October 18, 1937, "the men and 
women who till the soil or work in the factories are 
hardly better off now than they were during the 
Spanish regime." There were not and there still 
are not enough barrio schools, roads, and sanitary 
services. The masses, through indirect taxation paid 
the bulk of the income of the Government. Tenants 
and share-croppers in some of the great landed es- 
tates were being exploited through unfair deals, 
usury, and other impositions. Working conditions on 
the farms and in factories were not as they should 
have been and the wages paid were entirely out of 
proportion to the profits employers realized and to the 
increasing cost of living. Laborers' housing was in- 
adequate and poor. In short, the task of nation- 
building focussed itself on the uplifting of the masses. 

In his 1937 message, the President penetratingly 
appraised the deplorable situation of our masses and 
accepted the responsibility of improving their lot. 
"It was, of coiurse, impossible for American adminis- 
trators," he said, "to see and reach the lowest strata 
of our population. But now that the reins of govern- 
ment are in our hands insofar as our own domestic 
affairs are concerned, what excuse, what reasonable 
justification can there be in allowing such a social 
and economic order to continue?" The answer to 
his question came subsequently in a series of legislative 
enactments calculated to improve the condition of the 

43808 



13 



masses. Not only was the cedula tax abolished but 
the indirect or consumption levies like the sales tax 
and customs duties which were eventually collected 
from the ultimate consumers' were modified or re- 
pealed. The new policy was announced by the Pres- 
ident as follows: 

"In the past, taxation has not been con- 
cerned with principles of justice and rarely 
has it been concerned with bettering the 
people. Rather it has sought only to produce 
revenues and to place the burdens on the 
backs of those least able to remonstrate . . . 
in the case of corporations, inheritance and 
income taxes the Government must bear in 
mind the need of reverting to the nation large 
amounts of wealth that may be accumulated 
in a few hands ... It remains for us to par- 
allel our achievements in the realm of political 
science by a similar achievement in the realm 
of economic and social justice." 
Mainly to carry out the policy of social justice, the 
anti-usury campaign was intensified and the Tenancy 
Act was amended to secure the tenant's tenure in 
addition to protecting him from exploitation by the 
landlord. The Government itself assumed the lead- 
ership in the raising of wages by adopting a minimum 
wage scale for all laborers employed in public works. 
Meanwhile, the President directly appealed to pri- 
vate industry to follow the government's example. 
To settle labor-capital disputes amicably and ex- 
peditiously, the Court of Industrial Relations was 
organized. The transfer to Mindanao of at least 
500,000 workingmen largely from the congested areas 

48808 



14 



was projected and started with an initial appropria- 
tion of P20,000,000. Some haciendas were taken over 
by the State to be subdivided and resold in small 
parcels to their tenants or to be operated on a coope- 
rative basis. Healthful and adequately planned re- 
sidential sites for workers, notably in the Diliman 
Estate and in Tondo in Manila, were provided. These 
are some of the steps which have been taken by the 
Commonwealth Government for the direct and im- 
mediate benefit of the laboring classes. 

The social justice program is being carried out 
vigorously so as to free labor from the strangling 
grip of inhimian exploitation. Every effort has been 
made to give the laborers decent wages and to afford 
them living conditions which will make them feel 
secure, happy, and contented. But the government 
is not unmindful of the fact that these conditions of 
labor can only be attained if labor requirements are 
such that capital is not deprived of its just share and 
if the normal progress of agriculture, business, and 
mdustry is not unduly interfered with. 

That this government has done more than its pre- 
decessors in this field is not a reflection against past 
administrations. It simply means that its predeces- 
sors undertook to attain certain political, economic, 
and social objectives as they saw and understood them; 
that times and conditions have changed and that the 
present government, because it is nearer to the peo- 
ple, has felt closer at heart their vital needs. 

The problem of economic adjustment has been an- 
other extremely serious task. Adding to its difficult 
solution has been the necessity of depending upon 
the action of the American Congress on the ultimate 



48808 



15 



terms of Philippine-American trade relations. The 
reason for the necessity of overhatiling the national 
economy is well known; Philippine industi-y and agri- 
culture are so dependent on their free or preferential 
access to the American market that they must now 
be weaned away as a result of the threatened loss of 
this market incident to pohtical independence. Either 
Philippine export must successfully hurdle the full 
American tariff or must seek new outlets elsewhere. 
As logical initial steps, the Commonwealth created 
the National Economic Council and at the same time 
strengthened the National Development Company. 
The National Rice and Corn Corporation was organized 
to stabilize the price of rice. Simultaneously, re- 
presentations were made to the American Govern- 
ment for the liberalization of the economic terms of 
the Tydings-McDuffie Law. 

Our planned economy is beginning to take definite 
shape along the lines indicated in the report of the 
Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs 
Activities toward economic readjustment are progress- 
ing in varying forms. It has taken the form of 
scientific research, as exemplified in the soil and crop 
survey, in more agricultural experiment and exten- 
sion stations, and in the projected Science and Nu- 
trition Institutes; of expansion of credit, as in the 
opening of the Agricultural and Industrial Bank; of 
the rehabilitation of old industries as in the creation 
of the abaca and other fibers corporation and the 
proposed coconut and tobacco corporations; of the 
industrialization of . raw export products as in the 
development of new manufactiu-es using coconut 
products and abaca fibers as raw materials; and the 

48808 



16 



expansion of the home market through the increased 
domestic consimiption of local products. To reduce 
our production costs without impairing the standard 
of living of our people the Government proposes to 
organize associations for marketing and purchasing 
so that the small producers may adopt the same 
modern methods of production used by big producers, 
enabling them to market their products more advan- 
tageously and to reduce the price that they pay for 
their daily necessities. With these objectives in view, 
the new National Trading Corporation has been es- 
tablished and farmers* and consumers' cooperatives 
are being organized. 

At this point, I desire to make a little digression 
in order to allay whatever fear might have been en- 
tertained by businessmen on account of the new poli- 
cies of the Government imder which certain industrial 
and commercial activities were imdertaken by the 
National Development Company and other corpora- 
tions of the Government. It is not the purpose of the 
Government to stifle private initiative in business. 
On the contrary, every encouragement has been and 
will be given to enable private enterprises to thrive. 
The Government will not supplant but rather will 
supplement private endeavor in business. It wiU only 
undertake activities of such national import as to 
^^ake nationalization thereof imperative. To this 
class belongs the business of the Manila Railroad 
Company and of the National Power Corporation. 
As to other business enterprises, it will merely blaze 
the way by imdertaking the establishment of indus- 
tries considered essential to our economic setup and 
demanded by the general welfare of the people, which 
private capital is unable or imwilling to establish. 

4380S 



17 



Neither should there be any fear on account of the 
taxation policies of the Government. The Govern- 
ment needs more revenues to take care of peremp- 
tory demands of the country such as the affording of 
opportunities for education to all children of school 
age and the preparations for national defense. But 
it will not go to the extent of "killing the goose that 
lays the golden eggs." The burden of taxation will 
be only such as can be borne by the taxpayers. Care 
will be taken so that capital will not be frightened 
to the point of hindering the normal growth of busi- 
ness. 

There need be no misgivings, therefore, on the part 
of private capital. And I mean to refer to both 
local and foreign capital. We are cognizant of the 
fact that foreign capital has played an important role 
in the past in the development of this country and 
it is still needed in the furtherance of such develop- 
ment. We are fully aware that no coimtry, Hot ex- 
cepting the United States, has been able to develop 
without the aid of outside capital. 

Our repeated petitions for the amendment of the 
economic provisions of the Tydings-McDuffie Act, 
which had remained unacted upon favorably imtil 
late last year, somewhat conditioned oin: success in 
our efforts to obtain economic adjustment. While 
the Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affaii's 
had recommended the modification of the export tax 
provision of the Tydings-McDuffie Act during the 
remaining years of the period of transition and the 
extension of Philippine-American trade preferences 
to 1960, the Congress left the matter of trade relations 
after independence for consideration at a futiu-e trade 

48809 



18 



conference to lDe held not later than 1944 but for- 
tunately extended rehef to our so-called borderlme 
industries which could not have withstood the first 
impacts of the export tax. 

Although the economic and social problems have 
drawn most of oui- attention, the Commonwealth has 
not neglected the improvement of the political basis 
of the coming RepubUc. This has been evident in 
the amendments to the Constitution proposed by the 
National Assembly. Regardless of the motives read 
into them by some people, the fact remains that 
the proposed amendments, upon which the electorate 
will pass in a few months, are intended to render 
the basis of our Government more stable. What is 
to be accomplished by these amendments, generally 
speaking, is the discarding of the constitutional in- 
novations we have tried during the last four years 
restoring democratic instrumentalities which had been 
part of our political tradition, which have been tried 
and proven to be successful by the leading govern- 
ments of the world, and which have more than ample 
justification in theory and in practice. 

Neither has the Government neglected the spiritual 
and cultural advancement of oiu: people in the con- 
scious realization of the truism that the material great- 
ness of a civilization may disappear under the inexor- 
able action of time but that spiritual greatness, based 
the high values of culture, has the attribute of 
immortality. The Commonwealth Government has 
accordingly taken steps of the most transcendental 
cultural and spiritual significance. It established, in 
the first place, the Institute of National Language 
or the purpose of adopting a common language based 

48808 



19 



on indigenous elements. I consider the development 
of a national language as of vital importance to our 
people. It will not only consolidate our national unity, 
but it will give to our people a most effective instru- 
ment for the diffusion of popular culture. 

Another measure taken by the Government to pro- 
mote cultural development is the opening of contests 
to reward the best works written by Filipinos in the 
several branches of literature. This policy will be 
h great encom-agement to our literary men and, by 
giving an impetus to our cultiu-al progress, may 
enable us to establish more fruitful cultm-al contacts 
with the rest of the world. 

Although the accomplishments of the Common- 
wealth during its four years of existence have been 
substantial, many vital problems still remain to be 
solved during the next six years. I shall mention 
some of them. The national defense plan must be 
carried out with all the means at our command. 
The inevitable obsolescence of some types of arms 
and tactics that will result from the present wars 
will logically mean constant reshaping of our defense 
plans and modernization of our equipment. Like- 
wise, the country should continue marching forward 
to achieve the desired economic and social equilibrium 
of our society. Finrther changes will have to be 
effected in the educational system: first, to bring 
about a greater emphasis on character training; sec- 
ondly, to provide more adequate vocationl instruction 
so that our young men and women may be compe- 
tently equipped to help in the economic development 
of the country; and thirdly, to shape the educational 
system so that its cost may not be out of proportion 

4S808 . 



20 



to the financial resources of the government. It has 
often been stated that the taxable wealth of the 
Philippines must be increased so that it will be cap- 
able of yielding a revenue sufficient for the support 
of an independent nation, militarily, diplomatically, 
and poHtically. Scientific and intensified agriculture 
must be promoted over an ever-widening area, and 
new industries must be created to meet oux own 
needs, to substitute for inevitable reduction of ex- 
ports, to afford a profitable outlet for capital, and to 
provide employment to otir workingmen. The objec- 
tives of national security, uplifted and contented 
masses, and a richer and more, stable economy, though 
on the way to attainment, will demand ever-increasing 
efforts before they are finally achieved. 

The accomplishment of these objectives would be 
facilitated if the gospel of work is emphasized. Om- 
citizens must be made to realize that they not only 
have rights to enjoy but, also, duties to perform, 
Hand in hand with the effort to educate them, we 
must preserve in their minds and souls the abiding 
faith of the race in freedom and independence. We 
must have greater and more evenly distributed ma- 
terial wealth so that our people may live in relative 
contentment and physical vigor and have a deeper 
attachment to home and country. Let us have a 
united people rich in material and physical endow- 
ments, socially conscious and law-abiding, loyal and 
contented, cultured and high in ideals, and fully 
confident of its capacity to attain an ever higher des- 
tiny. This should be our final objective. 

I have endeavored to give you a kaleidoscopic 
view of what has been done and accomplished after 

«808 



21 



the establishment of the Commonwealth and of the 
important problems confronting our government.- 
Allow me to say in closing that the Philippines has 
been wi'ought not by chance or accident. It is a 
country with its own history now welded into a 
compact and united whole by the sustained efforts 
of patient and self-sacrificing generations that labored 
at times under difficult and adverse conditions— 
those which test the temper and solidity of character 
of people and races — and at other times under favor- 
able and auspicious circumstances. The Common- 
wealth Government, sohdarily boimd to that history 
formed by the past and the present and which throws 
out its light upon the ample perspective of the future, 
did not only respect and preserve the work of the 
past, where it must be respected and preserved, but 
endeavored to improve and enrich it in every way 
possible. The Commonwealth Government has done 
more than this. Considering itself hen- of a great 
past and forerunner of a still greater future, it did 
not hesitate to experiment with new ideas and new 
plans, opening to the genius and to the energies of 
the nation new norms of conduct and new spheres of 
development. It may, therefore, be stated that the 
Commonwealth Government has been conservative, 
but at the same time, resolutely and audaciously 
progressive. 

I believe that this policy will be pursued in the 
future with the same firmness and decision as it has 
been heretofore. Prudence counsels that the results 
so far achieved be solidly secured, by giving to the 
already established institutions such stability as will 
enable them to stand the test of time and of its vicis- 



22 



situdes. Without yielding to the temptation of atopic 
•and dangerous panaceas, it is also necessary for us 
to accept the challenge of the future and of the pro- 
gressive spirit of the times. By consolidating what 
has already been achieved and conquered, and at the 
same time by marching on resolutely, we shall insure 
the success of this gigantic work of spiritual and 
material reconstruction in which, under the auspices 
of the Commonwealth, we are engaged. This work 
is directed not only to clear and pave the transition 
path to 1946 — the time set for independence — but 
mainly and above everything to assure the strength 
and stability of the Republic so that, once established, 
it shall not have a merely ephemeral existence, but 
be a lasting and permanent blessing for us and for 
our descendants. 

o 

43608 



