DDH/bf 



CIVIL CENSORSHIP DETACHMENT 

G-2 Section 

Advanced Headquarters* USAFFE 
APO 72 



13 November 1944 



MEMORANDUM : 



TO > Major General Bo J. VALDES, Secretary of National Defense and 

Communications * Commonwealth of the Philippine Islands* 

1# It would be greatly appreciated if the Civil Censorship Detachment 
could obtain information on the opening date for mail to the United States 
and such other destinations as may be authorized. We wish to eliminate pos^ 
sible delay to the mail by notifying the United States Office of Censorship, 
and censorship of other nations involved, that such mail has been examined 
here. Undoubtedly the United States Post Office Department also should be 
notified. As you know, the Commonwealth is the sovereign administrator of 
public matters and therefore a radio to the Postmaster General should be dis- 
patched by your office, informing them of the re-establishment of postal com- 
munications. I suggest that this radio be routed through G-5, GHQ, thereby 
establishing military approval. 



2. It is understood that the Naval Fleet Post Office is prepared to 
accept civilian mail for transhipment to the continental United States. 

3. Through the excellent cooperation of Mr MATO AY, Lt. ACEBEDO, and 
Mr CUNANAN, we have trained Filipino personnel immediately available for 
examining mail, and the maximum delay will be less than 24 hours. 4 JList o f 
subjects by which Comment Sheets will be prepared for the Commonwealth Govern^ 
ment, the Theater Commander, and general and special staff sections 13 using 
compiled for your comment or additions. 

4. You may be interested to know that international postal service 
has been resumed recently to the following portions of liberated Europe? 



a. I taly - To the liberated provinces, including: Avellino, 

Aquila, Bari, Benevento, Brindisi, Catanyaro, Chieti, Campobasso, Cosenya, 
Foggia, Fronsinona, Lecce, lattoriaj Matera, Naples, Pescara, Potenya, ^ 
Reggio-Calabia , Rome, Salerno, Taranto, Taramo, Vatican City; and islands 
of Pantellaria, Lipari, Lampedusa, Linosa and Ustica Islands, Sicily and 

Sardinia. 



b« France - Non-illustrated postcards only, to liberated conti- 
nental France. French North Africa and Corsica have, in addition, letter and 
parcel post service. 

c. Russia - Mail service except parcel post on an irregular basis 






5® French censorship is admitting only postcards (and later, letters) 
written in French and English® Should you feel persons in the Commonwealth 
might desire to write in other languages, representations will be made through 
channels to Sont roles Techniques, the French censorship organization® 

6® In order that you may be fully informed of all details of this 
intelligence gathering activity, it would appear feasible that a Filipino 
liaison officer of field grade be permanently assigned to the Civil Censor- 
ship Detachment as an advisor as to how this function can best aid in rehabi— 
lit ion of the Commonwealth and furtherance of the war against Japan® X appre- 
ciate of course the fact that such an officer may not be presently available 
but it is naturally better for us to plan ahead® Incidentally I wouldn't want 
you to misunderstand me in this request^ it is, needless to say, no reflection 
on the fine work of Lt ACEBEDO® 

7o Your cooperation has been most deeply appreciated® 




DONALD D. HOOVER 

Lt Colonel, G5C 

Civil Censorship Officer 



