aPSECH OF OSH* BASILIO J. V^DISS, CHIEF OF STAFF, PHILIPPINE ARM? 

oa Saturday, 6 October 1945* 

/maad*i 

• To me it is a distinct pleasure to be here with you 
today. The YMOA has played a creditable role in the life 
and progress of the Philippines and it is my earnest hope 
and expectation that it sha3.1 continue with undiminished 
fervour it great work toward the creation of able-bodied, 
raentelly alert, and civic-spirited citizen©. 

At this critical moment of our history as a people it 
is v’ell to consider the value of national discipline. The 
Japanese hordes which occupied our land for three long years 
had ruthlessly destroyed the moral fibre of our people. This 
utter annihilation of moral values is nowhere more eloquently 
apparent than in our poorer classes. These wretched men, 
women, children heid endured untold privations and sacrifices 
in the hands of the Japanese and the fact of their survival 
is still one of the mysteries of the war that has just passed 
into history, Hun^er-striolcca and in dire poverty these poor 
men, naturally, had to discard time-honored virtues of honesty 
anA decency for the preservation of life. And vhen the forces 
of liberation at long last came ashore on our beautiful islands 
these benighted citizens continued their reprehensible practice 
of Indulging in petty thefts and robberies and other acts which 
they would never would have done before the Japanese Occupation 




An organization like the YMCA, knovai the world over for 
its active interest in the enlightenment of the masses, can 
go a long way toward encouraging respect for the law, obedience 
to sane principles, and the establishment of a truly disciplined 
citizenry. The YMCA should lead in this campaign for national 
discipline. Our salvation as a people depends, to a great 
extent, upon the orderly conduct of our youth today so that 
the Philippines of tomorrow could devote all its energy and 
talent to the development of a genuinely independent nation. 

National discipline is imperatively essential if we must 
preserve these virtues that have ennobled our people through 
the centuries; kindness, hospitality, courage, and unerring 
honesty. Without order these cannot be peace. Without 
peace there can never be any progress. The most progressive 
and prosperous nations of history have gone through the painful 
metamorphosis from chaos to discipline and only thus have they 
been able to contribute to the material and cultural wealth of 
the world. Only thus have the citizens been imbued with the 
fundamental and personal responsibility that everyone whould 
do his part in the tremendous task of nation-building, lest the 
whole structure fall to pieces and become a prey of more 
disciplined and aggressive powers. 

The YMCA then should do its part in leading the way 
to sane, disciplined and alert citizenship. In the present 
campaign there should be a whole-hearted interest in the 
restoration of those traits that shall ultimately make of us 



one nation i^divieible, one people dedicated to its honorable 

V 

place in the concert of free men* Let us help the YMCA with 
the needed funds to carry out this work# 

t 



1 thank you# 



