February 1, 1940 



BIRTH AID PARSCTAQE :- 

Major General 3asilio J. ValdSs, Chief of Staff, 
Philippine Arm y. 



Bom: - July 10, 1892 Plaeo :- Manila, Philippines 
Ilsae of Parents :- 

Father : ° Dr. Benito ValdSs, Filipino, bom in 
Lubao, Pant 

Mother :- Filomena Pica, Spanish, bom in Hatanzas, 



) VJJLGLUtj) 1. 

: ; ?a 



EDUCATION: - 



Cuba. 



Schools Attended: - 



At the age of 5, attended tho De La Salle College 
in Barcelona, Spain. Returned to Uanila in 1901, and 
entered tho San Bcda College, 1901-1903; attended St. 
Joseph’s College in Hongkong, 1903-1904. Returned to 
Uanila in 1904 and attended American School,- Uanila, 
1904-1905; finished Intermediate School at Pagsanjan, 
Laguna, in 1908; end graduated from the Uanila High 
School in 1911. Entered the College of Ucdicine, Univer- 
sity of Santo Tomas, from where he graduated in March, 
1916. 




Degree obtained : - 

M. D., University of Santo Tomas, March, 1916. 



Services after graduation : - 

After graduation from tho University of Santo Tomas, 
was appointed Instructor of Physiology in tho College of 
Medicine, University of tho Philippines, a position which 



ho resigned in September, 1916, aM left for Europe 
to join the Amod Forces, In ITovomber, 1916, was 
appointed Assistant Surgeon of tho French Red Cross 
Hospital No. 101 undo? C a ptain Cotto, now Profossor 
of Gynecology, University of Lyons. On July 10, 1917, 
was appointed Captain of the ^morican Red Cross and 
was assigned to Military Hospital V. R. 76 as Assist- 
ant to Colonel w illiam L. Keller, U. S. A rmy Medical 
Corps. This v;as a French Red Cross Hospital with an 
American staff. U. s . A nny Medical officers used to 
visit this hospital to learn tho methods of treatment 
of war wounds. In June, 1918, was made Chief Surgeon 
of Military Hospital of Arc-Sn-Barrois, Haute liar no. 

In February, 1919, was appoint ed, Me mber of tho Inter- 
Allied Commission to ^omanj^JBhprved in various capa- 
cities until July, 1919, whenBBfes promoted to I.Iajor 
and Deputy Commissioner, American Red Cross. In August, 
1919, was made Chief of the Medical Service of the Red 
Cross Commission to Albania, and while there was taken 
seriously ill and sent to New York where he was mustered 
out of the service and returned to the Philippines. 

Stages of Public Career : - 



June 6, 1921 - was appointed First Lieutenant and Medi- 
cal Inspector, Philippine Constabulary; 

March 17, 1922 - was promoted to the rank of Captain 
and Surgeon, Philippine Constabulary; 

November 1, 1925 - was promoted to the rank of Major 

and Surgeon, Philippine Constabulary; 

February 4, 1926 - was promoted to the rank of Lioutenant- 

Colonel and made Chiof Surgeon of the 
Philippine Constabulary; 

April, 1922 - was appointed member of the Board of Medical 
Examiners; 

April 6, 1926 - was made President of the Board of Medical 
Examiners, a position which I occupied 
until April, 1932; 







January 25, 1933 - was appointed Acting Commissioner 

of Hoalth and Welfare, a position 
which I occupied until April, 1934; 

May 1, 1934 - was appointed Brigadier-General and Chief 
of Constabulary; 

January 11, 1936 - upon the organization of tho Phil- 
ippine Army was appointed Brigadier- 
General and First Assistant Chief of 
Staff, Philippine Army; 

May 4, 1936 - was promoted to the rank of Major General 
and designated Deputy Chief of Staff, 
Philippine Army*^^ 

* W 

Juno 23, 1938 - whan the Philippino Constabulary was 
recreated by Commonwealth Act No, 345, 
was appointed Acting Chief of Constabu- 
lary; 

January 1, 1939 - was designated Chief of Staff, Fnilip- 

pine Amy. 




Obstacles in Ufe:- 




I have not given importance to obstacles I have met 
in life because I have always considered that there can 
be no work without hardship; there can be no task with- 
out obstacles. In April, 1917, while serving with the 
French Red Cross in France, I applied both to the American 
Ambassador and American Consul offering my services. They 
very courteously informed me that they had not received 
instructions what to do with volunteers. When I seer; that 
my plans and my desire were unsuccessful, I wrote a per- 
sonal letter to General John J. Pershing. I did not know 
him, but I knew he had been in tho Philippines, and I was 
sure he would not pass unnoticed a letter from a Filipino 
young nan who was willing to servo. I resombored clearly 
that it v/as Wednesday, July 4, 1917, when I sat down and 
wrote a lotter to General Pershing telling him who I was, 
who were my parents, and what I rvanted to do. On July 6 
scarcely 48 hours afterwards I received a reply to my 
letter signed by the then Colonol Iroland, later Major 
General and Surgeon General, U, S, Amy, informing me 



- 3 - 






T 





that in view of the fact that I was not an American 
citizen, it was not possible to commission me in 
tho U. S, .array, and instructing me to present myself 
at the Headquarters of the American Red Cross* The 
following day, Saturday, July 7th, in compliance 
with instructions, I reported to the Headquarters of 
the American Rod Cross. I.Jajor Lambert, U. S, Army, 
was then tho Acting Chief of the American Red Cross. 

He took my name, qualifications, and address and in- 
formed mo that he would be very glad to notify me a 3 
soon as a vacancy was available, but that he could 
not promise any salary. I informed him that I did not 
want any salary, I wanted to serve. On Sunday, July 
8th, I received a letter signed by a certain i'dajor 
William L. ICcller, Medical Corps, U. t>. Army, inviting 
mo for an interview on Llondqy Lining July 9th at the 
Ritz Hotel, Paris. At 9:00 o’clock sharp on Monday 
morning, I entered the lobby of the Ritz Hotel looking 
for Major Koller whom I did not know. I saw an Ameri- 
can officer seated, but not knov/ing who he was, I 
thought it best to proceed to the information cleric 
to inquiro if he knew Major Kellor. A s i passed this 
seated American officer, I heard the following remark, 
"3aan ka paparon" . Hearing Tagalog spoken, I turned 
around and asked him if he wa3 Major Kollor to which 
he replied affirmatively. He informed ne that my 
name had been given to him and asked me if I would 
like to be his first assistant. I readily accepted the 
offer and on July 9th at 10:30 in the morning I was 
leaving Paris for my assignment. Hospital V. R. 76 Ris 
Orangis, a French Hospital with an American staff. 



What make a good soldier? 

Discipline, professional efficiency and physical 
fitness. 



What are the advantages of our training camps? 

Until the operation of tho national Defense Act, 
the idea that the defense of tho country is the para- 
mount duty of every citizen was understood only by a 
few. 2ven nor; the average youth, whether in college 
or out of it, is not thoroughly imbued with a strong 



- 4 - 










cense of nationalism. How many of our pcoplo are 
conscious of the fact that aside from obeying our 
laws, paying our taxes, observing poace and order 
in our communities and otherwise honestly earning 
our livelihood, we may someday be called upon to 
give our very lives in the defense of our shores? 

I say, therefore, that our training camps give in- 
calculable benefits to our people by indoctrinating 
them NATIGKAX DISCIPLIiS and instilling in their 
hearts the COfBCIOUSllLSS that we havo hero a country 
worth fighting for. 



DJ30RAH0I55 Aid) HSDAL5:- 



1. Distinguished Service Star (Philippine Con- 

stabulary) . 

2. Luzon Campaign Medal (Philippine Constabu- 

lary). 

3. U. S. 2ed cross Foreign Service. 

4. Cross of Commander of the Dragon of Annam 

(French) . 

5. Cross of Officer of the Legion of Honor 

(French). 

6. Cross of Officer of the Order of the Crown 

(Belgian). 

7. Cross of Officer of the Royal Order of Cam- 

bodge (French). 

8. Medailec de la Reconnaissance Francaise 

(French). 

9. Hodaille d’Honncur (French). 

10. Uedaille de la Grande Guerre (French). 

11. Liedaille de la v ietoire (French), 



SOCIETY : - 

Member 



1. Philippine c olumbiun Association 

2. Los I'amaraos Polo Ci u b 

3. Wack Wack G olf and Country Club, 



SPOUTS s- 



1. Tennis 

2. Horse riding 

3. Fishing 

4. Hunting 



FAMILY: - 



Married to Hosario Logarda, July 15, 1923. 
Has five (5) brothers and four (4) sisters. 



ooOoo- 



- 6 - 






