•V 

/ 





malacaIJm palace 9 

MNILA 

BY THE PHESIDENT OP THS PHILIPPINES 



EXEGUTIirp ORDER No. 10 
ARMY PROMOTION REGULATIONS 

I, MANUEL L. QUEZON, President of the Philippines, under 
authority conferred upon me by the Constitution and the exist- 
ing laws, do hereby prescribe the following regulations for 
controlling seniority among officers commissioned in the act- 
ive elements of the military forces now or hereafter to be au- 
thorized by law in the Commonwealth of the Philippines and for 
governing promotion of all officers below the grade of Colonel 
therein. 



I. SENIORITY. 

1. Regular officers shall take precedence over Re- 
serve officers of like grade. 

2. As soon as practicable after the initial estab- 
lishment of a Regular Officer Corps in the Philippine Army, 

\ Staff shall prepare an initial seniority list, 

on which shall appear the names of all officers then coiit- ' 

^ missioned in the Army. When approved by the President 
this list shall establish permanently the relative senior- 
ity of such officers. Subject to specific excaptions oc- 
casioned by original appointments directed by the President, 
officers of the Philippine Constabulary and of the Philip- 
pine Scouts who may be commissioned in the Philippine A^^my 
shall occupy the same relative standing among themselves in 
each of these categories as that obtaining at the time of 
transfer. Officers thereafter appointed or promoted to any 
grade in the Philippine Army shall be placed at the bottom 
of the grade to which appointed or promoted and seniority 
in such grade shall be established according to total length 
of service therein, except that any officer of the Army may 
suffer loss of seniority at any time as the resTilt of an ap- 
proved sentence of a court martial. 



3. The Chief of Staff shall cause all changes occeu- 
Bioned by separations, appointments, loss of rank by action 
of court martial and all other changes due to the operation 
of law or regulations to be entered on the approved seniority 
list, and, as corrected, this list shall be published to the 
Army at least once each year. 

II. PROMOTION. 



1. The number of officers to be maintained in each 
grade above 1st Lieutenant in the Regular Force is regulat- 
ed by law. Promotion to any of these grades may be made 
only when the number of officers commissioned therein shall 



^ become less than that legally authorized. 

or aerviep\n^wh?!J°? operate to change the arm 

or service in which an ofiicer may be commissioned, 

cradfl n-p^al Third Lieutenants shall be promoted to the 

Lieutenant and Second Lieutenants shall be 
tion of twn r?? Lieutenant upon the comple- 

enISt any time that a Third or Second Lieut- 

Tails, in the opinion of the Chief of Staff, to de- 
Batisfaotory qualifications as an officer of the 

presented to the Promo- 
Board, hereinafter prescribed, for oonsi- 

Tor retention ii ihe service. 
If the Board deems the officer's services and qualifications 

If shall be continued in the service. 

If the Board finds the officer's service or qualifications 
to be unsatisfactory, it shall so report to the President 
and upon his approval of the Board's findings the officer^ 
concerned shall be discharged, 

+>,0+ ^4. (o) j^enever a vacancy may occur in a grade between 
that of Captain and Colonel inclusive, it shall be filled 

^5? senior officer in the grade next below, 
no officer may be promoted whose name is not 
described! Promotion Eligible List, hereinafter 

cr4>vn« T-i 4 officer whose name is not borne on the eli- 

for promotion at the time that he may become due 
find Y-' oT seniority shall be passed over 

eligible 11 officer whose name is so borne on the 
oiifi ® promoted. Any officer so passed over 

npon expiration of such accrued leave as 'may then be 
due him, be separated from the active list, and, if he so 

grade, and in the same branch or 
Reserve Force. He shall thereafter be eli- 
gible for promotion in the Reserve Force subject to the same 
examinations, tests and conditions as may be prLc?iSd b^ 
regulations or law for promotion of other Reserve Officer^ 

3. Officers separated from the active list under the 
provisions of paragraph 2, above, shall be entitled, unless 
the Board shall find that the reason for such separation is 
due to the officer's own misconduct or wilful failure, to a 
cash bonus or to retired compensation as follows;- 

(a) If he shall have served a total of less than 
ten years as a commissioned officer in the active elements 
S; ^5® ^nstabulary or the Army of the Philippines, or both, 
ne shall receive a bonus of one month's base and loneevitv 
xeoeivod by him at the time of his separation, fox 
saoh complete year of such service. 



(b) If the length of his conimissioned service, as 
above described, shall total ten years or more, he shall he 
entitled, as he may elect, either to a cash bonus on the 
same basis as provided above for officers of less than ten 
years service, or to a retired pay of one and one-half per 
centum of his base and longevity pay, as received by him at 
the time of his separation from the active list, multiplied 
by the number of complete years he shall have served as a 
commissioned officer. 

III. PROMOTION ELiaiBILITY BOARDS. 

1. A Promotion Eligibility Board shall be appointed 
annually by the President. 

2. Composition of the Board ; 

(a) The Promotion Eligibility Board shall consist 
of five members, of whom not less than four shall be from 
among the active officers of the Army not below the grade 
of Colonel. One member may be a retired officer, not below 
the grade of Colonel, or a civilian holding no government 
position of any kind, either elective or appointive. 

(b) No civilian may serve on a Promotion Eligibi- 
lity Board more than once. 

(c) Not more than one military member may serve 
on two successive Boards, and any member serving on two 
successive Boards may not serve on another Board within 
three years. 

(d) Neither the Chief of Staff nor the Deputy 
Chief of Staff may be a member of any Board. 

3. Information and assistance furnished to Board. 

(a) The Chief of 3ta<ff shall cause to be furnish- V 
ed to the Board the Seniority List of the Army, completely i 
; oorreote d to^dater”^g©ther with an estimate of the number 
of vadeaidies likely to occur in each grade during the en- 
suing year. He shall provide such office supplies and cle- 
rical assistance as may be required by the Board, and an 
officer to serve, without vote, as its Secretary. He shall 
make available to the Board the complete official records 
of all officers on the active list of the Army, except that 
no document or record that has, during an officer's service, 
emanated from any source other than his properly const il 
tuted military or civil superiors shall he submitted to, or 
considered by, the Board. 



Duties and procedure of the Board. 



’ V 4 -u Chairman of the Board shall be designated 

\ vote President. All decisions shall bo reached by majority 



nv ^ Board shall consider recommendations of the 

Chief of Staff pertaining to the discharge of Third and Second 
Li6ut0H6Lnt s • 

(c) It shall determine annually the eligibility for 
promotion of officers between the grades of First Lieutenant 
tod Lieutenant Colonel, inclusive. It shall consider first 
the suitability for promotion of the senior officer in each 
grade, and shall proceed progressively to consideration of 
the name of the next senior until the number of individuals 
it shall have listed as eligible for promotion shall be double 
the number of vacancies estimated by the Chief of Staff as 
likely to occur in the next higher grade during the ensuing 
calendar year. 



(d) Should the Board omit from the eligible list the 
ntoe of any officer who has been, found by the preceding Eligi- 
bility Board to be qiialified for promotion to the next higher 
grade, it shall submit to the President a special report set- 
ting forth clearly the reasons for this '.ommission. It shall 
promptly forward a copy of this special report, through the 
Staff, to the officer concerned, who shall have the 
V n, Q-PP©al, in writing, to the President. Such appeals 
shall be submitted throiigh the Chief of Staff, and may be ac- 
companied by documentary supporting evidence. The President's 
decision shall be final. 



(e) In determining eligibility there shall be weighed 
by the Board the individual's professional efficiency, ex- 
perience, accomplishments, attitude and ability; and his cha^ 
raoter and general value to the government. No weight shall 
attached to any political, social, financial or any other fac- 
tor not military in nature. Whenever an officer's physical 
qualifications are called into question, the case shall bo re- 
ferred, through the Adjutant-General, to a Board for determi- 
nation of physical fitness. 

(f) The decisions and proceedings of Eligibility 
Boards shall be confidential. Complete reports shall be sub- 
mitted to the President at the earliest practicable date after 
their completion. Subject to such modifications as may be 
made by the President under the provisions of sub-paragraph (d) 



i po-3^3<graph, the names of officers reported hy the 

A Board as eligible for promotion shall constitute for the 
1 several grades the Promotion Eligibility Lists. These 
V shall be published to the service^ and remain unchanged 
the calendar year to which they apply. 

Done at the City of Manila, ‘this 11th day of January 
in the year of our Lord, nineteen hundred and thirty-six, 
and of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, the first. 



By the President 



TEOPILO SI SON 
Secretary of the Interior 



