THE 1953 ISSUES 

Major Speeches Delivered by the Presidential Candi- 
dates, President Elpidio Quirino and Former- 
Defense Secretary' Ramon Magrsaysay, at 
the University of the East 




UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST 

Department of Alumni Affairs and 
University Publications 



Manila, Philippines 
1953 



FOREWORD 

The University of the East, like any other uni- 
versity loorthy of its name, believes and follows the 
Volicy long honored by the leading universities of 
America to the effect that ''a university does 7iot 
take an official position of its oivn . . . on poli- 

tical questions or matters of puhlic policy " 

But there are potoerfid reasons ivhy a university 
shoidd be solicitous and hospitable to those who are 
in the enviable position to clarify public matters 
and qmblic questions. The university community 
is made up of citizens many of whom are qualified 
voters and all of whom are searching for know- 
ledge and truth. To kjiow the facts of the 1953 
presidential election is vital to their citizenship and 
to their stiidies. If those 2oho may vote are to exer- 
cise the right of suffrage freely and intelligently, 
and if our students are to acquire practical know- 
ledge of public affairs so to prepare themselves for 
active and intelligent citizenship, it stands to rea- 
son that they shoidd be exposed to the most autho- 
ritative and constructive information. 

—President FRANCISCO DALUPAN 

Extract from speech presenting 
President Elpidio Quirino 



I 



( 



4 



CONTENTS 



Page 

Presentation Speech by President 

Francisco Dalupan 1 

Speech by President Elpidio Quirino 4 

Presentation Speech by President 

Francisco Dalupan • 14 

Speech by Former Defense Secretary 

Ramon Magsaysay 18 

Presentation Speech by Professor 

Lino J. Inciong 32 

Speech by Vice-President Fernando Lopez 34 



REMARKS OF PRESIDENT FRANCISCO DALU- 
PAN OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST PRE- 
SENTING HIS EXCELLENCY, PRESIDENT 
ELPIDIO QUIRINO AS GUEST OF HONOR 
AND SPEAKER AT A GENERAL CON- 
VOCATION OF THE FACULTIES AND 
STUDENT BODY OF THE UNIVER- 
SITY OF THE EAST 

September 30, 1953 



YOUR EXCELLENCY, 
DISTINGUISHED GUESTS, 

FELLOW TRUSTEES AND FACULTY MEMBERS, 
THE STUDENT BODY, 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: 

The presence of the President of the Republic of the 
Philippines on any campus is a great honor to the univer- 
sity. At a time like this, when, on the eve of the natio- 
nal election to elect the highest officials of the Republic, 
there are issues so confusing as to bewilder the most in- 
telligent voter, the presence of the Chief Magistrate him- 
self, in order to clarify some of these issues, is a signal re- 
cognition of the importance and hospitality of a university 
community. On behalf of our own university community, 
I thank His Excellency, President Elpidio Quirino, for his 
presence and extend to him our warmest and fullest wel- 
come . 

His Excellency is not only the head of the nation ; he 
is also a good and helpful friend of the University, and the 
co-.sponsor with the late Mrs. Aurora Aragon Quezon, at 



1 



2 



the inauguration and blessing of this very building which 
took place on August 28, 1948. At this time, he is with 
us in a third capacity; he happens to be a candidate for 
reelection to the very same office which he now occupies 
with dignity and distinction . He appears before us, there- 
fore, as the highest national official, as a tried and true 
friend of the University and as one of the aspirants for 
the highest office within the gift of the people . So that 
there may not be any misunderstanding among us and 
among the public in general, I wish to repeat at the out- 
set a policy I have often emphatically stated and on which 
I have often been quoted correctly in the newspapers. 
The University of the East, like any other university 
worthy of its name, believes and follows the policy long 
honored by the leading universities of America to the ef- 
fect that *'a university does not take an official position 
of its own ... on political questions or matters of public 
policy." The reason for this policy is obvious. A uni- 
versity, which is committed to certain political plans and 
attitudes ceases to be the open-minded center of scientific 
inquiry that it should be and becomes merely an advocate, 
a propagandist, a partisan — conditions which, to say the 
least, are not calculated to be helpful to its main business 
of educating the youth . 

But there are powerful reasons why a university 
should be solicitous and hospitable to those who are in the 
enviable position to clarify public matters and public ques- 
tions. The university community is made up of citizens 
many of whom are qualified voters and all of whom are 
searching for knowledge and truth. To know the facts of 
the 1953 presidential election is vital to their citizenship 
and to their studies. If those who may vote are to exer- 
cise the right of suffrage freely and intelligently, and if 
our students are to acquire practical knowledge of public 
affairs so to prepare themselves for active and intelligent 
citizenship, it stands to reason that they should be exposed 
to the most authoritative and constructive information. 



8 



No one will dispute the fact that the President of the Phil- 
ippines himself is the best source of the most authoritative 
and constructive information on the affairs of our govern- 
ment. But may I add that there is still another reason 
for our decision to invite His Excellency to appear before 
this audience. It is to give ourselves the opportunity to 
see him in the flesh after his two critical operations in 
the Johns Hopkins Hospital and the rumors, which spread 
even to our campus like bush fire, that he had passed to 
the Great Beyond. Behold him, therefore, not a ghost 
but a man full of vitality and life, and draw from his case 
the useful lesson that fiction always far outruns fact. (Ap- 
plMise.) 

His Excellency, the President, needs no introduction. 
This is not the first time that he has honored us with his 
presence and counsel. Neither is he a stranger to the 
people here or elsewhere, for he is their President and our 
President. It only remains for me to say, therefore, that 
it is a great honor and a genuine pleasure for me once more 
to present His Excellency, the President, as our guest of 
honor and speaker of the evening. (Applavse.) 



EXTEMPORANEOUS SPEECH OF HIS EXCEL- 
LENCY, PRESIDENT ELPIDIO QUIRINO AT 
A GENERAL CONVOCATION OF THE 
FACULTY AND STUDENT BODY OF 
THE UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST 

September 30, 1953 



PRESIDENT DALUPAN, 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, 

MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY, 

STUDENT BODY OF THIS GREAT INSTITUTION, 

FELLOW GUESTS AND FRIENDS: 

I want to thank you for the opportunity to be with 
you this afternoon. I assure you I was more tlian eager 
to stand before this huge assemblage if only to show to 
this intelligent and understanding group thaf your Pres- 
ident, using a popular idiom, is still kicking around. 
(Applause.) 

Filipinos are rich in imagination (laughter), and 
richer still in speculation. (Laughter.) There is nothing 
rhetorical about these expressions. They are true to form 
in my case. 

I understand that some newspaper publishers, in 
their eagerness to make a scoop— natural in the news- 
paper profession-had extra editions ready announcing 
my death when it was learned from sources not too 
friendly that my second surgical operation was not re- 
sponding satisfactorily to treatment. Had that happened, 
that is, the announcement of my premature death, I 



4 



would have enjoyed reading my own obituary upon my 
return from the United States and experiencing the unique 
opportunity of finding out how my people felt towards 
me and my stewardship in the last five years. 

I thank the Almighty that I came back not dead but 
rid of the ailment that would have hampered my effi- 
ciency and usefulness to the nation and now able to lead 
a life of further fruitful achievement, if given a chance 
to do so. (Applause*) 

About a year ago, invited to appear before the stu- 
dent body of this great University, I w^as asked point 
blank if I was running for re-election. Desirous not to 
harm my administration by arousing suspicion regarding 
the motives of my actuations thereafter, I shied at the 
question. 

Now I am prepared to answer it in the affirmative. 
I must say at the outset that in seeking nomination I 
did not beg for it. I simply made my position clear. I 
was lying flat in my bed on May 12 of this year when 
my party nominated me unanimously as its standard- 
bearer. 

My friends, I have been serving for more than five 
years, pushing a program not only of administration but 
of nation-building of the greatest scope, its effect most 
far-reaching upon our people. You are all familiar with 
conditions obtaining in Manila immediately after Libe- 
ration. You know wliat liave transpired in our life as 
a nation, how we have established our Government since 
we inaugurated this Republic on July 4, 1946. The re- 
sidents of Manila, in particular, and those of the neigh- 
boring provinces who went through the darkest hour of 
our history, bear witness to the great strides we have 
since taken politically and economically. I need not re- 
cite my role during this period of reconstruction, reha- 
bilitation, and nation-building. The record speaks for 



6 



itself. My conscience is clear. One thing I know, that 
my descendants will be proud of the fact that I presided 
over the destiny of this nation, encouraging' and enabling 
our people to stand on their feet and establishing a gov- 
emment now respected — even loved and envied — by 
friends and associates from across the seas. 

I do not attribute the great development of this 
country during the last six or seven years solely to my 
personal efforts. But I must say that whatever this 
counti-y has been able to accomplish under a national 
program of action has not been done by accident. Some- 
body must have planned that and generated the motive 
power and pushed the progi-am through to enable us to at- 
tain economic and political stability that we now enjoy. 
I repeat I do not attribute all of this personally to my 
efforts, but I am proud to state there has been proper 
coordination, and as a result, despite the systematic ob- 
struction in recent years by the opposition, we have push- 
ed our program through successfully. In the last three 
years, we have inaugurated one project after another in 
our program of development. 

Now that we are about to complete our program, 
new issues have cropped up, confusing the public mind 
and retarding, even stultifying, our advance to our na- 
tional goal. 

I want to thank you. Dr. Dalupan, for the opportu- 
nity to elucidate on some of those issues and to stress 
their importance to our future existence as a nation. 

We are still in the midst of that task. We have, 
so far, broadened the foundation of this Republic and 
set up thereon the essential parts so that the super- 
structure could withstand the impact of increased acti- 
vity. Unfortunately, there has arisen a body, a band, 
a demolition squad, so to speak, the professional wreck- 
ers of this Administration, pointing out not only to us 



7 



but to the whole world that we have been a failure. But 
only yesterday those people, now harassing and embar- 
rassing us, were my associates who found words insuf- 
ficient to describe our progress in nation-building. 

Strange things do happen in politics. Fi'iends to- 
day, enemies tomorrow. Why? Because political power 
is so viciously attractive that it makes one easily for- 
get past associations and affections. The tantahzing lust 
for power brings out one's uglier traits. Detractors pre- 
dict that this coming election is the last call for demo- 
cracy in our country. 

But this country is going to last. The foundations 
are well laid and made secure not only locally but inter- 
nationally. Aside from the bold total economic mobili- 
zation whicli we launched in 1949, we have established 
relations to achieve our external security, entering into 
pacts and understandings with the United States and 
our associates in the Pacific and in the Atlantic. 

Heretofore the issues in this campaign have center- 
ed on the matter of qualifications of the candidates — 
that so and so is too young, that so and so is too old, 
that so and so is inexperienced, that so and so loves the 
common tao. I am prepared to show that under the 
direction of my party, the Liberal Party, this country 
has attained stability and strength. I rely on that re- 
cord and on the sense of fairness of our people as the 
hour for final decision approaches. 

However, a new issue has cropped uid — an issue that 
endangers this country after having climbed from hu- 
miliation in recent years. Tlie opposition has raised the 
bugaboo that the party in power in order to win in the 
next election would commit fraud and terrorism and 
that it is necessary for the United States to intervene, 
in the name of democracy, so as to preserve the insti- 
tutions we have succeeded in establishing in this country. 



8 



As a matter of fact, the opposition is signalling through- 
out the world for help because its rightful leader is afraid 
to fight for his own party and to face me in this election. 

Now the opposition is dragging down the name and 
prestige of this administration with the threat that a 
foreign country is supporting my opponent and that I 
must watch out because, if my tenancy in office and 
the present administration are prolonged, the United 
States will withdraw the assistance being extended to 
us. My opponents are calling on a foreign power to 
supervise our internal affairs avowedly to restore demo- 
cracy. Let me tell you with all possible emphasis that 
democracy in this country has never been more vigorous. 

What kind of democracy do they want, what kind 
of political institutions, what kind of tolerance, what 
kind of patience do they want? Is it not a fact that 
most people you meet in the streets, in the bars, in the 
restaurants, on the platform, on the radio, and in the 
press freely and loudly criticize your own President even 
exceeding the limits of decency and decorum? Some even 
go to the extent of conveying the impression that I am 
lame, that I am sick, that I should no longer continue in 
office, that it is time for me to retire. Retire — I would 
like to do that, but not in the way they have been try- 
ing to persuade me — through intimidation and threat. 

First, they invited me and the presidential aspirant 
who failed in 1949 to withdraw from the presidential 
race, in the name of patriotism and democracy, in order, 
it was claimed, to avoid bloodshed and revolution. In- 
stead of accepting that proposition, believing that the 
one I defeated in 1949 was ready— and I felt ready my- 
self— I told him (Dr. Laurel) to stand up and fight for 
himself. They failed in that. Then they sounded out 
the alarm that, if I ran for re-election, there would be 



9 



violence, revolution, bloodshed everywhere. That did not 
scare me or my party. 

Again they went to the people and told them that 
if I were re-elected or the present administration were 
to continue, the United States of America would stop the 
assistance we have been receiving* from her. They kept 
on anticipating that there would be fraud, terrorism, and 
bloodshed in the next election, urging a foreign power 
to come to the Philippines to restore peace and order 
and to secure the election of the American candidate to 
the same post. 

That is the true and naked issue that the opposition 
has raised lately. Are we going to allow the United 
States of America — or any other power for that matter 
— to come to the Philippines, supervise our election, and 
place ourselves under foreign control in order to make 
way for the candidate avowedly supported by the United 
States of America? 

Unfortunately, such threats, which in the past I 
considered childish, have been fanned lately by a sus- 
ceptible American correspondent who, after a few days' 
visit, had the cheek to tell us that the candidate of the 
United States — the American people and official Wash- 
ington — was my opponent. Now, there have been half- 
hearted attempts from opposition quarters to deny that 
the opposition's candidate beai^ the American brand, but 
my own opponent himself has had the temerity to as- 
sume the role of spokesman for the United States, re- 
peatedly proclaiming that, if the present administration 
continued in office, America would withdraw her aid from 
the Philippines. Speaking of colonial-mindedness, this 
takes the cake. 

My friends, I have come to you with a message and 
a mission. It is necessary to know the background of 
what I am going to say. The bugaboo of fraud and ter- 



10 



rorism, which they claim will be perpetrated by the pre- 
sent administration, is nothing but an advance alibi for 
the defeat they fear to encounter in the coming election. 
It provides a convenient smokescreen for their own fraud 
and terrorism. 

The ti'ouble is they cannot conceive the Filipino peo- 
ple of being capable of grappling with multifarious pro- 
blems, going farther than did past generations faced with 
problems of less magnitude, and maldng readjustments, 
collectively or individually, to enable this country to meet 
the present world exigencies. My opponent cannot un- 
derstand that our people can just smile at those threats 
and promises being dished out in the barrios and the out- 
lying districts— threats of putting people to jail for graft 
or coiTuption, fantastic promises of improvement for the 
common tao — as so much rigmarole to distract the peo- 
ple away from the primary and real issue in this camp- 
aign, which is to continue building this nation in order 
to insure its stability and durability. It is not a ques- 
tion of whether one party should be given a chance to 
hold the reins of power. This is not a race for power. 
The issue is, which party can sei-ve and promote the in- 
terests of the country better, politically and economically. 

In other words, shall this country continue in its 
momentum of upward surge in the preparation of its 
stabiUty and durability or shall we entrust the future of 
this country to untried, adventurous hands merely hun- 
gry for power and relying on foreigners who may des- 
troy the very independence and sovereignty of this coun- 
try? 

This continuous talk of bloodshed, of fraud, of ter- 
rorism, of intervention of the United States is destroy- 
ing the morale of the people, driving away prospective 
investors, discouraging the development of industries, 
poisoning the economic and political life of our people. 



11 



smearing the name and prestige of this Eepubhc, and 
sacrificing the honor and dignity of our people. 

My friends, you need not be afraid of fraud, of ter- 
rorism, of bloodshed, of revolution. Revoliition cannot 
come from this administration. Revolution cannot come 
from the governing power. Revolution means defiance of 
the established order. The people's will is supreme here. 
The established order is in our hands, your hands. 

Revolution must come from the minority, and if the 
minority wants to make good its threat, I want to an- 
nounce now that I am prepared to meet that threat with- 
out the assistance of any foreign power. (Applanse) I 
shall die fighting for our sovereignty and dignity. (Aj)^ 
plaiise,) 

In the early days, when we were organizing our own 
government and preparing our treaties and understand- 
ings with other nations, especially with the United States, 
I had the great privilege of being instrumental in con- 
cluding each and every treaty entered into by our Rep- 
ublic. And I have showTi, and the minority must admit, 
that I have never ceded any single territory, not even 
an inch, by any dubious concession of extraterritorial 
rights in the very City of Manila. (Applajise) And as 
long as I am at the head of this nation, as long as I have 
the power and the strength of life to stop those who 
would like to take advantage of this most mercenary, un- 
dignified attitude and who would invite foreign inter- 
vention, I will resist to the last drop of my blood any 
such attempt. (A2)2^1anse.) 

Why did we work so hard, fight for centuries, repel 
enemies who came here in successive waves, and make 
our shores crimson with our blood? Why the struggle 
for centuries and centuries to be independent and sov- 
ereign and now, simply for the election of one candidate 



12 



for president, barter everything — ^the fame and dignity 
and sacrifices of our people? We survived national cri- 
ses to attain liberty and freedom, prosperity and pro- 
gress. Why should we now turn the clock back and re- 
turn to servitude and servility to oblige a presidential 
candidate? 

My dear friends, you who are going to lead this 
country tomorrow, this is a great lesson in political phi- 
losophy. Those in the past who cried out loud for na- 
tionalistic, assertive principles of government and opposed 
creative political cooperation with the United States are 
the same individuals now banded together, foisting on 
our people a new type of nationalism, a patriotism to su- 
bordinate our interests to those of a single man, simply 
because they want to down one person, Elpidio Quirino. 
I knew the personal feeling of hatred, of suspicion, of 
envy, of bitterness involved in this effort, and our coun- 
try is being pulled down by this issue, invoking princi- 
ples when they don't know what principles they are re- 
lying on now. 

These Nacionalistas of today — where were they when 
we needed the assistance of the United States? They 
faced northward, toward the Mikado, and associated with 
our enemies in the name of the East Asia Co-Prosp^^ritv 
Sphere. They never wanted America to come back. Now 
America is asked by these Nacionalistas to be the saviour 
of democracy. What a mockery! 

My friends, I do not want to be unkind by making 
a comparison of the conduct of our leaders during the 
darkest hour of our history and the attitude of those 
leading the nation today, but history will show you that 
those who are now crying loud to the sky for interven- 
tion did not want American intervention when we needed 
it most. As a matter of fact, they openly defied Amer- 
ica, and now that America could be their source of po- 



13 



wer, strength, and influence in this country, they turn 
their backs and cry: ''America, come and save us.^ All 
in the name of democracy and patriotism! 

I want to stress, my friends, that there will be no 
fraud; there will be no terrorism by the administration. 
We don't need that to win. As far as I am concerned, 
I make the solemn pledge that no matter what is going- 
to be the result of the election I would rather sacrifice 
everything than besmirch the good name and sovereignty 
of this government. {Applaiise.) My long years of as- 
sociation in our government affairs and the opportuni- 
ties given me to serve my country and people are too 
precious to be sacrificed for a brief continuation of the 
present honor that I now enjoy as the head of this na- 
tion. 

My friends, I must tell you once more that this bu- 
gaboo of fraud and terrorism is being raised to cow the 
people, to cow the administration, to intimidate — mean- 
ing us — that if you don't vote for the American candi- 
date, this country will go to the dogs. The challenge is 
for you to make use of your intelligence and express youi- 
real sentiment — your patriotism and appreciation of the 
historical development of this country. {Applause.) 



SPEECH OF PRESIDENT FRANCISCO DALUPAN 
OF THE UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST PRE-" 
SENTING THE HON. RAMON MAGSAYSAY, 
NACIONALISTA CANDIDATE, AS GUEST 
OF HONOR AND SPEAKER AT A GENE- 
RAL CONVOCATION OF THE FACUL- 
TIES AND STUDENT BODY OF THE 
UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST 

October 17, 1953 



MR. SECRETARY, 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES 

AND FACULTIES, 
STUDENT BODY, 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN : 

I do not mind telling you that, of all the prominent 
and distinguished men and women we have invited to the 
University, Secretary Magsaysay has been the hard- 
est to convince. At one time or another, we have 
had as guests the presidents of two nations, the Philippines 
and Indonesia; we have had the pleasure of welcoming to 
our midst foi-eign ambassadoi-s as well as our own diplo- 
mats, elder statesmen, and ladies prominent not only on 
their own but also on account of the high po.sitions of their 
husbands. But in no case before this time has the invi- 
tation extended to any of them been more than the respect- 
ful and pleading request in consonance with their high po- 
sitions and distinctions. In the case of Seci-etary Mag- 
saysay, however, we have had to write letters, burn the 
wires, crash social and professional affairs, and avail our- 



14 



15 

selves of the assistance and cooperation of mutual friends. 
In fact, we started inviting Secretary Magsaysay to be our 
guest last January'- in connection with our anniversary ce- 
lebration, and our publications, including the UE Founder, 
printed his picture with the announcement that he was to 
come to our campus. Therefore, if I may stretch the point 
a bit, I can truthfully say that it has taken us about a year 
to get him here in body and spirit . Of course, during all 
this time, I never felt that he was purposely shying away 
from us, for I do know that he is a good and true friend 
of our University. Indeed, I have it on good authority 
that even when he is on other campuses, he never fails to 
remember us. {Laughter,) 

On the surface, such a phenomenal resistance to an in- 
vitation to appear publicly may seem strange in a candi- 
date for public office. Candidates are known to be al- 
ways looking for audiences to talk to and groups to shake 
hands with. But his postponing his coming here is, in 
a way, a measure of the man we have with us today. He 
is not an ordinary candidate nor an ordinary man. He is 
a unique product of our times and our problems, a man who 
became a candidate for president drafted by one party from 
the ranks of another, and for whose candidacy a third party 
abandoned its presidential and vice-presidential ambitions 
and joined the swelling crowd rallying around him. 

But before I go further in my discussion of Ramon 
Magsaysay, I should like to say a word regarding the po- 
sition of the University of the East with respect to the 
presidential election as well as all other elections. It is 
well-known that there are institutions of learning which 
tak3 sides in political controversies. The fact that we 
have taken great pains to bring the two presidential can- 
didates before our community should be sufficient proof 
that we are neutral and impartial. The University 
of the East itself cannot and does not take any position 
or an attitude with respect to candidates for public office 
and political parties. 



16 



When, therefore, the University sponsors convocations 
such as what we are holding today, it is only for the pur- 
pose of enabling our University community to exercise its 
academic freedom with intelligence . Freedom, w^hether on 
a University campus or in our general society, implies 
knowledge of the basic information and the ability to think 
logically on the part of the citizen . There is, I believe, no 
better help to the garnering of such information, to serve 
as the materials of independent and logical thinking, than 
the very candidates for the highest positions in the govern- 
ment themselves. 

With this necessary digression over, I now return to 
the more interesting subject of Ramon Ma^saysay . 

The rise of this man from relative obscurity to the 
most-talked-about man in this country and, to a certain ex- 
tent, also abroad, has no precedent in Philippine politics. 
In an era of leadership scarcity, it took Sergio Osmena 
several years in the public service to rise to the speaker- 
ship of the Philippine Assembly and thus become the first 
Filipino national leader. It took Manuel L. Quezon to 
climb the political ladder from fiscal to Senate President 
something like fifteen years . Manuel Roxas needed about 
two decades to achieve the stature of a truly national lead- 
er. But it has taken Ramon Magsaysay only about eight 
years in the public service to gain not only national but in- 
ternational stature. His exploits as guerrilla leader and 
his energetic generalship of the fight against the Hukbala- 
haps have been so dramatic and so full of the courage, 
humanity and heroism of the storybook hero that they have 
captured the imagination of the press of two countries and 
fired the enthusiasm of their readers . Ordinarily, the ex- 
pression **meteoric rise*' is only a figure of speech ; in the 
case of Ramon Magsaysay, it is a literal phrase. WTieth- 
er he will win the election or not, he has become one of 
the conspicuous rallying points in the free world's fight 
against communism in defense of democracy. 



17 



Only about two weeks ago on a similar occasion, I had 
the gi-eat honor and pleasure of presenting to you His 
Excellency, the President of the Republic of the Philip- 
pines. That was not the first lime that I had the entire- 
ly pleasant chore. In presenting the President, I expe- 
rience a feeling of participating modestly in the unreeling 
of history, for history invariably records the acts of pre- 
sidents. But today, in undertaking a similar task with 
Ramon Magsaysay as the subject of my effoi-ts, I exper- 
ience a feeling of participating, also in a modest measure, 
at the inception of an era, of witnessing the beginning of 
greater events to come, of hearing the heralds of a histo- 
ric tomorrow. {Applazisc-) 

I have known Ramon Magsaysay for only a few years 
of his young 46 years . I met him for the first time some- 
time last year when he received from the Quezon Colleges 
the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws. I had the good 
fortune of sitting by his side on the platform and to listen 
to his thoughtful address of gratitude and acknowledgment 
for the honor accorded him. Since then, I have carefully 
watched his rapid growth in stature and popularity with 
the interest of one who was and is attracted by his dynamic 
personality. Before today, I saw him and heard him just 
two nights ago at the banquet of the Federation of Pri- 
vate Medical Practitioners held at the Philipipne Colum- 
bian Club to which I had been invited by President Angeles 
of the Federation. 

It is this relatively young but personable man whom we 
have the pleasure of having as guest of honor and speaker 
today. With a mingled feeling of pride, privilege and 
honor, I present to you a gallant guerrilla leader, a former 
congressman selected by the press as among the ten most 
effective members of the lower house, a former Secretary 
of National Defense who scored the first decisive victory 
over communism by a democratic country, and a Doctor of 
Laws from Fordham University — the Honorable Ramon 
Magsaysay. {Prolonged applause.) 



POLICY ADDRESS OF EX-SECRETARY RAMON 
MAGSAYSAY AT A GENERAL CONVOCA- 
TION OF THE FACULTY AND STUDENT 
BODY OF THE UNIVERSITY 
OF THE EAST^=^ 

October 17, 1953 



PRESIDENT DALUPAN, 

DISTINGUISHED MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY OF 

THE UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST, 
MY DEAR STUDENTS, 
LADIES AND GENTLEMEN: 

President Daluqmn was right ivhen he said that it 
is very difficidt to invite me. Well, my friends, I ivill tell 
you lohy it is always difficult to convince me. Perhaps 
I took after our mothers. Filipino womanhood, the sun^ 
shine of the Filipino home, is very difficult to convince, 
especially in courtship. (Laughter and applause.) 

Furthermore, my friends, it is difficidt to get me to 
speak before a distinguished crowd of imiversity students 
and faculty members. This is because when I was a stu- 
dent myself, I was so poor that I had only a pair of shoes 
ichich got icet every time it rained. I had to use that pair 
of shoes everyday, in spite of its being wet, for three years. 
Due to this sad experience, I developed cold feet. (Laugh- 
ter and applause.) And even now, as I stand before nniver- 
sity students, I still suffer once in a while from cold feet, 
(Applause.) 

♦ Italicized passages were delivered extemporaneously. 



18 



19 



When President Daliipan did me the honor of ask- 
ing me to speak before you today, I was very happy to 
accept the invitation for two important reasons: First, I 
consider it a great privilege to speak before the faculty 
and student body of this young, progressive institution; 
second, I have been anxious to speak again before you, 
the youth of the land, because I wish to express my 
views to you, and through you to the rest of our people, 
on a subject which should be very close to your hearts 
— National Defense. Our policy on National Defense should 
be of great interest to you young men and women not 
only because it has to do with the security of our coun- 
try but especially because someday you yourselves may 
be called upon to implement it. It is a su^^ject on which 
I do not claim to be an authority but vnth which I can 
claim, in all humility, a genuine experience. 

Before I begin on my chosen subject, permit me 
first to pay tribute to the officers and men in the active 
service of the armed forces. We all owe them a debt of 
gi-atitude. They are serving in the best traditions of the 
soldier's creed. 

I have served with these men. I know them well. 
They work and fight without complaint. But one should 
not be surprised if today they are shaken with mixed 
feelings of anger and shame as they contrast the heroic 
tradition they serve to defend with the moral cancer that 
afflicts the high councils of our government. Our army 
men are disciplined men of the highest order. Our coun- 
try is blessed with a corps of officers and enlisted men 
who are well-trained for combat and, what is more im- 
portant, who are acutely conscious of their duties as 
guardians of their country's honor. If left unhampered 
by undue pressure from above, they are certain to ful- 
fill all our expectations and we can depend fully on their 
protection not only of our territorial integrity but, what 



20 



is more urgently at stake at the present time, our civil 
liberties. 

But now the independence of our gallant forces is 
daily harrassed by unscrupulous men in power, who are 
eager to insure that the army shall not again play the role 
of protector of the people's sacred right. Top Liberal 
leaders are resorting to every foul means to violate the 
soldier's right to obey the law and his conscience in the 
performance of his duty. They are easing out high rank- 
ing officers whom they cannot expect to follow their evil 
designs, shuffling and reshuffling provincial commanders 
in positions vital to the Liberal party, apparently in a 
frantic effort to deny the free expression of the popu- 
lar will. 

It seems timely and proper now to appeal to the 
President and the head of the Liberal party. Speaker 
Perez, to stop this sinister inroad of politics into our 
army. All we can say now is that our hearts are with 
all our officers and men. We know they are all resisting 
this attack in the best way they can. These are grave 
moments of trial for them, but we know that they will 
never yield to pressure and that they will come through 
with the proud army honor held high and unblemished. 
We pray God to give them the added courage that they 
need at this hour. Our people will never forget their 
steadfastness and fidelity. 

The development of the defensive strength of the 
Piiilippines is essential to the promotion of the general 
welfare of all our communities. I do not propose to dis- 
cuss today how many infantry divisions we should arm, 
how many squadrons of jet planes we shoulJ fly, or how 
many battleships we should sail under our flag. Nor do 
I wish to impress upon you the terrors of any atomic war 
and the measures we should take to prepare us for such 



21 



an eventuality. Such discussion is better left to the 
staff rooms of our high command. 

The question I would like to discuss is this: We are 
a small and young nation. How can we develop our de- 
fensive potential within our means, and in such a man- 
ner as to have a stabilizing influence on our lives and 
those of generations to come? 

The strength of the Philippines, or of any country 
for that matter, is measured by two considerations ; name- 
ly, the combined force presented by the number of trained 
battalions under arms in reserve, and the capacity of the 
country to maintain not only the combat front, but the 
home front as well. 

The will and the means both to work and to fight 
are inseparable essentials to national survival. In modern 
warfare, subversion, psychological pressure, cultivated cor- 
ruption in high circles, and outright threats of violence, 
are enemy methods to destroy the iviU to fight; shoot- 
ing campaigns, sabotage, and economic strangulation, are 
designed to destroy the means of fighting. 

Experience has shown that mental subversion of a 
people is the preparation for a physical assault. No na- 
tion that is ill-sheltered and underfed, in tatters and cor- 
ruptly governed, could possibly offer more than a mere 
token resistance to psychological or physical invasion. 
Great powers invest heavily in military and economic as- 
sistance to other countries, in the interest of collective 
security and to bolster their own global defenses. A gov- 
ernment that is morally bankrupt could not possibly be 
considered a bulwark against subversion. It could not be 
looked upon as a "worthy risk'' for military and economic 
investment purposes. 

The art of w^ar is no longer the exclusive job of the 
professional soldier. The armed forces today represent 



22 



only a small section of the national effort to protect the 
country from unfriendly domination from within and from 
without. Today, every citizen, every man and woman is 
a soldier, and every useful thing is a target for destruc- 
tion by the enemy. 

The Philippines should maintain a standing force 
that is within the reach of our combined human and ma- 
terial resources. This force should be adequate to pre- 
serve order, and consistent with our modest interna- 
tional effort. Our standing force, should be able to ad- 
just itself easily to the rise and fall of criminality and 
lawlessness in our country and to the varying degrees of 
threats from within or from without that call for military 
action. 

Our Armed Forces must have a core of skilled pro- 
fessional soldiers. But the military leader's concern must 
be for the welfare of the common man as well as for 
his soldiers. 

If elected, it is my aim to look upon the annual ap- 
propriation for National Defense not merely as a necessaiy 
expense for national military protection, but also as a 
vital investment in total national strength through the 
development of our natural and human resources for in- 
creased employment and production. 

It is not my habit to indulge in idle dreams. The 
EDCOR settlements of Kapatagan and Buldon are a real- 
ity. But we must do more. We must plan towards an 
even more desirable goal. We must visualize a defense 
line of prosperous barrios and settlements built by men 
who love God and country, with homes to cherish and to 
protect; men of skill and discipline, and trained in the 
ways of democi-atic freedom. These communities could 
become in the future, the veritable bastions of democracy 
against which the assaults of Communism could never 
prevail. That my countrymen, to my way of thinking, 



is the most lasting: and most effective program of national 
defense. 

Such a plan would immediately improve the lot of our 
God-fearing citizens whose aim is to work in peace with 
their neighbors and fellowmen. At the same time it will 
influence and benefit those who, through deception, 
threats and false promises, have gone astray in the past 
and taken up arms against our society, but who now show 
willingness to make amends and lead a peaceful life witli- 
in the law. 

But let there be no doubt that the primary duty of 
the Ai-med Forces should always be to stand ready to 
protect the peaceful citizen and his home. The full force 
of our arms should be applied without quarter, against 
the evil and the disloyal who would destroy our way of 
life, and whose aim for us is slavery in its most hateful 
form. They have earned the contempt and ire of oui- 
people. They deserve punishment to the full extent of 
the law. 

Today, there actually is a world war going on. The 
targets are the wills, the minds and the hearts of the 
people. They are led to waver and to doubt by conspiracy 
and lies. Those who corrupt while in the high places of 
government, and those who wink an approving eye at the 
practice of corruption, are just as deadly as salvos from 
the enemy guns. Those who honor the public crook, and 
those who accept their company, are just as effective 
saboteurs as those who shelter foreign terrorists. 

Our basic defense problem is the problem of good 
government, of restoring our pride as a people; of pro- 
moting dignity in toil, and of accepting responsibility in 
the community. The political mongrel who grabs at every 
morsel of favor thrown down to him by his cynical mas- 
ters is more contemptible than the foreign spy who risks 



24 



his life in the trade in any country especially in this 
country of ours. 

Let us keep our social and political structure sound, 
and we shall have the firm foundation of defensive 
strength. For we are nationally strong when the indivi- 
dual citizen is good, when the community is sound, when 
the leaders are true to their trust, when the government 
is responsive to the needs of the humble people of the 
country, and when we live with God. Only then may we 
survive as a people. 

For many months now you have listened patiently 
to both sides of the political campaign. On November 
10th the campaign will be over and our people will go to 
the polls to make known their decision. It is time we 
started to summarize the millions of words directed at 
your ears and eyes during these long months. 

Let us now consider the case of the Liberals — and I 
hope Budget Commissioner Sychangco xcill excuse me, be- 
cause he is in the front roiv; (laughter) but Commissioner 
Sychangco is a good Filipino, (applause) — the case of the 
administration which wants to be kept in power, and. we 
ivill keep many of them in poiver — many of them are good 
Filipinos — if elected. (Applause.) Their case has had 
three distinct lines. First, using every dirty trick in the 
book, they tried to smear me, sneer at my humble back- 
ground, and laugh at my progi-am. Second, they tried to 
win the approval and endorsement of the United States. 
Third, they boasted of their accomplishments. How suc- 
cessful have they been? Let us examine each line sepa- 
rately . 

A feeble attempt was made to attack my honesty. 
This stupid attempt was quickly and completely demo- 
lished when I returned to Manila and faced them with 
with documented, unassailable facts. 



25 



Then they spread the lie that 1 liad changed my 
religion for political expediency and political advantage. 
(Laughter.) And they have falsified and faked an affi- 
davit saying that I was baptized May 10, 1953, in the 
Iglesia Ni Ci-isto. This was quickly proved to be a lie. 
As a citizen in a democracy, I am tolerant and respect- 
ful of all religious beliefs, but I was born and raised a 
Catholic, baptized a Catholic, still a Catholic, and I ex- 
pect to die a Catholic. (Apphiuse.) 

When I went directly to the people in the cities and 
towns and remote barrios, to see for myself how they 
lived and what they needed, Mr. Quirino called it cheap 
and vulgar. Now they are trying to imitate me. (Laught- 
er). They even made a Barrio Week. But they do not 
ride in jeeps and walk along dusty roads as I did. They 
travel in planes and cars and yachts paid for by the tax- 
payers' money of my country. (Applause.) And as for 
being cheap, they do not even hesitate to defile the church 
of their fathers by using it as a political stump. 

As for my program, they laughed until they almost 
choked on their scotch-soda when I said that our people 
were entitled at least to safe drinking water. But here, 
too, they showed themselves to be great imitators. I am 
told that at least one of the towns mentioned in my radio 
appeal to Malacanan has just been given a water supply. 
However, it seems they cannot leave their poker tables 
long enough to do much more. The San Lazaro compound 
today is overflowing with good iron pipes, bought by 
American taxpayers' dollars so that our people would have 
safe water supplies. Our administration sees this pre- 
cious and critical material only as a storage problem. 
Even though they knew for many months that this aid 
was coming, and that even more is on the way, they made 
no plans to put it to use for the benefit of our people. 



26 

There is no need to spend much time on their second 
line, their effort to win American endorsement. Every 
one of us feels a sense of national shame over that dis- 
gusting episode. First they tried to bully the American 
embassy into saying something nice about their adminis- 
tration, even calling American economists communistic 
when they insisted on telling the bitter truth . Then Presi- 
dent Eisenhower was chased all over the country in the 
United States in an effort to get at least one picture for 
Liberal campaign literature. (Laughter.) And when these 
efforts failed, when it was realized that America was real- 
ly determined to stay neutral in our elections, these great 
statesmen of the administration turned to screaming and 
kicking like spoiled hysterical children who want a second 
helping of ice-cream. 

Now let Us look at their third party line, at their 
boasted list of accomplishments. President Quirino seems 
to forget that I was once a member of his cabinet, a 
member of his party, that I knew what was going on in 
those critical days of 1950 and 1951. I have said before 
that the progress we have made since those dark days 
was made in spite of the administration, that the credit 
belongs not to Liberal politicians, but to our American 
friends and to the energy and intelligence of our own 
private citizens. I say that again because it is a fact 
that can be proved hy the records in our own government 
files. 

President Quirino claims credit for American aid. 
The truth is that it was the U.S. embassy in 1949 that 
finally convinced him that his administration's neglect 
had brought our nation to tlie edge of bankruptcy— that 
loefore the end of the year our foreign reserves would drop 
below the danger point. By October of that year, our 
teachers and soldiers had gone without pay for several 
months, and it was only an American loan that brought 
them relief. 



27 



And in 1950, / ivas with Governor Cuaderno of the 
Central Bank in Washington and he failed to borroiv even 
only a loan of P5,000,000 for this government. 

President Quirino claims credit for the Bell Mission. 
The truth is that he fought against it for months, in- 
sisting on a joint mission that would whitewash tlu*. cor- 
ruption and incompetence of our administration at that 
time. When Ambassador Cowen held firm, he threattmed 
to have him recalled, giving in only when wo faced 
collapse. 

President Quirino claims credit for the EGA (later 
called MSA and now FO A) , He claims credit for the 
Foster-Quirino agreement. The truth is lie was forced to 
accept the terms of that agreement or get no aid at ul!. 
He was told that America could not help us in oiir ec.;- 
nomic development unless he cleaned house, unless he 
stopped squandering the nation's money and balanced the 
budget, unless he secured legislation that would make sure 
that the aid reached the people who needed it, the work- 
ers and farmers. The minimum wage act. The *'Magna 
Carta" of labor. The tenancy reforms. The improved 
tax laws. Look at every piece of worthwhile legislation 
and you see, not the hand of Malacanan, but the patient 
hard work of American technicians working with our Con- 
gress against the resistance of Malaciian. Remember, I 
was there in those days, and the tired MSA people used 
to come to me for encouragement. There was a time when 
they wanted to deport Mr. Valery Biirati of the MSA who 
was in charge of labor. This is the cold, hard truth . 

President Quirino takes credit for the progress of the 
aid program. And incidentally, he now admits publicly that 
he wants to be president in name only, that the real pres- 
ident will be the man who was in charge of that aid pro- 
gram. So let us see how successfully both these gentle- 
men made use of American aid. Keep in mind that it was, 



28 



and is, our government's responsibility to suggest and plan 
the projects on whicli the aid funds are spent. 

The U.S. Congress appropriates funds for foreign aid 
programs in accordance with the speed and efficiency that 
those funds are used. Listen to the comment of I\Ir. 
Prentice, writing in the Fookien Times Yearbook as acting 
director of MSA. He says : 

**To avoid an acute case of administrative indigestion 
— inability of government agencies to expand fast enough 
to put dollar commodities and peso counterpart to work 
on economic development — available dollar funds from the 
program will be reduced from the annual allotment of 
al>out S30 million of fiscal year 1952 to somewhat undei* 
$20 million for fiscal year 1954"; therefore, a reduction of 
almost $10 million. 

Well, Mr. Prentice turned out to be an optimist. Mr. 
Quirino's administrative indigestion was so bad that they 
were able to spend only under $18 million in 1953. Tlie 
result is that MSA, discouraged, has cut the allotment to 
about $16 and a half million for 1954— all because of ad- 
ministrative indigestion. And the man responsible is the 
man Mr. Quirino promises to give you as a substitute if 
you re-elect him to office. 

And what about the dollars that were really spent? 
Anyone with eyes can see the desperately needed irriga^ 
tion pumps rusting in bodegas where they have lain neg- 
lected for many months. Anyone with eyes can see the 
fertilizer, rotting in broken bags, because tlie administra- 
tion failed to have it distributed to our farmers. But what 
is even worse is the fact that the completed MSA pro- 
jects are threatened with collapse because the administra- 
tion failed to make provision for their upkeep and main- 
tenance. That, my friends, is Mr. Quirino's "total econom- 
ic immobilization." (Laughter.) 



29 



Or take military aid as an example. Ask Mi\ Quirino 
if it is not true that the United States refused to enter 
into the military assistance pact unless he first cleaned 
out the corruption and inefficiency of his armed forces. 
Ask him if it is not true that when he suggested tliat I 
be made Secretary of National Defense, the American ne- 
gotiators promptly agreed, and only then was the pact 
concluded . (Applause. ) 

These are matters of hard fact. Mr. Quirino cannot 
deny them. And when you add them up they mean one 
thing: in seven years of power, the Liberal administra^ 
tion has accomplished only one thing. They have stuffed 
their pockets and their bellies while millions of our people 
are starving, especially in onr rural areas. (Applause.) 

That is why Mr. Quirino faces defeat. That is why 
he cannot even pretend to keep his clean-election promises. 
That is why he swears he will keep our ballot free to 
save democracy in this country and turns his back while 
gangsters are organized to terrorize the voters, while ink 
eradicator is sent to custodians of the ballots and provin- 
cial treasurers, while key officials are shuffled to put 
honest public servants where they cannot interfere with 
fraud, and while his party's journalistic mouthpiece urges 
that foreign correspondents and observers who tell the 
truth should be deported from the Philippines. 

You have contributed, my friends, in the election of 
1951. Thousands of ROTC cadets volunteered to police 
that election. My friends, many of tcs fought in the bat- 
tlefield of 2var for the kindred words of liberty, jtistice 
and equality. And because you also fought for those three 
kindred zvords, you %vanted to interpret them ivith more 
precision and accuracy in peacetime. You vohinteered to 
police the election of 1951, 7ny friends, to fight for those 
three words, not in the battlefield of imr but in the battle- 
field of peace. We succeeded in that election of 1951. And, 



80 



my fHends, today we have only the Army to help us pre- 
serve democracy here. And I hope that it will live up to 
the expectations of the Filipino j)eople and the world. Our 
Chief of Staff, General Duque, played a major role in the 
election of 1951, my friends; let us anchor to our Army in 
this election of 1953 and let us hope that it toill carry us 
across again at this critical period of our history. 

That is why Mi\ Quirino is now maldng dark threats 
of revolution, trying to build himself an excuse to use 
naked force to keep himself in power. That is why plots 
are being hatched with hardened criminals to cause dis- 
turbances which will give him an excuse to tear up our 
Constitution. 

My friends, six 2^asses ivere given to six Huks to come 
down to liquidate Mag say say! And one of the Huks came 
doxun and handed over to me his pass given by this ad- 
ministratioyi. This Huk commander told one: ''Mr. Mag- 
saysay, when you loere Secretary of National Defense and 
ive toere in the mountains, you ordered your agents to lo- 
cate our families. You distributed food to our starving 
2vives and sick children. You hospitalized our sick and 
you gave jobs to those able to loork. Nine thousand, five 
hundred Huks surrendered to you and you gave them lands, 
electric lights, bidldozers, roads, water system and all the 
conveniences of city life. We are human beings. I cannot 
come doivn and kill you. I am surrendeHng to you this 
pass.'' (Applause.) 

That 2)ass 2vill come out someday. I have the pass 
at home; Vm sorry, I did not bring it ivith me tonight. 
(Prolonged applause.) 

I am telling Mr. Quirino now that he does not fright- 
en us with his threatened abuse of power. If there is 
any violence, it will have to come from him and from the 
gangsters on his payroll. / have cautioned the Nacionalista 
Party not to commit any violence, but to humble them- 



31 



selves in all conflicts because, my fHends, we do not want 
to set fire to oitr democracy. And I kiiow the students of 
the University of the East are ivith me in this election 
of 1953. The people of this nation stand solidly with me 
for democratic progress, democratic processes and free 
elections. You want a free election because you will be 
the future leaders of this country. We want to be a true 
democracy today, not twenty years from today; and we 
ivant to hand over to you this democracy and our country 
safe from the terrorists of the Liberal Party, my country- 
men. We have faith in the strength of our constitutional 
rights and in the law. We have faith in the overwhelm- 
ing might of the popular will. We stand unarmed but 
confident in our moral power, in the vigilance and steel 
purpose of an aroused people. We will face the Liberal 
party's goons and all the frauds they concoct — and we 
will win! 

Thank you, and God bless you all! (Prolonged ap- 
plause.) 



SPEECH OF PROFESSOR LINO J. INCIONG, 
ADVISER OF THE POLITICAL SCIENCE CLUB, 
UNIVERSITY OF THE EAST, PRESENTING 
THE HONORABLE FERNANDO LOPEZ, 
VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES, 
AS SPEAKER AND GUEST OF HONOR 
AT A SPECIAL CONVOCATION OF 
THE CLUB HELD ON THE UNI- 
VERSITY QUANDRANGLE 

November 3, 1953, 



DISTINGUISHED GUEST, 
PRESIDENT DALUPAN, 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, 
MEMBERS OF THE FACULTIES, 
FELLOW-STUDENTS AND FRIENDS : 

We are honored with the presence here this afternoon 
of a man whom the Filipino people, in the exercise of their 
constitutional prerogative, elected Senator in 1947 and 
Vice-President in 1949. 

He entered public life for the first time in 1945 as 
Mayor of the City of Iloilo. 

His rise from that position to the office of Vice-Presi- 
dent of the Republic of the Philippines, and concurrently. 
Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources in four 
years, is a feat yet unequalled in our political history. 

A tireless champion of good government, he personi- 
fies what Confucious described as a government official in 



32 



33 



an ideal society, a model of propriety in his private and 
public life maintaining his leadership by example. 

A leader of his own people, he has given true meaning 
to that aphorism known to every student of political science 
that "A PUBLIC OFFICE IS A PUBLIC TRUST". 

Ladies and Gentlemen : The Vice President, Honorable 
Fernando Lopez. (Applause) 



ADDRESS OF THE HONORABLE FERNANDO 
LOPEZ, VICE-PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF THE PHILIPPINES, AT A CONVOCATION 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE POLITL 
CAL SCIENCE CLUB, UNIVERSITY 
OF THE EAST 

November 3, 1953 



PRESIDENT DALUPAN, 

MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES, 
MEMBERS OF THE FACULTY AND 

STUDENT BODY, 
AND FRIENDS: 

Seven days from today, the electorate of this country 
will go to the polls to exercise the right of suffrage vouch- 
safed by our Constitution. Through the democratic pro- 
cess of election, our people shall choose from among the 
candidates who have offered their services to the nation 
those who shall sit in the highest councils of our government 
and guide our destinies during the next four years. 

As I am not a candidate for reelection, this will in all 
probability be one of my last public appearances as Vice- 
President before you . This is the reason why I gladly ac- 
cepted the invitation extended to me by your Political 
Science club and welcomed the opportunity afforded me 
by your distinguished president, Mr. Dalupan, to address 
this non-partisan assembly of young men and women, 
knowing, of course, that I would find here an audience re- 
sponsive to the political needs of the nation and alive to the 
responsibilities of citizenship in a democracy. 



34 



35 



During the last four years, it has been my privilege 
to serve our people as Vice-President of the Republic. 
While some may think of the office of Vice-President as 
nothing more than a decorative fixture — especially in the 
one-man administration of the past — I have considered 
the job a great personal challenge and have devoted my best 
and sincerest efforts to fulfill my sworn duty to preserve 
and defend the Constitution of the Republic, to execute the 
laws without fear or favor, to do justice to every man ir- 
respective of class and political affiliation, and to conse- 
crate myself to the service of the Nation. (ApjMnse.) 

This was the solemn oath that I took four years ago 
when President Quirino and I stood before a great popu- 
lace at the Luneta to assume the two highest elective posi- 
tions in the land . I cannot speak for others ; but for my- 
self, I can say in conscience and before God that I have 
done my best to fulfill the oath and to serve you and to 
serve this nation . 

My record as Vice-President is known to all. Under 
the most trying conditions, I have endeavored at all times 
to do my share in the constructive job of nation building 
in which we are engaged today. It was in this spirit that 
I accepted various administrative positions in the govern- 
ment, among them that of Economic Coordinator and later 
that of Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources. 
It was also in the same spirit that I crusaded during my 
four-year term of office for efficiency and honesty in the 
government, knowing that there cannot be progress and 
material well-being in this country without an efficient 
administi'ation to make it possible. In plain words, it is 
useless to make grandiose economic plans and talk of na- 
tional prosperity without first establishing here a good, 
clean and honest government. I am convinced that this is 
the basic need of our country today. 

I have consistently espoused a high standard of mo- 
rality in the government and especially in the higher eche- 



36 



Ion of public administration. My concept of public serv- 
ice has been, and will always be, service to the people above 
self. I realize, of course, that we cannot with one stroke 
of the pen do away with corruption in the government. 
But I do believe that the only way to keep crooks away from 
the government is to keep them in jail — wher-e they be- 
long. (Ap2ylause.) 

The strong and rather pronounced views that I have 
repeatedly expressed on the conduct of men in public of- 
fice has, unfortunately, involved me in great and acrimo- 
nious controversies in the past. Naturally, there have 
been some who have been disturbed by what I have had to 
say. They are those who feel that my concept of public 
service is old and outmoded . To them, it would seem that 
public office is a means to an end, a stepping stone for the 
accumulation of wealth and personal power. There are 
even those outside the administration who brazenly act as 
if the government were their own property, a private pre- 
serve to use and exploit as they see fit. To these men 
and to the political '^hucksters" that they employ, anyone 
who talks of cleaning the government commits a great and 
unpardonable political sin to the party. No wonder I have 
been harrassed, blocked and even ostracized by some of 
my old political friends. And because I have refused to 
play the game according to their rules, I have become an 
outcast in their eyes. 

My friends, I am proud to say that I have never sa- 
crificed principle at the altar of expediency. I have not 
done so in the past, and I do not intend to do so now or 
in the future. So, I say to those who think that politics 
is just a game with wealth and power as the high stakes, 
that I shall not deviate from my chosen course. I shall 
not falter and will continue to work for honest government 
and expose abuses and injustice wherever I see them, re- 
gardless of the consequences to myself and my party and 
no matter whom it hurts . I shall shout from the roof tops, 
if necessar}^ and '*let the chips fall where they may." 



37 



One of the reasons which prompted me to resign from 
the Liberal Party and join a great patriot, General Carlos 
P. Romulo, in the founding of the Democratic Party, was 
the fact that I had become convinced that it was impossible 
for me to remain loyal to my old party and still be true to 
my trust as a public servant. Never had President Que- 
zon's immortal words, "My loyalty to my party ends where 

my loyalty to my country begins," held so much meaning 

at least for me — as when I decided to leave the party un- 
der whose banner I had been elected to the Vice-Presidency^ 

Believe me, it was a hard decision to make. When 
General Romulo and I decided to walk out of the Liberal 
Party we knew the odds that were against us. We rea- 
lized too well the trials and tribulations, the misery and the 
heartaches that would surely be ours in a fight against an 
entrenched majority on the issue of better leadership and 
good government. But we were convinced that these prin- 
ciples could not be upheld within the framework of the Li- 
beral Party, and undaunted, we proceeded to organize the 
Democratic Party as a vehicle for airing this basic politi- 
cal issue to the people. And, when in the course of the 
campaign, it became obvious that the hats that we had 
thrown into the political arena endangered the ultimate 
victory of the principles which we sought to uphold, Gen- 
eral Romulo and I did not hesitate to sacrifice our own 
personal interests and withdraw from the race in favor of 
the two great leaders of the coalesced opposition, Ramon 
Magsaysay and Carlos P. Garcia. (Applause.) 

This great coalition of the Nacionalista and Democra- 
tic parties under the leadership of Ramon Magsaysay, is 
the medium by which honest and sincere men hope to bring 
about a change in the political atmosphere in this country ; 
We need fresh, pure and clean air. The Filipino people 
are entitled to a fair deal, simple justice and the truth. 
And I am convinced that when truth finally outs, as it 
inevitably does, and when the political double deals of the 
past are revealed in their true color, an enraged citizenry 



88 



shall give bent to its fury in a popular expression of the 
public will at the elections on November 10 . 

I have been asked by friends why I have accepted a 
berth on the coalition ticket for the Senate. I have, as 
you know, served as Mayor of Iloilo, then as Senator, be- 
fore assuming the office of Vice-President in 1949. Not 
being a professional politician, I had hopes of eventually re- 
tiring from politics and returning to the peaceful, quiet 
and normal life to which I had always been accustomed. 
When I withdrew as candidate for Vice-President, I thought 
that chance had finally come . Unfortunately, it could not 
be so because the leaders of the coalesced opposition invited 
me to run for the Senate. 

I have accepted nomination as candidate for the Se- 
nate because I consider it the duty of every citizen to serve 
his country in any position that he can be most useful. 
Although I have already served one full term as Vice- 
President — the second highest elective position in the na- 
tion — I can assure you that I shall be willing to serve in 
any capacity, even as a humble councilor, if by so doing I 
feel that I can render real and positive service to my coun- 
try and people. (Applmise,) 

There is also another reason why I have agreed to run 
as a candidate for the Senate. In the great political cam- 
paign that is now unfolding, it is the duty of every candi- 
date for office to present to the people the basic issues of 
the election. Truly, this is a responsibility that I relish 
because I sincerely feel that our people are entitled to the 
truth and should know the real state of our political af- 
fairs . 

What are the issues in this election? 

I know that each candidate has his own pet issue, but 
by and large the fundamental principles involved in this 
election are now clearly defined. 



39 



First and foremost, we must have a cleansing of the 
government administration. I have said before and I re- 
peat that we cannot plan for our economic and political 
progress unless we succeed in establishing here an efficient 
machinery of government. 

Second, we must have dynamic leadership from the 
very top and at all levels of government activity. The co- 
alesced opposition parties believe that they can provide such 
leadership. In Ramon Magsaysay we have a born leader 
who in the brief period of his public career has electrified 
the nation with his energy, enthusiasm, ability and proven 
honesty. His understanding of the problems of the com- 
mon man will no doubt contribute to the rapid promotion 
of the social justice program of the government and in- 
sure the economic stability of the Philippines. (Applause.) 

Third, we must develop respect for the Constitution 
and establish a government of laws and not of men. If 
our Republic is to survive, we must re-establish public con- 
fidence in the government by insuring that laws are en- 
forced, criminals brought to justice, and the Constitution 
upheld. We must disband private armies, get rid of body- 
guards and return the convicts to jail. Political gangster- 
ism must end in order that we may enjoy a regime of law 
and order. 

These are the high stakes in the elections of 1953. 
Yours is the choice between the statvs qtto, on the one hand, 
and a return to sanity and order, on the other. What shall 
it be? 

I see this a question close to your hearts. For as I 
look around me, I can see written in your young and eager 
faces the desire and the determination to do something in 
a positive sense to help your country. That is as it should 
be For you are young, mentally alert, patriotic and fair . 
You can do much to strengthen your government and make 
it play its rightful role in the progi-ess of our nation. \ou 



40 



can do much, if you have the will so to do, because you 
are citizens of this Republic and as such enjoy certain 
rights which make it possible for you to have a voice in 
the conduct of national affairs. 

One of the most precious political rights guaranteed 
to a citizen of this country under our democratic Constitu- 
tion is the right of suffrage. This, to my mind, is the most 
fundamental of all our political rights because in the exer- 
cise of this right every citizen of the Republic is afforded 
the opportunity and the privilege, directly or indirectly, to 
participate in the establishment and administration of our 
government. 

In acquiring this right, however, we, as citizens, ac- 
quire an equal if not a greater responsibility. It is the 
political responsibility of citizenship, one which must be 
exercised diligently and conscientiously in order that de- 
mocracy may succeed. 

What does this responsibility consist of? 

First, is the duty of every citizen to interest himself 
in the affairs of his community, his nation and the world 
at large . 

Second, is the duty of every citizen to keep well in- 
formed on vital issues of the day in so far as they affect 
himself, his family and his people. 

Third, is the duty of every citizen to form an opinion 
and express his views, if necessary, on current issues of 
the day. 

Fourth, is the duty of the citizen to acquaint himself 
with the vital issues involved at each election and with a 
complete understanding of such issues vote for the right 
man for the right job. 

Fifth, is the duty of the citizen to remain ever vigilant 
in defense of his constitutional rights and privileges and to 



41 



make sure that once his vote is cast that same should be 
respected as his rightful wish. 

Sixth, is the duty of the citizen after an election to 
abide by the wishes of the majority, to close ranks, and to 
obey the laws and edicts promulgated by the legally — con- 
stituted authorities. 

This, my friends, is citizenship of the highest order. 
This is the type of citizenship responsibility that gives 
sustenance to democracy and makes it work. 

As citizens, let us not close our eyes to the realities 
of the day . For democracy in this country is facing its 
severest test. Our ability to conduct ourselves as free men, 
expressing our voluntary will in a free and honest elec- 
tion, will decide whether this Republic which has been 
built on the sacrifices of so many in the past shall thrive, 
prosper and flourish or whether it shall wither and die 
and pass on into oblivion. 

You have invited me here in my official capacity as 
Vice-President of the Philippines to give you a sober mes- 
sage almost on the eve of the elections. 

Using the strongest terms at my command, I enjoin 
you to exercise your right of suffrage . Use your vote and 
use it well ! I say this not as a candidate for office plead- 
ing for your support, but as an official of this government 
deeply concerned with insuring the success of our Republic. 

I urge you not only to vote but to see to it that your 
friends, your families and your neighbors do. Every legi- 
timate vote cast at the polls is a vote denied to the **flying 
voter" and to the perpetrators of electoral frauds. Remem- 
ber, if you don't vote others may use your vote for you. 

And so, again, I say to each and everyone of you, and 
to each and every citizen of this country: 

**Vote as you please, but PLEASE vote." 



42 



Bear in mind that your vote — that one solitary bal- 
lot which you cast in the polls — when added up to the 
millions of other votes of the electorate of this country, 
represents the written expression of the will of the people, 
the motive power behind government, and the propelling 
force for national policy. 

Do not underestimate the power of your vote. For 
only when citizens actively express their will at the polls, 
can a government become truly responsive to the needs of 
the nation. 

Last Sunday, as I pondered over the message that I 
would leave with you on this occasion, my attention was 
called by a news item in the local papers %vritten by the 
Associated Press correspondent in Hongkong. Under the 
heading of "AH Asia Watches Philippine Elections." the 
article read as follows: 

I quote — 

"The man in the dusty street or the sludgy rice paddy 
of Asia is watching the Philippine election next month 
with much personal interest. 

"This is unusual in a part of the world where elec- 
tions don't rate too highly. 

"From New Guinea clear into Red China and probab- 
ly beyond, this election has caught Asia's attention as a 
sort of test of the new nations and new freedoms that 
sprouted after World War 11." Unquote. 

I must say that this short article is full of meaning. 

We need not stretch our imagination to realize how di- 
sastrous it would be for the cause of democracy in the Far 
East if our own experiment in this country fails to suc- 
ceed. For the Philippines today is the best "show window" 
of democracy in this part of the world . Ever since we be- 
came free and independent, the nations around us have 
watched the progress of this Republic quite closely. They 



48 



have watched us not only because they wish us well, as our 
friends and our neighboi-s, but because they themselves 
have become free or are about to be set free and they are 
interested in finding out whether democracy can really 
work under the conditions that exist in the countries of 
Asia today. Naturally, if the experiment in democracy in 
the Philippines succeeds, we shall influence many of our 
neighbors to adopt the same or a similar form of govern- 
ment based on the principle of the gi-eatest good for the 
greatest number. If we fail to impress our neighbors, then 
they, in turn, will be ripe for Communist infiltration, and 
we may wake up one day to find ourselves surround^ on 
all sides by unfriendly and hostile regimes. 

.1, ^?M.°"!^' reputation and prestige of 

the Philippine Republic at stake in the coming elections 
so possibly the fate of democracy in Asia. 

From a domestic as well as an international viewpoint 
the election on November 10 becomes crucial to the des- 
tiny of our people. 

Once again — as in the past — the nation calls on its 
citizens. 

Imbued with a high sense of patriotism, let us exer- 
cise our civic responsibilities with diligence and care. 

Let us vote intelligently. 

Let us keep inviolate the sanctity of the ballot. 

Let us keep our heads cool and let reason prevail. 

Let us listen to the voice of the people, and once ex- 
pressed, let us abide by its dictum . 

Let us show to the world that we are politically mature 
and deserving of the sovereignty which we have won 
through the blood and sacrifices of our forebears. 



44 



Finally, let us prove to ourselves that here, in . this 
country, we have a citizenry alert to its responsibility and 
fully capable of enjoying the blessings of democracy. {Pro- 
longed applause.) 



I 



