REVISED PENAL CODE 

[Act No. 3815 as amended] 




5563 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1946 



REVISED PENAL COM «-~£f 



[Act No. 3815 as amended] 



f 1 

.V 



MANILA 
BUREAU OF PRINTING 
1946 

6 5 08 




7 TySpM^ vuAx^Ji. %^4s^<L^ 







Eighth Philippine Legislature 
Third Session 



H. No. 3366 



[No. 3815] 

AN ACT REVISING THE PENAL CODE AND OTHER 

PENAL LAWS 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives 
of the Philippines in Legislature assembled and by the 
authority of the same: 

Preliminary Article. — This law shall be known as 
"The Revised Penal Code." 

BOOK ONE 

GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING THE DATE OF 
ENFORCEMENT AND APPLICATION OF THE 
PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE, AND RE- 
GARDING THE OFFENSES, THE 
PERSONS LIABLE AND THE 
PENALTIES 

Preliminary Title 

DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND APPLICATION OF THE 
PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE 

Article 1. Time when Act takes effect. — This Code shall 
take effect on the first day of January, nineteen hundred 
and thirty-two. 

Art. 2. Application of its provisions.— Except as pro- 
vided in the treaties and laws of preferential application, 
the provisions of this Code shall be enforced not only within 
the Philippine Archipelago, including its atmosphere, its 
interior waters and maritime zone, but also outside of its 
jurisdiction, against those who: 

1. Should commit an offense while on a Philippine ship 
or airship. 



4 



2. Should forge or counterfeit any coin or currency note 
of the Philippine Islands or obligations and securities is- 
sued by the Government of the Philippine Islands. 

3. Should be liable for acts connected with the intro- 
duction into these Islands of the obligations and securities 
mentioned in the preceding number. 

4. While being public officers or employees, should com- 
mit an offense in the exercise of their functions; or 

5. Should commit any of the crimes against national 
security and the law of nations, defined in Title One of 
Book Two of this Code. 

Title One 

FELONIES AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH AFFECT 
CRIMINAL LIABILITY 

CHAPTER ONE 

FELONIES 

ART. 3. Definition. — Acts and omissions punishable by 
law are felonies (delitos). 

Felonies are committed not only by means of deceit (dolo) 
but also by means of fault (culpa). 

There is deceit when the act is performed with deli- 
berate intent; and there is fault when the wrongful act 
results from imprudence, negligence, lack of foresight, or 
lack of skill. 

ART. 4. Criminal liability. — Criminal liability shall be 
incurred : 

1. By any person committing a felony (delito) although 
the wrongful act done be different from that which he 
intended. 

2. By any person performing an act which would be an 
offense against persons or property, were it not for the 
inherent impossibility of its accomplishment or on account 
of the employment of inadequate or ineffectual means. 

ART. 5. Duty of the court in connection ivith acts which 
shoidd be repressed but which are not covered by the law, 
and in cases of excessive penalties. — Whenever a court has 



5 



knowledge of any act which it may deem proper to repress 
and which is not punishable by law, it shall render the 
proper decision, and shall report to the Chief Executive, 
through the Department of Justice, the reasons which in- 
duce the court to believe that said act should be made the 
subject of penal legislation. 

In the same way the court shall submit to the Chief 
Executive, through the Department of Justice, such state- 
ment as may be deemed proper, without suspending the 
execution of the sentence, when a strict enforcement of the 
provisions of this Code would result in the imposition of 
a clearly excessive penalty, taking into consideartion the 
degree of malice and the injury caused by the offense. 

ART. 6. Consummated, frustrated, and attempted felo- 
nies. — Consummated felonies, as well as those which are 
frustrated and attempted, are punishable. 

A felony is consummated when all the elements necessary 
for its execution and accomplishment are present; and it 
is frustrated when the offender performs all the acts of 
execution which would produce the felony as a consequence 
but which, nevertheless, do not produce it by reason of 
causes independent of the will of the perpetrator. 

There is an attempt when the offender commences the 
commission of a felony directly by overt acts, and does not 
perform all the acts of execution which should produce the 
felony by reason of some cause or accident other than his 
own spontaneous desistance. 

ART. 7. When light felonies are punishable. — Light felo- 
nies are punishable only when they have been consummated, 
with the exception of those committed against persons or 
property. 

Art. 8. Conspiracy and proposal to commit felony. — Con- 
spiracy and proposal to commit felony are punishable only 
in the cases in which the law specially provides a penalty 
therefor. 

A conspiracy exists when two or more persons come to 
an agreement concerning the commission of a felony and 
decide to commit it. 



6 



There is proposal when the person who bas decided to 
commit a felony proposes its execution to some other per- 
son or persons. 

Art. 9. Grave felonies, less grave felonies and light felo- 
nies. — Grave felonies are those to which the law attaches 
the capital punishment or penalties which in any of their 
periods are afflictive, in accordance with article 25 of this 
Code. 

Less grave felonies are those which the law punishes 
with penalties which in their maximum period are cor- 
rectional, in accordance with the above mentioned article. 

Light felonies are those infractions of law for the com- 
mission of which the penalty of arresto menor or a fine 
not exceeding 200 pesos or both, is provided. 

Art. 10. Offenses not subject to the provisions of this 
Code. — Offenses which are or in the future may be punish- 
able under special laws are not subject to the provisions of 
this Code. This Code shall be supplementary to such laws, 
unless the latter should specially provide the contrary. 

CHAPTER TWO 

JUSTIFYING CIRCUMSTANCES AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH 
EXEMPT FROM CRIMINAL LIABILITY 

Art. 11. Justifying circumstances. — The following do not 
incur any criminal liability: 

1. Anyone who acts in defense of his person or rights, 
provided that the following circumstances concur: 

First. Unlawful aggression; 

Second. Reasonable necessity of the means employed to 
prevent or repel it; 

Third. Lack of sufficient provocation on the part of the 
person defending himself. 

2. Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights 
of his spouse, ascendants, descendants, or legitimate, nat- 
ural or adopted brothers or sisters, or of his relatives by 
affinity in the same degrees, and those by consanguinity 
within the fourth civil degree, provided that the first and 
second requisites prescribed in the next preceding circum- 
stance are present, and the further requisite, in case the 



7 



provocation was given by "the person attacked, that the one 
making defense had no part therein. 

3. Anyone who acts in defense of the person or rights of 
a stranger, provided that the first and second requisites 
mentioned in the first circumstance of this article are pres- 
ent and that the person defending be not induced by revenge, 
resentment, or other evil motive. 

4. Any person who, in order to avoid an evil or injury, 
does an act which causes damage to another, provided that 
the following requisites are present: 

First. That the evil sought to be avoided actually exists ; 

Second. That the injury feared be greater than that 
done to avoid it; 

Third. That there be no other practical and less harmful 
means of preventing it. 

5. Any person who acts in the fulfillment of a duty or 
in the lawful exercise of a right or office. 

6. Any person who acts in obedience to an order issued 
by a superior for some lawful purpose. 

Art. 12. Circumstances which exempt from criminal lia- 
bility. — The following are exempt from criminal liability: 

1. An imbecile or an insane person, unless the latter has 
acted during a lucid interval. 

When the imbecile or an insane person has committed an 
act which the law defines as a felony (delito), the court 
shall order his confinement in one of the hospitals or asy- 
lums established for persons thus afflicted, which he shall 
not be permitted to leave without first obtaining the per- 
mission of the same court. 

2. A person under nine years of age. 

3. A person over nine years of age and under fifteen, 
unless he has acted with discernment, in which case, sucli 
minor shall be proceeded against in accordance with the 
provisions of article 80 of this Code. 

When such minor is adjudged to be criminally irre- 
sponsible, the court, in conformity with the provisions of 
this and the preceding paragraph, shall commit him to 
the care and custody of his family who shall be charged 
with his surveillance and education ; otherwise, he shall be 



8 



committed to the care of some institution or person men- 
tioned in said article 80. 

4. Any person who, while performing a lawful act with 
due care, causes an injury by mere accident without fault 
or intention of causing it. 

5. Any person who acts under the compulsion of an ir- 
resistible force. 

6. Any person who acts under the impulse of an uncon- 
trollable fear of an equal or greater injury. 

7. Any person who fails to perform an act required by 
law, when prevented by some lawful or insuperable cause. 

CHAPTER THREE 

CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MITIGATE CRIMINAL LIABILITY 

Art. 13. Mitigating circumstances. — The following are 
mitigating circumstances : 

1. Those mentioned in the preceding chapter, when all 
the requisites necessary to justify the act or to exempt 
from criminal liability in the respective cases are not at- 
tendant. 

2. That the offender is under eighteen years 1 of age or 
over seventy years. In the case of the minor, he shall 
be proceeded against in accordance with the provisions of 
article 80. 

3. That the offender had no intention to commit so grave 
a wrong as that committed. 

4. That sufficient provocation or threat on the part of 
the offended party immediately preceded the act. 

5. That the act was committed in the immediate vindi- 
cation of a grave offense to the one committing the felony 
(deiito), his spouse, ascendants, descendants, legitimate, 
natural, or adopted brothers or sisters, or relatives by 
affinity within the same degrees. 

6. That of having acted upon an impulse so powerful 
as naturally to have produced passion or obfuscation. 

7. That the offender had voluntarily surrendered him- 
self to a person in authority or his agents, or that he had 
voluntarily confessed his guilt before the court prior to 
the presentation of the evidence for the prosecution. 



1 See article 80, infra. 



9 



8. That the offender is deaf and dumb, blind or other- 
wise suffering some physical defect which thus restricts 
his means of action, defense, or communication with his 
fellow beings. 

9. Such illness of the offender as would diminish the exer- 
cise of the will-power of the offender without however de- 
priving him of consciouness of his acts. 

10. And, finally, any other circumstance of a similar na- 
ture and analogous to those above mentioned. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH AGGRAVATE CRIMINAL LIABILITY 

ART. 14. Aggravating circumstances. — The following are 
aggravating circumstances: 

1. That advantage be taken by the offender of his public 
position. 

2. That the crime be committed in contempt of or with 
insult to the public authorities. 

3. That the act be committed with insult or in disregard 
of the respect due the offended party on account of his 
rank, age, or sex, or that it be committed in the dwelling 
of the offended party, if the latter has not given provoca- 
tion. 

4. That the act be committed with abuse of confidence or 
obvious ungratefulness. 

5. That the crime be committed in the palace of the Chief 
Executive, or in his presence, or where public authorities 
are engaged in the discharge of their duties, or in a place 
dedicated to religious worship. 

6. That the crime be committed in the night time or in 
an uninhabited place, or by a band, whenever such circum- 
stances may facilitate the commission of the offense. 

Whenever more than three armed malefactors shall have 
acted together in the commission of an offense it shall be 
deemed to have been committed by a band. 

7. That the crime be committed on the occasion of a con- 
flagration, shipwreck, earthquake, epidemic or other calam- 
ity or misfortune. 



10 



8. That the crime be committed with the aid of armed 
men or persons who insure or afford impunity. 

9. That the accused is a recidivist. 

A recidivist is one who, at the time of his trial for one 
crime, shall have been previously convicted by final judg- 
ment of another crime embraced in the same title of this 
Code. 

10. That the offender has been previously punished for an 
offense to which the law attaches an equal or greater 
penalty or for two or more crimes to which it attaches a 
lighter penalty. 

11. That the crime be committed in consideration of a 
price, reward, or promise. 

12. That the crime be committed by means of inundation, 
fire, poison, explosion, stranding of a vessel or intentional 
damage thereto, derailment of a locomotive, or by the use of 
any other artifice involving great waste and ruin. 

13. That the act be committed with evident premedita- 
tion. 

14. That craft, fraud, or disguise be employed. 

15. That advantage be taken of superior strength, or 
means be employed to weaken the defense. 

16. That the act be committed with treachery (alevo- 
sta) . 

There is treachery when the offender commits any of the 
crimes against the person, employing means, methods, or 
forms in the execution thereof which tend directly and 
specially to insure its execution, without risk to himself 
arising from the defense which the offended party might 
make. 

17. That means be employed or circumstances brought 
about which add ignominy to the natural effects of the act. 

18. That the crime be committed after an unlawful entry. 
There is an unlawful entry when an entrance is effected 

by a way not intended for the purpose. 

19. That as a means to the commission of a crime a wall, 
roof, floor, door, or window be broken. 

20. That the crime be committed with the aid of persons 
under fifteen years of age or by means of motor vehicles, 
airships, or other similar means. 



11 



21. That the wrong done in the commission of the crime 
be deliberately augmented by causing other wrong not nec- 
essary for its commission. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

ALTERNATIVE CIRCUMSTANCES 

Art. 15. Their concept. — Alternative circumstances are 
those which must be taken into consideration as aggravat- 
ing or mitigating according to the nature and effects of 
the crime and the other conditions attending its commis- 
sion. They are the relationship, intoxication and the de- 
gree of instruction and education of the offender. 

The alternative circumstance of relationship shall be 
taken into consideration when the offended party is the 
spouse, ascendant, descendant, legitimate, natural, or 
adopted brother or sister, or relative by affinity in the same 
degrees of the offender. 

The intoxication of the offender shall be taken into con- 
sideration as a mitigating circumstance when the offender 
has committed a felony in a state of intoxication, if the 
same is not habitual or subsequent to the plan to commit 
said felony; but when the intoxication is habitual or inten- 
tional it shall be considered as an aggravating circumstance. 

Title Two 

PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE FOR FELONIES 
Art. 16. Who are criminally liable. — The following are 
criminally liable for grave and less grave felonies: 

1. Principals. 

2. Accomplices. 

3. Accessories. 

The following are criminally liable for light felonies: 

1. Principals. 

2. Accomplices. 

Art. 17. Principals. — The following are considered prin- 
cipals : 

1. Those who take a direct part in the execution of the 
act; 

2. Those who directly force or induce others to commit 

it; 



12 



3. Those who cooperate in the commission of the offense 
by another act without which it would not have been ac- 
complished. 

Art. 18. Accomplices. — Accomplices are those persons 
who, not being included in article 17, cooperate in the 
execution of the offense by previous or simultaneous acts. 

Art. 19. Accessories. — Accessories are those who, having 
knowledge of the commission of the crime, and without 
having participated therein, either as principals or accom- 
plices, take part subsequent to its commission in any of the 
following manners : 

1. By profiting themselves or assisting the offenders to 
profit by the effects of the crime. 

2. By concealing or destroying the body of the crime, or 
the effects or instruments thereof, in order to prevent its 
discovery. 

3. By harboring, concealing, or assisting in the escape 
of the principal of the crime, provided the accessory acts 
with abuse of his public functions or whenever the author 
of the crime is guilty of treason, parricide, murder, or .an 
attempt to take the life of the Chief Executive, or is known 
to be habitually guilty of some other crime. 

Art. 20. Accessories who are exempt from criminal lia- 
bihty.—The penalties prescribed for accessories shall not 
oe imposed upon those who are such with respect to their 
spouses, ascendants, descendants, legitimate, natural, and 
aciopted brothers and sisters, or relatives by affinity within 
the same degrees, with the single exception of accessories 
tailing within the provisions of paragraph 1 of the next 
preceding article. 

Title Three 
PENALTIES 

CHAPTER ONE 

PENALTIES IN GENERAL 

Art. 21. Penalties that may be imposed.— No felony shall 
oe punishable by any penalty not prescribed by law prior 
to its commission. 

Art. 22. Retroactive effect of penal laws.— Penal laws 
shall have a retroactive effect in so far as they favor the per- 



13 



son guilty of a felony, who is not a habitual criminal, as 
this term is defined in rule 5 of article 62 of this Code, 
although at the time of the publication of such laws a final 
sentence has been pronounced and the convict is serving 
the same. 

Art. 23. Effect of pardon by the offended party. — A par- 
don by the offended party does not extinguish criminal ac- 
tion except as provided in article 344 of this Code; but 
civil liability with regard to the interest of the injured 
party is extinguished by his express waiver. 

Art. 24. Measures of prevention or safety which are not 
considered penalties. — The following shall not be considered 
as penalties: 

1. The arrest and temporary detention of accused per- 
sons, as well as their detention by reason of insanity or 
imbecility, or illness requiring their confinement in a hos- 
pital. 

2. The commitment of a minor to any of the institutions 
mentioned in article 80 and for the purposes specified 
therein. 

3. Suspension from the employment or public office dur- 
ing the trial or in order to institute proceedings. 

4. Fines and other corrective measures which, in the exer- 
cise of their administrative or disciplinary powers, superior 
officials may impose upon their subordinates. 

5. Deprivation of rights and the reparations which the 
civil laws may establish in penal form. 

CHAPTER TWO 

CLASSIFICATION OF PENALTIES 

Art. 25. Penalties which may be imposed. — The penal- 
ties which may be imposed, according to this Code, and 
their different classes, are those included in the following 

SCALE 
PRINCIPAL PENALTIES 

Capital punishment: 

Death. 
Afflictive penalties: 

Reclusion perpetua, 



14 



Reclusion temporal, 

Perpetual or temporary aboslute disqualification, 

Perpetual or temporary special disqualification, 

Prisi6n mayor. 
Correctional penalties: 

Prisi6n correccional, 

Arresto mayor, 

Suspension, 

Destierro. 
Light penalties: 

Arresto menor, 

Public censure. 
Penalties common to the three preceding classes: 

Fine, and 

Bond to keep the peace. 

ACCESSORY PENALTIES 

Perpetual or temporary absolute disqualification, 
Perpetual or temporary special disqualification, 
Suspension from public office, the right to vote and 

be voted for, the profession or calling, 
Civil interdiction, 
Indemnification, 

Forfeiture or confiscation of instruments and pro- 
ceeds of the offense, 
Payment of costs. 
ART. 26. Fine — When afflictive, correctional or light 
penalty. — A fine, whether imposed as a single or as an 
alternative penalty, shall be considered an afflictive penalty, 
if it exceeds 6,000 pesos; a correctional penalty, if it does 
not exceed 6,000 pesos but is not less than 200 pesos ; and 
a light penalty, if it be less than 200 pesos. 

CHAPTER THREE 

DURATION AND EFFECT OF PENALTIES 
Section One. — Duration of penalties 

Art. 27. Reclusidn perpetua. — Any person sentenced to 
any of the perpetual penalties shall be pardoned after under- 
going the penalty for thirty years, unless such person by 



15 



reason of his conduct or some other serious cause shall be 
considered by the Chief Executive as unworthy of pardon. 

Rechmon temporal. — The penalty of reclusion temporal 
shall be from twelve years and one day to twenty years. 

Prision mayor and temporary disqualification. — The du- 
ration of the penalties of prision mayor and temporary 
disqualification shall be from six years and one day to 
twelve years, except when the penalty of disqualification 
is imposed as an accessory penalty, in which case its dura- 
tion shall be that of the principal penalty. 

Prisi6?i correctional, suspension, and destierro. — The 
duration of the penalties of prision correctional, suspension 
and destierro shall be from six months and one day to six 
years, except when suspension is imposed as an accessory 
penalty, in which case, its duration shall be that of the 
principal penalty. 

A?Testo mayor. — The duration of the penalty of arresto 
mayor shall be from one month and one day to six months. 

Arresto menor. — The duration of the penalty of arresto 
menor shall be from one day to thirty days. 

Bond to keep the peace. — The bond to keep the peace shall 
be required to cover such period of time as the court may 
determine. 

Art. 28. Computation of penalties. — If the offender shall 
be in prison the term of the duration of the temporary 
penalties shall be computed from the day on which the 
judgment of conviction shall have become final. 

If the offender be not in prison, the term of the duration 
of the penalty consisting of deprivation of liberty shall be 
computed from the day that the offender is placed at the 
disposal of the judicial authorities for the enforcement of 
the penalty. The duration of the other penalties shall be 
computed only from the day on which the defendant com- 
mences to serve his sentence. 

ART. 29. One-half of the period of the preventive impris- 
onment deducted from term of imprisonment.— Offenders 
who have undergone preventive imprisonment shall be cred- 
ited in the service of their sentences consisting of depriva- 
tion of liberty, with one-half of the time during which they 



16 



have undergone preventive imprisonment, except in the 
following cases: 

1. When they are recidivists, or have been convicted pre- 
viously twice or more times of any crime; 

2. When upon being summoned for the execution of their 
sentence they have failed to surrender voluntarily; 

3. When they have been convicted of robbery, theft, es~ 

tafa, malversation of public funds, falsification, vagrancy, 

or prostitution. 

Section Two. — Effects of the penalties according 
to their respective nature 

ART. 30. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or tempo- 
vary absolute disqualification. — The penalties of perpetual 
or temporary absolute disqualification for public office shall 
produce the following effects : 

1. The deprivation of the public offices and employments 
which the offender may have held, even if conferred by 
popular election. 

2. The deprivation of the right to vote in any election 
for any popular elective office or to be elected to such office 

3. The disqualification for the offices or public emplov 
ment and for the exercise of any of the rights mentioned 

In case of temporary disqualification, such disqualifica- 
tion as is comprised in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this articl" 
shall last during the term of the sentence. 

4. The loss of all right to retirement pay or other pen- 
sion for any office formerly held. 

ART. 31. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or tempo- 
rary special disqualification. — The penalties of perpetual or 
temporary special disqualification for public office, profes- 
sion or calling shall produce the following effects: 

1. The deprivation of the office, employment, profession 
or calling affected; 

2. The disqualification for holding similar offices or em- 
ployments either perpetually or during the term of the sen- 
tence, according to the extent of such disqualification. 

Art. 32. Effects of the penalties of perpetual or tempo, 
vary special disqualification for the exercise of the right of 
suffrage.— The perpetual or temporary special disqualifica- 



17 



tion for the exorcise of the right of suffrage shall deprive 
the offender perpetually or during the term of the sentence, 
according to the nature of said penalty, of the right to 
vote in any popular election for any public office or to be 
elected to such office. Moreover, the offender shall not be 
permitted to hold any public office during the period of his 
disqualification. 

Art. 33. Effects of the penalties of suspension from any 
public office, profession or calling, or the right of suffrage. — 
The suspension from public office, profession or calling, and 
the exercise of the right of suffrage shall disqualify the 
offender from holding such office or exercising such profes- 
sion or calling or right of suffrage during the term of the 
sentence. 

The person suspended from holding public office shall not 
hold another having similar functions during the period 
of his suspension. 

ART. 34. Civil interdiction. — Civil interdiction shall de- 
prive the offender during the time of his sentence of the 
rights of parental authority, or guardianship, either as to 
the person or property of any ward, of marital authority, 
of the right to manage his property and of the right to 
dispose of such property by any act or any conveyance 
inter VIVOS* 

Art. 35. Effects of bond to keep the peace.— It shall be 
the duty of any person sentenced to give bond to keep the 
peace, to present two sufficient sureties who shall under- 
take that such person will not commit the offense sought to 
be prevented, and that in case such offense be committed 
they will pay the amount determined by the court in its 
judgment, or otherwise to deposit such amount in the office 
of the clerk of the court to guarantee said undertaking. 

The court shall determine, according to its discretion, the 
period of duration of the bond. 

Should the person sentenced fail to give the bond as re- 
quired he shall be detained for a period which shall in no 
case exceed six months, if he shall have been prosecuted 
for a grave or less grave felonv, and shall not exceed thirty 
days, if for a light felony, 
s.ieg 2 



18 



ART. 36. Pardon; its effects. — A pardon shall not work 
che restoration of the right to hold public office, or the 
right of suffrage, unless such rights be expressly restored 
by the terms of the pardon. 

A pardon shall in no case exempt the culprit from the 
payment of the civil indemnity imposed upon him by the 
sentence. 

Art. 37. Costs — What are included. — Costs shall include 
tees and indemnities in the course of the judicial proceed- 
ings, whether they be fixed or unalterable amounts pre- 
viously determined by law or regulations in force, or 
amounts not subject to schedule. 

ART. 38. Pecuniary liabilities — Order of payment. — In 
case the property of the offender should not be sufficient 
for the payment of all his pecuniary liabilities, the same 
shall be met in the following order: 

L The reparation of the damage caused. 

2. Indemnification of consequential damages. 

3. The fine. 

1 The costs of the proceedings. 

Art. 39. Subsidiary penalty. — If the convict has, no prop- 
erty with which to meet the pecuniary liabilities mentioned 
in paragraphs 1st, 2nd and 3rd of the next preceding 
article, he shall be subject to a subsidiary personal liabil- 
ity at the rate of one day for each 2 pesos amd 50 centavos, 
subject to the following rules : 

1. If the principal penalty imposed be prision correctio- 
nal or arresto and fine, he shall remain under confinement 
until his fine and pecuniary liabilities referred in the pre- 
ceding paragraph are satisfied, but his subsidiary imprison- 
ment shall mot exceed one-third of the term of the sentence, 
and in no case shall it continue for more than one year 
and no fraction or part of a day shall be counted against 
the prisoner. 

2. When the principal penalty imposed be only a fine, 
the subsidiary imprisonment shall oiot exceed six months! 
if the culprit shall have been prosecuted for a grave or less 
grave felony, and shall not exceed fifteen days, if for a 
light felony. 



19 



3. When the principal penalty imposed is higher than 
prision correctional no subsidiary imprisonment shall be 
imposed upon the culprit. 

4. If the principal penalty imposed is not to be executed 
by confinement in a penal institution, but such penalty is 
of fixed duration, the convict, during the period of time es- 
tablished in the preceding rules, shall continue to suffer 
the same deprivations as those of which the principal pen- 
alty consists. 

5. The subsidiary personal liability which the convict 
may have suffered by reason of his insolvency shall not 
relieve him from reparation of the damage caused, nor 
from indemnification for the consequential damages in case 
his financial circumstances should improve; but he fihall be 
relieved from pecuniary liability as to the fine. 

SECTION THREE. — Penalties in which other accessory 
penalties are inherent 

ART. 40. Death — Its accessory penalties. — The death 
penalty, when it is not executed by reason of commutation 
or pardon shall carry with it that of perpetual absolute 
disqualification and that of civil interdiction during thirty 
years following the date of sentence, unless such accessory 
penalties have been expressly remitted in the pardon. 

Art. 41. Reclusidn perpetua and reclusion temporal — 
Their accessory penalties. — The penalties of reclusion per- 
petua and reclvmdn temporal shall carry with them that 
of civil interdiction for life or during the period of the 
sentence as the case may be, and that of perpetual absolute 
disqualification which the offender shall suffer even though 
pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless the same shall 
have been expressly remitted in the pardon. 

Art. 42. Prision mayor — Its accessory penalties. — The 
penalty of prisidn mayor shall carry with it that of tempo- 
rary absolute disqualification and that of perpetual spe- 
cial disqualification from the right of suffrage which the 
offender shall suffer although pardoned as to the principal 
penalty, unless the same shall have been expressly remit- 
ted in the pardon. 



20 



Art. 43. Prision correctional— Its accessor)/ penalties.— 
The penalty of prision correctional shall carry with it that 
of suspension from public office, from the right to follow 
a profession or calling, and that of perpetual special dis- 
qualification from the right of suffrage, if the duration of 
said imprisonment shall exceed eighteen months. The of- 
fender shall suffer the disqualification provided in this ar- 
ticle although pardoned as to the principal penalty, unless 
the same -hall have been expressly remitted in the pardon. 

Art. 44. Arresto—Its accessory penalties.— The penalty 
ox arrestt .shall carry with it that of suspension of the right 
to hold office and the right of suffrage during the term of 
the sentence. 

ART. 45. Confiscation and forfeiture of the proceeds or 
™^ °{ the c '^e— Every penalty imposed for the 
TZT° n °f a fel0ny sha11 ca "T with it the forfeiture 
with , t * 0 u e t ds ° f the crime anrt the instruments or tools 
with which it was committed. 

terl «!wi P / 0C ^ ds and instruments or tools shall be confisca- 
te %h*i ! 6(1 hl favor of the Government, unless they 
but tL E*2 ^ ° f a third P erson not liable for the offense, 

«M rdeSoye S ch VhiCh ^ ^ C ° mmerC€ 

CHAPTER FOUR 

APPLICATION OF PENALTIES 

Section One,— *■ 

r,-,^,- * a »Pl*ation of penalties to the person* 

lHalhf Uable W* for the graduation of the same 

eral^nt to be im P° s ^ upon principals in gen- 

of a felonv I* , . Prescribed h y law f or the commission 

— Z ot^fSony^ ^ ^ * ** 

^T^Zf%^^ ih ^ a a felony in 

Sg!ft^f be ******* - a PP'-ble to the 



21 



Art. 47. In what cases the death penalty shall not be 
imposed. — The death penalty shall be imposed in all cases 
in which it must be imposed under existing laws, except 
in the following cases: 

1. When the guilty person be more than seventy years 
of age. 

2. When upon appeal or revision of the case by the Su- 
preme Court, all the members thereof are not unanimous 
in their voting as to the propriety of the imposition of the 
death penalty. For the imposition of said penalty or for 
the confirmation of a judgment of the inferior court im- 
posing the death sentence, the Supreme Court shall render 
its decision per curiam, which shall be signed by all jus- 
tices of said court, unless some member or members there- 
of shall have become disqualified from taking part in the 
consideration of the case, in which event the unanimous 
vote and signature of only the remaining justices shall be 
required. 

Art. 48. Penalty for complex crimes. — When a single act 
constitutes two or more grave or less grave felonies, or 
when an offense is a necessary means for committing the 
other, the penalty for the most serious crime shall be im- 
posed, the same to be applied in its maximum period. (As 
amended by Act No. 4000.) 

Art. 49. Penalty to be imposed upon the principals when 
the crime committed is different from that intended. — In 
cases in which the felony committed is different from that 
which the offender intended to commit, the following rules 
shall be observed: 

L If the penalty prescribed for the felony committed 
be higher than that corresponding to the offense which the 
accused intended to commit, the penalty corresponding to 
the latter shall be imposed in its maximum period. 

2. If the penalty prescribed for the felony committed be 
lower than that corresponding to the one which the accused 
intended to commit, the penalty for tte former shall be im- 
posed in its maximum period. 



22 



3. The rule established by the next preceding paragraph 
.shall not be applicable if the acts committed by the guilty 
person shall also constitute an attempt or frustration of 
another crime, if the law prescribes a higher penalty for 
either of the latter offenses, in which case the penalty 
provided for the attempt or the frustrated crime shall be 
imposed in its maximum period. 

Art. 50. Penalty to be imposed upon principals of a f ries- 
trated crime. — The penalty next lower in degree than that 
prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be im- 
posed upon the principal in a frustrated felony. 

Art. 51. Penalty to be imposed iipon principals of at- 
tempted crimes. — A penalty lower by two degrees than that 
prescribed by law for the consummated felony shall be 
imposed upon the principals in an attempt to commit a 
felony. 

Art. 52. Penalty to be imjwsed upon accomplices in a 
consummated crime.— The penalty next lower in degree 
than that prescribed by law for the consummated felony 
shall be imposed upon the accomplices in the commission 
of a consummated felony. 

ART. 53. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories to the 
commission of a consummated felony.— -The penalty lower 
by two degrees than that prescribed by law for the consum- 
mated felony shall be imposed upon the accessories to the 
commission of a consummated felony. 

Art. 54. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in a 
) frustrated, crime.— -The penalty next lower in degree than 
that prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall 
be imposed upon the accomplices in the commission of a 
frustrated felony. 

Art. 55. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories of a 
I rustrated crime. — The penalty lower by two degrees than 
that prescribed by law for the frustrated felony shall be 
imposed upon the accessories to the commission of a frus- 
trated felony. 

Art. 56. Penalty to be imposed upon accomplices in an 
attempted crime.— The penalty next lower in degree than 



23 



that proscribed by law for an attempt to commit a felon v 
shall be imposed upon the accomplices in an attempt to 
commit the felony. 

Art. 57. Penalty to be imposed upon accessories of an 
attempted crime. — The penalty lower by two degrees than 
that prescribed by law for the attempt shall be imposed 
upon the accessories to the attempt to commit a felony. 

ART. 58. Additional penalty to be imposed upon certain 
accessories. — Those accessories falling within the terms oi 
paragraph 3 of article 19 of this Code who should act with 
abuse of their public functions, shall suffer the additional 
penalty of absolute perpetual disqualification if the prin- 
cipal offender shall be guilty of a grave felony, and that 
of absolute temporary disqualification if he shall be guilty 
of a less grave felony. 

Art. 59. Penalty to be imposed in case of failure to com- 
mit the crime because the means employed or the aims 
sought are impossible. — When the person intending to com- 
mit an offense has already performed the acts for the exe- 
cution of the same but nevertheless the crime was not 
produced by reason of the fact that the act intended was 
by its nature one of impossible accomplishment or be- 
cause the means employed by such person are essentially 
inadequate to produce the result desired by him, the court, 
having in mind the social danger and the degree of crimi- 
nality shown by the offender, shall impose upon him the 
penalty of arrcsto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 
500 pesos. 

Art. 60. Exception to the rules established in articles 50 
to 57. — The provisions contained in articles 50 to 57, inclu- 
sive, of this Code shall not be applicable to cases in which 
the law expressly prescribes the penalty provided for a 
frustrated or attempted felony, or to be imposed upon ac- 
complices or accessories. 

Art. 61. Rules for graduating pemlties. — For the pur- 
pose of graduating the penalties which, according to the 
provisions of articles fifty to fifty-seven, inclusive, of this 



2<i 



Code, are to be imposed upon persons guilty as principals 
of any frustrated or attempted felony, or as accomplices or 
accessories, the following rules shali be observed: 

1. When the penalty prescribed for the felony is single 
and indivisible, the penalty next lower in degree shall be 
that immediately following that indivisible penalty in the 
respective graduated scale prescribed in article seventy-one 
of this Code. 

2. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is com- 
posed of two indivisible penalties, or of one or more divi- 
sible penalties to be imposed to their full extent, the 
penalty next lower in degree shall be that immediately 
following the lesser of the penalties prescribed in the 
respective graduated scale. 

3. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is com- 
posed of one or two indivisible penalties and the maximum 
period of another divisible penalty, the penalty next lower 
wf 66 /;, 6 com P° sed of the medium and minimum 
periods of the proper divisible penalty and the maximum 
period of that immediately following in said respective 
graduated scale. 

4. When the penalty prescribed for the crime is composed 
or several periods, corresponding to different divisible pe- 
nalties, the penalty next lower in degree shall be composed 
ot the period immediately following the minimum pre- 
f™!« ? e tW ° next fo11 °wing, which shall be taken 
thTiJnSf^ alt * ^scribed, if possible; otherwise from 

raSVT 6 ? 1 ? ely followin * to the above » cntioned 

lespective graduated scale 

m LZ h 2?l ] ™ S VQS ™ hes a P enalt y 'or a crime in some 

rtE? 4 fcLsr y providetl for ™ the four ***** 

r t£ by ^o S y, shall impose cor- 

upon accomplices' and acce or t ^ ST* ffV* 
Act No. 217.) accessories. (As amended by Com. 



25 



Penalty to b«- 
Imposed upon 
the accessory in 
en attempted 
erirne 


Prisidn corrcc- 
cional. 
Arresto mayor. 

Fine and arrcsto 
mayor in its 
minimum 
and medium 
periods. 

Fine. 


Penalty to be 
imposed upon tho 

accessory in a 
frustrated crime, 
and the accomplice 
in an attempted 
crime 


Prision manor 


Prisidn correccional 

Arrcsto mayor in its 
maximum period 
to prisidn correc- 
cional in its me- 
dium period. 

Fine and arresto 
mayor in its mini- 
mum and medium 
periods. 


Penalty to bo 
imposed upon the 
principal in an 
attempted crime, the 
accessory in the 
eonsumated crime, 
and the accomplices 
in a frustrated 
crime 


Rcclusidn IcmporaL . . 1 
Prisidn mayor J 

Prisidn corrcccional 
in its maximum 
period to prisidn 
mayor in its me- 
dium period. 

Arresto mayor in its 
maximum period 
to prisidn corrcc- 
cional in its me- 
dium period. 


1 

Penalty to be 
imposed upon the 

principal in a 
frustrated crime, 
and the accomplice 
in a consummated 
crime 


Rcclusidn perpetua 1 

Rcclusidn temporal- 

Prisidn mayor in its 
maximum period 
to rechision tem- 
poral in its me- 
dium period. 

Prisidn correccional 
in its maximum 
period to prisidn 
mayor in its me- 
dium-period. 


til 

111 

* a 

B 
a. 


+- 

9 

a 
P 


Rcclusidn perpetua 
to death. 

Rcclusidn temporal 
in its maximum 
period to death. 

Prisidn mayor in 
its maximum 
period to reclu- 
sidn temporal in 
its medium pe- 
riod. 




First case 
Second case 
Third case 

; Fourth case. 

1 

1 



26 



Section Two. — Rules for the application of penalties with regard 
to tlie mitigating and aggravating circumstances, and habitual 
delinquency. 

ART. 62. Effect of the attendance of mitigatino or aggra- 
vating circumstances and of habitual delinquency. — Miti- 
gating or aggavating circumstances and habitual delin- 
quency shall be taken into account for the purpose of 
diminishing or increasing the penalty in conformity with 
the following rules : 

1. Aggravating circumstances which in themselves con- 
stitute a crime specially punishable by law or which are 
included by the law in denning a crime and prescribing the 
penalty therefor shall not be taken into account for the 
purpose of increasing the penalty. 

2. The same rule shall apply with respect to any aggra- 
vating circumstance inherent in the crime to such a degree 
that it must of necessity accompany the commission thereof. 

°* Aggravating or mitigating circumstances which arise 
worn the moral attributes of the offender, or from his pri- 
vate relations with the offended party, or from any other 
personal cause, shall only serve to aggravate or mitigate the 
lability of the principals, accomplices and accessories as 
to whom such circumstances are attendant. 

4. The circumstances which consist in the material ex- 
ecution of the act, or in the means employed to accomplish 
it, shall serve to aggravate or mitigate the liability of those 
Persons only who had knowledge of them at the time of 

6 e w°K- ti0n ° f the act or their cooperation therein. 

( i i tt tUal delin<Juencv sha11 have the following effects : 
tenr i + P ° n & third convicti on the culprit shall be sen- 
wh l I thC penaltv Provided by law for the last crime ©f 

men he be found guilty and to the additional penalty of 
/ wwn correctional in its medium and maximum periods ; 

(O) upon a fourth conviction the culprit shall be sen- 
tenced.™ the Penalty provided for the last crime of which 

De tound guiltv and to the additional penalty of priptdw 
mayor in its minimum and medium periods; and 

W Upon a fifth or additional conviction, the culprit 
shall be sentenced to the penalty provided for the last 



27 



crime of which he be found guilty and to the additional 
penalty of prision mayor in its maximum period to reclu : 
sion temporal in its minimum period. 

Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, the total 
of the two penalties to be imposed upon the offender, in 
conformity herewith, shall in no case exceed 30 years. 

For purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed 
to be habitual delinquent, if within a period of ten years 
from the date of his release or last conviction of the crimes 
of serious or less serious physical injuries, robo, hurto, es- 
tafa, or falsification, he is found guilty of any of said crimes 
a third time or oftener. (As amended by Republic Act No. 
18.) 

ART. 63. Rides for the application of indivisible penal- 
ties. — In all cases in which the law prescribes a single 
indivisible penalty, it shall be applied by the courts re- 
gardless of any mitigating or aggravating circumstances 
that may have attended the commission of the deed. 

In all cases in which the law prescribes a penalty com- 
posed of two indivisible penalties, the following rules shall 
be observed in the application thereof: 

1. When in the commission of the deed there is present 
only one aggravating circumstance, the greater penalty 
shall be applied. 

2. When there are neither mitigating nor aggravating 
circumstances in the commission of the deed, the lesser 
penalty shall be applied. 

3. When the commission of the act is attended by some 
mitigating circumstance and there is no aggravating cir- 
cumstance, the lesser penalty shall be applied. 

4. When both mitigating and aggravating circumstances 
attended the commission of the act, the courts shall reason- 
ably allow them to offset one another in consideration of 
their number and importance, for the purpose of applying 
the penalty in accordance with the preceding rules, ac- 
cording to the result of such compensation. 

Art. 64. Rules for the application of penalties which 
contain three periods. — In cases in which the penalties 
prescribed by law contain three periods, whether it be a 



28 



single divisible penalty or composed of three different pen- 
alties, each one of which forms a period in accordance with 
the provisions of articles 76 and 77, the courts shall 
observe for the application of the penalty the following 
rules, according to whether there are or are not mitigating 
or aggravating circumstances: 

1. When there are neither aggravating nor mitigating 
circumstances, they shall impose the penaltv prescribed by 
law m its medium period. 

2. When only a mitigating circumstance is present in 
the commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty 
in its minimum period. 

3. When only an aggravating circumstance is uresent in 
he commission of the act, they shall impose the penalty 
in its maximum period. 

Jt n! Vhei \ b °? h miti £ating and aggravating circumstances 
class f »r f if C ° Urt 3ha11 reason ably offset those of one 
5 Wh 7u ° ther accor(lin g to their relative weight, 
and n 6 are two or more mitigating circumstances 

ah»n it aggravatin £ circumstances are present, the court 
law ff 38 the penaltv nex t ^wer to that prescribed by 
thP «Lk Peri ° d that * m& y deem applicable, according to 
the number and nature of such circumstances. 

*rav a ««? • may be the nui "ber and nature of the ag- 
greatSi C1 ,? ui ? stances > the courts shall not impose a 
Period. ty than that prescribed by law, in its maximum 

^^SbXh? each period ' the courts sha11 dc - 

and nature of th ? e "alty according to the number 

and the *reat M . ® a * gravatin e and mitigating circumstances 
crime. esser extent of the evil produced by the 

A.RT 65 T? j • 

poked 'of threTJr\o7* e \ in WMeh tke & Mt °° m - 

scribed by law " Cases in which the P enalty P r * 

shall apply the rnlt C ° n T 86(1 ° f three » eriods > the Courts 
dividing into tU I T temed in the foregoing articles, 
* mto three equal portions the time included in the 



29 



penalty prescribed, and forming one period 61 each ot the 
three portions. 

Art. 66. Imposition of fines.— In imposing fines the 
courts may fix any amount within the limits established 
by law; in fixing the amount in each case attention shall 
be given, not only to the mitigating and aggravating cir- 
custances, but more particularly to the wealth or means 
of the culprit. 

ART. 67. Penalty to be imposed when not (dl the requi- 
sites of exemption of the fourth circumstance of article 
12 are present. — When all the conditions required in cir- 
cumstance number 4 of article 12 of this Code to exempt 
from criminal liability are not present, the penalty of 
arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisidn correccional 
in its minimum period shall be imposed upon the culprit if 
he shall have been guilty of a grave felony, and arresto 
mayor in its minimum and medium periods, if of a less 
grave felony. 

ART. 68. Penalty to be imposed upon a person under 
eighteen years of age.— When the offender is a minor under 
eighteen years 1 and his case is one coming under the pro- 
visions of the paragraph next to the last of article 80 of this 
Code, the following rules shall be observed: 

1. Upon a person under fifteen but over nine years of 
age, who is not exempted from liability by reason of the 
court having declared that he acted with discernment, a 
discretionary penalty shall be imposed, but always lower 
by two 'degrees at least than that prescribed by law for 
the crime which he committed. 

2. Upon a person over fifteen and under eighteen year** 
of age the penalty next lower than that prescribed by law 
shall be imposed, but always in the proper period. 

Art. 69. Penalty to be imposed when the crime committed 
is not wholly excusable. — A penalty lower by one or two 
degrees than that prescribed by law shall be imposed if 
the deed is not wholly excusable by reason of the lack of 



J See article SO, infra. 



30 



some of the conditions required to justify the same or 
to exempt from criminal liability in the several cases men- 
tioned in articles 11 and 12, provided that the majority oi' 
such conditions be present. The courts shall impose the 
penalty in the period which may be deemed proper, in view 
of the number and nature of the conditions of exemption 
present or lacking. 

Art. 70. Successive service of sentences.— When the cul- 
prit has to serve two or more penalties, he shall serve them 
simultaneously if the nature of the penalties will so permit ; 
otherwise, the following rules shall be observed: 

In the imposition of the penalties, the order of their 
respective severity shall be followed so that they may be 
executed successively or as nearly as may be possible, should 
a pardon have been granted as to the penalty or penalties 
nrst imposed, or should they have been served out. 
nwwS- purpoae of a PP*ying the provisions of the next 
ST"? ? aragra P h the respective severity of the penalties 
snail determined in accordance with the following scale: 

1. Death, 

2. Reclusi&n perpetua, 

3. Reclwi&n temporal, 
1. Prision mayor, 

5. Prisi6n correccional, 

6. Arreato mayor, 

7. Arresto menor, 

8. Destierro, 

10 P S? tUal ab30lute disqualification, 
1 Su?n P I rary f 3 ° lute Salification, 
be voted for Z fB PUbUc ofRce ' the ri * ht to vote aud 
ifpubHc'cetur ^ fOHOW ~™ « CaHh1 *' 

iJt^SSS . he provisions of the **** i n ' eccd - 

not £ mZT£ »» duration of the convict's sentence shall 

C to Z n ? n e ° f0ld the lei ^ h of time correspond- 
mg to the most severe of the penalties imposed upon him. 
No other penalty to which he may be liable shall be inflicted 



31 



after the sum total of those imposed equals the same max- 
imum period. 

Such maximum period shall in no case exceed forty 
years. 

In applying the provisions of this rule the duration of 
perpetual penalties (pena perpetua) shall be computed at 
thirty years. (As amended by Com. Act No. 217.) 

Art. 71. Graduated scales.— In the cases which the law 
prescribes a penalty lower or higher by one or more degrees 
than another given penalty, the rules prescribed in article 
61 shall be observed in graduating such penalty. 

The lower or higher penalty shall be taken from the gra- 
duated scale in which is comprised the given penalty. 

The courts, in applying such lower or higher penalty, 
shall observe the following graduated scales: 

Scale No. 1 

t. Death, 

2. Reclusion* perpetua, 

3. Reclusifai temporal, 

4. Prisidn mayor, 

5. Prisi&n correctional, 

6. Arresto mayor, 

7. Destierro. 

8. Arresto menor, 

9. Public censure, 
10. Fine. 

Scale No. 2 

1. Perpetual absolute disqualification, 

2. Temporary absolute disqualification, 

3. Suspension from public office, the right to vote and be 
voted for, and the right to follow a profession or calling, 

4. Public censure, 

5. Fine. 



32 



Art. 72. Preference in the payment of the civil liabil- 
ities.-^ : civil liabilities of a person found guilty of two 
oi more offenses shall be satisfied by following the chro- 

de ZTll ° r f u° f ^ dat6S 0f the final Judgments ren- 
dered against him, beginning with the first in order of 

Section Three.— Provision co mm „n to the last t.vo 

preceding section* 

Denaltv iriifrt k, " IM ; n . e%ei the courts shall impose a 

Sm^SiTSf ° f law ' carries * othei> 

42, 43,44 and «2t*i- n 1>Vovlsio » s of articles 40, 41, 
the accessory penJL . , ' * mUSt be understood that 
Art. ri-S , 6 a,S0 im P° sed "Pon the convict. 

alty higher than ,„ « m which the law prescribes a pen- 
designating the S £ V T penalty > without ^fi^ 
should be that of Sh ' ' * PenaltJ ' 

Penalties of article 40 V a n. Same penalty aucl the accessory 
penalty. * Sha11 be considered as the next higher 

■Art 7t> /} 

crease or reduce th* f^^ 61 ' lt; ma J' be necessary to in- 
• ^ shall be increased I ° f ^ hy one * ni °re degrees ' 
«ree» by one-fourth ofth d ' res P«ctively f for each de- 
law, without, howev™ u max| mum amount prescribed by 

The same rules SrSf 8 ?* the minimum, 
that do not consist of fl « ^ erved with regard to fines 
Honal. a nxod amount, but are made propor- 

Art 73 Lcc i 

The legal period of dura? duration °f divisible penalties.— 
considered as divided intn°H° f divisib,e penalties shall be 
riods, the minimum, the mJr Parts » forming three pe- 
manner shown in tile fJu . m > and the maximum in the 

snowing table: 



33 



— o 
en 

•a o 

IS 



a « 



2 
rt 
c; 
>, 
o 

CM 



d 

P £ »o 



£ 5 o o 

" *» r-i 



e 

a 

I 

cj CM 

K o 

43 

>* 
cj 



Cj 

a 
>» 

£ 
o 



2 

cJ 
a 



£ o 

o 

£ 



cJ 



T3 
O 
CO 

o 



^ -s 



III 



£ 
o 



oo 



li 

eh 



cj 



CJ 



t-H ^ 
44 
C 

S d 
p £ 



2 

cJ 

CU 

>» J 
5 I 



d 

ri 
CJ 







>> 

CJ 


CM 




ars. 


E 




and 




a> 
>» 
o 


yea 


and 


e 

Cj 




T-l 

3 


CM 


ths 


a 
>> 


ths. 


day 


'rom 


mon 


o 
•*-» 


mon 



CJ ^> 
d 

O ^ 



rt 
13 



cJ 
o 

O 



£ 
o 



2 

■ 5 *n 
a a 

T3 - 

3 £ 

■a ? 

eg 

.££ 
E- 



d 



C3 
0) 



cj 
o 



c 

o 

£ 

£5 " oo 

c >> T 

C CJ C 

s * a 



s £ 

t I 

Cj P> 
00 

* O 

CO 4* 

d >» 

d cJ 

2 *9 



d 

CJ 



e 

CJ 

9 

CM 5 
C 

o o 
* E 

d 

rH CJ 



d 
o 

£ 

CM 
O 



£ 
o 

E 



CJ 



"3.2 
q » 

- ~. 

£ rt 



rt g 

w >> 

cJ O 

<U CM 



£ 

o 



1 e 
rt g 

2 >> 

cJ CM 

c >> 

C cJ 
O 

M 



£ » 
cJ 

5 >, 

- CD 

§ P 



£ 

o 



CJ 



i B 

O CO 

£ o 

rH & 

£ & 



CJ 

O 

CO 



£ 
o 



Si 



A5 



.2 .2 « 

co el 



3 

o nzJ 

a s 

en * 



d 
o 

O O 

1 £ 
cr 4^ 



CO 

I 

d 

cJ 

d 
.2 

'to 

d 
a> 
a 



o 



5668 3 



34 



ART. 77. When the penalty is a complex one composed 
of three distinct penalties. — In cases in which the law pre- 
scribes a penalty composed of three distinct penalties, each 
one shall form a period; the lightest of them shall be the 
minimum, the next the medium, and the most severe the 
maximum period. 

Whenever the penalty prescribed does not have one of 
the forms specially provided for in this book, the periods 
shall be distributed, applying by analogy the prescribed 
rules. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

EXECUTION AND SERVICE OF PENALTIES 
Section One. — General provisions 
Art. 78. When and how a penalty is to be executed. — 
No penalty shall be executed except by virtue of a final 
judgment. 

A penalty shall not be executed in any other form than 
that prescribed by law, nor with any other circumstances 
or incidents than those expressly authorized thereby. 

In addition to the provisions of the law, the special 
regulations prescribed for the government of the institu- 
tions in which the penalties are to be suffered shall be 
observed with regard to the character of the work to be 
performed, the time of its performance, and other incidents 
connected therewith, the relations of the convicts among 
themselves and other persons, the relief which they may 
receive, and their diet. 

The regulations shall make provision for the separation 
of the sexes in different institutions, or at least into dif- 
ferent departments, and also for the correction and re- 
form of the convicts. 

Art. 79. Suspension of the execution and service of the 
penalties in case of insanity. — When a convict shall become 
insane or an imbecile after final sentence has been pro- 
nounced, the execution of said sentence shall be suspended 
only with regard to the personal penalty, the provisions 
of the second paragraph of circumstance number 1 of article 
12 being observed in the corresponding cases. 



35 



If at any time the convict shall recover his reason, his 
sentence shall be executed, unless the penalty shall have 
prescribed in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 

The respective provisions of this section shall also be 
observed if the insanity or imbecility occurs while the con- 
vict is serving his sentence. 

Art. 80. Suspension of sentence of minor delinquents. — 
Whenever a minor of either sex, under sixteen years of 
age at the date of the commission of a grave or less grave 
felony, is accused thereof, the court, after hearing the 
evidence in the proper proceedings, instead of pronouncing 
judgment of conviction, shall suspend all further proceed- 
ings and shall commit such minor to the custody or care 
of a public or private, benevolent or charitable institution, 
established under the law for the care, correction or 
education of orphaned, homeless, defective, and delinquent 
children, or to the custody or care of any other responsible 
person in any other place subject to visitation and super- 
vision by the Director of Public Welfare or any of his 
agents or representatives, if there be any, or otherwise by 
the superintendent of public schools or his representatives, 
subject to such conditions as are prescribed herein below 
until such minor shall have reached his majority or for 
such less period as the court may deem proper. 

The court, in committing said minor as provided above, 
shall take into consideration the religion of such minor, 
his parents or next of kin, in order to avoid his commit- 
ment to any private institution not under the control and 
supervision of the religious sect or denomination to which 
they belong. 

The Director of Public Welfare or his duly authorized 
representatives or agents, the superintendent of public 
schools or his representatives, or the person to whose cus- 
tody or care the minor has been committed, shall submit 
to the court every four months and as often as required 
in special cases, a written report on the good or bad con- 
duct of said minor and the moral and intellectual progress 
made by him. 



36 



The suspension of the proceedings against a minor may 
be extended or shortened by the court on the recommenda- 
tion of the Director of Public Welfare or his authorized 
representatives or agents, or the superintendent of public 
schools or his representatives, according as to whether the 
conduct of such minor has been good or not and whether 
he has complied with the conditions imposed upon him, or 
not. The provisions of the first paragraph of this article 
shall not, however, be affected by those contained herein. 

If the minor has been committed to the custody or care 
of any of the institutions mentioned in the first paragraph 
of this article, with the approval of the Director of Public 
Welfare and subject to such conditions as this official in 
accordance with law may deem proper to impose, such 
minor may be allowed to stay elsewhere under the care of 
a responsible person. 

If the minor has behaved properly and has complied 
with the conditions imposed upon him during his confine- 
ment, in accordance with the provisions of this article, he 
shall be returned to the court in order that the same may 
order his final release. 

In case the minor fails to bohave properly or to comply 
with the regulations of the institution to which he has 
been committed or with the conditions imposed upon him 
or in i?J? c T mitted to the care of a responsible person, 
stav it ? * Uld be f0Und ^corrigible or his continued 
retted tAi nStltUti ° n should invisible, he shall be 
SStalSl C ° Urt in 0rder that the same may render 

The e^ent,°7 eS ^ nding to the ™™ committed by him. 

riiall hp Wr,* ♦ ? 11 t0 whlch he has been committed, 

tf^ot Z* , y u or partia "y »v hi * p^ nts or relatives 

£ £Z r t r!, hable t0 SU PP° r t him, if they are able 
to do so, m the discretion of the court: Provided, That in 
case his parents or relatives or those persons liable to sup- 
port him have not been ordered to pay said expenses, the 
municipality m which the offense was committed shall pay 
one-third of said expenses; the province to which the mu- 



37 



nicipality belongs shall pay one-third; and the remaining 
one-third shall be borne by the National Government: Pro- 
vided, however, That whenever the Secretary of Finance 
certifies that a municipality is not able to pay its share in 
the expenses above mentioned, such share which is not paid 
by said municipality shall be borne by the National Govern- 
ment. Charted cities shall pay two-thirds of said expenses ; 
and in case a chartered city cannot pay said expenses, the 
internal revenue allotments which may be due to said city 
shall be withheld and applied in settlement of said indebted- 
ness in accordance with section five hundred and eighty- 
eight of the Administrative Code. (As amended by Com. 
Act No. 99 and Rep. Act No. 47.) 

Section Two. — Execution of principal penalties 

Art. 81. When and hoio the death penalty is to be ex- 
ecuted.— The death sentence shall be executed with pref- 
erence to any other and shall consist in putting the person 
under sentence to death by electrocution. The death sen- 
tence shall be executed under the authority of the Director 
of Prisons, endeavoring so far as possible to mitigate the 
sufferings of the person under sentence during electrocu- 
tion as well as during the proceedings prior to the execution. 

If the person under sentence so desire, he shall be anaes- 
thetized at the moment of the electrocution. 

ART. 82. Notification and execution of the sentence and 
assistance to the culprit, — The court shall designate a work- 
ing day for the execution, but not the hour thereof; and 
such designation shall not be communicated to the offender 
before sunrise of said day, and the execution shall not 
take place until after the expiration of at least eight hours 
following the notification, but before sunset. During the 
interval between the notification and the execution, the 
culprit shall, in so far as possible, be furnished such as- 
sistance as he may request in order to be attended in his 
last moments by priests or ministers of the religion he pro- 
fesses and to consult lawyers, as well as in order to make a 



38 



will and confer with members of his family or persons in 
charge of the management of his business, of the adminis- 
tration of his property, or of the care of his descendants. 

Art. 83. Suspension of the execution of the death sen- 
tence.— The death sentence shall not be inflicted upon a 
woman within the three years next following the date of 
the sentence or while she is pregnant, nor upon any person 
over seventy years of age. In this last case, the death 
sentence shall be commuted to the penalty of reclusidn per- 
petua with the accessory penalties provided in article 40. 

Art. 84. Place of execution and persons who may witness 
the same.— The execution shall take place in the peniten- 
tiary of Bihbid in a space closed to the public view and shall 
oe witnessed only by the priests assisting the offender and 
oy ms lawyers and by his relatives, not exceeding six, if he 
lequest, by the physician and the necessary personnel of 
^l^Mshment, and by such persons as the Direc- 
tor ot Prisons may authorize. 

Art. 85. Provision relative to the corpse of the person 
cZT * nd Us burial — Unless claimed by his family, the 
orpse of the culprit shall, upon the completion of the legal 
proceedings subsequent to the execution, be turned over to 
for IJ 18 - 1 ^ 16 of Naming or scientific research first applying 
that Z u the pm 'P° se °f study and investigation, provided 
m such institute shall take charge of the decent burial 
ordP,^ em u am . S - 0ther wise, the Director of Prisons shall 
exnenl ? ° f the boa > of the culprit at government 
memw/?i 5 permis sion to be present thereat to the 
members of the family of the culprit and the friends of the 

S en7pn, 0 i n f n V aS , e ShaH the buri& l of the body of a person 
sentenced to death be held with pomp. 

ART. 86. Reclusidn perpetua, reclusidn temporal, prisidn 
mayor, pnston correccional and arresto mayor.— The pen- 
alties of reclusidn perpetua, reclusidn temporal, prisidn ma- 
yor pnsi6 n correccional, and arresto mayor, shall be ex- 
ecuted and served in the places and penal establishments 
provided by the Administrative Code in force or which 
may be provided by law in the future 



39 



Art. 87. Destierro. — Any person sentenced to destierro 
shall not be permitted to enter the place or places designated 
in the sentence, nor within the radius therein specified, 
which shall be not more than 250 and not less than 25 
kilometers from the place designated. 

Art. 88. Arresto menor. — The penalty of arresto menor 
shall be served in the municipal jail, or in the house of the 
defendant himself under the surveillance of an officer of 
the law, when the court so provides in its decision, taking 
into consideration the health of the offender and other 
reasons which may seem satisfactory to it. 

Title Four 
EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY 

CHAPTER ONE 
TOTAL EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY 1 

ART. 89. How criminal liability is totally extinguished.— 
Criminal liability is totally extinguished : 

1. By the death of the convict, as to the personal penal- 
ties ; and as to pecuniary penalties, liability therefor is ex- 
tinguished only when the death of the offender occurs be- 
fore final judgment. 

2. By service of the sent ence. 

3. By anmesty, which ^completely extinguishes the penal- 
ty and all its effects. 

4. By absolute pard on. 

5. By prescription of th e crime. 

6. By prescripti on of the penalty. 

7. By the marri age of the offended woman, as provided 
in article 344 of this Code. 

ART. 90. Prescription of crimes. — Crimes punishable by 
death, reclusion perpetua or reclusion temporal shall pre- 
scribe in twenty years. 

Crimes punishable by other afflictive penalties shall pre- 
scribe in fifteen years. 



1 As amended by Act No. 4116. 



40 



Those punishable by a correctional penalty shall pre- 
scribe in ten years; with the exception of those punishable 
by arresto mayor, which shall prescribe in five years. 

The crime of libel or other similar offenses shall pie- 
scribe in two years. 

The offenses of oral defamation and slander by deed 
shall prescribe in six months. 

Light offenses prescribe in two months. 

When the penalty fixed by ] aw is a compound one the 
highest penalty shall be made the basis of the application 

t-^L < X C ° ?-T d in the first ' second and third para- 
graphs of this article. 

Period ^•J 0m ?^ ation of prescripts of offenses.-The 
on Zil P + y escn P tlon shall commence to run from the day 
tteluthLS 6 Cni ?u 13 discov ered by the offended party, 
he KTJfS* th6ir agents ' shall be interrupted by 
mence tc > rL COmplaint « information, and shall corn- 
out the accutd g hl Wh6n SUCh P roce edings terminate with- 
tifiably g £S f bemg conv icted or acquitted, or are unjus- 

The te m r any reason ^ imputable to him. 
is absent ?™ *™ c * iption sha11 not ru " when the offender 

Art V Z the Phili PPine Archipelago, 
ties imposed hT<? , W V e ™ Ui ™ prescribe,— -The penal- 

1. tSSStJS f Sentence Prescribe as follows: 

2- Other mtZT S ™ n i Perpetua > in twen ^ ^ars; 

3- CorrecSnai .? e u altieS ' * fifteen 

tion of the penalty / in ten years; with the eXC6P " 
five years; arresto mayor, which prescribes in 

ART.fi zz%t* one year - 

The period of pr^crfrt? ° f th f vrescH Ption of penalties.— 
run from the date wh S. penalt ies shall commence to 
ice of his sentence and> u Culprit should evade the serv- 
ant should give himself t be inter ™pted if the defend- 
foreign country with whM fu . Captured > should go to some 
dition treaty, or should 1 Government has no extra- 

expiration of the dbwJ comm it another crime before the 
1 oa of Prescription. 



41 



CHAPTER TWO 



PARTIAL EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY 1 

ART. 94. Partial extinction of criminal liability. — Crim- 
inal liability is extinguished partially: 

1. By conditional pard on ; 

2. By commutation of the sen tence ; and 

3. For go o3 conduct allowan ces which the culprit may 
earn while he is serving his sentence. 

Art. 95. Obligation incurred by person granted condi- 
tional pardon. — Any person who has been granted condi- 
tional pardon shall incur the obligation of complying strictly 
with the conditions imposed therein, otherwise, his non- 
compliance with any of the conditions specified shall result 
in the revocation of the pardon and the provisions of article 
159 shall be applied to him. 

Art. 96. Effect of commutation of sentence. — The com- 
mutation of the original sentence for another of a different 
length and nature shall have the legal effect of substituting 
the latter in the place of the former. 

Art. 97. Alloivance for good conduct — The good conduct 
of any prisoner in any penal institution shall entitle him 
to the following deductions from the period of his sentence : 

1. During the first two years of his imprisonment he 
shall be allowed a deduction of five days for each month of 
good behavior; 

^ 2. During the third to the fifth year, inclusive, of his 
imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of eight days 
for each month of good behavior; 

3. During the following years until the tenth year, in- 
clusive, of his imprisonment, he shall be allowed a deduc- 
tion of ten days for each month of good behavior; and 

4. During the eleventh and successive years of his im- 
prisonment, he shall be allowed a deduction of fifteen days 
for each month of good behavior. 

Art. 98. Special time allowance for loyalty.— A deduc- 
tion of one-fifth of the period of his sentence shall be grant- 



1 As amended by Act No. 4116. 



42 



ed to afiy prisoner who, having evaded' the service of his 
sentence under the circumstances mentioned in article 158 
of this Code, gives himself up to the authorities within 48 
hours following the issuance of a proclamation announcing 
the passing away of the calamity or catastrophe referred 
to in said article. 

Art. 99. Who grants time allowances. — Whenever law- 
fully justified the Director of Prisons shall grant allow- 
ances for good conduct. Such allowances once granted 
shall not be revoked. 

Title Five 
CIVIL LIABILITY 
CHAPTER ONE 

PERSONS CIVILLY LIABLE FOR FELONIES 

Art. 100. Civil liability of person guilty of felony. — 
Every person criminally liable for a felony is also civilly 
liable. 

Art 101. Rules regarding civil liability in certain cases. — 
The exemption from criminal liability established in sub- 
divisions 1, 2, 3, 5, and 6 of article 12 and in subdivision 
4 of article 11 of this Code does not include exemption from 
civil liability, which shall be enforced subject to the follow- 
ing rules: 

First. In cases of subdivisions 1, 2, and 3 of article 12 
the civil liability for acts committed by an imbecile or in- 
sane person, and by a person under nine years of age, or 
by one over nine but under fifteen years of age, who has 
acted without discernment, shall devolve upon those having 
such person under their legal authority or control, unless 
it appears that there was no fault or negligence on their 
part. 

Should there be no person having such insane, imbecile 
or minor under his authority, legal guardianship, or control, 
or if such person be insolvent, said insane, imbecile, or 
minor shall respond with their own property, excepting 
property exempt from execution, in accordance with the 
civil law. 



43 



Second. In cases falling within subdivision 4 of article 
11, the persons for whose benefit the harm has been pre- 
vented shall be civilly liable in proportion to the benefit 
which they may have received. 

The courts shall determine, in their sound discretion, the 
proportionate amount for which each*one shall be liable. 

When the respective shares can not be equitably deter- 
mined, even approximately, or when the liability also at- 
taches to the Government, or to the majority of the inhab- 
itants of the town, and, in all events, whenever the damage 
has been caused with the consent of the authorities or their 
agents, indemnification shall be made in the manner pre- 
scribed by special laws or regulations. 

Third. In cases falling within subdivisions 5 and 6 of 
article 12, the persons using violence or causing the fear 
shall be primarily liable and secondarily, or, if there be no 
such persons, those doing the act shall be liable, saving 
always to the latter that part of their property exempt from 
execution. 

Art. 102. Subsidiary civil liability of innkeepers, tavern- 
keepers and proprietors of establishments. — In default of 
the persons criminally liable, innkeepers, tavernkeepers, * A 

and any other persons or corporations shall be civilly liable $ 
for crimes committed in their establishments, in all cases fkfi>~** 
where a violation of municipal ordinances or some general ^ 4/r ^{? m 
or special police regulation shall have been committed by v*]*^. f 
them or their employees. 

Innkeepers are also subsidiarily liable for the restitution/ 3) ^> f^ 1 
of goods taken by robbery or theft within their houses from- ' iL ^JC^ 
guests lodging therein, or for the payment of the value 
thereof, provided that such gu&sis^hall have notified in 
advance the innkeeper Ji ims e lf , or the person representing 
him, of the deposit of such goods within the inn; and shall 
furthermore have followed the directions which such inn- 
keeper or his representative may have given them with 
respect to the care of and vigilance over such goods. .No 
liability shall attach in case of rob bery with violence ag ainst 
or intimidation of persons/unless com mitted by the inn- 
keeper's employees. / * * 



44 



Art. 103. Subsidiary civil liability of other persons. — 
The subsidiary liability established in the next preceding 
article shall also apply to employers, teache rs, persons, and 
corporations engaged in any kind of industry for felonies 
committed by their servants, pupils , workmen, apprentices, 
or employees in the discharge of their duties. 



CHAPTER TWO 

WHAT CIVIL LIABILITY INCLUDES 

Art. 104. What is included in civil liability. — The civil 
liability established in articles 100, 101, 102, and 103, of 
this Code includes: 

1. Restitution; 

2. Reparation of the damage caused; 

3. Indemnification for consequential damages. 

Art. 105. Restitution— How made.— -The restitution of 
the thing itself must be made whenever possible, with al- 
lowance for any deterioration or diminution of value as 
determined by the court. 

The thing itself shall be restored, even though it be found 
in the possession of a third person who has acquired it 
by lawful means, saving to the latter his action against the 
proper person who may be liable to him. 
tv I P rov ision is not applicable in cases in which the 
unrig has been acquired by the third person in the manner 

f«r the re( l u i re ments which, by law, bar an action 

lor its recovery. 

te^SL 1 ?!?' R& !> arat ion—Hoiv made.— The court shall de- 
the ml* \ a r° Unt ° f dama e e > taking into consideration 
sentim en t fl i ^ ? ine: ' whe ^ver possible, and its special 

TZTll^ZT' injured party ' and reparation sha11 

ficftion «£ ^ demni fi c ^on-~What is included.-lndenmi- 
those lull C t °, nSeqUential dama * es ^all include not only 

St party ' r also tho r . suffe - cd by 

Art in« n » r ? d person bv reason of the crime. 
damcL. nr Z 7 T *° make restoration, reparation for 
damages, 01 indemnification for consequential damages and 



45 



action to demand the same— Upon whom it devolves.— The 
obligation to make restoration or reparation for damages 
and indemnification for consequential damages devolves 
upon the heirs of the person liable. 

The action to demand restoration, reparation, and indem- 
nification likewise descends to the heirs of the person in- 
jured. 

Art. 109. Share of each person civilly liable. — If there 
are two or more persons civilly liable for a felony, the 
courts shall determine the amount for which each must 
respond. 

ART. 110. Several and subsidiary liability of principals, 
accomplices, and accessories of a felony — Preference in 
payment. — Notwithstanding the provisions of the next pre- 
ceding article, the principals, accomplices, and accessories, 
each within their respective class, shall be liable severally 
(in solidum) among themselves for their quotas, and sub- 
sidiarily for those of the other persons liable. 

The subsidiary liability shall be enforced, first against 
the property of the principals; next, against that of the 
accomplices, and, lastly, against that of the accessories. 

Whenever the liability in solidum or the subsidiary lia- 
bility has been enforced, the person by whom payment has 
been made shall have a right of action against the others 
for the amount of their respective shares. 

Art. 111. Obligation to make restitution in certain 
cases. — Any person who has participated gratuitously in 
the proceeds of a felony shall be bound to make restitution 
in an amount equivalent to the extent of such participation. 

CHAPTER THREE 

EXTINCTION AND SURVIVAL OF CIVIL LIABILITY 

ART. 112. Extinction of civil liability .—>CW\\ liability es- 
tablished in articles 100, 101, 102, and 103 of this Code 
shall be extinguished in the same manner as other obliga- 
tions, in accordance with the provisions of the Civil Law. 

Art. 113. Obligation to satisfy civil liability.— Except 
in case of extinction of his civil liability as provided in 



46 



the next preceding article, the offender shall continue to 
be obliged to satisfy the civil liability resulting from the 
crime committed by him, notwithstanding the fact that he 
has served his sentence consisting of deprivation of liberty 
or other rights, or has not been required to serve the same 
by reason of amnesty, pardon, commutation of sentence, 
or any other reason. 



BOOK TWO 



CRIMES AND PENALTIES 
Title One 

CRIMES AGAINST NATIONAL SECURITY AND THE 
LAW OF NATIONS 

CHAPTER ONE 

CRIMES AGAINST NATIONAL SECURITY 

Section One. — Treason and espionage 

ART. 114. Treason.— Any person who, owing allegiance 
to the United States or the Government of the Philippine 
Islands, not being a foreigner, levies war against them 
or adheres to their enemies, giving them aid or comfort 
within the Philippine Islands or elsewhere, shall be pu- 
nished by rectoision temporal to death and shall pay a fine 
not to exceed 20,000 pesos. 

No person shall be convicted of treason unless on the 
testimony of two witnesses at least to the same overt act 
or on confession of the accused in open court. 

Likewise, an alien, residing in the Philippine Islands, 
who commits acts of treason as defined in paragraph 1 of 
this article shall be punished by prision mayor to death 
and shall pay a fine not to exceed 20,000 pesos. (As amend- 
ed by Executive Order No. 44, May 31, 1945.) 

Art. 115. Conspiracy and proposal to commit treason — 
Penalty. — The conspiracy or proposal to commit the crime 
of treason shall be punished, respectively, by prision mayor 
and a fine not exceeding 10,000 pesos, and by prisidn correc- 
tional and a fine not exceeding 5,000 pesos. 

Art. 116. Misprision of treason. — Every person owing 
allegiance to the United States or the Government of the 
Philippine Islands, without being a foreigner, and having 
knowledge of any conspiracy against them, who conceals or 
does not disclose and make known the same, as soon as pos- 
sible to the governor or fiscal of the province, or the mayor 
or fiscal of the city in which he resides, as the case may be, 
shall be punished as an accessory to the crime of treason. 

47 



4S 



ART. 117. Espionage. 1 — The penalty of prision correc- 
tional shall be inflicted upon any person who: 

1. Without authority therefor, enters a warship, fort or 
naval or military establishment or reservation to obtain 
any information, plans, photographs or other data of a con- 
fidential nature relative to the defense of the Philippine 
Archipelago; or 

2. Being in possession, by reason of the public office he 
holds, of the articles, data or information referred to in 
the preceding paragraph, discloses their contents to a rep- 
resentative of a foreign nation. 

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed if 
the offender be a public officer or employee. 

Section Two.— Provoking war and disloyalty in case of war 
Art. 118. Inciting to war or giving motives for repri- 
sals.— Ihe penalty of reclusion temporal shall be imposed 
upon any public officer or employee, and that of prision 
mayor upon any private individual, who, by unlawful or 
unauthorized acts provokes or gives occasion for a war in- 
vo ying or liable to involve the Philippine Islands or exposes 
JJ pino citi zens to reprisals on their persons or property. 
ART. 119. Violation of neutrality. — The penalty of pri- 
sion correctional shall be inflicted upon anyone who, on the 
occa Slon of a war in which the Government is not involved, 
loiates any regulation issued by competent authority for 

AR UrP ° Se ° f enforcin 2 neutrality. 

T. 120. Correspondence with hostile country. — Any 
Person, who in time of war, shall have correspondence with 

*^J n u my countr y or territory occupied by enemy troops 
snail be punished : 

r^u-?.^ prisii5 n correctional, if the correspondence has been 
Prohibited by the Government; 

• By prision mayor, if such correspondence be carried 
on in ciphers or conventional signs; and 

8. By reclusion temporal, if notice or information be 
given thereby which might be useful to the enemy. If the 
°^qer_ mtended to aid the e nemy by giving such notice 

1 See Commonwealth Act No. 616. 



49 



or information he shall suffer the penalty of reclusion tem- 
poral to death. 

Art. 121. Flight to enemy's country. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor shall be inflicted upon any person who, owing 
allegiance to the Government, attempts to flee or go to an 
enemy country when prohibited by competent authority. 

Section Twxm^Piracu and mutiny on the high seas 

Art. 122. Piracy in general and mutiny on the high 
seas. — The penalty of reclusion temporal shall be inflicted 
upon any person who, on the high seas, shall attack or seize 
a vessel or, not being a member of its complement nor a 
passenger, shall seize the whole or part of the cargo of 
said vessel, its equipment or personal belongings of ite com- 
plement or passengers. 

The same penalty shall be inflicted in case of mutiny on 
the high seas. 

Art. 123. Qualified piracy.— The penalty of reclusion 
temporal to death shall be imposed upon those who commit 
any of the crimes referred to in the preceding article, under 
any of the following circumstances : 

1. Whenever they have seized a vessel by boarding or 
tiring upon the same ; 

2. Whenever the pirates have abandoned their victims 
without means of saving themselves; or 

3. Whenever the crime is accompanied by murder, homi- 
cide, physical injuries, or rape. 

Title Two 

CRIMES AGAINST THE FUNDAMENTAL LAWS 
OF THE STATE 

CHAPTER ONE 

ARBITRARY DETENTION OR EXPULSION, VIOLATION OF DWELL- 
ING, PROHIBITION, INTERRUPTION, AND DISSOLUTION OF 
PEACEFUL MEETINGS AND CRIMES AGAINST RELIGIOUS 
WORSHIP. 



50 



Section One. — Arbitrary detention and expulsion 

ART. 124. Arbitrary detention. — Any public officer or em- 
ployee who, without legal grounds, detains a person, shall 
suffer: 

1. The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period 
co prision correctional in its minimum period, if the deten- 
tion has not exceeded three days ; 

2. The penalty of prision correctional in its medium and 
maximum periods, if the detention has continued more than 
three but not more than fifteen days; 

3. The penalty of prision mayor, if the detention has con- 
tinued for more than fifteen days but not more than six 
months; and 

4. That of reclusion temporal, if the detention shall have 
exceeded six months. 

The commission of a crime, or violent insanity or any 
other ailment requiring the compulsory confinement of the 
patient in a hospital, shall be considered legal grounds for 
the detention of any person. 

ART. 125. Delay vn the deliv&ry of detained person* to 
the proper judicial authorities.— The penalties provided m 
the next preceding article shall be imposed upon the public 
officer or employee who shall detain any person for some 
legal ground and shall fail to deliver such person to the 
proper judicial authorities within the period of six hours. 
(As amended by Act No. 3940.) 

ART. 126. Delaying release.— The penalties provided for 
m article 124 shall be imposed upon any public officer or 
employee who delays for the period of time specified therein 
the performance of any judicial or executive order for 
the release of a prisoner or detention prisoner, or unduly 
delays the service of the notice of such order to said prisoner 
or the proceedings upon any petition for the liberation of 
such person. 

Art. 127. Expulsion.— The penalty of prision correctio- 
nal shall be imposed upon any public officer or employee 
who, not being thereunto authorized by law, shall expel 
any person from the Philippine Islands or shall compel 
such person to change his residence. 



51 



SECTION Two. — Violation of domicile 

Art. 128. Violation of domicile.— The penalty of pri$i6ri 
correctional in its minimum period shall be imposed upon 
any public officer or employee who, not being authorized by 
judicial order, shall enter any dwelling against the will of 
the owner thereof, search papers or other effects found 
therein without the previous consent of such owner, or, 
having surreptitiously entered said dwelling, and being re- 
quired to leave the premises, shall refuse to do so. 

If the offense be committed in the night-time, or if any 
papers or effects not constituting evidence of a crime be 
not returned immediately after the search made by the of- 
fender, the penalty shall be prision correctional in its me- 
dium and maximum periods. 

Art. 129. Search warrants nwlitiously obtained and 
abuse in the service of those legally obtained. — In addition 
to the liability attaching to the offender for the commission 
of any other offense, the penalty of arresto mayor in its 
maximum period to prisidn correctional in its minimum 
period and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be im- 
posed upon any public officer or employee who shall procure 
a search warrant without just cause, or, having legally 
procured the same, shall exceed his authority or use un- 
necessary severity in executing the same. 

Art. 130. Searching domicile without witnesses. — The 
penalty of arresto mayor in its medium and maximum pe- 
riods shall be imposed upon a public officer or employee who. 
in cases where a search is proper, shall search the domicile, 
papers or other belongings of any person, in the absence 
of the latter, any member of his family, or in their default, 
without the presence of two witnesses residing in the same 
locality. 

Section Three.— Prohibitum, interruption, and dissolution of 
peaceful meetings 

ART. 131. Prohibition, interruption, and dissolution of 
peaceful meetings. — The penalty of prision correctional in 
its minimum period shall be imposed upon any public officer 
or employee who, without legal ground, shall prohibit or 



52 

interrupt the holding of a peaceful meeting, or shall dissolve 
the same. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon a public officer 
or employee who shall hinder any person from joining any 
lawful association or from attending any of its meetings. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any public officer 
or employee who shall prohibit or hinder any person from 
addressing, either alone or together with others, any peti- 
tion to the authorities for the correction of abuses or 
redress of grievances. 

Section Fayi—Crims against religious worship 
ART 132. Interruption of religion* worship.— The pen- 
alty of pnsion eorreccioml in its minimum period shall 
be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall 
Son. 01 ' h thG ponies or manifestations of any 

thJeVts'thpT S u 11 h v. aVG beeu emitted with violence or 

im an 11 • ShaH be pHsi6n eorreccioml in its me- 
mum antl maximum periods. 

klSk^LZ?*^ the religi0its feeKngs'.—The penalty 

X , V ]^1T U T f d0d Sha11 be im Posed upon anyone 
cekbrTtion of fl ? eVOt v t0 religious ™hip or during the 
3SSS oLn' V re l lgi ° US shall perform act. 

tououslj offensive to the feelings of the faithful. 

Title Three 
CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER 
CHAPTER ONE 

&« ^rrr™' sedition and 

The crime of rSellkm Z insurrect ™>~Hoiv committed— 
ing publicly and ^ nw ?»*« is committed by ris- 
the purpose of removing against th e Government for 
ernment or its laws the tll°^ the alle ^ ian ce to said Gov- 
or any part thereof of am i 7 ° f the Philippine Islands 

armed forces, or of demnvL!° d , y of land ' naval 01 * other 
• . C P mg th e Chief Executive or the 



Legislature, wholly or partially, of any of their powers or 
prerogatives. 

ART. 135. Penalty for rebellion or imim cetion. — Any 
person who promotes, maintains, or heads a rebellion or 
insurrection, or who, while holding* any public office or em- 
ployment takes part therein, engaging in war against the 
forces of the Government, destroying property or commit- 
ting serious violence, exacting contributions or diverting 
public funds from the lawful purpose for which they have 
been appropriated, shall suffer the penalty of prisidn mayor 
and a fine not to exceed 20,000 pesos. 

Any person merely participating or executing the com- 
mands of others in a rebellion shall suffer the penalty of 
prisidn mayor in its minimum period. 

When the rebellion or insurrection shall be under the 
command of unknown leaders, any person who in fact di- 
rected the others, spoke for them, signed receipts and other 
documents issued in their name, or performed similar acts, 
on behalf of the rebels shall be deemed the leader of such 
rebellion. 

ART. 136. Conspiracy and proposal to commit rebellion 
or insurrection. — The conspiracy and proposal to commit 
rebellion or insurrection shall be punished, respectively, by 
prision corrcccional in its maximum period and a fine which 
shall not exceed 5,000 pesos, and by prision correctional in 
its medium period and a fine not exceeding 2,000 pesos. 

ART. 337. Disloyalty of public officers or employees. 
The penalty of prisidn correccional in its minimum period 
shall be imposed upon public officers or employees who nave 
failed to resist a rebellion by all the means in their power, 
or shall continue to discharge the duties of their offices 
under the control of the rebels or shall accept appointment 
to office under them. 

ART. 138. Inciting to rebellion or in$ti rn ction.— The pen- 
alty of prision mayor in its minimum period shall be im- 
posed upon any person who, without taking arms or being 
in open hostility against the Government, shall incite others 
to the execution of any of the acts specified in article 134 
of this Code, by means of speeches, proclamations, writings, 



<3 ; b 



54 



emblems, banners or other representations tending to the 
same end. 

Art. 139. Sedition — Haw committed. — The crime of sedi- 
tion is committed by persons who rise publicly and tumul- 
tuously in order to attain by force, intimidation, or by other 
means outside of legal methods, any of the following ob- 
jects: 

1. To prevent the promulgation or execution of any law 
or the holding of any popular election; 

2. To prevent the National Government, or any provin- 
cial or municipal government, or any public officer thereof 
from freely exercising its or his functions, or prevent the 
execution of any administrative order ; 

3. To inflict any act of hate or revenge upon the person 
or property of any public officer or employee ; 

4. To commit, for any political or social end, any act 
of hate or revenge against private persons or any social 
class; and 

5. To despoil, for any political or social end, any person, 
municipality or province, or the National Government or 
the Government of the United States, of all its property 
op any part thereof. (As amended by Com. Act No. 202.) 

Art. 140. Penalty for sedition.— The leader of a sedition 
shall suffer the penalty of prision mayor in its minimum 
Period and a fine not exceeding 10,000 pesos. 

Other persons participating therein shall suffer the pen- 
alty of prision correctional in its maximum period and a 
™e not exceeding 5,000 pesos. 

Art. 141. Conspiracy to commit sedition. — Persons con- 
spiring to commit the crime of sedition shall be punished 
by prision correctional in its medium period and a fine not 
exceeding 2,000 pesos. 

Art. 142. Inciting to sedition.— The penalty of prision 
correctional in its maximum period and a fine not exceeding 
2,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who, without 
taking any direct part in the crime of sedition, should 
incite others to the accomplishment of any of the act& 
which constitute sedition, by means of speeches, proclama- 
tions, writings, emblems, cartoons, banners, or other re- 



presentations tending to the same end, or upon any person 
or persons who shall utter seditious words or speeches, 
write, publish, or circulate scurilous libels against the Gov- 
ernment of the United States or the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines, or any of the duly con- 
stituted authorities thereof, or which tend to disturb or 
obstruct any lawful officer in executing the functions of 
his office, or which tend to instigate others to cabal and 
meet together for unlawful purposes, or which suggest or 
incite rebellious conspiracies or riots, or which lead or 
tend to stir up the people against the lawful authorities 
or to disturb the peace of the community, the safety and 
order of the Government, or who shall knowingly conceal 
such evil practices. (As amended by Com. Act No. 202.) 

CHAPTER TWO 

CHIMES AGAINST POPULAR REPRESENTATION 

Section Oxi:.— Crime* against legislative bodies ami similar bo&ie* 

Art. 148. Acts tending to prevent the meeting of the 
Assembly and similar bodies.— The penalty of 2»'isi6n cor- 
rectional or a fine ranging* from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who by force or fraud 
prevents the meeting of the National Assembly or of any 
of its committees or subcommittees, constitutional com- 
missions or committees or divisions thereof, or of any 
provincial board or city or municipal council or board. (As 
amended by Com. Act No. 264.) 

ART. 141, Disturbance of proceedings.— -The penalty of 
arreslo mayor or a fine from 200 to 1,000 pesos shall be 
imposed upon any person who disturbs the meetings of 
the National Assembly or of any of its committees or sub- 
committees, constitutional commissions or committees or 
divisions thereof, or of any provincial board or city or 
municipal council or board, or in the presence of any such 
bodies should behave in such manner as to interrupt its 
proceedings or to impair the respect due it. (As amended 
by Com. Act No. 264.) 



56 



Section Two. — Violation of parliamentary imn 
Art. 145. Violation of parliamentary innuvvit-y. — The 
penalty of prisidn mayor shall be imposed upon any person 
who shall use force, intimidation, threats, or fraud to pre- 
vent any member of the National Assembly from attending 
the meetings of the Assembly or of any of its committees 
or subcommittees, constitutional commissions or committees 
or divisions thereof, from expressing his opinions or cast- 
ing his vote; and the penalty of prisidn correccioval shall 
be imposed upon any public officer or employee who shall, 
while the Assembly is in regular or special session, arrest 
or search any member thereof, except in case such member 
has committed a crime punishable under this Code by a pen- 
alty higher than prim&n mayor. (Amended by Com, Act 
No. 264.) 

CHAPTER THREE 
ILLEGAL ASSEMBLIES AND ASSOCIATIONS 

^ Art. 146. Illegal assemblies.— The penalty of prisiCn cur- 
''eccioiial in its maximum period to prisidn mayor in its 
medium period shall be imposed upon the organizers or 
leaders of any meeting attended by armed persons for the 
Purpose of committing any of the crimes punishable under 
tms Code, or of any meeting in which the audience is in- 
cited to the commission of the crime of treason, rebellion or 
insurrection, sedition or assault upon a person in authority 
°£ his agents. Persons merely present at such meeting 
snail suffer the penalty of arresto mayor, unless they are 
^'med, in which case the penalty shall be prisidn corrcc- 
cional. 

If any person present at the meeting carries an unlicensed 
nrearm, it shall be presumed that the purpose of said meet- 
ing ! lns °far as he is concerned, is to commit acts punishable 
under this Code, and he -shall be considered a leader or or- 
gazmer of the meeting within the purview of the preceding 
Paragraph. 

As used in this article, the word "meeting" shall be 
understood to include a gathering or group, whether in 
a fixed placed or moving. (As amended by Rep. Act No. 
12.) 



57 



ART. 147. Illegal associations. — The penalty of prision 
correctional in its minimum and medium periods and a fine 
not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon the 
founders, directors, and presidents of associations totally 
or partially organized for the purpose of committing any 
of the crimes punishable under this Code or for some pur- 
pose contrary to public morals. Mere members of said 
associations shall suffer the penalty of wriresto mayor. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

ASSAULT UPON, AND RESISTANCE AND DISOBEDIENCE TO 
PERSONS IN AUTHORITY AND THEIR AGENTS 

Art. 148. Direct assaults. — Any person or persons who, 
without a public uprising, shall employ force or intimida- 
tion for the attainment of any of the purposes enumerated 
in defining the crimes of rebellion and sedition, or shall 
attack, employ force or seriously intimidate or resist any 
person in authority or any of his agents, while engaged in 
the performance of official duties, or on occasion of such 
performance, shall suffer the penalty of prision correctional 
in its medium and maximum periods and a fine not ex- 
ceeding 1,000 pesos, when the assault is committed with a 
weapon or when the offender is a public officer or employee, 
or when the offender lays hands upon a person in authority. 
If none of these circumstances be present the penalty of 
prision correctional fti its minimum period and a fine not 
exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed. 

Art. 149. Indirect assaults. — The penalty of prision 6b- 
rreceioaal in its minimum and medium periods and a fine 
not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon any person 
who shall make use of force or intimidation upon any per- 
son coming to the aid of t]ie authorities or their agents on 
occasion of the commission of any of the crimes defined 
in the next preceding article. 

Art. 150. Disobedience to summons issued bj/ the Nor 
tional Assembly, Us committees or subcommittees, by the 
Constitutional Commissions, its committees, subcommittees 
or divisions. — The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ran- 
ging from two hundred to one thousand pesos, or both 



58 

such line and imprisonment, shall be imposed upon anj 
person who, having been duly summoned to attend as a 
witness before the National Assembly. Its special or stand- 
ing committees and subcommittees, the Constitutional Com- 
missions and its committees, subcommittees or divisions, 
or before any commission or committee chairman or mem- 
ber authorized to summon witnesses, refuses, without legal 
excuse, to obey such summons, or being presenl before 
any such legislative or constitutional body or official, r<£ 
fuses to be sworn or placed under affirmation or to ans- 
wer any legal inquiry or to produce any books, papers, 
documents, or records in his possession, when required by 
them to do so in the exercise of their functions. The same 
penalty shall be imposed upon any person who shall re- 
strain another from attending as a witness, or who shall 
induce disobedience to a summon or refusal to be sworn 
by any such body or official. (As amended by Com. Act 
No. 52.) <^vs^V 

Art. 151. Resistance and disobedience to a person in 
authority or the agents of such person.— -The penalty of 
arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be 
imposed upon any person who not being included in the 
provisions of the preceding articles shall resist or seriously 
disobey any person in authority, or the agents of such per- 
son, while engaged in the performance of official duties. 

When the disobedience to an agent of a person in author- 
ity is not of a serious nature the penalty of arresto menor 
o a fine ranging from 10 to 100 pesos shall be imposed 
upon the offender. 

ART 152. Persons in authority— Who shall be deemed 
assvch.-ln applying the Provisions of the preceding and 
Code ' person li ect v vested with 
.,un,diction, whether as an individual or as a member of 
some court or governmental corporation board or commis- 
sion, shall be deemed a nersm, i rt " on ' «°< uu 

In applying the provK" " . , , fv 

eight and on f huncfred Sw* ^ ? S one " n" 

fessors, and persons chlvlT^ ^ Code, teachers, pro- 
,, -i uu t>eci with the sunervision of public 

or duly recognized private qm. i "r au P eivlBAU . . • 
in\aie schools, colleges, and univer- 



59 



sities, shall be deemed persons in authority. (As amended 
by Com. Act No. 578.) 

CHAPTER FIVE 
— PUBLIO&DISORDERSm 

ART. 15;>. Tumults and other disturbances of public 

order Tumultuous disturbance or interruption liable to 

cause disturbance. — The penally of arresto mayor in its 
medium period to prision correctional in its minimum period 
and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos shall be imposed 
upon any person who shall cause any serious disturbance 
in a public place, office, or establishments, or shall interrupt 
or disturb public performances, functions or gatherings, 
or peaceful meetings, if the act is not included in the pro- 
visions of articles 131 and 132. 

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed 
upon persons causing any disturbance or interruption of 
a tumultuous character. 

The 'disturbance or interruption shall be deemed to be 
tumultuous if caused by more than three persons who are 
armed or provided with means of violence. 

The penalty of arresto mayor shall be imposed upon any 
person who in any meeting, association, or public place 
shall make any outcry tending to incite rebellion or sedition 
or in such place shall display placards or emblems which 
provoke a disturbance of the public order. 

The penalty of arresto wiener and a fine not to exceed 
200 pesos shall be imposed upon those persons who in 
violation of the provisions contained in the last clause of 
article 85 shall bury with pomp the body of a person who 
has been legally executed. 

Art. 154. Unlawful 7ise of means of publication and un- 
lawful utterances. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a 
fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos shall be imposed upon : 
1. Any person who by means of printing, lithography, 
or any other means of publication shall publish or cause 
to be published as news any false news which may en- 
danger the public order, or cause damage to the interest 
or credit of the State ; 



60 

2. Any person whofby the same means, or by words, 
utterances or speeches, shall encourage disobedience to the 
law or to the constituted authorities or praise, justify, or 
"xtol any act punished by law; 

Any person who shall maliciously publish or cause 
to be published any official resolution or document without 
proper authority, or before they have been published of- 
iicially ; or 

4. Any person who shall print, publish, or distribute or 
cause to be printed, published or distributed books, pam- 
phlets, periodicals, or leaflets which do not bear the real 
printer's name, or which are classified as anonymous. 
(Amended by Com. Act No. 202.) 

Art. 155. Alarms and scandals. — The penalty of arresto 
""nor or fine not exceeding 200 pesos shall be imposed 
upon: 

1. Any person who within any town or public place, 
7 a«charge any firearm, rocket, firecracker, or other 

explosive calculated to cause alarm or danger; 

2. Any person who shall instigate or take an active 
Part m any charivari or other disorderly meeting offensive 
to another or prejudicial to public tranquility; 

3 Any person who, while wandering about at night or 
nil , ei l? aged in an y other nocturnal amusements, shall 
disturb the public peace; or 

caused P i- V ?° n Wh ° While intoxicated or otherwise, shall 
thit iC msturbanc e or scandal in public places, provided 

visions nf r °Tf a,1CGS 0f thG ™™ m » k « lhe pr °* 

visions of article 153 applicable. 

of arr^f; Peliv f^ n S Prisons from jail*.—™* Penalty 
r < > I i t T V0> m its Period to vrW* correc- 

oerson ttJFT^ Period sha11 be ^posed upon any 
J a11 remove fl ' om a »y iail or penal establish- 
ment any person confined therein or shall help the escape 
erv V)T n ' ^ meaUS ° f viole "<*. intlnudation, or brib- 

hail b ^ " 8ed the ^ of « rre * f ° mayor 



61 



If the escape oi the prisoner shall take place outside of 
said establishments by taking the guards by surprise, the 
same penalties shall be imposed in their minimum period. 

CHAPTER SIX 

EVASION OF SERVICE OF SENTENCE 

Akt. 157. Evasion of service of sentence. — The penalty 
of prisi&n correctional in its medium and maximum periods 
shall be imposed upon any convict who shall evade service of 
his sentence by escaping during the term of his imprison- 
ment by reason of final judgment. However, if such eva- 
sion or escape shall have taken place by means of unlawful 
entry, by breaking doors, windows, grates, walls, roofs, 
or floors, or by using picklocks, false keys, disguise, deceit, 
violence or intimidation, or through connivance with other 
convicts or employees of the penal institution, the penalty 
shall be prisi&n correctional in its maximum period. 

Art. 158. Evasion of service of .sentence on the occasion 
of disorders, conflagrations, earthquakes, or other calam- 
ities. — A convict who shall evade the service of his sentence, 
by leaving the penal institution where he shall have been 
confined, on the occasion of disorder resulting from a con- 
flagration, earthquake, explosion, or similar catastrophe, 
or during a mutiny in which he has not participated, shall 
suffer an increase of one-fifth of the time still remaining 
to be served under the original sentence, which in no 
case shall exceed six months, if he shall fail to give him- 
self up to the authorities within forty-eight hours following 
the issuance of a proclamation by the Chief Executive 
announcing the passing away of such calamity. 

Convicts who, under the circumstances mentioned in the 
preceding paragraph, shall give themselves up to the author- 
ities within the above mentioned period of 48 hours, shall 
be entitled to the deduction provided in article 98. 

ART. 159. Other cases of evasion of service of sentence. — 
The penalty of prision correctional in its minimum period 
shall be imposed upon the convict who, having been granted 
conditional pardon by the Chief Executive, shall violate any 
of the conditions of such pardon. However, if the penalty 



62 



remitted by the granting of such pardon be higher than sijs 
years, the convict shall then suffer the unexpired portion 
of his original sentence. 

CHAPTER SEVEN 
COMMISSION OF ANOTHER CRIME DURING SERVICE OF PKNALTY 
IMPOSED FOR ANOTHER PREVIOUS OFFENSE 

Art. 160. Commission of (mother crimt during s< > vice of 
penalty imposed for another previous offense— Penalty. 
Besides the provisions of rule 5 of article 62, any person 
who shall commit a felony after having been convicted D> 
final judgment, before beginning to serve such sentence, oi 
while serving the same, shall be punished by the masmuM 
Period of the penalty prescribed by law for the new reiowg 

Any convict of the class referred to in this article, wna 
>s not a habitual criminal, shall be pardoned at the age o 
seventy years if he shall have already served out nis o™ 
mal sentence, or when he shall complete it after reacn ng 
sai <* age, unless by reason of his conduct or other circum- 
stances he shall not be worthy of such clemency. 

Title Four 
CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC INTEREST 
CHAPTER ONE 
FORGERIES 

86 <>MON O^E.~F or!jinlJ t ,ic seal of the Government of <>" ^"'"' / '"" 
hlanda, the signature or stamp of the Chief Exem 

ART. 161. Counterfeiting the great seal of the Govern- 
of the Philippine Islands, forging the 
•;'«"''' <>f the Chief Exe<xdiw.-Tho penalty 
^nporal shall be im d upon any person who shah fOl« 
Great Seal of the Government of . the Philippine Islands 
°* the signature or stamp of the Chief Executive. 

Art. lea. Vsin f J ^^^6 or counterfeit seal o> 
•^-The penaltv of prision mayor shall be imposed 
upon any person who shall knowingly make use oi tlie 
counterfeit seal or forged signature or stamp mentioned 
,n the Preceding article. 



63 



Section two. — GounterfeUins coins 
ART. 16:). Making and importing and uttering false 
coins.— Any person who makes, imports, or utters false 
coins, in connivance with counterfeiters or importers, shall 
suffer : 

1. Prision mayor in its minimum and medium periods 
and a fine not to exceed 10,000 pesos, if the counterfeited 
coin be gold or silver coin of the United States or of the 
Philippine Islands. 

2. Prision corrcccional in its minimum and medium pe- 
riods and a tine not to exceed 2,000 pesos, if the counter- 
feited coin be any of the minor coinage of the United States 
or of the Philippine Islands. 

3. Prision corrtx'cional in its minimum period and a fine 
not to exceed 1,000 pesos, if the counterfeited coin be cur- 
rency of a foreign country. 

ART. 164. Mutilation of coins— Importation and utter- 
ance of mutilated cows.— The penalty of prisixhi correc- 
cional in its minimum period and a line not to exceed 2,000 
pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall mutilate 
coins of the legal currency of the United States or of the 
Philippine Islands or import or utter mutilated current 
coins, in connivance with mutilators or importers. 

ART. 165. Selling of false or mutilated coin, without con- 
nivance— Any person who knowingly, although without 
the connivance mentioned in the preceding articles, shall 
possess false or mutilated coin with intent to utter the 
same, or shall actually utter such coin, shall suffer a penalty 
lower by one degree than that prescribed in said articles. 

Section Three.— Forcing tyranny or bank notes, obligations and 
securities; importing and uttering false or forged notes, obli- 
gations and securities. 

ART. 166. Forging treasury or bank notes or other doc- 
uments payable to bearer; importing, and uttering such 
false or forged notes and documents.— -The forging or fal- 
sification of treasury or bank notes or certificates or other 
obligations and securities payable to bearer and the impor- 
tation and uttering in connivance with forgers or importers 



61 



of such false or forged obligations or notes, shall be pun- 
ished as follows : 

1. By reclusiou temporal in its minimum period and aline 
not to exceed 10,000 pesos, if the document which has been 
falsified, counterfeited, or altered is an obligation or secur- 
ity of the United States or of the Philippine Islands. 

The words "obligation or security of the United States 
or of the Philippine Islands" shall be held to mean all 
bonds, certificates of indebtedness, national bank notes, 
coupons, United States or Philippine Islands notes, treas- 
lu >- notes, fractional notes, certificates of deposit, bills 
^ecks, or drafts for money, drawn by or upon authorized 
officers of the United States or of the Philippine Islands, 
and other representatives of value, of whatever ^nomina- 
tion, which have been or may be issued under any act ot tne 
Congress of the United States or the Philippine Legislature. 

2- By Prmon mayor in its maximum period and a fine 
n °t to exceed 5,000 pesos, if the falsified or altered doc- 
,mc »t is a circulating note issued by any banking associa- 
'°n duly authorized by law to issue the same. 

- 3 - By Prision mayor in its medium period and la .nne nm 
t0 exceed 5,000 pesos, if the falsified or counterfeited doc- 
Ument was issued by a foreign government. 
4. By prUMn ma y or in its minimum period and a nne 
ot to exceed 2,000 pesos, when the forged or « ltem \™-/ 
J*** is a circulating note or bill issued by a foreign bank 
a W authorized therefor. . ytmt 

ART. 167. Counterfeiting, importing and uttering mstru- 
T*** Payable to bearer.— Any person who shall forge, lm- 
J 0rt ov utter, in connivance with the forgers or importers, 
instrument payable to order or other document ol 
JJ*t not payable to bearer, shall suffer the penalties of 
anT'"" correccif >™l "I its medium and maximum periods 

( a f me not exceeding 6,000 pesos. 
bm^' 168 - Ille V< a Possession and use of false treasury or 
act l mtes mul other instruments of credit— Unless the 
of \h ° ne of those coming under the provisions of any 
the preceding articles, any person who shall knowingly 
or hav e in his possession, with intent to use any of the 



65 



false or falsified instruments referred to in this section, shall 
suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed 
in said articles. 

ART, 169. How forgery is committed. — The forgery re- 
ferred to in this section may be committed by any of the 
following* means : 

1. By giving to a treasury or bank note or any instrument 
payable to bearer or to order mentioned therein, the ap- 
pearance of a true and genuine document. 

2. By erasing, substituting", counterfeiting or altering by 
any means the figures, letters, words or signs contained 
therein. 

SECTION FOUR. — Falsification of legislative, public, commercial, and 
private documents, and wireless, telegraph, and telephone mes- 

:<<tf/es. 

Art. 170. Falsification of legislative documents. — The 
penalty of prision correccional in its maximum period and 
a fine not exceeding 6,000 pesos shall be imposed upon 
any person who, without proper authority therefor al- 
ters any bill, resolution, or ordinance enacted or approved 
or pending approval by either House of the Legislature or 
any provincial board or municipal council. 

Art. 171. Falsification by public officer, employee or 
notary or ecclesiastic minister. — They penalt}' of prision 
mayor and a fine not to exceed 5,000 pesos shall be imposed 
upon any public officer, employee, or notary who, taking 
advantage of his official position, shall falsify a document by 
committing any of the following acts: 

1. Counterfeiting or imitating any handwriting, signa- 
ture or rubric; 

2. Causing it to appear that persons have participated 
in any act or proceeding when they did not in fact so par- 
ticipate ; 

3. Attributing to persons who have participated in an 
act or proceeding statements other than those in fact made 
by them ; 

4. Making untruthful statements in a narration of facts; 

5. Altering true dates; 



5568- 



66 



• 6. Making any alteration or intercalation in a genuine 
document which changes its meaning; 

7. Issuing in a authenticated form a document purport- 
ing to be a copy of an original document when no such 
original exists, or including in such copy a statement con- 
trary to, or different from, that of the genuine original ; of 

8. Intercalating any instrument or note relative to the 
issuance thereof in a protocol, registry, or official book. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any ecclesias- 
tical minister who shall commit any of the offenses enumer- 
ated in the preceding paragraphs of this article, with re- 
spect to any record or document of such character that its 
falsification may affect the civil status of persons. 

Art, 172. Falsification by private individuals and use of 
falsified documents. — The penalty of prision correctional 
in its medium and maximum periods and a fine of not more 
than 5,000 pesos shall be imposed upon : 
. 1. Any private individual who shall commit any of the 
falsifications enumerated in the next preceding article in 
•any public or official document or letter of exchange or any 
other kind of commercial document ; and 

2. Any person who, to the damage of a third party, or 
with the intent to cause such damage, shall in any private 
document commit any of the acts of falsification enumerated 
in the next preceding article. 

. . Any person who shall knowingly introduce in evidence 
.in any judicial proceeding or to the damage of another 
or who, with the intent to cause such damage, shall use 
any of the false documents embraced in the next preceding 
article or in any of the foregoing subdivisions of this 
Article, shall be punished by the penalty next lower in 
degree. 

Art. 173. Falsification of ivireless, cable, telegraph and 
telephone messages, and use of said falsified messages.— 
The penalty of prisidn correctional in its medium and max- 
imum periods shall be imposed upon any officer or employee 
of the Government or of any private corporation or concern 
engaged in the service of sending or receiving wireless, 
cable or telephone messages who utters a fictitious wire- 



ft 



67 



.ess, telegraph or telephone message of any system or 
falsifies the same. 

Any person who shall use such falsified dispatch to the 
prejudice of a third party or with the intent to cause such 
prejudice, shall suffer the penalty next lower in degree. 

Section FIVE. — F unification of medical certificate*, certificates of 
merit or service and the like 

Art. 174. False medical certificates, false certificates of 
merit or service, etc.— The penalties of arresto mayor in its 
maximum period to prisi&n correccional in its minimum 
period and a fine not to exceed 1.000 pesos shall be im- 
posed upon : 

1. Any physician or surgeon who, in connection with the 
practice of his profession, shall issue a false certificate; 
and 

2. Any public officer who shall issue a false certificate 
of merit or service, good conduct or similar circumstances. 

The penalty of arresto manor shall be imposed upon any 
private person who shall falsify a certificate falling within 
the classes mentioned in the two preceding subdivisions. 

Art. 175. Using fahc certificates.— The penalty of 
arresto mvnor shall be imposed upon any one who shall 
knowingly use any of the false certificates mentioned in 
the next preceding article. 

Section Six.—Manufaeiurinff, importing and possession oj »'•-''" 
mcnts or implements intended for the commission of falsification 

Art. 176. Manufacturing and possession of instrument* 
or implements for falsification.— The penalty of prism 
correccional in its medium and maximum periods and a fine 
not to exceed 10,000 pesos shall be imposed upon any 
person who shall make or introduce into the Philippine 
Islands any stamps, dies, marks, or other instruments or 
implements intended to be used in the commission of the 
offenses of counterfeiting or falsification mentioned in the 
preceding sections of this chapter. 

Any person who, with the intention of using them, shall 
have in his possession any of the instruments or implements 
mentioned in the preceding paragraph, shall suffer the pen- 
alty next lower in degree than that provided therein. 



68 



CHAPTER TWO 

OTHER FALSITIES 

SECTION Onk. — Usurpation of authority, rank, title, <n><i imprapi i 
use of names, uniforms and insignia 

Art. 177. Usurpation of official functions. — Any per- 
son who, under pretense of official position, shall perform 
any act pertaining to any person in authority or public 
officer, without being lawfully entitled to do so, shall suffer 
the penalty of prisidn correctional in its minimum and 
medium periods. 1 

Art. 178. Using fictitious name and concealing true 
name. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not to 
exceed 500 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who 
shall publicly use a fictitious name for the purpose of con- 
cealing a crime, evading the execution of a judgment or 
causing damage. 

Any person who conceals his true name and other per- 
sonal circumstances shall be punished by arresto menor or 
a fine not to exceed 200 pesos. 

Art. 179. Illegal use of uniforms or insignia. — The pen- 
alty of arresto mayor shall be imposed upon any person who 
shall publicly and improperly make use of insignia, uniforms 
or dress pertaining to an office not held by such person or 
to a class of persons of which he is not a member. 

Section Two. — False testimony 
Art. 180. False testimony against a defendant. — Any per- 
son who shall give false testimony against the defendant 
in any criminal case shall suffer: 

1. The penalty of reclusidn temporal, if the defendant in 
said case shall have been sentenced to death; 

2. The penalty of prisidn mayor, if the defendant shall 
have been sentenced to reclusidn temporal or perpetua; 

3. The penalty of prisidn correctional, if the defendant 
shall have been sentenced to any other afflictive penalty ; and 

4. The penalty of arresto mayor, if the defendant shall 
have been sentenced to a correctional penalty or a fine, or 
shall have been acquitted. 



1 See Rep. Act No. 10. 



69 

In cases provided in subdivisions 3 and 4 of this article 
the offender shall further suffer a fine not to exceed 1.000 
pesos. 

Art. 181. False testimony favorable to the defendant.— 
Any person who shall give false testimony in favor of the 
defendant in a criminal case, shall suffer the penalties of 
arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisidn correccional 
in its minimum period and a fine not to exceed 1,000 pesos, 
if the prosecution is for a felony punishable by an afflictive 
penalty, and the penalty of arresto manor in any other case. 

Art. 182. False testimony in civil cases.— Any person 
found guilty of false testimony in a civil case shall suffer 
the penalty of prisidn correccional in its minimum period 
and a fine not to exceed 6,000 pesos, if the amount in con- 
troversy shall exceed 5,000 pesos, and the penalty of arresto 
mayor in its maximum period to prisidn correccional in its 
minimum period and a fine not to exceed 1,000 pesos, if the 
amount in controversy shall not exceed said amount or 
cannot be estimated. 

Art. 183. False testimony in other cases and perjury m 
solemn affirmation.— The penalty of arresto mayor in its 
maximum period to prisidn correccional in its minimum 
period shall be imposed upon any person who, knowingly 
making untruthful statements and not being included m the 
provisions of the next preceding articles, shall testify under 
oath, or make an affidavit, upon any material matter before 
a competent person authorized to administer an oath i 
cases in which the law so requires. . 

Any person who, in case of a solemn affirmation made m 
lieu of an oath, shall commit any of the falsehoods men- 
tioned in this and the three preceding articles of tins s 
tion, shall suffer the respective penalties provided therein. 

Art. 184. Offering false testimony in evidence.— Any pel - 
son who shall knowingly offer in evidence a false witness 
or testimony in any judicial or official proceeding, shall be 
punished as guilty of false testimony and shall suffer the 
respective penalties provided in this section. 



70 

CHAPTER THREE 
FRAUDS 



Section One. — Machinations, monopolies, and combination* 
Art. 185. Machinations in public auctions. — Any person 
who shall solicit any gift or promise as a consideration for 
refraining from taking part in any public auction, and any 
person who shall attempt to cause bidders to stay away 
from an auction by threats, gifts, promises, or any other 
artifice, with intent to cause the reduction of the price of 
the thing auctioned, shall suffer the penalty of prision cor- 
reccional in its minimum period and a fine ranging from 
10 to 50 per centum of the value of the thing auctioned. 

ART. 186. Monopolies and combinations in restraint of 
/mete —The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum 
period or a fine ranging from 200 to 6,000 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon: 

1. Any person who shall enter into any contract or agree- 
ment or shall take part in any conspiracy or combination 
in me form of a trust or otherwise, in restraint of trade 
or commerce or to prevent by artificial means free com- 
petition in the market; 

2. Any person who shall monopolize any merchandise or 
object of trade or commerce, or shall combine with any 
other person or persons to monopolize said merchandise or 
ooject in order to alter the prices thereof bv spreading false 

™m^?-*°- r making use of any other art «tee to restrain free 
competition in the market; 

Ait t ny u e TV yho ' bein « an importer of any merchan- 
f om th P °n eC ?«? T™*™ from ^reign country or 
otZ ™ f S + atGS ' ShaU Combine ™ any manner with 
nTo JTT l 0l i PU1 ' P0Se ° f makfa * transactions prej- 
udicial to lawful commerce, or of increasing the market 
price in any part of the Philippine Islands of any article 
or articles imported or intended to be imported into said 
Islands, or of any article in the manufacture of which an 
imported article is used. 

If the offense mentioned in this article affects any food 
substance or other article of prime necessity, the penalty 



71 



shall be that of prison correctional in its medium and max- 
imum periods, it being sufficient for the imposition thereof 
that the initial steps have been taken toward carrying oul 
the purposes of the combination. 

Any property possessed under any contract or by any 
combination mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, and 
being the subject thereof, shall be forfeited to the Govern- 
ment of the Philippine Islands. 

Whenever any of the offenses described above is com- 
mitted by a corporation or association, the president and 
each one of the directors or managers of said corporation 
or association, or its agent or representative in the Philip-, 
pine Islands, in case of a foreign corporation or associa- 
tion, who shall have knowingly permitted or failed^to pre- 
vent the commission of such offenses, shall be held Aable as 
principals thereoi'. 

SECTION Two. — Fraud* iii commerce and industry 

Art. 187. Importation and disposition of falsely marked 
articles or merchandise made of gold, silver, or other Vi- 
cious metals or their alloys.— The penalty of prisidn correc- 
tional or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who shall knowingly im- 
port or sell or dispose of any article or merchandise made 
of gold, silver, or other precious metal, or their alloys, 
with stamps, brands, or marks, which fail to indicate the 
actual fineness or quality of said metals or alloys. 

Any stamp, brand, label, or mark shall be deemed to W 
to indicate the actual fineness of the article on which it - 
engraved, printed, stamped, labeled or attached, whej WJ 
test of the article shows that the quality or fineness tneieu 
is less by more than one-half karat, if made of gold, , ana 
less by more than four one-thousandth, if made ot snver, 
than what is shown by said stamp, brand, label, or marK. 
But in case of watch cases and flatware made of gold, tne 
actual fineness of such gold shall not be less by more than 
three one-thousandth than the fineness indicated by said 
Stamp, brand, label, or mark. 



72 



Art. 188. Substituting and altering trade-mark* and 
trade-names. — The penalty of jmsion correecional in its 
minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos 
or both, shall be imposed upon : 

1. Any person who shall substitute the name or mark of 
some other manufacturer for the name or mark of the real 
manufacturer upon any article of commerce and shall sell 
the same; 

2. Any person who shall sell such articles of commerce or 
offer the same for sale, knowing that the trade-mark has 
been fraudulently used in such goods as described in the 
preceding subdivision; or 

3. Any person who, knowing the purposes for which the 
trade-mark or trade-name of a person is to be used, prints, 
lithographs, or in any way reproduces such trade-mark or 
trade-name, or a colorable imitation thereof, for another 
person, to enable that other person to fraudulently use such 
trade-mark or trade-name on his own goods. 

A trade-name or trade-mark is a word or words, name, 
emblem, sign, or device used as an advertisement, sign, 
label, poster or otherwise, for the purpose of enabling the 
public to distinguish the business of the person who owns 
and uses said trade-name or trade-mark. 

Art. 189. Unfair competition and fraudulent registration 
of trade-mark or trade-n ame. — The penalty provided in the 
next preceding article shall be imposed upon any person 
who, in unfair competition and for the purpose of deceiving 
or defrauding another of his legitimate trade or the public 
m general, shall sell his goods giving them the general ap- 
pearance of goods of another manufacturer or dealer, either 
in the wrapping of the packages in which they are con- 
tained, or the device of words thereon, or in any other 
feature of their appearance which would be likelv to in- 
duce the public to believe that the goods offered are those 
of a manufacturer or dealer other than the actual manu- 
facturer or dealer, or shall give other persons a chance or 
opportunity to do the same with a like purpose. 

The penalty of prision correecional in its minimum pe- 
riod or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, shall 



73 



be imposed upon any person who, by means of false or 
fraudulent representations or declarations, orally or in writ- 
ing, or by other fraudulent means shall procure from the 
Oiiice of Patents, Copyrights, and trade-marks the registry 
of a trade-mark, or of himself as the owner of a trade- 
mark or trade-name, or an entry respecting a trade-mark 
or trade-name. 

Title Five 

CRIMES RELATIVE TO OPIUM AND OTHER 
PROHIBITED DRUGS 

ART. 190. Posession, preparation and use of prohibited 
d?*ugs, and maintenance of opium dens. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor in its medium period to prisiSn correctional 
in its minimum period and a fine ranging from 300 to 
10,000 pesos shall be imposed upon: 

1. Anyone who, unless lawfully authorized shall pos- 
sess, prepare, administer or otherwise use any prohibited 
drug. 

^'Prohibited drug," as used herein, includes opium, co- 
caine, alfa and beta eucaine, their derivatives, and all prep- 
arations made from them or any of them. 

"Opium" embraces every kind, class, and character of 
opium, whether crude or prepared ; the ashes or refuse of 
the same; narcotic preparations thereof or therefrom; 
morphine or alkaloid of opium; preparations in which 
opium, morphine or alkaloid of opium, enter as an ingre- 
dient, and also opium leaves or wrappings of opium leaves, 
whether prepared or not, for their use. 

2. Anyone who shall maintain a dive or resort where 
any prohibited drug is used in any form, in violation of 
the law. 

Art. 191. Keeper, watchman and visitor of opium 
den. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine ranging from 
100 to 300 pesos shall be imposed upon : 

1. Anyone who shall act as keeper or watchman of a 
dive or resort where any prohibited drug is used in any 
manner contrary to law; and 



74 



2. Any person who, not being included in the provisions 
of the next preceding article, shall knowingly visit any 
dive or resort of the character referred to above. 

Art. 192. Importation and sale of prohibited drugs. — 
The penalty of prision correccional in its medium and 
maximum periods and a fine ranging from 300 to 10,000 
pesos shall be imposed upon any person who shall import 
or bring into the Philippine Islands any prohibited drug. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any person who 
shall unlawfully sell or deliver to another any prohibited 
drug. 

ART. 193. Illegal possession of opium pipe or other para- 
phernalia for the use of any prohibited drug. — The penalty 
of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall 
be imposed upon any person who, not being authorized by 
law, shall possess any opium pipe or other paraphernalia 
for smoking, injecting, administering or using opium or 
any prohibited drug. 

The illegal possession of an opium pipe or other para- 
phernalia for using any other prohibited drug shall bc- 
prinia facie evidence that its possessor has used said drug. 

ART. 194. Prescribing opium unnecessarily for a pa- 
tient. — The penalty of prision correccional or a fine ranging 
from 300 to 10,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon 
any physician or dentist who shall prescribe opium for 
any person whose physical condition does not require the 
use of the same. 

Title Six 
CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
CHAPTER ONE 
GAMBLING AND BETTING 

ART. 195. What acts are punishable in gambling. — (a) 
The penalty of arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 
two hundred pesos, and, in case of recidivism, the penalty 



75 



of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from two hundred to 
six thousand pesos, shall be imposed upon: 

1. Any person other than those referred to in subsections 
(6) and (c) who, in any manner, shall directly or indi- 
rectly take part in any game of monte, jueteng or any 
other form of lottery, policy, banking or percentage game, 
dog races or any other game or scheme the result of which 
depends wholly or chiefly upon chance or hazard; or 
wherein wagers consisting of money, articles of value or 
representative of value are made; or in the exploitation or 
use of any other mechanical invention or contrivance to 
determine by chance the loser or winner of money or any 
object or representative of value. 

2. Any person who shall knowingly permit any form of 
gambling referred to in the preceding subdivision to be 
carried on in any inhabited or uninhabited place or any 
building, vessel or other means of transportation owned or 
controlled by him. If the place where gambling is carried 
on lias the reputation of a gambling place or that prohibited 
gambling is frequently carried on therein, the culprit shall 
be punished by the penalty provided for in this article in 
its maximum period. 

(6) The penalty of prision correctional in its maximum 
degree shall be imposed upon the maintainer, conductor, 
or banker in a game of jueteng or any similar game. 

(c) The penalty of prision correctional in its medium 
degree shall be imposed upon any person who shall, know- 
ingly and without lawful purpose, have in his possession 
any lottery list, paper or other matter containing letters, 
figures, signs or symbols which pertain to or are m any 
manner used in the game of jueteng or any similar game 
which has taken place or about to take place. (As amended 
by Com. Act No. 235.) 

Art. 196. Importation, sale and possession of lottery 
tickets or advertisements.— -The penalty of arresto mayor 
•n its maximum period to prision correctional in its mini- 
mum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or 
both, in the discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon 
any person who shall import into the Philippine Islands 



76 

from any foreign place or port any lottery ticket or ad- 
vertisement or, in connivance with the importer, shall sell 
or distribute the same. 

Any person who shall knowingly and with intent to use 
them, have in his possession lottery tickets or advertise- 
ments, or shall sell or distribute the same without conni- 
vance with the importer of the same, shall be punished by 
arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pe sos, or both 
in the discretion of the court. 

The possession of any lottery ticket or advertisement 
shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to sell, distribute 
or use the same in the Philippine Islands. 

Art. 197. Betting in sport contests. — The penalty of 
arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who shall bet money or 
any object or article of value or representative of value 
upon the result of any boxing or other sport contest. 

Art. 198. Illegal betting on horse races. — The penalty of 
arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who, except during the 
periods allowed by law, shall bet on horse races. The 
penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 
pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, under 
the same circumstances, shall maintain or employ a total- 
izer or other device or scheme for betting on horse races 
or realizing any profit therefrom. 

For the purposes of this article, any race held on the 
same day and at the same place shall be held punishable as 
a separate offense, and if the same be committed by any 
partnership, corporation or association, the president and 
the directors or managers thereof shall be deemed to be 
principals in the offense if they have consented to or know- 
ingly tolerated its commission. 

ART. 199. Illegal cock fighting. —The penalty of arresto 
menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, in the 
discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon: 

1. Any person who directly or indirectly participates in 
cockfights, by betting money or other valuable things, or 



77 



who organizes cockfights at which bets are made, on a day 
other than those permitted by law. 

2. Any person who directly or indirectly participates in 
cockfights, by betting money or other valuable things, or 
organizes such cockfights, at a place other than a licensed 
cockpit. 

CHAPTER TWO 

OFFENSES AGAINST DECENCY AND GOOD CUSTOMS 

Art. 200. Grave scandal— The penalties of arresto mayor 
and public censure shall be imposed upon any person who 
shall otfend against decenc y or good customs by any highly 
scandalous conduct not expressly falling within any other 
article of this Code. 

, Art. 201. Immoral doctrines, obscene publications and 
exhibitions. — The penalty of prision correctional, in its 
minimum period, or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 pesos, 
or both, shall be imposed upon: 

1. Those who shall publicly expound or proclaim doc- 
trines openly contrary to public morals ; 

2. The authors of obscene literature, published with their 
knowledge in any form, and the editors publishing such 
literature ; 

3. Those who in theaters, fairs, cinematographs or any 
other place open to public view, shall exhibit indecent oi 
immoral plays, scenes, acts or shows ; and 

4. Those who shall sell, give away or exhibit prints* 
engravings, sculptures or literature which are offensiv 
to morals. 

Art. 202. Vagrants and prostitutes— Penalty. —The to - 
lowing are vagrants: 

L Any person having no apparent means of subsist- 
ence, who has the physical ability to work and who neglects 
to apply himself or herself to some lawful calling; 

2. Any person found loitering about public or semi-public 
buildings or places or tramping or wandering about the 
country or the streets without visible means of support ; 



78 



3. Any idle or dissolute person who lodges in houses of 
ill-fame; ruffians or pimps and those who habitually asso- 
ciate with prostitutes; 

4. Any person who, not being included in the provisions 
of other articles of this Code, shall be found loitering in 
any inhabited or uninhabited place belonging to another 
without any lawful or justifiable purpose; 

5. Prostitutes. 

For the purposes of this article, women who, for money 
or profit, habitually indulge in sexual intercourse or las- 
civious conduct, are deemed to be prostitutes. 

Any person found guilty of any of the offenses covered 
oy this article shall be punished by arresto menor or a 
hne not exceeding 200 pesos, and in case of recidivism, by 
arresto niayor in its medium period to prision correctional 
in its minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 2,000 
Pesos, or both, in the discretion of the court. 

Title Seven 
CRIMES COMMITTED BY PUBLIC OFFICERS 
CHAPTER ONE 

PRELIMINARY PROVISIONS 
ART. 203. Who are public officers. — For the purpose of 
applying the provisions of this and the preceding titles of 
tnis book, any person who, by direct provision of the law, 
popular election or appointment by competent authority, 
snan take part in the performance of public functions in 
the Government of the Philippine Islands, or shall perform 
in said Government or in any of its branches public duties 
as an employee, agent or subordinate official, of any rank 
or class, shall be deemed to be a public officer. 

CHAPTER TWO 
MALFEASANCE AND MISFEASANCE IN OFFICE 
SECTION One.— Dcrelictiov of duty 
ART. 204. Knowingly rendering unjust judgment.— Any 
judge who shall knowingly render an unjust judgment in 



79 



any case submitted to him for decision, shall be punished 
by prision mayor and perpetual absolute disqualification. 

ART. 205. Judgment rendered through negligence —Any 
judge who, by reason of inexcusable negligence or igno- 
rance, shall render a manifestly unjust judgment in any 
case submitted to him for decision shall be punished by 
arresto mayor and temporary special disqualification. 

ART. 206. Unjust interlocutory order.— Any judge who 
shall knowingly render an unjust interlocutory order or 
decree shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor in its 
minimum period and suspension ; but if he shall have acted 
by reason of inexcusable negligence or ignorance and the 
interlocutory order or decree be manifestly unjust, the 
penalty shall be suspension. . 

ART. 207. Malicious delay in the administration of jus- 
tice. — The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum 
period shall be imposed upon any judge guilty of malicious 
delay in the administration of justice. 

Art. 208. Prosecution of offenses; negligence and tou->- 
ance.— The penalty of prision correccional in its mmim "" c 
period and suspension shall be imposed upon any pu i 
officer, or officer of the law. who, in dereliction of tn 
duties of his office, shall maliciously refrain from instituting 
prosecution for the punishment of violators of the law, 
or shall tolerate the commission of offenses. 

ART. 209. Betrayal of trust by an attorney or solicitor 
Revelation of secrets.— In addition to the proper admin - 
trative action, the penalty of prision corrcccbiud in 
minimum period, or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 p •» 
or both, shall be imposed upon any attorney-at-law oi r - 
licitor (procurador judicial) who, by any malicious ore* 
of professional duty or inexcusable negligence or ignore *j 
shall prejudice his client, or reveal any of the secrets 
the latter learned by him in his professional capacity. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon an attorney-at- 
law or solicitor (procurador judicial) who, having under- 
taken the defense of a client or having received confidential 
information from said client in a case, shall undertake 



80 



the defense of the opposing party in the same case, with- 
out the consent of his first client. 

Section Two.— Bribery 

Art. 210. Direct bribery.—Any public officer who shall 
Rgree to perform an act constituting a crime, in connection 
with the performance of his official duties, in consideration 
of any offer, promise, gift or present received by such, 
officer, personally or through the mediation of another, 
shall suffer the penalty of V risi6n correctional in its min- 
imum and medium periods and a fine of not less than the 
value ot the gift and not more than three times such 
value, in addition to the penalty corresponding to the crime 
agreed upon, if the same shall have been committed. 

ii the gift was accepted by the officer in consideration 
of the execution of an act which does not constitute 
cinne, and the officer executed said act, he shall suffer the 
Z£ ^ffn P1 ' 0Vided iu the Preceding paragraph; and if 
? 0t haVe been accomplished, the officer shall 
suite! the penalties of arresto mayor in its maximum period 

mL f I ° . n0t l6SS than the value of the gift and not 
more than twice such value. 

vJf f thG °? j6 ^ for Which the * ift w as received or promised 
was to make the public officer refrain from doing something 

pename T * duty to do > he sh *» suffer the 

oeHods .nl a Z eSt ° may0r in its medium and maximum 

aTd ntl d re\ h :;l n °V IeSS * ** ^ 

In addiH^ f 1 6 times such vah,e - 
parLraDhs thl° ^ Penalties provided « the preceding 
2^&8S2^ »*« *• Penalty of special 

and claim «J2^*£^ ""S* *** apprataal 
forming public duties 1 * 01 ° ther pers0na per ' 

ART. 211. Indirect bribery.— The penalties of arresto 
mayor, suspension in its minimum JS r * T 

«r,,i ™Mi« l « , ,uin "num and medium periods 

and public censure sha 1 be nrnn«^ . 

ue imposed upon anv public officer 



81 

who shall accept gifts offered to him by reason of his 
office. 

Art. 212. Corruption of public officials. — The same pen- 
alties imposed upon the officer corrupted, except those of 
disqualification and suspension, shall be imposed upon any 
person who shall have made the offers or promises or given 
the gifts or presents as described in the preceding articles. 



CHAPTER THREE 

FRAUDS AND ILLEGAL EXACTIONS AND TRANSACTIONS 

ART. 213. Frauds against the public treasury and similar 
offenses. — The penalty of prision correccional in its medium 
period to pHsion mayor in its minimum period, or a fine 
ranging from 200 to 10,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed 
upon any public officer who : 

t In his official capacity, in dealing with any person 
with regard to furnishing supplies, the making of con- 
tracts, or the adjustment or settlement of accounts relating 
to public property or funds shall enter into an agreement 
with any interested party or speculator or make use of any 
other scheme, to defraud the Government; 

2. Being entrusted with the collection of taxes, licenses, 
fees and other imposts, shall be guilty of any of the fol- 
lowing acts or omissions : f 

(a) Demanding, directly or indirectly, the payment oi 
sums different from or larger than those authorized by 
law. 

(&) Failing voluntarily to issue a receipt, as provided 
by law for any sum of money collected by him officially. 

(c) Collecting or receiving, directly or indirectly, by way 
of payment or otherwise, things or objects of a nature 
different from that provided by law. 

When the culprit is an officer or employee of the Bureau 
of Internal Revenue or the Bureau of Customs, the provi- 
sions of the Administrative Code shall be applied. 

Art. 214. Other frauds.— In addition to the penalties 
prescribed in the provisions of Chapter Six, Title Ten, 



5568— ti 



82 



Book Two, of this Code, the penalty of temporary special 
disqualification in its maximum period to perpetual special 
disqualification shall be imposed upon any public officer 
who, taking advantage of his official position, shall commit 
any of the frauds or deceits enumerated in said provisions. 

Art. 215. Prohibited transactions. — The penalty of prir 
sion correctional in its minimum period or a fine ranging 
from 200 to 1,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon 
any appointive public officer who, during his incumbency, 
shall directly or indirectly become interested in any trans- 
action of exchange or speculation within the territory sub- 
ject to his jurisdiction. 

Art. 216. Possession of prohibited interest by a public of- 
ficer.— The penalty of arresto mayor in its medium period 
to prisidn correctional in its minimum period, or a fine rang- 
ing from 200 to 1,000 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon 
a public officer who, directly or indirectly, shall become 
interested in any contract or business in which it is his 
official duty to intervene. 

This provision is applicable to experts, arbitrators and 
private accountants who, in like manner, shall take part in 
any contract or transaction connected with the estate or 
property in the appraisal, distribution or adjudication of 
which they shall have acted, and to the guardians and 
executors with respect to the property belonging to their 
wards or estate. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

MALVERSATION OP PUBLIC FUNDS OR PROPERTY 

ART. 217. Malversation of public funds or property — 
Presumption of malversation. — Any public officer who, by 
reason of the duties of his office, is accountable for public 
funds or property, shall appropriate the same, or shall take 
or misappropriate or shall consent, or through abandonment 
or negligence, shall permit any other person to take such 
public funds or property, wholly or partially, or shall other- 



83 



wise be guilty of the misappropriation or malversation of 
such funds or property, shall suffer: 

L The penalty of prision correctional in its minimum 
and medium periods, if the amount involved in the mis- 
appropriation or malversation does not exceed 200 pesos. 

2. The penalty of prision correctional in its maximum 
period to prision mayor in its minimum period, if the 
amount involved is more than 200 pesos but does not exceed 
6,000 pesos. 

3. The penalty of pnsidn mayor in its medium and maxi- 
mum periods, if the amount involved is more than 6,000 
pesos but is less than 12,000 pesos. 

4. The penalty of reclusion temporal in its minimum and 
medium periods, if the amount involved is more than 12,000 
pesos but is less than 22,000 pesos. If the amount ex- 
ceeds the latter, the penalty shall be reclusi&n temporal in 
its medium and maximum periods. 

In all cases, persons guilty of malversation shall also 
suffer the penalty of perpetual special disqualification and 
a fine ranging from one-half to the total value of the funds 
or property embezzled. 

The failure of a public officer to have duly forthcoming 
any public funds or property with which he is chargeable, 
upon demand by any duly authorized officer, shall be prim 
facie evidence that he has put such missing funds or prop- 
erty to personal uses. 

Art. 218. Failure of accountable officer to render ac- 
counts.— Any public officer, whether in the service or sep- 
arated therefrom by resignation or any other cause, who is 
required by law or regulation to render account to the 
Insular Auditor, or to a provincial auditor and who fails 
to do so for a period of two months after such accounts 
should be rendered, shall be punished by pnsi&n correc- 
tional in its minimum period, or by a fine ranging from 
200 to 6,000 pesos, or both. 

Art. 219. Failure of a responsible public officer to ren&w 
accounts before leaving the countiy.— Any public officer 



84 



who unlawfully leaves or attempts to leave the Philippine 
Islands without securing a certificate from the Insular 
Auditor showing that his accounts have been finally settled, 
shall be punished by arresto mayor, or a fine ranging from 
200 to 1,000 pesos, or both. 

Art. 220. Illegal use of public funds or property. — Any 
public officer who shall apply any public fund or property 
under his administration to any public use other than that 
for which such fund or property were appropriated by law 
or ordinance shall suffer the penalty of prision correccional 
in its minimum period or a fine ranging from one-half to 
the total value of the sum misapplied, if by reason of such 
misapplication, any damage or embarrassment shall have 
resulted to the public service. In either case, the offender 
shall also suffer the penalty of temporary special disquali- 
fication. 

If no damage or embarrassment to the public service 
has resulted, the penalty shall be a fine from 5 to 50 per 
cent of the sum misapplied. 

Art. 221. Failure to make delivery of public funds or 
Property.— Any public officer under obligation to make pay- 
ment from Government funds in his possession, who shall 
fail to make such payment, shall be punished by arresto 
mayor and a fine of from 5 to 25 per cent of the sum which 
he failed to pay. 

This provision shall apply to any public officer who, being- 
ordered by competent authority to deliver any property 
in his custody or under his administration, shall refuse to 
make such delivery. 

The fine shall be graduated in such case by the value of 
the thing, provided that it shall not be less than 50 pesos. 

ART. 222. Officers included in the preceding provisions. — 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to private indi- 
viduals who, in any capacity whatever, have charge of any 
insular, provincial or municipal funds, revenues or prop- 
erty and to any administrator or depository of funds or 
property attached, seized or deposited by public authority, 
even if such property belongs to a private individual. 



85 



CHAPTER FIVE 



INFIDELITY OF PUBLIC OFFICERS 

Section One. — Infidelity in the custody of prisoners 

ART. 223. Conniving roith or consenting to evasion. — Any 
public officer who shall consent to the escape of a prisoner 
in his custody or charge, shall be punished: 

1. By Prision correctional in its medium and maximum 
periods and temporary special disqualification in its maxi- 
mum period to perpetual special disqualification, if the fu- 
gitive shall have been sentenced by final judgment to any 
penalty. 

2. By prision correctional in its minimum period and 
temporary special disqualification, in case the fugitive shall 
not have been finally convicted but only held as a detention 
prisoner for any crime or violation of law or municipal 
ordinance. 

Art. 224. Evasion through negligence.— li the evasion of 
the prisoner shall have taken place through the negligence 
of the officer charged with the conveyance or custody of the 
escaping prisoner, said officer shall suffer the penalties of 
arresto mayor in its maximum period to prision correctional 
in its minimum period and temporary special disqualifica- 
tion. 

Art. 225. Escape of prisoner tender the custody of a 
person not a public officer.— Any private person to whom 
the conveyance or custody of a prisoner or person under 
arrest shall have been confided, who shall commit any of 
the offenses mentioned in the two preceding articles, shall 
suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed 
for the public officer. 

Section Two.— Infidelity in the custody of documents 

Art. 226. Removal, concealment or destruction of docu- 
ments.— Any public officer who shall remove, destroy or 
conceal documents or papers officially entrusted to him, shall 
suffer : 



86 



1. The penalty of prision mayor and a fine not exceeding 
1,000 pesos, whenever serious damage shall have been 
caused thereby to a third party or to the public interest. 

2. The penalty of prision correctional in its minimum and 
medium periods and fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, when- 
ever the damage caused to a third party or to the public 
interest shall not have been serious. 

In either case, the additional penalty of temporary spe- 
cial disqualification in its maximum period to perpetual 
special disqualification shall be imposed. 

Art. 227. Officer breaking seal. — Any public officer 
charged with the custody of papers or property sealed by 
proper authority, who shall break the seals or permit them 
to be broken, shall suffer the penalties of prision correc- 
cional in its minimum and medium periods, temporary 
special disqualification and a fine not exceeding 2,000 pesos. 

Art. 228. Opening of closed documents. — Any public of- 
ficer not included in the provisions of the next preceding 
article who, without proper authority, shall open or shall 
permit to be opened any closed papers, documents or ob- 
jects entrusted to his custody, shall suffer the penalties of 
arresto mayor, temporary special disqualification and a fine 
not exceeding 2,000 pesos. 

Section Three.— Revelation of secrets 
ART. 229. Revelation of secrets by an officer.— Any pub- 

rL°f "5 ? h ° f. haU reveal a *y se <*et known to him by 
° 1Cial ca P aci ty, or shall wrongfully deliver 

TnTXhT 6 ^ Papers of which h * may have charge 
and which should not be published shall suffer the penal- 
ties cf pmstcn correctional in its medium and maximum 
periods, Perpetual special disqualification and a fine not 
exceeding ^,000 pesos if the revelation of such secrets or 
the delivery of such papers shall have caused serious dam- 
age to the public interest; otherwise, the penalties of pri- 
son correccional in its minimum period, temporary special 
disqualification and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be 
imposed. 



87 

ART. 230. Public officer revealing secrets of private indi- 
vidual. — Any public officer to whom the secrets of any pri- 
vate individual shall become known by reason of his office 
who shall reveal such secrets, shall suffer the penalties of 
arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos. 



CHAPTER SIX 

OTHER OFFENSES OR IRREGULARITIES BY PUBLIC OFFICERS 

Section One.— Disobedience, refusal of assistance and maltreatment 

of prisoners 

ART. 231. Open disobedience.— Any judicial or executive 
officer who shall openly refuse to execute the judgment, de- 
cision or order of any superior authority made within the 
scope of the jurisdiction of the latter and issued with all 
the legal formalities, shall suffer the penalties of arresto 
mayor in its medium period to prision correccional in i 
minimum period, temporary special disqualification in i 
maximum period and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos. 

Art. 232. Disobedience to order of superior officer, when 
said order was suspended by inferior officer. — Any pub 1C 
officer who, having for any reason suspended the execution 
of the orders of his superiors, shall disobey such superiors 
after the latter have disapproved the suspension, shall suf- 
fer the penalties of prision correccional in its minimum an 
medium periods and perpetual special disqualification. 

Art. 233. Refusal of assistance.— The penalties of arresto 
mayor in its medium period to prision correccional in i 
minimum period, perpetual special disqualification ana 
fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, shall be imposed upon _a 
public officer who, upon demand from competent authority, 
shall fail to lend his cooperation towards the administra- 
tion of justice or other public service, if such failure shau 
result in serious damage to the public interest, or to a third 
party; otherwise, arresto mayor in its medium and maxi- 
mum periods and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be 
imposed. 



88 



Art. 234. Refusal to discharge elective office. — The pen- 
alty of arrresto mayor or a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos, 
or both, shall be imposed upon any person who, having been 
elected by popular election to a public office, shall refuse 
without legal motive to be sworn in or to discharge the 
duties of said office. 

Art. 235. Maltreatment of prisoners. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor in its medium period to prision correccional 
in its minimum period, in addition to his liability for the 
physical injuries or damage caused, shall be imposed upon 
any public officer or employee who shall overdo himself in 
the correction or handling of a prisoner or detention pris- 
oner under his charge, by the imposition of punishments not 
authorized by the regulations, or by inflicting such punish- 
ments in a cruel and humiliating manner. 

If the purpose of the maltreatment is to extort a confes- 
sion, or to obtain some information from the prisoner, the 
Offender shall be punished by prision correccional in its 
minimum period, temporary special disqualification and a 
nne not exceeding 500 pesos, in addition to his liability for 
™e physical injuries or damage caused. 

Section Two.— Anticipation, prolongation and abandonment of tin- 
duties and powers of public office 

Art. 236. Anticipation of duties of a public office. — Any 
person who shall assume the performance of the duties and 
powers of any public office or employment without first 

S, g K W ° rn m or havin £ e iven the bond required by law, 
M be suspended from such office or employment until 

i? uk « V ! S° mpIied with the respective formalities and 
shall be fined from 200 to 500 pesos. 

ART. 237. Prolonging performance of duties and 
pmvers — Any public officer who shall continue to exercise 
me aunes ana powers of his office, employment or commis- 
sion, beyond the period provided by law, regulations or 
special provisions applicable to the case, shall suffer the 
penalties of prision correccional in its minimum period, 



89 



special temporary disqualification in its minimum period 
and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos. 

Art. 238. Abandonment of office or position.— Any pub- 
lic officer who, before the acceptance of his resignation, 
shall abandon his office to the detriment of the public serv- 
ice shall suffer the penalty of airesto mayor. 

If such office shall have been abandoned in order to evade 
the discharge of the duties of preventing, prosecuting or 
punishing any of the crimes falling within Title One, and 
Chapter One of Title Three of Book Two of this Code, the 
offender shall be punished by prisi&n correctional in its 
minimum and medium periods, and by arresto mayor if the 
purpose of such abandonment is to evade the duty of pre- 
venting, prosecuting or punishing any other crime. 

Section Three. — Ux urpation of powers and unlawful appointments 

Art. 239. Usurpation of legislative powers.— The penal- 
ties of prision correctional in its minimum period, tem P°" 
rary special disqualification and a fine not exceeding 1,000 
pesos, shall be imposed upon any public officer who shall 
encroach upon the powers of the legislative branch of the 
Government, either by making general rules or regulations 
beyond the scope of his authority, or by attempting to re- 
peal a law or suspending the execution thereof. 

Art. 240. Usurpation of executive functions.— Any judge 
who shall so assume any power pertaining to the executiv 
authorities, or shall obstruct the latter in the lawful exei- 
cise of their powers, shall suffer the penalty of 
mayor in its medium period to prision correccwnal in its 
minimum period. 

Art. 241. Usivrpation of judicial functions.— The penalty 
of arresto mayor in its medium period to prision correccw- 
nal in its minimum period shall be imposed upon any otticei 
of the executive branch of the Government who shall as- 
sume judicial powers or shall obstruct the execution of any 
order or decision rendered by any judge within his juris- 
diction. 



90 



ART. 242. Disobeying request for disqualification. — Any 
public officer who, before the question of jurisdiction is 
decided, shall continue any proceeding after having been 
lawfully required to refrain from so doing shall be punished 
by arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos. 

Art. 243. Orders or requests by executive officers to any 
judicial authority. — Any executive officer who shall ad- 
dress any order or suggestion to any judicial authority with 
respect to any case or business coming within the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the courts of justice shall suffer the penalty 
of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos. 

Art. 244. Unlawful appointments. — Any public officer 
who shall knowingly nominate or appoint to any public 
office any person lacking the legal qualifications therefor, 
shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not 
exceeding 1,000 pesos. 

Section Four. — Abuse against chastity 

Art. 245. Abuses against chastity — Penalties. — The pen- 
alties of prision correccional in its medium and maximum 
periods and temporary special disqualification shall be im- 
posed: 

1. Upon any public officer who shall solicit or make im- 
moral or indecent advances to a woman interested in mat- 
ters pending before such officer for decision, or with respect 
to which he is required to submit a report to or consult 
with a superior officer; 

2. Any warden or other public officer directly charged 
with the care and custody of prisoners or persons under 
arrest who shall solicit or make immoral or indecent ad- 
vances to a woman under his custody. 

If the person solicited be the wife, daughter, sister or 
relative within the same degree by affinity of any person 
in the custody of such warden or officer, the penalties shall 
be prision correccional in its minimum and medium periods 
and temporary special disqualification. 



91 



Title Eight 
CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS 
CHAPTER ONE 

DESTRUCTION OF LIFE 
Section One. — Parricide, murder, homicide 
ART. 246. Parricide. — Any person who shall kill his fa- 
ther, mother, or child, whether legitimate or illegitimate, or 
any of his ascendants or descendants, or his spouse, shall be 
guilty of parricide and shall be punished by the penalty of 
reclusion perpetua to death. 

ART. 247. Death or physical injuries inflicted under ex- 
ceptional circumstances. — Any legally married person who, 
having surprised his spouse in the act of committing sexua 
intercourse with another person, shall kill any of them or 
both of them in the act or immediately thereafter, or shan 
inflict upon them any serious physical injury, shall suiter 
the penalty of destierro. 

If he shall inflict upon them physical injuries of any otn 
kind, he shall be exempt from punishment. 

These rules shall be applicable, under the same ci - 
cumstances, to parents with respect to their daug nte ^ 
under eighteeen years of age, and their seducers, while t 
daughters are living with their parents. .. u 

Any person who shall promote or facilitate the pros i 
tion of his wife or daughter, or shall otherwise have ^ 
sented to the infidelity of the other spouse shall n 
entitled to the benefits of this article. w ithin 
Art. 248. Murder.— Any person who, not & nmS ~ « be 
the provisions of article 246 shall kill another, s 
guilty of murder and shall be punished by reC . , ith 
poral in its maximum period to death, if committee 
any of the following attendant circumstances: 

1. With treachery, taking advantage of superiors «*ng . 
with the aid of armed men, or employing means to w^ane 
the defense or of means or persons to insure or anora 
impunity. 




92 



2. In consideration of a price, reward, or promise. 

3. By means of inundation, fire, poison, explosion, ship- 
wreck, stranding of a vessel, derailment or assault upon a 
street car or locomotive, fall of an airship, by means of 
motor vehicles, or with the use of any other means involv- 
ing great waste and ruin. 

4. On occasion of any of the calamities enumerated in 
the preceding paragraph, or of an earthquake, eruption of 
a volcano, destructive cyclone, epidemic, or any other public 
calamity. 

5. With evident premeditation. 

6. With cruelty, by deliberately and inhumanly augment- 
ing the suffering of the victim, or outraging or scoffing at 
his person or corpse. 

Art. 249. Homicide. — Any person who, not falling with- 
in the provisions of article 246 shall kill another without 
the attendance of any of the circumstances enumerated in 
the next preceding article, shall be deemed guilty of homi- 
cide and be punished by reclusion temporal. 

Art. 250. Penalty for frustrated parricide, murder or 
homicide. — The courts, in view of the facts of the case, may 
impose upon the person guilty of the frustrated crime of 
parricide, murder or homicide, defined and penalized in the 
preceding articles, a penalty lower by one degree than that 
which should be imposed under the provisions of article 50. 

The courts, considering the facts of the case, may like- 
wise reduce by one degree the penalty which under article 
51 should be imposed for an attempt to commit any of such 
crimes. 

Art. 251. Death caused in a tumtdtuous affray. — When, 
while several persons, not composing groups organized for 
the common purpose of assaulting and attacking each other 
reciprocally, quarrel and assault each other in a confused 
and tumultuous manner, and in the course of the affray 
someone is killed, and it cannot be ascertained who actually 
killed the deceased, but the person or persons who inflicted 
serious physical injuries can be identified, such person or 
persons shall be punished by prisidn mayor. 



93 



If it cannot be determined who inflicted the serious phys- 
ical injuries on the deceased, the penalty of prfcMn correc- 
tional in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed 
upon all those who shall have used violence upon the person 
of the victim. 

Art. 252. Physical injuries inflicted in a tumultuous 
affray.— When in a tumultuous affray as referred to in the 
preceding article, only serious physical injuries are in- 
flicted upon the participants thereof and the person re- 
sponsible therefor cannot be identified, all those who appear 
to have used violence upon the person of the offended party 
shall suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that 
provided for the physical injuries so inflicted. 

When the physical injuries inflicted are of a less serious 
nature and the person responsible therefor cannot be iden- 
tified, all those who appear to have used any violence upon 
the person of the offended party shall be punished by 
arresto from five to fifteen days. 

Art. 253. Giving assistance to suicide.— Any person who 
shall assist another to commit suicide shall suffer the pen- 
alty of prision mayor; if such person lends his assistance 
to another to the extent of doing the killing himself, he 
shall suffer the penalty of reclusion temporal. However, it 
the suicide is not consummated, the penalty of arresto ma- 
yor in its medium and maximum periods shall be imposed. 

Art. 254. Discharge of firearms.— Any person who shall 
shoot at another with any firearm shall suffer the penaitj 
of prision correceional in its minimum and medium periods, 
unless the facts of the case are such that the act can De 
held to constitute frustrated or attempted parricide, min- 
der, homicide or any other crime for which a higher pen- 
alty is prescribed by any of the articles of this Code. 
Section Two.— Infanticide and abortion 
Art. 255. Infanticide.— The penalty provided for parri- 
cide in article 246 and for murder in article 248 shall be 
imposed upon any person who shall kill any child less than 
three days of age. 



94 



If the crime penalized in this article be committed by the 
mother of the child for the purpose of concealing her dis- 
honor, she shall suffer the penalty of prision correctional in 
its medium and maximum periods, and if said crime be com- 
mitted for the same purpose by the maternal grandparents 
or either of them, the penalty shall be prision mayor. 

Art. 256. — Intentional abortion. — Any person who shall 
intentionally cause an abortion shall suffer : 

1. The penalty of reclusion temporal, if he shall use any 
violence upon the person of the pregnant woman. 

2. The penalty of prision mayor if, without using violence, 
he shall act without the consent of the woman. 

3. The penalty of prision correctional in its medium and 
maximum periods, if the woman shall have consented. 

Art. 257. Unintentional abortion. — The penalty of prisi&n 
correctional in its minimum and medium periods shall be 
imposed upon any person who shall cause an abortion by 
violence, but unintentionally. 

Art. 258. Abortion practiced by the woman herself or by 
her parents.~The penalty of prisidn correctional in its me- 
dium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon a woman 
who shall practice an abortion upon herself or shall consent 
that any other person should do so. 

Any woman who shall commit this offense to conceal her 
dishonor, shall suffer the penalty of pinsidn correctional in 
its minimum and medium periods. 

If this crime be committed by the parents of the pregnant 
woman or either of them, and they act with the consent 
of said woman for the purpose of concealing her dishonor, 
the offenders shall suffer the penalty of prision correctional 
in its medium and maximum periods. 

ART. 259. Abortion practiced by a physician or midwife 
and dispensing of abortives, —The penalties provided in ar- 
ticle 256 shall be imposed in its maximum period, respec- 
tively, upon any physician or midwife who, taking advan- 
tage of their scientific knowledge or skill, shall cause an 
abortion or assist in causing the same. 



95 



Any pharmacist who, without the proper prescription 
from a physician, shall dispense any abortive shall suffer 
arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 1,000 pesos. 

Section Three. — Duel 

Art. 260. Responsibility of participants in a duel.— The 
penalty of reclusion temporal shall be imposed upon any 
person who shall kill his adversary in a duel. 

If he shall inflict upon the latter physical injuries only, 
he shall suffer the penalty provided therefor, according to 
their nature. , f 

In any other case, the combatants shall suffer the penai > 
of arresto mayor, although no physical injuries have 
inflicted. .. 

The seconds shall in all events be punished as accomp • 

Art. 261. Challenging to a duel.— The penalty of 2»« 
correccional in its minimum period shall be imposed v 
any person who shall challenge another, or incite a not ". 
give or accept a challenge to a duel, or shall scoff at or ^ 
another publicly for having refused to accept a chane g 
fight a duel. 

CHAPTER TWO 

PHYSICAL INJURIES 

Art. 262. Mutilation—The penalty of reclusidn 
to reclusion perpetua shall be imposed upon any pei 
shall intentionally mutilate another by depriving n »™' uction> 
totally or partially, of some essential organ for repr 

Any other intentional mutilation shall be punisnea 

mayor in its medium and maximum penoc . ^ ^ 

Art. 263. Serious physical in juries. —Any P rf ^ 
shall wound, beat, or assault another, shall W S > 
crime of serious physical injuries and ^shau ^ ^ ^ 

1. The penalty of prision mayor, if U cor * q 
Physical injuries inflicted, the injured peisui 

insane, imbecile, impotent, or blind ; ^.o^inm and 

2. The penalty of prision correccional™ f^j^™ 
maximum periods, if in consequence of the I^ ^h 
x^a. » « mm . . j „uoii have lost the use 01 spetxn 
mflictcd, the person injured shall nave »vo 



96 



or the power to hear or to smell, or shall have lost an eye, 
a hand, a foot, an arm, or a leg or shall have lost the use of 
any such member, or shall have become incapacitated for 
the work in which he was theretofore habitually engaged ; 

3. The penalty of prision correctional in its minimum and 
medium periods, if in consequence of the physical injuries 
inflicted, the person injured shall have become deformed, or 
shall have lost any other part of his body, or shall have lost 
the use thereof, or shall have been ill or incapacitated for 
the performance of the work in which he was habitually 
engaged for a period of more than ninety days ; 

4. The penalty of arresto mayor in its maximum period to 
prision correctional in its minimum period, if the physical 
injuries inflicted shall have caused the illness or incapacity 
for labor of the injured person for more than thirty days. 

If the offense shall have been committed against any of 
the persons enumerated in article 246, or with attend- 
ance of any of the circumstances mentioned in article 248, 
the case covered by subdivision number 1 of this article 
shall be punished by reclusion temporal in its medium and 
maximum periods; the case covered by subdivision number 
2 by prision correctional in its maximum period to prision 
mayor in its minimum period; the case covered by subdivi- 
sion number 3 by prision correctional in its medium and 
maximum periods ; and the case covered by subdivision num- 
ber 4 by prision correctional in its minimum and medium 
periods. 

The provisions of the preceding paragraph shall not be 
applicable to a parent who shall inflict physical injuries 
upon his child by excessive chastisement. 

ART. 264. Administering injurious substances or bever- 
ages. — The penalties established by the next preceding arti- 
cle shall be applicable in the respective cases to any person 
who, without intent to kill, shall inflict upon another any 
serious physical injury, by knowingly administering to him 
any injurious substances or beverages or by taking advan- 
tage of his weakness of mind or credulity. 

ART. 265. Less serious physical injuries. — Any person 
who shall inflict upon another physical injuries not described 



97 

in the preceding articles, but which shall incapacitate the 
offended party for labor for ten days or more, or shall re- 
quire medical attendance for the same period, shall be guilty 
of less serious physical injuries and shall suffer the penalty 
of arresto mayor. 

Whenever less serious physical injuries shall have been 
inflicted with the manifest intent to insult or offend the 
injured person, or under circumstances adding ignominy to 
the offense, in addition to the penalty of arresto mayor, a 
fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed. 

Any less serious physical injuries inflicted % upon the 
offender's parents, ascendants, guardians, curators, teachers, 
or persons of rank, or persons in authority, shall be punish- 
ed by prision correctional in its minimum and medium pe- 
riods, provided that, in the case of persons in authority, the 
deed does not constitute the crime of assault upon such 
persons. 

Art. 266. Slight physical injuries and maltreatment— 
The crime of slight physical injuries shall be punished: 

1. By arresto menor when the offender has inflicted phys- 
ical injuries which shall incapacitate the offended party 
for labor from one to nine days, or shall require medical 
attendance during the same period. 

2. By arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos and 
censure when the offender has caused physical injuries 
which do not prevent the offended party from engaging in 
his habitual work nor require medical attendance. 

3. By arresto menor in its minimum period or a fine no 
exceeding 50 pesos when the offender shall ill-treat another 
by deed without causing any injury. 

Title Nine 

CRIMES AGAINST PERSONAL LIBERTY AND SECURITY 

CHAPTER ONE 

CRIMES AGAINST LIBERTY 
Section One. — Illegal detention 
Art. 267. Kiknapping and serious illegal detention.— 
Any private individual who shall kidnap or detain another, 

5S6& — 7 



98 



or in any other manner deprive him of his liberty, shall 
suffer the penalty of reclusion temporal in its maximum 
period to death: 

1. If the kidnapping or detention shall have lasted more 
than five days. 

2. If it shall have been committed simulating public au- 
thority. 

3. If any serious physical injuries shall have been in- 
flicted upon the person kidnapped or detained, or if threats 
to kill him shall have been made. 

4. If the person kidnapped or detained shall be a minor, 
female or a public officer. 

The penalty shall be reclusion perpetua to death where 
the kidnapping or detention was committed for the purpose 
of extorting ransom from the victim or any other person, 
even if none of the circumstances above mentioned were 
present in the commission of the offense. (As amended 
by Republic Act No. 18.) 

Art. 268. Slight illegal detention. — The penalty of reclu- 
sidn temporal shall be imposed upon any private individual 
who shall commit the crimes described in the next proceed- 
ing article without the attendance of any of circumstances 
enumerated therein. 

The same penalty shall be incurred by anyone who shall 
furnish the place for the perpetration of the crime. 

If the offender shall voluntarily release the person so 
kidnapped or detained within three days from the comence- 
ment of the detention, without having attained the purpose 
intended, and before the institution of criminal proceed- 
ings against him, the penalty shall be prisicn mayor in its 
minimum and medium periods and a fine not exceeding 
seven hundred pesos. (As amended by Republic Act 
No. 18.) 

Art. 269. Unlawful arrest.— The penalty of arresto ma- 
yor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon 
any person who, in any case other than those authorized by 
law, or without reasonable ground therefor, shall arrest or 
detain another for the purpose of delivering him to the 
proper authorities. 



99 



Si i thin Two. — Kidnapping of minor* 

ART. 270. Kidnapping and failure to return a minor.— 
The penalty of reclvsicn perpetua shall be imposed upon 
any person who, being entrusted with the custody of a 
minor person, shall deliberately fail to restore the latter 
to his parents or guardians. (As amended by Republic 
Act No. 18.) 

ART. 271. Inducing a minor to abandon his home.— The 
penalty of prisi&n correctional and a fine not exceeding 
seven hundred pesos shall be imposed upon any one who 
shall induce a minor to abandon the home of his parents 
or guardians or the persons entrusted with his custody. 

If the person committing any of the crimes covered by 
the two preceding articles shall be the father or the mother 
of the minor, the penalty shall be arresto mayor or a fine 
not exceeding three hundred pesos, or both. (As amended 
by Republic Act No. 18.) 

Skction Three.— Slavery and aervitiidt 

Art. 272. Slavery.— The penalty of prison mayor and a 
fine of not exceeding 10,000 pesos shall be imposed upon 
anyone who shall purchase, sell, kidnap or detain a human 
being for the purpose of enslaving him. 

If the crime be committed for the purpose of ^* lgni "J 
the offended party to some immoral traffic, the penalty sna 
be imposed in its maximum period. , 

Art. 273. Exploitation of child labor.— The P ena |£. o ° s 
prision correccional in its minimum and medium P el 
and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upo 
anyone who, under the pretext of reimbursing nimsen 
a debt incurred by an ascendant, guardian or person e - 
trusted with the custody of a minor, shall, against tne 
latter's will, retain him in his service. 

Art. 274. Services rendered under compulsion m pay- 
ment of debts.— The penalty of arresto mayor m its max- 
imum period to prisidn correctional in its minimum period 
shall be imposed upon any person who, in order to require 
or enforce the payment of a debt, shall compel the debtor 



100 

to work for him, against his will, as household servant or 
farm laborer. 

CHAPTER TWO 

CRIMES AGAINST SECURITY 

Section One. — Abandonment of helpless persons <nnl 
exploitation of minors 

Art. 275. Abandonment of persons in danger and aban- 
donment of one's own victim. — The penalty of arresto 
mayor shall be imposed upon : 

1. Anyone who shall fail to render assistance to any 
person whom he shall find in an uninhabited place wounded 
or in danger of dying, when he can render such assistance 
without detriment to himself, unless such omission shall 
constitute a more serious offense. 

2 - An y«ne who shall fail to help or render assistance to 
another whom he has accidentally wounded or injured. 

3. Anyone who, having found an abandoned child under 
seven years of age, shall fail to deliver said child to the 
authorities or to his family, or shall fail to take him to a 
safe place. 

ARTf 276. Abandoning a minor. — The penalty of arresto 
mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed 
upon anyone who shall abandon a child under seven years 

wT CU3tod y of which is incumbent upon him. 
Hnnr«f»f tl l! death of the min <»- shall result from such aban- 
SEmJu * CU J lpi * it sha11 b e punished by prisidn corrcc- 
JS™ . lts medium and maximum periods; but if the life 
SLl I h - 1 have been in danger only, the penalty 
snan oe prun6n correccional in its minimum and medium 
periods. 

The provisions contained in the two preceding para- 
giapns shall not prevent the imposition of the penalty 
piovidicl for the act committed, when the same shall 
constitute a more serious offense. 



101 



Art. 277. Abandonment of minor by person entrusted 
ivith his custody; indifference of parents. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor and fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be 
imposed upon anyone who, having charge of the rearing 
or education of a minor, shall deliver said minor to a public 
institution or other persons, without the consent of the 
one who entrusted such child to his care or in the absence 
of the latter, without the consent of the proper authorities. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon the parents 
who shall neglect their children by not giving them the 
education which their station in life require and financial 
condition permit. 

Art. 278. Exploitation of minors.— The penalty of pri- 
sion correccional in its minimum and medium periods and a 
fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon: 

1. Any person who shall cause any boy or girl under 
sixteen years of age to perform any dangerous feat of 
balancing, physical strength or contortion. 

2. Any person who, being an acrobat, gymnast, rope- 
walker, diver, wild-animal tamer or circus manager or 
engaged in a similar calling, shall employ in exhibitions 
of these kinds children under sixteen years of age who are 
not his children or descendants. 

3. Any person engaged in any of the callings enumerated 
in the next preceding paragraph who shall employ any 
descendant of his under twelve years of age in such dan- 
gerous exhibitions. 

4. Any ascendant, guardian, teacher or person entrusted 
in any capacity with the care of a child under sixteen years 
of age, who shall deliver such child gratuitously to any 
person following any of the callings enumerated in para- 
graph 2 hereof, or to any habitual vagrant or beggar. 

If the delivery shall have been made in consideration of 
any price, compensation, or promise, the penalty shall in 
svery case be imposed in its maximum period. 

In either case, the guardian or curator convicted shall 
also be removed from office as guardian or curator; and 
in the case of the parents of the child, they may be de- 



102 



prived, temporarily or perpetually, in the discretion of the 
court, of their parental authority. 

5. Any person who shall induce any child under sixteen 
years of age to abandon the home of its ascendants, guard- 
ians, curators or teachers to follow any person engaged in 
any of the callings mentioned in paragraph 2 hereof, or 
to accompany any habitual vagrant or beggar. 

Art. 279. Additional penalties for other offenses. — The 
imposition of the penalties prescribed in the preceding 
articles, shall not prevent the imposition upon the same 
person of the penalty provided for any other felonies de- 
fined and punished by this Code. 

Section Two. — Trespass to dwelling 

Art. 280. Qualified trespass to dwelling. — Any private 
person who shall enter the dwelling of another against the 
latter's will, shall be punished by arresto mayor and a fine 
not exceeding 1,000 pesos. 

If the offense be committed by means of violence or in- 
timidation, the penalty shall be prision correctional in its 
medium and maximum periods and a fine not exceeding 
1,000 pesos. 

The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to 
any person who shall enter another's dwelling for the pur- 
pose of preventing some serious harm to himself, the oc- 
cupants of the dwelling or a third person, nor shall it be 
applicable to any person who shall enter a dwelling for the 
purpose of rendering some service to humanity or justice, 
nor to anyone who shall enter cafes, taverns, inns and 
other public houses, while the same are open. 

Art. 281. qther forms of trespass.— The penalty of 
arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who shall enter the 
closed premises or the fenced estate of another, while either 
of them are uninhabited, if the prohibition to enter be 
manifest and the trespasser has not secured the permission 
of the owner or the caretaker thereof. 



103 



Section Three. — Threats and coercion 

ART. 282. Grave threats.— Any person who shall threaten 
another with the infliction upon the person, honor or prop- 
erty of the latter or of his family of any wrong amounting 
to a crime, shall suffer: 

1. The penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed 
by law for the crime he threatened to commit, if the offender 
shall have made the threat demanding money or imposing 
any other condition, even though not unlawful, and said 
offender shall have attained his purpose. If the oftender 
shall not have attained his purpose, the penalty lower oy 
two degrees shall be imposed. 

If the threat be made in writing or through a middle- 
man, the penalty shall be imposed in its maximum period. 

2. The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 
500 pesos, if the threat shall not have been made subject 
to a condition. 

ART. 283. Light threats.— A threat to commit a wrong 
not constituting a crime, made in the manner expressed m 
subdivision 1 of the next preceding article, shall be punished 
by arresto mayor. 

ART. 284. Bond for good behavior.— In all cases falling 
within the two next preceding articles, the person making 
the threats may also be required to give bail not to moles 
the person threatened, or if he shall fail to give such oau. 
he shall be sentenced to (testier ro. 

ART. 285. Other light threats.— The penalty ot arre ^° Q 
menor in its minimum period or a fine not exceeding 
pesos shall be imposed upon: 

1. Any person who, without being included in the pro- 
visions of the next preceding article, shall threaten anotnei 
with a weapon, or draw such weapon in a quarrel, unless 
it be in lawful self-defense. 

2. Any person who, in the heat of anger, shall orally 
threaten another with some harm not constituting a crime, 
and who by subsequent acts shows that he did not persist 



104 



in the idea involved in his threat, provided that the circum- 
stances of the offense shall not bring it within the provisions 
of article 282 of this Code. 

3. Any person who shall orally threaten to do another 
any harm not constituting a felony. 

ART. 286. Grave coercions. — The penalty of arresto ma- 
yor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed 
upon any person who, without authority of law, shall, by 
means of violence, prevent another from doing something 
not prohibited by law, or compel him to do something 
against his will, whether it be right or wrong. 

If the coercion be committed for the purpose of compelling 
another to perform any religious act or to prevent him from 
so doing, the penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed. 

Art. 287. Light coercions. — Any person who, by means 
of violence, shall seize any thing belonging to his debtor for 
the purpose of applying the same to the payment of the 
debt, shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor in its mini- 
mum period and a fine equivalent to the value of the thing, 
but in no case less than 75 pesos. 

Any other coercions or unjust vexations shall be punished 
by arresto menor or a fine ranging from 5 to 200 pesos, 
or both. 

Art. 288. Other similar coercions — (Compulsory pur- 
chase of merchandise and payment of wages by means of 
tokens) .—The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine ranging 
form 200 to 500 pesos, or both, shall be imposed upon any 
person, agent or officer of any association or corporation 
who shall force or compel, directly or indirectly, or shall 
knowingly permit any laborer or employee employed bv 
him or by such firm or corporation to be forced or com- 
pelled, to purchase merchandise or commodities of any kind. 

The same penalties shall be imposed upon any person who 
shall pay the wages due a laborer or employee employed by 
him, by means of tokens or objects other than the legal 
tender currency of the Philippine Islands, unless expressly 
requested by the laborer or employee. 



105 



ART. 289. Formation, maintenance and prohibition of 
combination of capital or labor through violence or 
threats. — The penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not ex- 
ceeding 300 pesos shall be imposed upon any person who, 
for the purpose of organizing, maintaining or preventing 
coalitions of capital or labor, strike of laborers or lockout 
of employers, shall employ violence or threats in such a 
degree as to compel or force the laborers or employers in 
the free and legal exercise of their industry or work, if the 
act shall not constitute a more serious offense in accord- 
ance with the provisions of this Code. 

CHAPTER THREE 

DISCOVERY AND REVELATION OF SECRETS 

Art. 290. Discovering secrets through seizure of corre- 
sj)ondence. — The penalty of prisidn correctional in its min- 
imum and medium periods and fine not exceeding 500 pesos 
shall be imposed upon any private individual who in order 
to discover secrets of another, shall seize his papers or 
letters and reveal the contents thereof. 

If the offender shall not reveal such secrets, the penalty 
shall be arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos. 

This provision shall not be applicable to parents, guard- 
ians, or persons entrusted with the custody of minors with 
respect to the papers or letters of the children or minors 
placed under their care or custody, nor to spouses with re- 
spect to the papers or letters of either of them. ' 

Art. 291. Revealing secrets with abuse of office.— The 
penalty of arresto mayor and a fine not exceeding 500 pesos 
shall be imposed upon any manager, employee, or servant 
who, in such capacity, shall learn the secrets of his prin- 
cipal or master and shall reveal such secrets. 

Art. 292. Revelation of industrial secrets.— The penalty 
of prisidn correccional in its minimum and medium periods 
and fine not exceeding 500 pesos shall be imposed upon 
the person in charge, employee or workman of any man- 
ufacturing or industrial establishment who, to the prej- 
udice of the owner thereof, shall reveal the secrets of the 
industry of the latter. 



106 

Title Ten 
CRIMES AGAINST PROPERTY 
CHAPTER ONE 

ROBBERY IN GENERAL 

Art. 293. Who are guilty of robbery. — Any person who, 
with intent to gain, shall take any personal property be- 
longing to another, by means of violence against or intim- 
idation of any person, or using force upon anything, shall 
be guilty of robbery. 

Section One. — Robbery with violence against or 
intimidation of persons 

ART. 294. Robbery with violence against or intimidation 

of persons— Penalties.— Any person guilty of robbery with 

J e ,, USe ^ f violence against or intimidation of any person 
shall suffer: 

1. The penalty of reclusion perpehta to death, when by 

2fnl° r °u occasion of the robbery, the crime of homicide 
shall have been committed. 

rifi T He pe , nalty of reclusion temporal in its medium pe- 
riod to reclusion perpetua, when the robbery shall have 
if bv ^ C a 0mPanied by ra P* or intentional mutilation, or 
nhvL J S ° n ° r 0n occasi on of such robbery, any of the 
shall wiT neS penaliz ed in subdivision 1 of article 263 
snan have been inflicted. 

on occasion^ «.° f reclusi °n temporal, when by reason or 

penalized in sttbdltv any of the physical injU1 ' ieS 

next preceding ° n 2 of the article mentioned in the 

4- The penaltv Pa f agraPh ' Sha11 have been inflicted - 
reclusion temporal mayor in its maxiim,m P eriod to 

or intimidation emnW 1 ? mediUm period ' if the Vi ° len ° e 
shall have been ? the commission of the robbery 

for the commission of ri? degree clearly unnecessary 

execution, the offended °' When in the C ° m ' Se ° f * 
not resn^^-wrr . haU have inflicted upon any person 
toiJKSS k r ? comm ^«ion any of the physical 
mjur.es covered by subdivisions 3 and 4 of said article 263. 



107 



5. The penalty of prisio-n correctional in its maximum 
period to prisi6n mayor in its medium period in other cases. 
(As amended by Republic Act No. 18.) 

Art. 295. Robbery with physical injuries, committed in 
an uninhabited place or by a band. — If the offenses men- 
tioned in the next preceding article shall be committed in 
an uninhabited place or by a band, or by attacking a train, 
car, vehicle, vessel or craft, or by entering any compart- 
ment thereof or, in any manner, taking the persons therein 
by surprise in the respective conveyances, the offender shall 
be punished by the maximum period of the proper penalties. 

In the same cases, the penalty next higher in degree 
shall be imposed upon the leader of the band. (As amended 
by Republic Act No. 12.) 

Art. 296. Definition of a band and penalty incurred by 
the members thereof. — When more than three armed male- 
factors take part in the commission of a robbery, it shall 
be deemed to have been committed by a band. When any 
of the arms used in the commission of the offense be an 
unlicensed firearm, the penalty to be imposed upon all tne 
malefactors shall be the maximum of the corresponding 
penalty provided by law, without prejudice to the criminal 
liability for illegal possession of such unlicensed firearm. 

Any member of a band who is present at the commis- 
sion of a robbery by the band, shall be punished as prin- 
cipal of any of the assaults committed by the band, unless ,n 
be shown that he attempted to prevent the same. ^ 
amended by Republic Act No. 12.) . . . 

Art. 297. Attempted and frustrated robbery commw _ 
under certain circumstances.— -When by reason or on _^ 
casion of an attempted or frustrated robbery a hom * cl< T b 
committed the person guilty of such offenses shall 
Punished by reclusidn temporal in its maximum period to 
reclusidn perpetua, unless the homicide committed sna 
deserve a higher penalty under the provisions of this Code. 

Art. 298. Execution of deeds by means of violence or in- 
timidation.— Any person who, with intent to defraud an- 
other, by means of violence or intimidation, shall compel him 
to sign, execute or deliver any public instrument or doc- 



108 



ument, shall be held guilty of robbery and punished by the 
penalties respectively prescribed in this Chapter. 

Section Two. — Robbery by the use of force upon things 
Art. 299. Robbery in an inhabited house or public build- 
ing or edifice devoted to worship. — Any armed person who 
shall commit robbery in an inhabited house or public build- 
ing or edifice devoted to religious worship, shall be punished 
by reclusion temporal, if the value of the property taken 
shall exceed 250 pesos, and if— 

(a) The malefactors shall enter the house or building in 
which the robbery was committed, by any of the following 
means : 

1. Through an opening not intended for entrance or 
egress. 

2. By breaking any wall, roof, or floor or breaking anv 
cloor or window. 

3- By using false keys, picklocks or similar tools. 
4. By using any fictitious name or pretending the ex- 
ercise of public authority. 
Or if— 

(b) The robbery be committed under any of the follow- 
ing circumstances : 

oth' B l- thC breakin S of doors > wardrobes, chests, or any 

ner kmd of locked or sealed furniture or receptacle; 
or f a S SUch f urniture or objects away to be broken 
™'Tf. 0 ^ outside the place of the robbery. (As 

w h y Republic Act No - 18 -> 

the nron 2? ° ffenders do not carry arms, and the value of 

in deirree^Ln i eX ° eedS 250 pesos ' the penalty next lower 
Th nal1 be ^Posed. 

»rmJ S w G + u Ule Sha11 be a PP"ed when the offenders are 
ceeT250 pesos! ° f the Pr ° perty taken .does not ex- 

thp W n,t n n Sa ; d f r^ 1 * 8 d ° not cai -^ ar ™ and the value of 
foe property taken does not exceed 250 pesos, they shall 
suffer the penalty prescribed in the two next preceding 
paragraphs, in its minimum period. 



109 



If the robbery be committed in one of the dependencies 
of an inhabited house, public building, or building" dedica- 
ted to religious worship, the penalties next lower in degree 
than those prescribed in this article shall be imposed. 

Art. 300. Robbery in an uninhabited place and by a 
band, — The robbery mentioned in the next preceding article, 
if committed in an uninhabited place and by a band, shall 
be punished by the maximum period of the penalty provided 
therefor. 

Art. 301. What is an inhabited house, public building or 
building dedicated to religious worship and their dependen- 
cies. — Inhabited house means any shelter, ship or vessel 
constituting the dwelling of one or more persons, even 
though the inhabitants thereof shall temporarily be absent 
therefrom when the robbery is committed. 

All interior courts, corrals, warehouses, granaries, barns, 
coachhouses, stables or other departments or inclosed places 
contiguous to the building or edifice, having an interior 
entrance connected therewith, and which form part of the 
whole, shall be deemed dependencies of an inhabited house, 
public building or building dedicated to religious worship. 

Orchards and other lands used for cultivation or produc- 
tion are not included in the terms of the next preceding 
paragraph, even if closed, contiguous to the building and 
having direct connection therewith. 

The term "public building ,, includes every building owned 
by the Government or belonging to a private person but 
used or rented by the Government, although temporarily 
unoccupied by the same. 

ART. 302. Robbery in an uninhabited place or in a private 
building. — Any robbery committed in an uninhabited place 
or in a building other than those mentioned in the first 
paragraph of article 299, if the value of the property taken 
exceeds 250 pesos, shall be punished by prisidn correccional 
in its medium and maximum periods provided that any of 
the following circumstances is present: 

1. If the entrance has been effected through any opening 
not intended for entrance or egress. 



110 



2. If any wall, roof, floor or outside door or window has 
been broken. 

3. If the entrance has been effected through the use of 
false keys, picklocks or other similar tools. 

4. If any door, wardrobe, chest, or any sealed or closed 
furniture or receptacle has been broken. 

5. If any closed or sealed receptacle, as mentioned in the 
preceding paragraph, has been removed, even if the same 
be broken open elsewhere. 

When the value of the property taken does not exceed 
250 pesos, the penalty next lower in degree shall be imposed. 

In the cases specified in articles 294, 295, 297, 299, 300, 
and 302 of this Code, when the property taken is mail mat- 
ter or large cattle, the offender shall suffer the penalties 
next higher in degree than those provided in said articles. 
(As amended by Com. Act No. 417.) 

Art. 303. Robbery of cereals, fruits or firewood in an 
uninhabited place or private building.— In the cases enu- 
merated in articles 299 and 302, when the robbery consists 
m the taking of cereals, fruits, or firewood, the culprit 
shall suffer the penalty next lower in degree than that 
prescribed in said articles. 

Art. 304. Possession of picklocks or similar tools. — Any 
persons who shall without lawful cause have in his posses- 
sion picklocks or similar tools specially adapted to the com- 
mission of the crime of robbery, shall be punished by 
atresto mayor in its maximum period to prision correccio- 
natm its minimum period. 

The same penalty shall be imposed upon any person who 

shall malCG SU ° h t00ls ' If the offender be a locksmith, he 
s a suffer the penalty of prision correccional in its medium 
and maximum periods. 

Art 305. False keys.— The term "false keys" shall be 
deemed to include: 

1. The tools mentioned in the next preceding article. 

* ^ enuine keys stolen from the owner. 

o. Any keys other than those intended by the owner for 

6 m the lock forcibly opened by the offender. 



Ill 



CHAPTER TWO 

BRIGANDAGE 

Art. 306. Who are brigands— Penalty.— Whew more than 
three armed persons form a band of robbers for the pur- 
pose of committing robbery in the highway, or kidnapping 
persons for the purpose of extortion or obtain ransom, for 
any other purpose to be attained by means of force and 
violence, they shall be deemed highway robbers or brigands 
Persons found guilty of this offense shall be punished 
by prision mayor in its medium period to reclusion temporal 
in its minimum period if the act or acts committed by them 
are not punishable by higher penalties, in which case, thev 
shall suffer such high penalties. 

If any of the arms carried by any of said persons be an 
unlicensed firearm, it shall be presumed that said P e . rs( ? n 
are highway robbers or brigands, and in case of c° nvictl ° 
the penalty shall be imposed in the maximum period. I 
amended by Republic Act No. 12.) 

Art. 307. Aiding and abetting a band of brigands---A > 
person knowingly and in any manner aiding, abetting 
protecting a band of brigands as described in the next pre- 
ceding article, or giving them information of the mo y - 
ments of the police or other peace officers of the G° ve11 " 
ment or of the forces of the United States Army, when tne 
latter are acting in aid of the Government, or acquin g 
or receiving the property taken by such brigands, sliai^ ^ 
punished by prision correccional in its medium pei 
prision mayor in its minimum period. - 

It shall be presumed that the person performing any 
the acts provided in this article has performed them k 
ingly, unless the contrary is proven. 

CHAPTER THREE 

THEFT 

Art. 308. Who are liable for theft.-Theft is committed 
by any person who, with intent to gain but without violence 
against or intimidation of persons nor force upon things, 
shall take personal property of another without the latter s 
consent. 



112 



Theft is likewise committed by: 

1. Any person who, having found lost property, shall fail 
to deliver the same to the local authorities or to its owner ; 

2. Any person who, after having maliciously damaged 
the property of another, shall remove or make use of the 
fruits or object of the damage caused by him ; and 

3. Any person who shall enter an inclosed estate or a field 
where trespass is forbidden or which belongs to another 
and without the consent of its owner, shall hunt or fish 
upon the same or shall gather fruits, cereals, or other forest 
or farm products. 

Art. 309. Penalties.— Any person guilty of theft shall 
be punished by : 

1. The penalty of prision mayor in its minimum and 
medium periods, if the value of the thing stolen is more 
than 12,000 pesos but does not exceed 22,000 pesos; but 
if the value of the thing stolen exceeds the latter amount, 
the penalty shall be the maximum period of the one pre- 
scribed in this paragraph, and one year for each additional 
ten thousand pesos, but the total of the penalty which may 
be imposed shall not exceed twenty years. In such cases, 
and in connection with the accessory penalties which may 
be imposed and for the purpose of the other provisions of 
this Code, the penalty shall be termed prision mayor or 
reclusion temporal, as the case may be. 

2. The penalty of prision correccional in its medium and 
maximum periods, if the value of the thing stolen is more 
than 6,000 pesos but does not exceed 12,000 pesos. 

3. The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum 
and medium periods, if the value of the property stolen 
is more than 200 pesos but does not exceed 6,000 pesos. 

4. Arrcsto mayor in its medium period to prision correc- 
cional in its minimum period, if the value of the property 
stolen is over 50 pesos but does not exceed 200 pesos. 

5. Arresto mayor to its full extent, if such value is over 
5 pesos but does not exceed 50 pesos. 

6. Arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods, 
if such value does not exceed 5 pesos. 



113 



7. Ai t'-sto menar or a line Dot exceeding 200 pesos, if 
the theft is committed under the circumstances enumerated 
in paragraph 3 of the next preceding article and the value 
of the thing stolen does not exceed 5 pesos. If such valu^ 
exceeds said amount, the provisions of any of the five pre- 
ceding subdivisions shall be made applicable. 

8. Arresto menor in its minimum period or a fine not 
exceeding 50 pesos, when the value of the thing stolen is 
not over 5 pesos, and the offender shall have acted under 
the impulse of hunger, poverty, or the difficulty of earning 
a livelihood for the support of himself or his family. 

Art. 310. Qualified theft.— The crime of theft shall be 
punished by the penalties next higher in degree than those 
respectively specified in the next preceding article, if com- 
mitted by a domestic servant, or with grave abuse of con- 
fidence, or if the property stolen consists of coconuts or 
fish taken from a fishpond or fishery. The maximum pe- 
riod of the penalty prescribed in this article shall be imposed 
if the property stolen is mail matter or large cattle. (As 
amended by Com. Act No. 117.) 

Art. 811. Theft of the property of the National Library 
and National Museum. — ]f the property stolen be any prop- 
erty of the National Library or of the National Museum, 
the penalty shall be arresto mayor or a fine ranging from 
200 to 500 pesos, or both, unless a higher penalty should 
be provided under other provisions of this Code, in which 
case, the offender shall be punished by such higher penalty. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

USURPATION 

Art. 312. Occupation of real property or usurpation of 
real rights in property.— Any person who, by means oi 
violence against or intimidation of persons, shall take pos- 
session of any real property or shall usurp any real rights 
in property belonging to another, in addition to the penalty 
incurred for the acts of violence executed by him, shall be 
punished by a fine of from 50 to 100 per centum of the gain 
which he shall have obtained, but not less than 75 pesos. 

- - B 



114 



If the value of the gain cannot be ascertained, a fine of 
from 200 to 500 pesos shall be imposed. 

Art. 313. Altering boundaries or landmarks.— Any per- 
son who shall alter the boundary marks or monuments of 
towns, provinces, or estates, or any other marks intended 
to designate the boundaries of the same, shall be punished 
by arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 100 pesos, or both. 

CHAPTER FIVE 

CULPABLE INSOLVENCY 

Art. 314. Fraudulent insolvency. — Any person who shall 
abscond with his property to the prejudice of his creditors, 
3hall suffer the penalty of prisidn mayor, if he be a mer- 
chant, and the penalty of prision correccional in its maxi- 
mum period to prisidn mayor in its medium period, if he 
be not a merchant. 

CHAPTER SIX 

SWINDLING AND OTHER DECEITS 

ART. 315. Smndling (estafa).— Any person who shall de- 
fraud another by any of the means mentioned hereinbelow 
shall be punished by: 

1st. The penalty of prisidn correccional in its maximum 
period to prision mayor in its minimum period, if the 
amount of the fraud is over 12,000 pesos but does not 
exceed 22,000 pesos, and if such amount exceeds the latter 
sum, the penalty provided in this paragraph shall be im- 
posed in its maximum period, adding one year for each 
additional 10,000 pesos; but the total penalty which may 
be imposed shall not exceed twenty years. In such cases, 
and in connection with the accessory penalties which may 
be imposed and for the purpose of the other provisions of 
this Code, the penalty shall be termed prision mayor or re- 
clusion temporal, as the case may be. 

2d. The penalty of prision correccional in its minimum 
and medium periods, if the amount of the fraud is over 
6,000 pesos but does not exceed 12,000 pesos. 



115 

3d, The penalty of wrresto manor in its maximum period 
to prision correctional in its minimum period, if such 
amount is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 6,000 pesos; 
and 

4th. By arresto mayor in its medium and maximum pe- 
riods, if such amount does not exceed 200 pesos, provided 
that in the four cases mentioned, the fraud be committed 
by any of the following means: 

1« With unfaithfulness or confidence, namely : 

<*) By altering the substance^ quantity, or quality oi 
anything of value which the offender shall deliver by virtue 
J* an obligation to do so, even though such obligation oe 
b ased on an immoral or illegal consideration. 



to) By misappropriating or converting, to ItoJjJJJ 
°t another, money, goods, or any other personal piopei 
received by the offender in trust or on commission, oi 



— uy m« uiienaer in irust «»• . i„; n(r the 

administration, or under any other obligation mvo lving 
duty to make delivery of or to return the "™ e J^-*3: 
*ttch obligation be totally or partially guaranteed d> 
0l * by denying having received such money, gooa*. 
Property. £ 

(c) By taking undue advantage of the ^^^nt 
offended party in blank, and by writing an> ^ ^ 
above such signature in blank, to the prejuai 
offended party or any third person. pre tenses or 

. 2. By means of any of the following iffi ' ^ Sivwith 
tr audulent acts executed prior to or simuiw 
tn e commission of the fraud : , pretending to 

(a) By using fictitious name, or fa |s - . operty , credit, 
Possess power, influence, qualifications, i ^ by meang 
agency, business or imaginary transacts •• 
°f other similar deceits. . r weight of any- 

(6) By altering the quality, fineness 
thing pertaining to his art or bu3in , eSS n y Government em- 
(c) By pretending to have bribed ca lumny which 

Ployee, without prejudice to the actl0 " o brm g against the 
the offended party mav deem proper . ^ pun i 3 hed by 
offender. In this case, the offender sn 
the maximum period of the penalty 



116 



(d) By postdating a check, or issuing such check in pay- 
ment of an obligation the offender knowing that at the time 
he had no funds in the bank, or the funds deposited by 
him in the bank were not sufficient to cover the amount 
of the check, and without informing the payee of such 
circumstances. 

(e) By obtaining any food, refreshment or accommoda- 
tion at a hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding house, lodging 
house, or apartment house and the like without paying there- 
for, with intent to defraud the proprietor or manager there- 
of, or by obtaining credit at a hotel, inn, restaurant, boarding 
house, lodging house, or apartment house by the use of any 
false pretense, or by abandoning or surreptitiously remov- 
ing any part of his baggage from a hotel, inn, restaurant, 
boarding house, lodging house or apartment house after 
obtaining credit, food, refreshment or accommodation 
therein without paying for his food, refreshment or accom- 
modation. (As amended by Com. Act No. 157.) 

3. Through any of the following f raudulent means : 

(a) By inducing another, by means of deceit, to sign any 
document. 

(*>) By resorting to some fraudulent practice to insure 
success in a gambling game. 

(c) By removing, concealing or destroying, in whole or 
m part, any court record, office files, document or any other 
papers. 

Art. 316. Other forms of swindling. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor in its minimum and medium periods and a 
fine of not less than the value of the damage caused and 
not more than three times such value, shall be imposed 
upon: 

1. Any person who, pretending to be the owner of any 
real property, shall convey, sell, encumber or mortgage 
the same. 

2. Any person who, knowing that real property is en- 
cumbered, shall dispose of the same, although such encum- 
brance be not recorded. 



117 



3. The owner of any personal property who shall wrong- 
fully take it from its lawful possessor, to the prejudice of 
the latter or any third person. 

1. Any person who, to the prejudice of another, shall 
execute any fictitious contract. 

5. Any person who shall accept any compensation given 
him under the belief that it was in payment of services 
rendered or labor performed by him, when in fact he did 
not actually perform such services or labor. 

6. Any person who, while being a surety in a bond given 
in a criminal or civil action, without express authority from 
the court or before the cancellation of his bond or be£ ° r * 
being relieved from the obligation contracted by him, sna 
sell, mortgage, or, in any other manner, encumber the rea 
property or properties with which he guaranteed the tu - 
tillment of such obligation. 

Art. 317. Stoindling a minor.— Any person who, taking 
advantage of the inexperience or emotions or feelings o 
minor, to his detriment, shall induce him to assume 8 y 
obligation or to give any release or execute a tran ^ 
of any property right in consideration of some loan 
money, credit or other personal property, whether the o 
clearly appears in the document or is shown in any o . 
form, shall suffer the penalty of wrresfo mayor and a ^ 
of a sum ranging from 10 to 50 per cent of the value 
the obligation contracted by the minor. 

Art. 318. Other deceits.— The penalty of airesto 
and a fine of not less than the amount of the damage e& _ 
and not more than twice such amount shall be imposed PV^ 
any person who shall defraud or damage andther, w 
other deceit not mentioned in the preceding articles o 
chapter. g 
Any person who, for profit or gain, shall interpret dre * 
make forecasts, tell fortunes, or take advantage of tne 
dulity of the public in any other similar manner, shall su 
the penalty of wrresto menor or a fine not exceeding * 
pesos. 



118 



CHAPTER SEVEN 
CHATTEL MORTGAGE 

Art. 319. Removal, sale or pledge of mortgaged prop- 
erty.— The penalty of arresto mayor or a fine amounting to 
twice the value of the property shall be imposed upon : 

1. Any person who shall knowingly remove any personal 
property mortgaged under the Chattel Mortgage Law to 
any province or city other than the one in which it was 
located at the time of the execution of the mortgage, with- 
out the written consent of the mortgagee or his executors, 
administrators or assigns. 

2. Any mortgagor who shall sell or pledge personal prop- 
erty already pledged, or any part thereof, under the terms 
of the Chattel Mortgage Law, without the consent of the 
mortgagee written on the back of the mortgage and noted 
on the record thereof in the office of the register of deeds 
of the province where such property is located. 



CHAPTER EIGHT 

ARSON AND OTHER CRIMES INVOLVING DESTRUCTION 

Art. 320. Destructive arson.— The penalty of rechisidn 
temporal in its maximum period to rechisidn perpetua shall 
be imposed upon any person who shall burn : 

1. Any arsenal, shipyard, storehouse or military powder 
or fireworks factory, ordnance storehouse, archives or gen- 
eral museum of the Government. 

2. Any passenger train or motor vehicle in motion or 
vessel out of port. 

3. In an inhabited place, any storehouse or factory of 
inflammable or explosive materials. 

1. Any theater, church, cockpit, or other building where 
meetings are held, when occupied by a numerous assem- 
blage. 

ART. 321. Other forms of arson.— When the arson con- 
sists in the burning of other property and under the cir- 
cumstances given hereunder, the offender shall be punished : 



119 



1. J3y rcdusi&n temporal to rcchtsioH pcrpdua, it' the 

offender shall set fire to any building, farmhouse, ware- 
house, hut, shelter, or vessel in port, knowing it to be 
occupied at the time by one or more persons. 

2. By rechision temporal: 

(a) If the building burned is a public building and the 
value of the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos; 

(b) If an inhabited house or any other building in which 
people are accustomed to meet is set on fire, and the cul- 
prit did not know that such house or building was occupied 
at the time, or if he shall §et fire to a moving freight 
train or motor vehicle, and the value of the damage caused 
exceeds 6,000 pesos. 

3. By pri$i6n mayor: 

(a) If the value of the damage caused in the cases 
mentioned in the next preceding subdivision does not ex- 
ceed 6,000 pesos. 

(6) If a building not used as a dwelling or place of 
assembly, located in a populated place, is set on fire, and 
the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos; 

(<- ) If a farm, sugar mill, cane mill, mill central, bam- 
boo groves or any similar plantation is set on fire, and 
the damage caused exceeds 6,000 pesos. 

4. By prision correctional in its maximum period to pri- 
sidn mayor in its medium period, when the damage caused 
exceeds 6,000 pesos and the following are set on fire: 

(a) A building used as a dwelling located in an unin- 
habited place; or 

(b) Grain fields, pasture lands, forests, or plantings. 

5. By priaidn correctional in its medium period to pn- 
$i6n mayor in its minimum period, when the damage caused 
is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 1,000 pesos, and 
any of the property referred to in paragraphs (a) and (6) 
of the next preceding subdivision is set on fire; but when 
the value of such property does not exceed 200 pesos, the 
penalty next lower in degree than that prescribed in this 
subdivision shall be imposed when the property burned is 
a building used as a dwelling in an uninhabited place, and 



120 



the penalty of arresto menor and a tine ranging from fifty 
to one hundred per centum of the damage caused shall be 
imposed, when the property burned consist of grain fields, 
pasture lands, forests or plantations. 

6. The penalty of prision correctional in its medium and 
maximum periods, if the damage caused in the cases men- 
tioned in paragraphs (b) and (c) of subdivision 3 of this 
article does not exceed 6,000 pesos but is over 200. 

7. The penalty of prision correctional in its minimum 
and medium periods, if the damage caused in the cases 
mentioned in paragraphs (6) and (c) of subdivision 3 of 
this article does not exceed 200 pesos. 

Art. 322. Cases of arson not included in the preceding 
articles. — Cases of arson not included in the next preceding 
articles shall be punished : 

1. By arresto mayor in its medium and maximum periods, 
when the damage caused does not exceed 50 pesos; 

2. By arresto mayor in its maximum period to prision 
correctional in its minimum period, when the damage caused 
is over 50 pesos but does not exceed 200; 

3. By prision correctional in its minimum and medium 
periods, if the damage caused is over 200 pesos Jbut does 
not exceed 1,000 ; and 

4. By prision correctional in its medium and maximum 
periods, if it is over 1,000 pesos. 

ART. 323. Arson of property of small value. — The arson 
of any uninhabited hut, storehouse, barn, shed, or any 
other property the value of which does not exceed 25 pesos, 
committed at a time or under circumstances which clearly 
exclude all danger of the fire spreading, shall not be pun- 
ished by the penalties respectively prescribed in this chap- 
ter, but in accordance with the damage caused and under 
the provisions of the following chapter. 

Art. 324. Crimes involving destruction. — Any person 
who shall cause destruction by means of explosion, dis- 
charge of electric current, inundation, sinking or stranding 
of a vessel, intentional damaging of the engine of said ves- 
sel, taking up the rails from a railway track, maliciously 



121 



changing railway signals for the safety of moving trains, 
destroying telegraph wires and telegraph posts, or those 
of any other system, and, in general, by using any other 
agency or means of destruction as effective as those above 
enumerated, shall be punished by reclusi&n temporal if the 
commission has endangered the safety of any person : other- 
wise, the penalty of prision mayor shall be imposed. 

Art. 325. Burning one's own property as a means to com- 
mit arson. — Any person guilty of arson or causing great 
destruction of property belonging to another shall suffer the 
penalties prescribed in this chapter, even though he shall 
have set fire to or destroyed his own property for the pur- 
pose of committing the crime. 

Art. 326. Setting fire to property exclusively owned by 
the offender.— If the property burned shall be the exclu- 
sive property of the offender, he shall be punished by 
arresto mayor in its maximum period to prisi&n, corrcceiQ- 
nal in its minimum period, if the arson shall have been 
committed for the purpose of defrauding or causing damage 
to another, or if, though such purpose be lacking, said dam- 
age or prejudice shall actually have been caused, or if the 
thing burned shall have been a building in an inhabited 
place. 

CHAPTER NINE 

MALICIOUS MISCHIEF 

ART. 327. Who are liable for malicious mischief .--AW 
person who shall deliberately cause to the property o 
another any damage not falling within the terms ol W 
next preceding chapter shall be guilty of malicious mi - 
chief. 

Art. 328. Special eases of malicious mischief. ~^ ny 1>er " 
son who shall cause damage to obstruct the performance 
of public functions, or using any poisonous or corrosive 
substance; or spreading any infection or contagion among 
cattle; or who causes damage to the property of the Na- 
tional Museum or National Library, or. to any archive or 



122 



registry, waterworks, road, promenade, or any oilier thing 
used in common by the public, shall be punished: 

1. By pruti&a correctional in its minimum and medium 
periods, if the value of the damage caused exceeds 1,000 
pesos ; 

2. By arresto mayor, if such value does not exceed the 
above-mentioned amount but is over 200 pesos ; and 

3. By arresto menor, if such value does not' exceed 200 
pesos. 

ART. 329. Other mischiefs.— The mischiefs not included 
in the next preceding article shall be punished: 

1. By arresto mayor in its medium and maximum 
periods, if the value of the damage caused exceeds 1,000 
pesos ; 

2 By arresto mayor in its minimum and medium pe- 
riods, ii such value is over 200 pesos but does not exceed 
1,000; and 

3 By arresto menor or fine of not less than the value 
M the damage caused and not more than 200 pesos, if the 
amount involved does not exceed 200 pesos or cannot be 
estimated. (Amended by Com. Act No. 3999.) 

Art. 330. Damages and obstruction to means of commu- 
nication.— The penalty of prisidn correctional in its me- 
dium and maximum periods shall be imposed upon anv 
fines' Sha " damage a " y raihra y, telegraph or tele- 

H the damage shall result in any derailment of cars, 
coil won or other accident, the penalty of prisidn mayor 
Sftafi be imposed, without prejudice to the criminal liability 
oMhe offender for the other consequences of his criminal 

For the purpose of the provisions of this article, the 
elect™ wires, traction cables, signal system and other 
things pertaining to railways, shall be deemed to constitute 
an integral part of a railway system. 

ART. 331. Destroying or damaging statues, public monu- 
ments or pamtings.-Any person who shall destroy or 
damage statues or any other useful or ornamental public 



123 



monument, shall suffer the penalty of arresto mayor in 
its medium period to prision correctional in its minimum 
period. 

Any person who shall destroy or damage any useful or 
ornamental painting of a public nature shall suffer the 
penalty of arresto manor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos, 
or both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of 
the court. 

CHAPTER TEN 

EXEMPTION FROM CRIMINAL LIABILITY IN CRIMES 
AGAINST PROPERTY 

Art. 332. Persons exempt from criminal liability. — No 
criminal, but only civil liability, shall result from the com- 
mission of the crime of theft, swindling or malicious mis- 
chief committed or caused mutually by the following- 
person : 

1. Spouses, ascendants and descendants, or relatives by 
affinity in the same line; 

2. The widowed spouse with respect to the property 
which belonged to the deceased spouse before the same shall 
have passed into the possession of another; and 

3. Brothers and sisters and brothers-in-law and sisters- 
in-law, if living together. 

The exemption established by this article shall not be 
applicable to strangers participating in the commission of 
the crime. 

Title Eleven 
CRIMES AGAINST CHASTITY 
CHAPTER one 

adultery and concubinage 

ART. 333. Who are gzcilty of adultery.— Adultery is com- 
mitted by any married woman who shall have sexual inter- 
course with a man not her husband and by the man who 
has carnal knowledge of her, knowing her to be married, 
even if the marriage be subsequently declared void. 



124 



Adultery shali be punished by priti&m correctional in ite 
medium and maximum periods. 

If the person guilty of adultery committed this offense 
while being abandoned without justification by the offended 
spouse, the penalty next lower in degree than that provided 
in the next preceding paragraph shall be imposed. 

Art. 334. Concubinage. — Any husband who shall keep a 
mistress in the conjugal dwelling, or, shall have sexual 
intercourse, under scandalous circumstances, with a woman 
who is not his wife, or shall cohabit with her in any other 
place, shall be punished by piision correctional in its mini- 
mum and medium periods. 

The concubine shall suffer the penalty of destierro. 

CHAPTER TWO 

RAPE AND ACTS OF LASCIVIOUSNESS 

ART. 335. When and how rape is committed. — Rape is 
committed by having carnal knowledge of a woman under 
any of the following circumstances: 

1. By using force or intimidation; 

2. When the woman is deprived of reason or otherwise 
unconscious; and 

3. When the woman is under twelve years of age, even 
though neither of the circumstances mentioned in the two 
next preceding paragraphs shall be present. 

The crime of rape shall be punished by reclusidn tern po- 
red. 

Art. 336. Acts of lasciviousness. — Any person who shall 
commit any act of lasciviousness upon other persons of 
either sex, under any of the circumstances mentioned in 
the preceding article, shall be punished by priM&n correc- 
tional. 

CHAPTER THREE 

SEDUCTION, CORRUPTION OF MINORS AND 
WHITE SLAVE TRADE 

ART. 337. Qualified seduction. — The seduction of a virgin 
over twelve years and under eighteen years of age. com- 



125 



Biitted by any person in public authority, priest, house- 
servant, domestic, guardian, teacher, or any person who. 
in any capacity, shall be entrusted with the education or 
custody of the woman .seduced, shall be punished by pns&n 
c&rreccional in its minimum and medium periods. 

The penalty next higher in degree shall be imposed upon 
any person who shall seduce his sister or descendant, 
whether or not she be a virgin or over eighteen years ot age. 

Under the provisions of this Chapter seduction is com- 
mitted when the offender has carnal knowledge ot any o 
the persons and under the circumstances described herein. 

Art. 338. Simple seduction'-^he seduction of a woman 
who is single or a widow of good reputation, over two w 
but under eighteen years of age, committed by means 
deceit, shall be punished by arresto manor. 

ART. 339. Acts of lascvoUmsness with the consent of v 
"fjendcd party.— The penalty of arresto mayor shall oe 
posed to punish any other acts of lasciviousness comm 
by the same persons and the same circumstances as 
provided in articles 337 and 338. , shaU 

Art. 340. Corruption of minors.— Any person wno > 
habitually or with abuse of authority or confidence, p ^ 
or facilitate the prostitution or corruption of person ^ 
age to satisfy the lust of another, shall be punlS "* iods , 
prisidn correctional in its minimum and medium P ^ 
and if the culprit be a public officer, he shall also sun 
penalty of temporary absolute disqualification. 

ART. 341. White slave Irade.-Th* penalty of P> V «™ ^ 
rreccional in its medium and maximum P erl0d J^ |n(ler any 
posed upon any person who, in any manner, oi 
pretext, shall engage in the business or shall pro jr 
titution or shall enlist the services of women foi tne p 
pose of prostitution. 

CHAPTER FOUR 

ABDUCTION 

ART. 342. Forcible abduction^The abduction ot any 
woman against her will and with lewd designs shall be 
punished by reclusi&n temporal 



126 



The same penalty shall be imposed in every case, if the 
female abducted be under twelve years of age. 

Art. 343. Consented abduction.— -The abduction of a vir- 
gin over twelve and under eighteen years of ago, carried 
out with her consent and with lewd designs, shall be punish- 
ed by the penalty of prisidn correctional in its minimum 
and medium periods. 

CHAPTER FIVK 

PROVISIONS RELATIVE TO THE PRECEDING CHAPTERS OF 

Title Eleven 
,.t RT - 34 t Pr osecuti*n of the cnmes of adultery, concu- 
T,. (lnctwn > abduction, rape and acts of lascivious- 
Z i Cnme3 0f adultery and concubinage shall not 

spouse 8 GXCePt UP °" a com P ,a5nt flled l >y the offended 

u-;I he ° ffended P art y cannot institute criminal prosecution * 
W rthout including both the guilty parties, if they are both 

Hrn!'iT'' » aDy case ' if he sha11 have consented or par- 
doned the offenders. 

eiS 0ffens f of seduction, abduction, rape or acts of las- 
e viousness, shall not be prosecuted except upon a complaint 
or offended P art y or her parents, grandparents. 
nr«r , n ° r ' m any casc > if the offender has been ex- 
may be P a y ab ° Ve named P ersons - as thr 
In 

and ran? 8 ^ seduct io». abduction, acts of lasciviousness 
oartv IhJ marria ge of the offender with the offended 
DenStv lu ? tlnguish the «iminal action or remit the 
Srann e ^ n ln l P0Sed Upon him " Th e provisions of this 
comoHc?A T a,S0 be applicable to the coprincipals, ac- 
S :i d aCCeSS ° rieS aft6r the f act of the above-men- 

aatitlt ^ 5 \ C j ivil J; iabi ^y of persons guilty of crimes 

ucZ ^f V r ^ er80nS gUilty of ™Pe, seduction or ab- 
duction, shall also be sentenced: 

1- To indemnify the offended woman. 



127 



2. To acknowledge the offspring, unless the law should 
prevent him from so doing. 

3. In every case to support the offspring. 

The adulterer and the concubine in the case provided for 
in articles 333 and 334 may also be sentenced, in the same 
proceeding or in a separate civil proceeding, to indemnify 
for damages caused to the offended spouse. 

Art. 346. Liability of ascendants, guardians, teachers, or 
other persons entrusted with the custody of the offended 
party. — The -ascendants, guardians, curators, teachers and 
any person who, by abuse of authority or confidential re- 
lationship, shall cooperate as accomplices in the perpetra- 
tion of the crimes embraced in chapters second, third and 
fourth of this title, shall be punished as principals. 

Teachers or other persons in any other capacity entrusted 
with the education and guidance of youth, shall also suffer 
the penalty of temporary special disqualification in its 
maximum period to perpetual special disqualification. 

Any person falling within the terms of this article, and 
any other person guilty of corruption of minors for the 
benefit of another, shall be punished by special disqualifica- 
tion from filling the office of guardian. 

Title Twelve 
CRIMES AGAINST THE CIVIL STATUS OF PERSONS 

CHAPTER ONE 

SIMULATION OF BIRTHS AND USURPATION OP CIVIL STATUS 

Art, 347. Simulation of births, substitution of one child 
for another and concealment or abandonment of a 
mate child.— The simulation of births and the substitu- 
tion of one child for another shall be punished by prtsion 
mayor and a fine of not exceeding 1,000 pesos. 

The same penalties shall be imposed upon any P ers ™ 
who shall conceal or abandon any legitimate child with 
intent to cause such child to lose its civil status. 

Any physician or surgeon or public officer who, in vio- 
lation of the duties of his profession or office, shall cooper- 



128 



ate in the execution of any of the crimes" mentioned in 
the two next preceding paragraphs, shall suffer the pen- 
alties therein prescribed and also the penalty of temporary 
special disqualification. 

ART 348. Usurpation of civil status. — The penalty of 
prision major shall be imposed upon any person who shall 
usurp the civil status of another, should he do so for the 
purpose of defrauding the offended party or his heirs; 
otherwise, the penalty of prision correctional in its me- 
dium and maximum 'periods shall be imposed. 



CHAPTER TWO 

ILLEGAL MARRIAGES 



Art. 849. Bigamy.— The penalty of prision mayor shall 
be imposed upon any person who shall contract a second 
or subsequent marriage before the former marriage has 
been legally dissolved, or before the absent spouse has 

een dec lared presumptively dead by means of a judg- 
ment rendered in the proper proceedings. 
r *50. Marriage contracted against provisions of 

aits. The penalty of prision correctional in its medium 
»nc maximum periods shall be imposed upon any person 

'I 10 ' without being included in the provisions of the next 
necedmg article, shall contract marriage knowing that 

or thf U ? emeikts ol tho law have not been com P lied with 
If +£ he marria » e is in disregard of a legal impediment, 
sent f th ° f tht> contractill g Parties shall obtain the con- 
frai iVi i ° thei by means of violence, intimidation or 
J" h0 sha11 be punished by the maximum period of the 
P " rt £- l '° V,d0Cl in the next preceding paragraph. 
m .\ Premature marriages.— -Any widow who shall 

ofttr Wlthin three hundred and one days from the date 
if h t eath ° f hei " husband ' ol * before having delivered 
sh n ! have been P re «han* at the time of his death, 
• at be punished by arresto manor and fine not exceed- 
»ig oOO pesos. 

* same Penalties vshall be imposed upon any woman 
086 marriage shall have been annulled or dissolved, if 



129 

she shall marry before her delivery or before the expira- 
tion of the period of three hundred and one days after 
the legal separation. 

Art. 352. Performance of illegal marriage ceremony. — 
Priests or ministers of any religious denomination or sect, 
or civil authorities who shall perform or authorize any 
illegal marriage ceremony shall be punished in accordance 
with the provisions of the Marriage Law. 



Title Thirteen 
CRIMES AGAINST HONOR 
CHAPTER ONE 
LIBEL 



Section One.— Definition, forms and punishment of this crime (J) 
Art. 353. Definition of libel— A libel is a public and 
malicious imputation of a crime, or of a vice or defect,^ 
real or imaginary, or any act, omission, condition, status, 
or circumstance tending to cause the dishonor, discredit, 
or contempt of a natural or juridical person, or to blacken 
the memory of one who is dead. 

Art. 354. Requirement for publicity.— -Every defamatory 
imputation is presumed to be malicious, even if it be true, 
if no good intention and justifiable motive for making it 
is shown, except in the following cases : 

1. A private communication made by any person to an- 
other in the performance of any legal, moral or social 
°-uty; and 

2. A fair and true report, made in good faith, without 
any comments or remarks, of any judicial, legislative or 
other official proceedings which are not of confidential na- 
ture, or of any statement, report or speech delivered in 
said proceedings, or of any other act performed by public 
officers in the exercise of their functions. 

Art. 355. Libel by means of writings or similar means. — 
A libel committed by means of writing, printing, litho- 
graphy, engraving, radio, phonograph, painting, theatrical 

fine, ft o 



130 

exhibition, cinematographic exhibition, or any similar 
means, shall be punished by prision correctional in its mini- 
mum and medium periods or a fine ranging from 200 to 
6,000 pesos, or both, in addition to the civil action which 
may be brought by the offended party. 

Art. 356. Threatening to publish and offer to prevent 
such publication for a compensation. — The penalty of 
arresto mayor or a fine of from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, 
shall be imposed upon any person who threatens another to 
publish a libel concerning him or the parents, spouse, child, 
or other member of the family of the latter, or upon anyone 
who shall offer to prevent the publication of such libel 
f °r a compensation or money consideration. 

ART. 357. Prohibited publication of acts referred to in 
the course of official proceedings. — The penalty of arresto 
mayor or a fine of from 200 to 2,000 pesos, or both, shall 
imposed upon any reporter, editor or manager of a 
newspaper, daily or magazine, who shall publish facts con- 
nected with the private life of another and offensive to 
the honor, virtue and reputation of said person, even though 
said publication be made in connection with or under the 
pretext that it is necessary in the narration of any judicial 
or administrative proceedings wherein such facts have been 
mentioned. 

Art. 358. Slander.— Oral defamation shall be punished 
by arresto mayor in its maximum period to prision correc- 
cional in its minimum period if it is of a serious and in- 
sulting nature; otherwise, the penalty shall be arresto 
menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos. 

Art. 359. Slander by deed.— -The penalty of arresto ma- 
yor in its maximum period to prision correctional in its 
minimum period or a fine ranging from 200 to 1,000 pesos 
shall be imposed upon any person who shall perform any 
act not included and punished in this title, which shall 
cast dishonor, discredit or contempt upon another person. 
If said act is not of a serious nature, the penalty shall 
be arresto menor or a fine not exceeding 200 pesos. 



131 

SECTION Two. — General provisions 



Art. 360. Persons responsible. — Any person who shall 
publish, exhibit or cause the publication or exhibition of 
any defamation in writing or by similar means, shall be 
responsible for the same. 

The author or editor of a book or pamphlet, or the 
editor or business manager of a daily newspaper, magazine 
or serial publication, shall be responsible for the defama- 
tions contained therein to the same extent as if he were 
the author thereof. , 

The criminal action and the civil action for damages 
in cases of written defamations, as provided m this chapter 
may be filed simultaneously or separately with the oourt 
of First Instance of the province wherein the libel was 
Published, displayed or exhibited, regardless ot the place 
where the same was written, printed or composed 

No criminal action for defamation which consists m the 
imputation of a crime which cannot be prose .cuted ae 
oficio shall be brought except at the instance of and upon 
complaint expressly filed by the offered party 

ART. 361. Proof of the m***-* «*g ^ ence t0 the 
cutmn f or Ube l, the truth may be „ libelous 

court and if it appears that the matter *gj good 
18 true, and, moreover, that it was Pendant shall be 
motives and for justifiable ends, the detenu 
acquitted. , of an act or omis- 

Proof of the truth of an imputation admitted, unless 
sl on not constituting a crime shall no nst Gove niment 
^e imputation shall have been made ^ ^ discharge G f 
employees with respect to facts related 
their official duties. « r nves the truth of the 

In such cases if the ^^f^^r.cquitted. 
imputation made by him, he shaU " b g loUS remarks or com- 
Art. 362. Libelous remarks. ~. vilege d under the pro- 
ments connected with the m * tte . r p malice , shall not exempt 
visions of article 354, if ™ade witn m infif editor of a 

the author thereof nor the editoi 
newspaper from criminal liability. 



132 

CHAPTER TWO 

INCRIMINATORY MACHINATIONS 

Art. 363. IneHminating innocent person. — Any person 
who, by any act not constituting perjury, shall directly in- 
criminate or impute to an innocent person the commission 
of a crime, shall be punished by arresto mayor. 

Art. 364. Intriguing against honor.— The penalty of 
arresto menor or fine not exceednig 200 pesos shall be im- 
posed for any intrigue which has for its principal purpose 
to blemish the honor or reputation of a person. 

Title Fourteen 
QUASI OFFENSES 
SOLE CHAPTER 

CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE 

bv re w lvn P r Uaenee and negligence. — Any person who, 
it b GP n w impruden ce, shall commit any act which, had 

suffer th 1 W ° Uld constitute a S rave felon y> sha11 

to -ariai - G Penalty of p resto mayor in its maximum period 
hJ e ZTA°7 eCCi0ml in its minimum period; if it would 
mayor in 5 & l6SS grave feIony - the Penalty of arresto 
Posed. mi mmum and medium periods shall be im- 

shali ^commit* Wh °' by simple imprudence or negligence, 
grave felon 1 & W &Ct which would otherwise constitute a 
its mediun/' *A SUffer the P enalty of ^ rr ^ sto ma<V or in 
stituted a l es maximum Periods ; if it would have con- 
in its minim.? Senous felony, the penalty of arresto mayor 

When the Peri °' d Sha11 be im P° sed - 
shall have 0 GXecutlon of the act covered by this article 

another the off r f ulted in damage to the property of 

from an amount Sha11 be P unishe d by a fine ranging 

times such viT"! to the value of said damages to three 

25 pesos which sha11 in 1,0 case be ,ess than 



133 

A fine not exceeding 200 pesos and censure shall be im- 
posed upon any person who, by simple imprudence or neg- 
ligence, shall cause some wrong which, if done maliciously, 
would have constituted a light felony. 

In the imposition of these penalties, the courts shall ex- 
ercise their sound discretion, without regard to the rules 
prescribed in article 62. . an 

The provisions contained in this article shall not oe ap- 
plicable: . „„, lol tn 

1. When the penalty provided for the rfen3e»«P? 
or lower than those provided in the first two paragraphs 
of this article, in which case the courts shaU ^ 
Penalty next lower in degree than that w« per to 
imposed, in the period which they may oee 

apply - ir i w ith violation 

2. When, by imprudence or negligence an " sha u be 
of the Automobile Law, the death of a P ighed b y 
caused, in which case the defendant sha 11 im periods. 1 
priswn correctional in its medium and ma* ^ wit hout 

Reckless imprudence consists in voU " * w hi<* material 
Malice, doing or failing to do an act n ' on f of pre caution 
damage results by reason of inexcusable ng ^ perform 
°n the part of the person performing or ployn ient or oc- 
such act, taking into consideration his dition and other 
cupation, degree of intelligence, physic* 
circumstances regarding persons, time _ preC aution dis- 

Simple imprudence consist in the If* impending to 
Played in those cases in which the dam mamfe st. 
be caused is not immediate nor the da 

Title Fifteen 
FINAL PROVISIONS 

urior to this 

ART. 366. Application of M> s jXrfons contained in 
Code.— Without prejudice to the misd emeanors, corn- 
article 22 of this Code, felonies of this Code shall 
mitted prio r to the date of efr ffll_---^^^^ 
» Sec Act No. 3992, known as Revised 



134 



be punished in accordance with the Code or Acts in force at 
he tim e of their commission. 

Art. 367. Repealing clause. — Except as is provided in the 
next preceding article, the present Penal Code, the Provi- 
isr« n «» W for the application of its provisions, and Acts 
lfi£ 292 ' 480 ' 518 ' 519 ' 899 > 1121, 1438, 1523, 1559. 
22Q« III 4 ' 1?55 * 1773 ' 2030 ' 2036 > 2071, 2142, 2212, 2293. 
8lS' S??* 2364 ' 2549 ' 2557 > 2595 > 2609, 2712, 2718, 3104. 
^ Sealed 98 ' ^ ^ 3397 ' 3559 ' and 3586 ' are here " 

under ° f the Acts whi <* are mentioned here- 

Art rrr a,so t . ie Pealed, namely: 
Act 666, sections 6 and 18 
Ac .1508 !, sections 9, 10, li/ and 12 
1524, section 4 

Ac! SGCti0ns h 2 > ««i 6. 
and 12. ' S6Ctl0ns 2 > 3 - 4, 5, 6, 7 (first clause), 11. 
£ 2m ?'«!' 4 ' 5 ' 6 - 8, and 9. 

General Orders N n ' ' and 5; and 

And all laws and ' t-' SGries of 1900 ' section 1° 6 - 

the Provisions of thi ° f laws which are contrary to 

Approved, Decern!! o m hereby ^pealed. 
' Uece mber 8, 1930. 



APPENDIX 



Second National Assembly^ b No 2 o93 

Third Session J 

[Commonwealth Act No. 616] 

AN ACT TO PUNISH ESPIONAGE AND OTHER 
OFFENSE AGAINST THE NATIONAL SECURITY 

Be it enacted by the National Assembly of the Philippines: 
Section 1. Unlawfully obtaining or permitting to be ob- 
tained information affecting national defense.— {a) Who- 
ever, for the purposes of obtaining information respect- 
ing the national defense with intent or reason to believe 
that the information to be obtained is to be used to the in- 
jury of the Philippines or of the United States, or to the 
advantage of any foreign nation, goes upon, enters, flies 
over, or otherwise obtains information co ncenunjr any 
vessel, aircraft, work of defense, navy yard naval station, 
submarine base, coaling station, fort, battery torpedo 
station, dockyard, canal, railroad arsenal, camp, factoi • 
mine telegraph, telephone, wireless, or signal station 
Sding? S or other place connected with the na tional 
defense, owned or constructed, or in progress of construc- 
tion by the Philippines or by the United States or under 
the control of the Philippines or of the United SteteM: 
any of its officers or agents, or within ^J^J^ 
diction of the Philippines or of the United S^es, or any 
Place in which any vessels, aircr ^ 0 f war 

other materials or instruments for the use ^ 

are being made, ^^^tlTvhaZS ° r the United 
contract or agreement with the ^j} 1 ** 1 ™ phili p p i nes or 
States, or with any person on behalf ! ot t Philippines 
the United States, or otherwise on behaU : o ^ ^ 

or the United States, or any prohibited pi 
meaning of section six hereof; or and with like 

(6) Whoever, for the purpose gJJ£*W or obtains, 
intent or reason to believe, copies, takes, m 



or attempts, or induces or aids another to copy, take, make, 
or obtain, any sketch, photograph, photographic negative, 
blue print, plan, map, model, instrument, appliance, docu- 
ment, writing, or note of anything connected with the 
national defense; or 

(c) Whoever, for the purpose aforesaid, receives or ob- 
tains or agrees or attempts or induces or aids another to 
receive or obtain from any person, or from any source 
2Ea d0C " ment > writi ^. code book, signal book, 

ntn \ P ° g y aph ' P hot °gi-aphic negative, blue print, 
tW o?' ' instrumen t, appliance, or note of any- 

la^L Zt 1 T ith the national defense > kn °wing or 
tSZ ■ * 2?- t0 believe > at th e time he receives or ob- 
taken * that ifc has be « n or will be obtained, 

the proSsTf STct ° f ^ ^ Pe "° n C ° ntrary t0 
of access m lawfull y or unlawfully having possession 
document wiZT°\° Ver ' ° r being intrusted with any 
granh nhJ!l , • Code book ' si S nal book > sketch, photo- 

fnsSent blUG plan ' map ' » ° de1 ' 

defense, wilfunv Ce ' ° r " 0te relating to the nat ional 
to communicate mmunicates or transmits or attempts 
entitled to r * * ransm it the same to any person not 
f ails to delive 06 - 1 ^ 6 *** ° r wilfull y retains the same and 
the Phili P ni n /„ ° n demand to the officer or employee of 
it; or 0r of the United States entitled to receive 

( e ) Whoever ho? 
Possession or coi t lnt nisted with or having lawful 
signal book, sket h ° f document > writing, code book, 
blue pri,^ pl an & Photograph, photographic negative, 
to the national fat*' mode1, not e or information, relating 
the same to be r GnSe ' tnrou £h gross negligence permits 
or delivered to ed from its proper place or custody 

lost, stolen, abstra^^ ta violation of his trust or to be 
imprisonment for t ° r destr °y ed . shall be punished by 
addition thereto b fi m ° re than ten years and may ' in 

Se C 2. Unlawful not . more than ten thousand pesos. 

tional defense ( n \ < Z^" >8 * n 9 information affecting no- 

K ' Whoever, with the intent or reason 



137 



to believe that it is to be used to the injury of the Phil- 
ippines or of the United States or to the advantage of a 
foreign nation, communicates, delivers, or transmits, or 
attempts to, or aids or induces another to, communicate, 
deliver, or transmit to any foreign government, or any 
faction or party or military or naval force within a foreign 
country, whether recognized or unrecognized by the Phil- 
ippines or by the United States, or to any representative, 
officer, agent, employee, subject, or citizen thereof, either 
directly or indirectly, any document, writing, code dook, 
signal book, sketch, photograph, photographic negative, 
blue print, plan, map, model, note, instrument, a PP h * nc b e ' 
or information relating to the national defense, stia ^ ars 
punished by imprisonment for not more than twenty y > 
if the offense is committed in time of peace, or by ^ 
or imprisonment for not more than thirty years, 1 
in time of war. 

(6) Whoever, in time of war with intent that tne 
shall be communicated to the enemy, shall collect, x *~?^ 
publish, or communicate, or attempt to elicit any m 10 i 
tion with respect to the movement, number, descrip » 
condition, or disposition of any of the armed forces, s *»> 
aircraft, or war materials of the Philippines or o 
United States, or with respect to the plans or conduc^ 
supposed plans or conduct of any military, naval, oi ,1 
operations, or with respect to any works or meas "^^.^ 
dertaken for or connected with, or intended for Tj^j.^ 
cation or defense of any place, or any other n ^ 
relating to the public defense, which mi * h \ ^ risonme nt 
the enemy, shall be punished by death or by rrop 
for not more than thirty years. . __ It s hall 

Sec. 3. Disloyal acts or words in time of W . {ere w j t h. 
be unlawful for any person, with intent to in discipl i ne of 
impair, or influence the loyalty, moral€, J£ lip pine6 or of 
the military, naval, or air forces of the Phi P ^ Jn . ftny 
the United States: (a) to advise, counsel, u**^ or re - 
manner cause insubordination, disloyalty, ^ or air 

fusal of duty by any member of the miHtJ^V^. or (&) 
forces of the Philippines or of the United 



138 



to distribute any written or printed matter which advises, 
counsels or urges insubordination, disloyalty, mutiny, or 
Iw* ?ll b ^, ny member of the militai T, naval, or 
^olS S n°f ^ 6 Ph ! iPPineS ° r 0f the United States. The 
violation of this section shall be punished by imprisonment 

& sssrjstisr or by fine not ™ re than 

whenthe «S^£^*«£ f ^-Whoever, 
wilfully make or ^ V ev ~ ^ St&U " at ^ Sha " 
with the intent to inSei £ ^ ° r faISe statements 
of the military naval ^ the °P eration or success 

of the United Sta+P ° V aU * ° rCes of the Phili PP ines or 
enemies shall wilfmi °* P ro ™ote the success of its 
dination, dislovaltv ° a . USe ° r attem Pt to cause insubor- 
military, naval or' Z* 7 ' ° r refusal of dut ^' in the 
United States or \ n ° es of the PhiUppines or the 
enlistment service ! ™ llfull y obstruct, the recruiting or 
States, to the iniurv *7v Phili PP ine s or of the United 
of the United States °1 \ Service of the Philippines or 
for not more than tw t P uni shed by imprisonment 

than twenty thone^j y years - or by a fine of not more 

Sec 5. Corner ™ t ° r both - 

or more persons cons ' m ° late Wading sections.— If two 
tions one, two, three * t0 violate the provisions of sec- 
of such persons doe's ° f this Act * and one or more 

conspiracy, each of th ^ aCt to effect the object of the 
Punished as i n 3a id «L£ artie8 to such conspiracy shall be 
doing of the act the ao Prided in the case of the 

of such conspiracy ° m P llsh ment of which is the object 

SEC. 6. Harborina „ 
Whoever harbors or con °° 1 \ Ce(ll ™'9 violators of the law.- 
has reasonable ground to h i- ^ Person who he knows > or 
or is about to commit 1 ~ e or SUs Pect, has committed, 
punished by imprison™? + nse under this Act, shall be 
and may, in addition th! + ° f not more than ten y ears 
thousand pesos. oto ' be fined not more than ten 

SEC. 7. Designation 0 f « 
Hon. — The President of «, nf . Places by proclama- 

€ p nilippines in time of war or 



139 



in case of national emergency may by proclamation desig- 
nate any place other than those set forth in subsection (a) 
of section one hereof in which anything for the use of the 
army, navy, or air forces are being prepared or constructed 
or stored as a prohibited place for the purpose of this 
Act: Provided, That he shall determine that .information 
with respect thereto would be prejudicial to the national 
defense. 

Sec. 8. Photographing, etc., defensive installations reg- 
ulated; penalties.— Whenever, in the interests of ™ tlon * 1 
defense, the President of the Philippines shall define ce - 
tain vital military, naval, or air installations or equ ! p ^ ion 
as requiring protection against the general dissemin 
of information relative thereto, it shall be unlawlu ^ 
make any photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map ' and 
graphical representation of such vital military, nava , 
air installations or equipment without first ob . tamin ^ a \^] > 
mission of the commanding officer of the military. n ^ r '_ 
or air post, camp, or station concerned, or higher au _ 
ity, and promptly submitting the product obtained ^ 
commanding officer or higher authority for censorsi 
such other action as he may deem necessary- Any *\ d 
found guilty of a violation of this section shall be pu ^ 
by imprisonment for not more than one year, or 
fine of not more than two thousand pesos, or both, 

Sec. 9. Photographing, etc., from aircraft. — Any f*^ 
who uses or permits or procures the use of an ^ 
for the purpose of making a photograph, ^tS'jSiitary, 
drawing, map, or graphical representation of vi of 
naval, or air installations or equipment, in . a j tv 
section eight of this Act, shall be liable to tn 
therein provided. ^ un cen- 

Sec. 10. Reproducing, publishing, selUn{ ?'. Vn Jnes shall 
sored copies.— After the President of the ph . v| sta i) a tion 
have defined any vital military, naval, or air ^.^piated 
or equipment as being within the category c , f u \ for 
under section eight of this Act, it shall be u^ ^ 
any person to reproduce, publish, sell, or gi ve p hical 
photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, m ft P' 0 



140 



representation of the vital military, naval, or air installa- 
tions or equipment so defined, without first obtaining per- 
mission of the commanding officer of the military, naval, 
or air post, camp, or station concerned, or higher authority, 
unless such photograph, sketch, picture, drawing, map, or 
graphical representation has clearly indicated thereon that 
it has been censored by the proper military, naval, or air 
authority. Any person found guilty of a violation of this 
section shall be punished as provided in section eight of 
this Act. 

Sec. 11. Destroying or injuring or attempting to injure 
or destroy xoar material in time of war.— When the Phil- 
ippines or the United States is at war, whoever, with intent 
to injure, interfere with, or obstruct the Philippines or 
the United States or any associate nation in preparing 
tor or carrying on the war, or whoever, with reason to 

«! lit hlS aCt may injure - interfere with, or obstruct 
the Philippines or the United States or any associate na- 
tion m preparing for or carrying on the war, or whoever, 
with reason to believe that his action may injure, interfere 
with, or obstruct the Philippines or the United States or 
any associate nation in preparing for or carrying on the 
war shall wilfully injure or destroy, or shall attempt to 
wJ f-r.° r destroy - an y war material, war premises, or 
mnLfu fi M herein defined > shall be imprisoned not 
no e than thirty years or be fined not more than thirty 
thousand pesos, or both. 

rf**S 12 ' Makin d or causing war matenal to be made in 
defective manner.-When the Philippines or the United 
jates is at war, whoever, with intent to injure, interfere 
with, or obstruct the Philippines or the United States or 
any associate nation in preparing for or carrying on the 
var or whoever, with reason to believe that his act may 
Vn \ ^ te / fere with ' or obstruct the Philippines or the 
united btates or any associate nation in preparing for or 
carrying on the war, shall wilfully make or cause to be 
made in a defective manner, or attempt to make or cause 
to be made in a defective manner, any war material, as 
nerem defined, or any tool, implement, machine, utensil, or 



141 



receptacle used or employed in making, producing, man- 
ufacturing, or repairing any such war material, as herein 
defined, shall be imprisoned not more than thirty years or 
be fined not more than thh-ty thousand pesos or both. 

Sec. 13. Injuring or destroying national defense mate- 
rial, premises, or utilities.— Whoever, with intent to injure, 
interfere with, or obstruct the national defense of the 
Philippines or the United States, shall wilfully injure or 
destroy, or shall attempt to so injure or destroy, any 
national defense material, national defense P ren " se! !' ™ 
national defense utilities, as herein provided, snau in 
imprisoned not more than ten years or be fined not mo 
than ten thousand pesos, or both. 

Sec. 14. Making or causing to be made in a de f ec . ™' a 
manner, or attempting to make or came to be made 
defectiv-fi manner, national defense material- W o » 
with intent to injure, interfere with, or obstruct tM - 
tional defense of the Philippines or of the United Mar- 
shall wilfully make or cause to be made in a del c ^ 
manner, or attempt to make or cause to be maa 
defective manner, any national defense material, as 
defined, or any tool, implement, machine, utensil, or ' 
tacle used or employed in making, producing, raanuia 
ing or repairing any such national defense material, » 
herein defined, shall be imprisoned not more than ten yeai , 
or fined not more than ten thousand pesos, or botn. ^ 

Sec. 15. Definition of terms.— The term "aircra fta* 
used in this Act means any contrivance known or 
after invented, used, or designed for navigation i © ^ 
in the air. The expression "post, camp, or statio vegge]s 
in this Act shall be interpreted to include nava 
military and naval aircraft, and any separate 
naval, or air command. as ^ 

The words "war or national defense marei « ]ivestock 
herein shall include arms, armament, amniuniti , ^ 
stores of clothing, food, foodstuffs, or fuel; a "' of what _ 
include supplies, munitions, and all other arw in , 
ever description, and any part or in« redie " use 0 f ' the 
tended for, adapted to, or suitable for tne 



142 



Philippines or the United States, or any associate nation, 
in connection with the conduct of war or national defense. 

^In - T r f S ? V , ar ° r national defense," as used herein, 
shall include all buildings, grounds, mines, or other places 

mo e cWi SUCh W /V r national defense ™*te*ial h being 
Sfrf^' repaired > n^ned, extracted, 

a 1 rnaoS: Unloaded > °* transported, together with 

PorKiS applia » ce s therein contained; and all 
ary naval !?' ""T prisons ' cam » s > « other miK- 

^^sssr^ phi,ippines ° r the united 

^^i^^^K^^ Uti,itieS '" aS l,SGd 
roads of whateve r l 1 . railroads - railways, electric lines, 

canal, lock dam ^ escnptl0n ' railroads or railway fixture, 
ture, engine ma'clV Pi6r ' d ° Ck ' brid £ e > building, struc- 
boat, or aircraft mechanical contrivance, car, vehicle, 

soever, whereon *"? ° ther means of transportation what- 
material or anv f whereb y such war or national defense 
States, or of anv " ° f the Phili PP ine s or of the United 
transported eith P asso ciate nation, are being or may be 
the United State the Hmits of the Philippines or 

reservoirs, aquedu UP ° n the high seas : and a11 dams - 
stations, pi pes *f Water and sas mains, oil or gasoline 
connection with , Uctui ' es > and buildings, whereby or in 
°r other fl uid • ^' nich water, or gas, or oil, or gasoline, 
an V war or na ti i S furnish ed, or may be furnished, to 
naval, 0r air °»al defense premises or to the military. 
°J* an y associate ! °J the PhiIi Ppines or the United States, 
steam or Pneu ma t na ' &nd a11 electri c light and power. 
[ °! e s, wires, and fi p0Wer > telephone, and telegraph plants, 
'Y^amgs connect* i S and wireles s stations, and the 
nereof Used ^ « With the maintenance and operation 
power, 0r f?SV Vater ' ligh t, heat, gas, oil, gasoline, 
Rational defe nse aC1I,tles of communication to any war or 
. of the P h i f m ises or to the military, naval, or air 
associate nation. es or of the United States, or any 
ihe words "a, 

shall be deemed To^ nation ," as used in this chapter, 

mean any nation at war with any 



143 



nation with which the Philippines or the United States 
is at war. 

The words "foreign government," as used in this Act, 
shall be deemed to include any government, faction, or body 
of insurgents within a country with which the Philippines 
or the United States is at peace, which government, faction, 
or bodv of insurgents may or may not have been recog- 
nized by the Philippines or the United States as a gov- 
ernment, i 
Sec. 16. This Act shall take effect upon its approval. 

Approved, June 4, 1941. 



First Congress op the Republic , 

op the Philippines t. H No 126 

First Session 

[Republic Act No. 10] 

AN ACT PENALIZING USURPATION OF PUBLIC 
AUTHORITY 

Be it 

oTth^vi J? tke Senate an d House of Representatives 
ne Philippines in Congress assembled: 
Section i a 

of official nm-f- person wh <>> with or without pretense 
Government o T' Sh&11 perform anv act pertaining to the 
wit hout beincr *i 0 any P er s°n in authority or public officer, 
with imprisonm t i ly entitled to do ™> shall be punished 
th an ten years n0t leSS than two years nor more 

Sec. 2 Th* a 

A PPro'v e H o * Sha11 take effect u P° n " S approval. 
u ' September 2, 1946. 



INDEX 



BOOK ONE 

GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING THE DATE OF ENFORCED 
MENT AND APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF 
THIS CODE, AND REGARDING THE OFFENSES, 
THE PERSONS LIABLE AND THE 
PENALTIES 

Articles 

PRELIMINARY TITLE. DATE OF EFFECTIVENESS AND 

APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CODE 1-2 
Title One.— FELONIES AND CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH 
AFFECT CRIMINAL LIABILITY: 

CHAPTER ONE.— Felonies - — ; 

CHAPTER Two. — Justifying circumstances and circum- 
stances which exempt from criminal liability - 11-12 

Chapter Three. — Circumstances which mitigate cnm- 

CHACTER^OUR.— Circumstances which aggravate crimi- 
nal liability • 

Chapter FIVE.— Alternative circumstances - 10 

mwo PERSONS CRIMINALLY LIABLE FOR 

Title Two.—* 16-20 

FELONIES 

Title Three-F^NALTIES: 

Chapter one.— Penalties in general v- *U*4 

Chapter Two. — Classification of penalties • 25-86 

CHAPTER THREE.— Duration and effect of penalties— 

1 Portion One.— Duration of penalties ~ ; 27 -*j 

lection Two-Effect, of the penalties accords to 
their respective nature — — 

■-asr^^i^^ ^ 

^"e P-ons criminally liable and for the ^ 
_ -ff^o^^i^^^o^ Penalties 
SeCt th Sard to the mitigating and aggravatmg 

^rcumsrances, and hahitual -fJ^S^ ^ 
Section Three.-Prov,sions common to tM 

Receding sections 

5*68—10 146 



146 

A i lid. 

CHAPTER Five. — Execution and service of penalties 

Section One. — General provisions 78-80 

Section Two.— Execution of principal penalties.. 81-88 

Title Four. — EXTINCTION OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY : 

Chapwi ONE — Total extinction of eefato*) l}«biut* W 

• rattm tv.-o. partial extinction of criminal liability 04 00 

Pltll i nv,.-ClVU, LIABILITY 

CHAMfflH m..-\W« , sMlly liabl« lot EolonlJ.... LOO tun 

Chajtbr Two.-vvhnt civil liability includes 104 ill 

' " Extinction im .i Bwylval of 0 j V || || a 

bllit y 112—119 

BOOK TWO 

CRIMES AND PENALTIES 



Chapteu 0N E.-Crimes against national security- 
Sec ion One-Treason and espionage 

Section Two.-p rovoking w „ and ^ ^ 



espionage 114-117 

in case 

118-121 



Section ^.^^^^"07'^^ 



122-123 



^W^^^™** THE FUNDAMENTAL 

CH U 0 rof O d;v^ Arbitl ' ai ' y d6t * nti0n or viola- 
tion oT & , P1 ;° hibition - interruption, ami dis- 

S£l worship- meGtingS CrimeS affai " 8t 

Section T^r"^ bi , tl ' aiy dete »tion and expulsion 124-127 

sect;:;; ?hr v pts n t of d< r ile 128 - 130 

g -lution T^SfS^T^ dis- 
Section Four— r-;™„ • 

««r. crimes against religious worship 132-138 

^Ch™' ok RIMES AGAINyT PUBLIC 0UDER: 

Chto! °T^vr R r belli0n ' Sediti0n and ,lisl °yalty 134-142 

tion— - ruaea against popular reprcsenta- 

Se simnar bodied againSt le * is]at ive 'bodies and 

143—144 



147 



Articles 

Section Two. — Violation of parliamentary immunity.. 145 
Chapter Threk.— Illegal assemblies and associations... 146-147 
CHAPTER Four. — Assault upon, and resistance and dis- 
obedience to persons in authority and their agents.... 148-152 

CuAi-TKi; Fm:. — Public disorders 153-156 

Ow* BUI Mf«<?i«» of ficiv • tji -,,<••• 1 f ,7 150 

, M ipfi gei bi i mmmitm at anofihi i crime BBrinj 

. Jlt fM!||«lf 4 V im|)OSC!d I-. HHOthei jucvioun 

«.ir. nr.« .-g 

,,,,, BWn cimmi.::: A<;\r\'^r itiii ffl fNMJftggf] 

< 'it m'tki! < )nk Forgeries - - 

Section () " (> forging the seal d the Government 

of the Philippine Islands, the signature <>r ^trum* 

of the Chief Executive ' • 

Section Two.— Counterfeiting coins. tSGS 

Section Three.— Forging treasury or bank notes, 
obligations and securities: importing and uttering* 
false or forged notes, obligations and securities.... I66-I69 
Section Four. — Falsification of legislative, public, 
commercial, and private documents, and wire- 
less, telegraph and telephonic messages 170-173 

Section Five. — Falsification of medical certificates, 

certificates of merit or service and the like 174-175 

Section Six.— Manufacturing, importing and posses- 
sion of instruments or implements intended for 
the commission of falsification 17(5 
CHAPTER Two.— Other falsities— 

Section One.— Usurpation of authority, rank, title, 

and improper use of names, uniforms and insignia 177-179 

Section Two.— False testimony 180-184 

Chapter Three.— Frauds- 
Section One.— Machinations, monopolies, and com- 
binations - ; ■ ■ 185-186 
Section Two.— Frauds in commerce and industry.... 187-189 

TITLE five -CRIMES RELATIVE TO OPIUM AND 

OTHER PROHIBITED DRUGS L90-194 
Title Six.-CRIMES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS: 

Chapter One.— Gambling and betting 105-199 

Chapter Two.— Offenses against decency and good cus- 

200 202 

toms 

Titu; Seykn.-CRIMES COMMITTED BY PUBLIC OF- 
FICERS: 

CHAPTER Onk.— Preliminary provisions 201 



148 

Articles 

Chapter Two.— Malfeasance and misfeasance in office- 
Section One. — Dereliction of duty 204-209 

Section Two. — Bribery 210-212 

Chapter Three.— Frauds and illegal exactions and 

transactions 213-216 

Chapter Four.— Malversation of public funds or prop- 

er ty 217-222 

Chapter Five.— Infidelity of public officer- 
Section One.— Infidelity in the custody of prisoners 223-225 
Section Two.— Infidelity in the custody of documents 226-228 

Section Three.— Revelation of secrets 229-230 

Chapter Six.-other offenses or irregularities by public 
officers — 

Section One.— Disobedience, refusal of assistance 
and maltreatment of prisoners _ 231-235 

bection Two— Anticipation, prolongation and aban- 

clonment of the duties and powers of public office.. 236-238 

section Three.— Usurpation of powers and unlawful 
appointments 239 _ 244 

section Four.-Abuses against chastity.... 245 

Title Eight.-CRIMES AG AINST PERSONS- 
Chapter ON E .- D estruction of life— 



SecS S ne, ~ !" arricide > mur der and homicide 246-254 

sects w-S ic :' e .. and abortion 255 - 259 



Chapter Two ™, TT" 2G °- 261 
TppiB *™ Tw °— Physical injuries 202-266 

SD^SSSSJr AGAINST PERS0NAL LIBERTY 

Chapter OxE.-Crimes against liberty- 

SecC T^HT 1 d6tenti0n 267-269 
Section" ™ K ' dna PP in S of minors 270-271 

ChaSr ? w T o e r~ S,aVery 3nd Servitude -- 272-274 
SfWi/^? nmeS aeainst security— 

Chapter TnnpJ ^ 3 and coer ci°n 282-289 

Tit,,, * "REE. Discovery and revelation of secrets.. 290-292 

tle Tek.-_ CRIMES AGAINgT pRopERTY . 

Chapter ONE.-Robbery in general . 29 , 
Action One.-Robbery with violence 



intimidation of persons V, ° IenCe ° r 
o . . UJ - persons on * 900 

mL TV,0 --*» hherV * the -' of' force upon 

v- •; 299-30:, 

V- V: 



14b 



Artieta 

Chapter Two.— Brigandage 306-307 

Chapter Three. — Theft 308-311 

Chapter Four.— Usurpation 332-313 

Chapter Five.— Culpable insolvency 314 

Chapter Six. — Swindling and other deceits 315-318 

Chapter Seven. — Chattel mortgage 319 

Chapter Eight. — Arson and other crimes involving de- 
struction 320-326 

Chapter Nine. — Malicious mischief 327-331 

Chapter Ten. — Exemption from criminal liability in 

crimes against property 332 

Title Eleven.-CRIMES AGAINST CHASTITY: 

Chapter One.— Adultery and concubinage 333-334 

Chapter Two. Rape and acts of lasciviousness 335-336 

CHAPTER Three.— Seduction, corruption of minors and 

white slave trade 337-341 

Chapter Four.— Abduction 342-343 

Chapter Five.— Provisions relative to the preceding 

chapters of Title Eleven 344-346 

Title Twelve.-CRIMES AGAINST THE CIVIL STATUS 
OF PERSONS: 
Chapter ONE.-Simulation of births and usurpation of 

civil status ; 349-352 

Chapter Two.— Illegal marriages 

TITLE T H irtee N . — CRI M E S AGAINST HONOR: 

Chapter One. — Libel — . . 

Section One-Definition, forms and punishment of 

this crime r evisions — " 360-362 
Section Two.— General provisions...— 

CHAPTER Two.-Incriminatory machinations 363-364 

Title Fourteen. — QUASI OFFENSES: ^ 

Sole Chapter.— Criminal negligence 

TITLE Fiftekn.-FINAL PROVISIONS 866-867 

O 



" 7 : ' 





(7) |^v^ ' 



