CHINESE QUESTION 

CHONG-SU SEE 




MANUEL L. QUEZON 



the Chinese f uestton 



THE UND r ^LYING CAUSE OF THE PRESENT 
CRISIS IN CHINA 



BY 

CHONG-SU SEE» PH. D. 

AUTHOR OF 

"THE FOREIGN TRADE OF CHINA" 
(new YORK. 1010] 



m 



MANILA. PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 

THE BULLETIN PUBLISHING COMPANY. INC. 
1925 



•>1 



4 



c OMp, 



op- 



'23 



To 

Those who believe 
In Justice and Fair-play for All, 
Regardless of Nationality, 
Color or Creed 



PREFACE 



HE following is a series of three articles on the present 



situation in China written by a businessman. The Chinese 



™ people are now passing through a great national trans- 
formation and the whole movement is pregnant with meaning. The 
underlying cause of the present crisis in China is to be attributed 
to the superior status of foreigners in that country — a status which 
is guaranteed by the unequal treaties imposed upon China by the 
Powers since 1842. China is so bound by the treaties that she is 
not even permitted to fix her own tariff and is forced to discriminate 
against her own subjects in favor of aliens. It is only by giving 
these treaties a speedy and just revision so as to keep in harmony 
with the spirit of the times that any permanent solution to the Chi- 
nese Question can be found. Such a revision will prove beneficial 
to all parties concerned. It will quicken the industrial develop- 
ment of China and encourage the unrestricted growth of her foreign 
trade, the advantages of both of which will be shared by foreigners 
as well as Chinese. Moreover, the change will enable the young 
Republic to carry out the reforms that will develop her into a strong 
and progressive nation which is to be desired as much in the com- 
mon interest of the world as for the sake of her own welfare. 

This series of articles was originally written for the local pe- 
riodicals and appeared in the MANILA DAILY BULLETIN on 
November 18 to 20, 1925, in the SUNDAY TRIBUNE beginning 
on November 22, 1925, while its Spanish translation was simulta- 
neously published in three separate issues of the Saturday edition 
of LA VANGUARDIA. At the suggestion of certain foreign friends 
shortly after the publication of the first of these articles, however, 
it was considered advisable to put them in a more convenient form 
for those who are interested in Far Eastern affairs; hence the 
appearance of this booklet. In this connection the writer is glad 
of the opportunity to express his appreciation of the courtesy shown 
him by the management of the MANILA DAILY BULLETIN 
which is publishing this pamphlet without charge. 




123 Juan Luna Street, 
Manila, P. I., 
November 24, 1925. 



C. S. See. 



CONTENTS 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 
The Underlying Cause of the Present Crisis in China 



Page 

Article I 

Extraterritoriality 7 

Article II 

Customs Tariff 14 

Article III 

Tariff Autonomy and Abolition of Extraterritoriality 22 



The Chinese Question 



The Underlying Cause of the Present Crisis 
in China 

ARTICLE I 
ExtraterritoriaUhj 



To dismiss the recent unfortunate 
happenings in China, which began in 
Shanghai on May 30 last and 
spread to other parts of the Celes- 
tial Republic one after another, as 
due to the sinister activity of the 
Bolsheviks is easy but very super- 
ficial. There is no use for us to 
camouflage the situation by paint- 
ing the whole affair "Red"" or by 
saying that it is anti-foreign. We 
must get at the facts and have the 
courage to face them squarely, 
however painful and humiliating 
they may be. No impartial ob- 
8( rver of Far Eastern affairs can 
deny that underneath the present 
crisis is involved the whole question 
of the superior status of foreigners 
in China. This status is guaranteed 
by the unequal treaties imposed 
upon China by the Powers headed 
by Great Britain since 1842, and it 
is only by giving these treaties a 
just and equitable revision that 
any permanent solution to the 
Chinese Question can be found. 

Briefly, the foreign relations of 
China date back to a most, distant 
period. From time immemorial the 
Chi nose have been preeminently a 
trading people. Even as early as 
the first century of the Christian 
era they carried on an active ex- 
change in silk and other products 
with the Roman Orient. Originally 
they were not exclusive, but, on 
the contrary, assumed a remarkably 
liberal attitude toward foreign in- 
tercourse, such as has been shown 
by no other nation in the world. 



They welcomed embassies from 
neighboring countries and despatch- 
ed missions abroad to foster trade 
and other relations. The portals of 
the Kingdom were thrown wide 
open to all aliens, regardless of 
calling, profession and creed. There 
was neither closing of markets nor 
imposition of restrictions on the 
practice or propagation of exotic 
faiths. Foreigners were admitted 
everywhere, and even high official 
positions were open to strangers 
from afar. The whole policy was 
one of complete toleration and 
genuine hospitality, of "open door" 
in the truest sense of the term. 
This attitude continued throughout 
ancient and mediaeval times — the 
period in which all aliens who 
voluntarily resorted to China's do- 
minions respected her laws and 
conformed with her institutions. 

With the coming of the modern 
era, however, the situation was 
entirely transformed. At the com- 
mencement of the sixteenth century 
we witness the arrival of pioneers 
from Europe. These representatives 
of so-called peaceful commerce were 
no better than pirates, for, Unlike 
their pacific Arab predecessors, 
they introduced themselves to the 
Chinese by harrying the coasts of 
the Empire and* plundering what- 
fviT valuables came their way, by 
committing unprovoked murders, 
rapine' and countless deeds of 
violence as well as setting at de- 
fiance all principles of propriety 
and humanity. This atrocious con- 



8 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



duct of the unwholesome specimens 
from the Occident compel^ L 
China to abandon her original 
generous attitude in all affairs 
touching aliens and to replace it 
by a rigid policy of surveillance 
and exclusion. This was, doubtless, 
a most radical change, but it was 
forced on China by the outsiders. 
As time went on, the new policy, 
niHtead of losing strength, was 
pursued with added vigor, for dur- 
ing later intercourse the westerners, 
who ought to have done something 
to correct the extremely bad im- 
pression created by their forerun- 
ners, continued to look upon things 
Chinese with a mien of offensive 
superiority, to disregard svstemati- 
cal y Chinese laws and regulations, 
and to vindicate whatever they 
thought to be right by a ready ap- 
peal to brute force. 

Under the "closed-door" regime 
all kinds of barriers were put up 
against foreign intercourse. The 
^eraal trade of the country was 
and J °n \f t0 °PP r ^ve taxation 
rl rJ. 011 " 0119 conditions; and 
cenTurv -, t0 thG middle of the l"t 
other iu* I? 3 Pitted at no 
ton K ? than th(i P° rt of Cau- 
tion ? ulte »« tur ally these restric- 
tions proved very annoying to the 

to°Z m0re Particularly 

to the British, whose trade pre- 
ponderated They generated a great 
leal of ill-feeling and hatred be- 
tween the Chinese and th e foreign 
community at Canton, and led to 
frequent disturbances, which culmi- 
nated m open hostilities with Groat 
Britain, when the English tried to 
force upon China that vitally im- 
portant branch of their trade with 
the Orient— the immoral and illegal 
traffic in opium. In the Opium 

War — as the conflict is called 

Cliiim was defeated. England, act- 
ing under the impulse for free 'trad 
at the time and feeling the urgent 
need of foreign markets for her 
surplus production, as a result of 
the Industrial Revolution, coerced 
China to sign the Treaty of Nan- 
king in 1842, by which the latter 
was opened to foreign trade under 
terms prescribed by the former. 



The old restrictions on foreign in- 
tercourse were removed, while 
freedom of action and increased 
facilities for trade were conceded. 
Henceforward the alien in China 
was to enjoy, and he still enjoys, a 
superior status guaranteed by writ 
ten compacts. This marks the be- 
ginning of the conventional period in 
China's international relations. 

The new regime, however, was 
only another artificial and pre- 
carious system of regulating inter- 
course. It proved most vexatious to 
China, as it would be to any self- 
respecting nation. It did not 
create better relationships between 
China and the West. The outrages 
which the Chinese suffered at the 
hands of the Europeans were not 
forgotten and the old rancor to- 
wards the foreigner remained 
smouldering, only to be kindled in- 
to a flame with the weakest 
draught. Under such circumstances 
it would require much conciliation 
and great forbearance before 
friendship could replace hostility 
and foreign intercourse be wel- 
comed and encouraged, instead of 
being a thing to be tolerated and 
dreaded. Most unhappily, huwever, 
no attempt at appeasement has 
ever been made since the commen- 
cement of the treaty period. On 
the contrary, the foreigner has as- 
sumed an increasingly domineering 
air and has constantly refused to 
treat the Chinese on a footing of 
equality even on their own soil. 
Since the middle of the last century 
the policy of the different nations 
in China has been one of greed 
and aggression, not of mollification 
and consideration. They have ex- 
torted heavy money indemnities 
from China for acts of their own 
provocation, earmarked for them- 
selves "spheres of influence" with- 
in her undisputed territory, and, 
under all sorts of pretexts, coerced 
her to agree to valuable "leases" 
and concessions, besides obtaining 
many far-reaching rights and spe- 
cial advantages — all to the utter 
derogation of her sovereignty and 
in flagrant discrimination against 
the interests of the Chinese people. 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



•J 



By these later exactions the rights 
secured in 1S41* have been greatly 
strengthened and multiplied, so 
much so that the position of the 
alien in China today is a highly 
dominating and privileged one, 
such as does not exist in other 
lands. 

So the last eighty odd years of 
continuous intercourse have abund- 
antly confirmed the old belief of 
the Chinese that the chief interest 
of the foreigner in China is one of 
money-making and land-grabbing. 
During this period China has learn- 
ed the bitter lesson that, inasmuch 
as the Powers that claim to be 
leaders of Christianity and modern 
culture have invariably resorted to 
superior force for t.ho accomplish- 
ment of their will. Western civili- 
zation is largely destructive of 
civilized life itself; and that until 
China has attained military and 
naval efficiency she can expect no 
equal treatment from outsiders. 

By the various treaties of 
"amity and commerce", as the 
conventions which the Chinese were 
forced to sign are called, China was 
stripped of two of the fundamental 
attributes of sovereignty, the two 
main divisions of practically all in- 
ternational agreements, to wit, 
the jurisdiction over the person and 
property of foreigners within her 
dominions and the regulation of her 
commerce with the outside world. 
"Let us briefly examine each of 
these and see how it affects for- 
eign intercourse in general and for- 
eign commerce in particular. 

Among the treaty stipulations the 
most important is that of extra- 
territoriality. By it the foreigner is 
everywhere withdrawn from Chin- 
ese control and is rendered amen- 
able only to the officials of his 
own government. In criminal cases 
he is judged according to the 
criminal code of his own country, 
and it is the commercial laws of his 
home land also that govern' his 
civil eases. However essential this 
arrangement may be from the for- 
ei ^ner 'a standpoint, it is intensely 
grilling to the Chinese. Just imagine 
what would be the effect on the 



United States if England and 
France were to govern their na- 
tionals in Boston and New York 
City through their respective con- 
suls and pay no attention what- 
soever to American laws. Doubtless 
such a thing would be regarded as 
a glaring outrage upon American 
sovereignty and would not for a 
moment be tolerated by the people 
of the United States. And yet 
that — and much more besides — is ex- 
actly what the Powers have done 
in China and forced the Chinese to 
acquiesce in. 

That the system should create a 
great dislike for the foreigner is 
only natural. The fact that the 
alien is exempt from local jurisdic- 
tion leads him to believe that he 
is under no obligation to observe 
the laws of China, including the 
customs, practices, and supersti- 
tions of a locality, which, although 
unwritten, are, nevertheless, obliga- 
tor v on every resident within the 
community. Some of these customs 
and practices appear peculiar and 
even ridiculous to the foreigner, 
who, because of their absurdity, 
whether apparent or real, usually 
treats them with contempt. But 
s\;ch disrespect gives rise to local 
ill-feeling; and the insult is most 
keenly felt, owing to the intimate 
relationship between the customs 
and the locality. Moreover, the 
alien in China enjoys a special pro- 
tection, which is not accorded to 
the natives. While he is not amen- 
able to any Chinese tribunal, 
China has always been held abso- 
lutely responsible for any injury 
which might be done to his person 
or property, irrespective of her abil- 
ity to prevent it. This strict ac- 
countability amounts to a guarantee 
of security, an obligation which the 
Powers do not recognize in their 
intercourse with one another. If 
in countries where extraterritorial- 
ity does not exist, such a liability 
is not assumed by the territorial 
government, how unjust it is to 
compel China, where aliens are al- 
together outside of her jurisdiction, 
to do 80. 



10 



THE CHINESE Q U E S T I O N 



Furthermore, under the aegis of 
extraterritoriality, offences perpe- 
trated by foreigners against natives 
often go unpunished or escape with- 
out the deserved penalty. In mixed 
cases in which the plaintiff is a 
Chinese, the consular officer, who is 
sent to China to protect his com- 
patriots, is apt to be prejudiced in 
favor of the latter and cares little, 
if at all, whether the settlement is 
satisfactory to the complainant or 
not. As a defendant, the Chinese is 
also at a disadvantage not only be- 
cause the foreigner is helped by the 
advocacy of his consul, but also 
because of the fact that for the 
same wrong committed in China 
different punishments are meted 
out. If the offender is an alien 
he is leniently dealt with by his 
own national laws, but if he is a 
< binese he is treated with sevcritv 
by the native tribunal. Again, 
wany of the extraterritorial 1 courts, 
those of the small powers in parti- 
cular, are not properly administer- 
ed; and the unapproved practice of 
■ending their nationals who com- 
mitted grave misdeeds in China to 
the home country for trial, of which 
the outcome is, as a rule, unknown 
J? th ° binese party interested in 
"» ease, tends to produce the 
motion that such offenders have not 
been brought to justice. 

The extraterritorial system also 
gives rise to a multiplicity of courts 
in one and th e same locality, each 
• 'i mi mistering a different code of 
under a different judicial pro- 
cedure, and the relation between 
these courts has often placed law- 
yers and litigants in a confused 
and embarrassing situation. More- 
over, the customary way of apply- 
ing the law of the defendants 
country makes the law uncertain. 
For instance, in the case of a 
transaction between two merchant, 
of two different nationalities the 
rights and liabilities of the parties 
concerned vary according as to 
which party files the suit first. 

Finally, the existence of extra- 
territoriality has the effect of lead- 
ing the Chinese to despise their 
own Government. Not only have 



the Chinese authorities no control 
over the alien, but in many instan- 
ces they have shown themselves 
powerless to offer their subjects 
adequate protection against foreign 
encroachments. The special status 
enjoyed by the alien is denied to 
the Chinese. Consequently, dishonest 
foreigners have found it very 
profitable to indulge in the illegal 
practice of giving the protection of 
their national flag to unscrupulous 
natives, who, for example, pass 
their merchandise as belonging to 
their foreign accomplices in order 
to evade inland taxation, from 
which the foreigner is exempted. 
So, while honest Chinese merchants 
suffer, those who break the laws of 
the count rv with the assistance of 
the extraterritorialized foreigner 
are greatly benefited. And if the 
Chinese authorities manifest a ten- 
dency to protect legitimate native 
interests they are criticized an 1 
denounced by outsiders, as though 
to look after the welfare of one's 
own people is presumptuous anl 
illegitimate. Thus the administra- 
tion of the country is deranged and 
the Chinese officials are humiliated 
in the discharge of their duties. 

The spirit of extraterritorial it y 
permeates the treaties through and 
through, and its presence indicates 
a partial sacrifice of sovereign 
authority by China. But if the 
Chinese are to enjoy any degree of 
independence at all it may be 
readily inferred that a limit must 
be set to the special privileges of 
the foreigners. In order that the 
system may rum more or less 
smoothly and in order that the 
alien may be under the constant 
protection of his official, the two 
parties must be situated compara- 
tively near each other. So for pur- 
poses of trade the alien in China is 
restricted to certain localities with- 
in the country which have been de- 
clared open to international res- 
idence and trade, although for 
purposes of evangelization the for- 
eign missionary is also permitted to 
reside in the interior. These com- 
mercial centers are usually classi 
fied under four different heads. To 



T II K CH1NKSE QUESTION 



11 



start: we have the "treaty ports/ ' 
Which arc thrown open, by the ttlf- 
forent treaties and agreements be- 
tween China and the Powers, as 
places where foreign states are 
entitled to establish consulates and 
foreign merchants arc permitted to 
do business "without molestation 
and restraint.- Originating with 
the Treaty of Nanking in 1842, 
these ports were five in number; 
since then they have been largely 
iucrcased. At some of these ports 
spaces are set aside as settlements 
or "reserved areas for residence*" 
as at Shanghai, where the adminis- 
tration is in the hands of a muni- 
cipal council, but the power of is- 
suing title-deeds is retained by 
China. At others, as at such im- 
portant commercial centers as 
Tientsin and Hankow, there are 
several foreign concessions, eaeh 
representing a different nationality 
and administered by a municipal 
council composed of representatives 
elected by the foreign taxpayers 
living in the concession or, in the 
absence of such a municipal coun- 
cil, by the consul of the grantee 
power for the exclusive benefit of 
his countrymen. In these foreign 
settlements or concessions Chinese 
subjects are allowed to reside, but 
the real estate within them is, as a 
rule, not open to Chinese ownership. 
Owing to the jealousy among tho 
Powers the tendency in recent years 
has been towards tho separation 
rather than the amalgamation of 
concessions. 

Although the foreign settlement 
in a treaty port represent no trans- 
fer of territory by China, and, 
therefore, remains subject to her 
sovereignty, yet there exists a dis- 
position among the foreign com- 
munity there to assume a constant 
air of patronage and proprietorship, 
and to regard the Chinese residents 
within it as being there by suf- 
ferance. This has proceeded so far 
that in Shanghai, the great em- 
porium of China, there is a park at 
the entrance of which was display- 
ed until recently tho disgraceful 
Bjen: "Chinese and dogs not ad- 
mitted. M Is such a thing imaginable 



anywhere else on earth? Incredible 
as it may sound, that is, never- 
theless, the treatment extended to 
the Chinese people by the repre- 
sentatives of the great Powers of 
the world, which have arrogated to 
themselves the title of the leaders 
of modern Christianity and civiliza- 
tion. If the foreigners persist in 
treating the Chinese as inferiors, 
how is it possible for them to ex 
peot permanent good relations and 
much commercial expansion? Out- 
rages like this are maintained by 
the mailed list. Will it require 
another mailed fist to remove 
them? We earnestly hope not. 

So much for the " treaty ports.' ' 
Somewhat akin to the treaty ports 
are the ports voluntarily opened to 
international trade by China her- 
self, such as Ohinwangtao in Chihli, 
and Tsinan Pu in Shantung. Here 
both foreign and Chinese merchants 
are equally privileged to lease land 
within the limits of the port, which 
are fixed by the Chinese Govern- 
ment. But th.se places have not 
been put on the same footing as 
the treaty ports, for, to quote a 
provision from the regulations for 
one of them (Tsinan Fu), "tEe 
control of all affairs therein shall 
pertain entirely to China; for- 
eigners must not interfere." This 
is the view held by the Chinese 
authorities, but the Powers have 
maintained a different opinion on 
♦ the subject; the latter insist that 
the stipulations as regards the re- 
gular treaty ports are also applic- 
able to the voluntarily opened 
ports. 

Then we have the ports situated 
in the territories '/leased' ' to cer- 
tain treaty Powers by China, such 
as Port Arthur to Russia, Kwang- 
Chowwan to France, and Weihaiwei 
to England. These districts were 
leased primarily for political rea- 
sons. Being important strongholds 
they possess a high strategic 
value, which enables the lessee gov- 
ernments to preserve their balance 
of power in China. However, the 
leased areas have also a commercial 
purpose for their existence, and are 



T II K C H I N E S E QUKSTIO N 



usually opened to international 
trade and residence. 

Lastly, there are the ports of 
call, which are stages established 
along the great rivers, where 
" steamers shall be allowed to 
touch for the purpose of landing or 
shipping passengers or goods,' 1 but 
where ' 'foreign merchants will not 
foe authorized to reside or open 
houses of business or warehouses." 
There are now twenty-five ports of 
call in China, nine on the Yangtze 
and sixteen on the West River. As 
for the ports and places opened to 
foreign trade by treaties or by the 
Chinese Government on its own 
initiative, which comprise the first 
three classes, the number is eightv- 
three. 6 * 

In addition to these four kinds 
of commercial ports we may men- 
tion the legation quarter at Peking 
wherein each power stations a per- 
manent guard for the security of 
its legation. From the Chinese 
point of view the establishment of 
foreign guards and garrisons is not 
a shield but a spear and until it is 
removed permanent good relations 
are not to be expected. The reason 
tor stationing the troops and 
guards, which was to prevent the 
recurrence of the ''Boxer" troub- 
les, does not exist any longer. The 
Chinese people believe in what is 
right and reasonable and so strong 
is this belief of theirs that they 
spurn the thought that it is neces- 
sary to back up or enforce their 
right by might. They use force 
only when they are irritated and 
humiliated to the utmost. So long 
as the Powers keep their oft-repeat 
ed promise to maintain the inde- 
pendence and integrity of China 
and refrain from committing on 
Chinese soil such outrages as those 
preceding the Boxer Rebellion, they 
ran fully rely on the non-recrudes- 
renee of anti-foreign outbreaks 
and the faithfulness of the Chinese 
to perform their international obli- 
gations as they have demonstrated 
in the past. Moreover, China has 
shown her ability to give adequate 
protection to the legations during 
the European War, when the num- 



ber of foreign troops was largely 
reduced. 

Outside of the fixed limits of 
the commercial ports discussed 
above, that is, in the interior of 
China, the alien may travel "for 
pleasure" or "for purposes of 
trade" only when he is provided 
with a passport, issued by his con- 
sul and countersigned by the 
Chinese authorities. He is prohibit- 
ed from lingering at an inland place 
after his business transaction lias 
been concluded. But he may be per- 
mitted to carry on railway or min- 
ing enterprises in the interior by 
the special authorization of the 
Chinese Government. In such cases 
the restrictions on the ordinary 
alien merchant are inapplicable, 
and the foreigner who is given n 
mining or railway grant is placed 
under the especial protection of the 
Chinese authorities. 

Without doubt the imposition of 
the restrictions on the traffic of the 
foreign merchant in the inland and 
the limiting of his activities to 
those ports and places, and those 
only, which have been specially set 
aside for purposes of international 
residence and trade are incompat- 
ible with the unfettered develop- 
ment of his commercial interests in 
China. The system is artificial and 
it cheeks the free movement of for- 
eign capital throughout the coun- 
try, thereby blocking the industrial 
progress of China. Owing to the 
lack of a code binding upon native 
and foreigners alike, the alien con- 
siders it risky for him to invest in 
the interior of China without in- 
voking the support of his own 
government. This accounts for the 
fact that foreign investment in 
China has formed the subject mat- 
ter of many a diplomatic negotia- 
tion, of which the results are de- 
tailed in the archives of tho dif- 
ferent capitals. But industrial un- 
dertakings of this type or "conces- 
sions," as they are called, have 
been granted by the Chinese only 
with the greatest reluctance. China 
has no jurisdiction over the alien, 
and in case of disputes between 
him and the natives he is supported 



T il i: C H I X K s K QUESTION 



18 



by his own government, and victory 
is always on his side, while the in- 
terests of the Chinese are rarely, 
if ever, given their due considera- 
tion. 

Moreover, many o£ the foreign 
enterprises In China are not bona 

fide business undertakings, but are 
established under the mask of 
private corporations by imperialis- 
tic governments for purposes oi ag- 
gression. So in quite a few oases the 
application of foreign capital in- 
stead 6£ leading to industrial ad- 
vancement, as it ought to do, has 
resulted in the curtailment of cer- 
tain of China's sovereign rights. 
Herein lies the explanation that 
although the Chinese have not the 
requisite capital to tap the hidden 
resources of their country, they 
have, nevertheless, looked upon for- 
eign investments with suspicion and 
pursued the apparently detrimental 
policy of not letting the foreigner 
do more than they could possibly 
help. With them it is simply a ques- 
tion of expediency, of avoiding un- 
necessary complications with for- 
eign governments which are con- 
stantly looking for a chance to file 
a "friendly" ultimatum at Pe- 
king. The Chinese are not, as out- 
siders allege, hostile to all foreign 
investments. They oppose only 
those that have ulterior motives 
behind them; while investments 
which are intended solely for the 
legitimate returns of business are 
always accorded their merited wel- 
come. A large part of the reason 
why tho Chinese are invariably anx- 
ious to do business with the United 
States is because they know that 
American capital and enterprise in 



China are devoid of all political de- 
signs, and look only for the ordi- 
nary profits of investment. The 
absence of a mechanism by which 
foreign capital can be readily 
brought into use is much to be 
lamented, for China, like all de- 
veloping countries, and being her- 
self the greatest of them all, needs 
money and credit in abundance and 
offers unprecedented opportunities 
for investment and commercial ex- 
pansion. 

Under the circumstances which 
we have described in the preceding 
paragraphs the natural growth of 
th< foreign trade of China cannot 
but be greatly obstructed. For this 
China is not to be blamed. We must 
remember that the various restric- 
tions placed on the activities of the 
foreign merchant constitute a neces- 
sary corollary to his enjoyment of 
the immunities of extraterritoriali- 
ty. If the Chinese Government 
prohibits the alien from going 
wherever he pleases, from holding 
land and establishing commercial 
houses wherever he chooses, it is 
because he insists on doing business 
in China without being amenable 
to the lawB of the country. The 
arrangement is artificial and doubt- 
less involves inconveniences, if not 
hardships, but it is the unavoidable 
outcome of the foreigner's exemp- 
tion from the lex loci. For as soon 
as extraterritorial jurisdiction is 
abolished in China the whole coun- 
try will bo thrown freely open to 
the residence and trade of all for- 
eigners. But so long as it exists, 
so long will the restrictions have 
to remain. 



The Chinese Question 

The Underlying Cause of the Present Crisis 
in China 

ARTICLE 11 
Customs Tariff 



We hove already dealt with ex- 
traterritoriality. Coming now to 
the other inalienable right of sover- 
eignty denied to China by the 
Powers, namely, the regulation of 
her foreign commerce, we discover 
tl at China is se bound by the trea- 
ties that she is not even permitted 
to fix her own tariff. The rate pro- 
vided is a uniform five per cent 
ad valorem on both imports and ex- 
ports—a rate which has remained 
unchanged for the last eighty-three 
years, which China has not the 
slightest chance to raise and which, 
in practice, is never effective, as 
we shall see presently. Imports hav- 
ing paid their duty at an open port 
once may be re-exported duly-free 
w another open port within three 
years; and if the imported articles 
are intended for a foreign port they 
toe entitled to a drawback or re- 
fund of the sum originally paid. 
Compare this tariff with the average 
rale of 15 per cent to 0*0 per cent, 
levied on imports by other coun- 
tries. 

In addition to enjoying this most 
moderate of existing tariffs the for- 
eign merchant is privileged to take 
his imported goods to, or bring 
Chinese produce from, an inland 
market by paying a commutation 
tax equivalent to one-half the tariff 
duty, or 2y 2 per cent ad valorem. 
Saving paid this "transit due," 
as the tax is called, his merchandise 
is exempt from all i * inland charges, ' ' 
Which weigh most oppressively on 
Chinese traders. Thus China is 
forced to discriminate against her 
own subjects in favor of aliens. 

In the third place, along the bind 
frontiers of Manchuria, Mongolia, 



Eastern Turkestan, Yunnan, and 
Kwangsi, China had to concede with- 
out condition an extra rebate on 
the ordinary tariff duties. In the 
first three named places the reduc- 
tion on the imports is equivalent to 
one-third of the regular tariff duty 
of 5 per centum, while in the last 
two the special rates amount to 
those of the ordinary tariff less 
three-tenths on imports and four- 
tenths on exports. There is no 
valid reason for the existence of 
this preferential treatment inasmuch 
as China has received nothing for 
it in return. Its removal has been 
under discussion since |0M and we 
hope that the attempt will soon 
meet with success. Fourthly, foreign 
merchants are exempt Prom all locril 
taxation at the treaty ports, and 
within the "areas reserved Cot for- 
eign residence and trade" all taxes 

are collected for the sole benefit of 
such special areas, 

Nor is this all. Por, in the fifth 
place, tin- alien has the right to par- 
ticipate in the coasting trade and 
inland navigation of China. In 
other countries these privileges are 
generally reserved by the sovereign 
power for tho exclusive enjoyment 
of its own subjects. Nevertheless, 
China was compelled to grant them 
to outsiders, and this not according 
to the tariffs and regulations im- 
posed upon native merchants but 
according to rules set up by the for- 
eigner and for the foreigner's ben- 
efit. The injustice of these con- 
cessions is further increased by the 
fact that those same outsiders, also, 
not only enjoy exceptional com 
mercial advantages, but are invest- 
ed with the immunities of extra- 



T UK CHINESE QUESTION 



16 



territoriality. The ri^lit to engage 
in the coast trade la clearly stipu- 
lated in the Treaty of Tientsin sign- 
ed between China and Denmark in 
1863. As for Inland navigation, the 
privilege was conceded In 1858, 
when the Yangtze River was opened 
:<> the traffic of British Bteomers. 
Since then the scope of this right 

has been widened, and to. lay the 
navigation of the greater pari of 
the Inland waters of China is en- 
joyed by all vessels under the for- 
eign flag, The foreign participa- 
tion In the coasting and river traf- 
fic, although Introducing safer and 
quicker methods of transportation, 
has, nevertheless, been injurious to 

Chinese Shipping trade, and in par- 
ticular the junk owners, and has 
put out of work the great number 
of boatmen formerly under their em- 
ploy. It is encouraging to learn 
thai much native capita] lias al- 
ready been invested in steamers and 
it is hoped that the local trade of 
China will be restored to the Chin- 
ese flag in no di8tan1 future. 

Such are the principal commercial 
privileges of the alien In China, tn 
view of their far-reaching import 
ancej however, it seems advisable to 
survey them o little further than 
has just been done. To begin with, 
the Chinese tariff is not a statutory 
but a conventional tariff, enforced 

by treaties with the Powers and 

applies to .-ill of then) alike. Most 
of these treaties are whal the jurist 
calls tniquwm fortius; fcney were m 

pOSed upon China as the results of 

military defeats, and as such wore 
drawn with little, if any, regard 
for the economic conditions of 
China, inasmuch as the primary mo- 
tive Of all foreign negotiators w;is 
to safeguard the interests of their 
own countries at all possible angles. 
Consequently, China was coerced 
into giving preferential treatment 
to foreigners as against her own 
subjects. 

The tariff impost is levied on ex- 
ports as well as imports. This pre- 
vents the Chinese government from 
pursuing the almost universal eco- 
nomic policy of facilitating the ex- 
port of home products, and this in 



8 country where the balance of trade 
has, with few exceptions, been "un- 
favorable" ever since 1 S«>4. The 
presence of the export tariff ac- 
counts in part for the rapid decline 
of the tea exports and the slow 
progress of the silk trade; and tea 
and silk are the two chief Btaple 
exports of China. Export duties 
constitute an obstacle to the devel- 
opment of a nation's foreign trade 
and that is why they are seldom 
utili/ed by the industrially advanced 
Countries of the world. China is to- 
day passing from local to national 
economy and under such circum- 
stances export duties are inexcus- 
able. During this transition, at 
least, her export tariff should be 

abolished in order to accelerate the 
economic development of the coun- 
try. The advisability of such a 
measure has long been appreciated 

by China, and it is only because of 
her fi8Cal exigencies that the suici- 
dal policy of taxing exports is con- 
tinued. 

Moreover, the Chinese merchant, 
who is handicapped by the export 
duty, is subjected to the Intolerable 
Ukfn, which is a tax levied on mer- 
chandise In inland transit. JAJin 
stations are to be found at all large 
towns and along the Important trade 
routes, whether" by bind or by wa- 
ter. Their presence constitutes an 
impediment to the free movement 
of traffic. It is hard to estimate 
the percentage of the tax on the 
value of goods, but usually the rate 

is three per cent at the departure 
station and about two per cent at 
every Inspecting station. As a rule, 
the "total amount collected within a 
province dees net go above ten per 
cent, but if the merchandise is ship- 
ped through several provinces the 
IQciti may be as high as twenty and 
even twenty five per cent of the 
value. For "instance, Hangchow silk 
shipped to Peking for sale has to 
pay a tax of 18 per cent on raw ma- 
terial. Prom these harassing taxes 
the alien merchant is entirely ex- 
empt by the payment of a light com- 
mutation tax of 2Vj per cent. That 
is why cotton mills iu China can 
obtain their raw materials from the 



16 



THE c n I. N K si: QI'ESTIO X 



United States or India at a lighter 
duty than cotton shipped from one 
Chinese province into another. To 
take a more concrete example of 
this discrimination in favor of out- 
siders: Timber transported from 
Fengtien and Antung (Chinese ter- 
ritory) to Peking is taxed at five 
different places, paying in all a dutv 
equivalent to 20 per cent of its 
market value; while timber from 
America pays no more than 10 per 
cent, including transit dues and the 
Peking octroi. Again, timber from 
Jueichow to Hankow and Shanghai 
has to pay duties at six different 
places, the sum total of which a* 
gregates 17% per cent, while timber 
imported into these same ports from 
abroad is dutiable only at one-third 
the amount. And these rates on 
Chinese goods are the minimum. 

So here again the foreigner is ac- 
corded special privileges at the ex- 
pense of the Chinese people. The 
fact that this is so, the fact that 
the Chinese are denied the exemp- 
ion given to foreigners, has led the 
I.'ttei to sell their names to un- 
scrupulous Chinese merchants, who 
are thereby enabled to pass' their 
goods as foreign consignments and 
th ?. Wssive fcaxea. 
In addition to this abuse of selling 
transit passes, the exemption of for- 
eign merchandise from the likin 
taxation is difficult to operate In 
a country so vast in size as China 
it is absurd that the foreigner should 
be entitled to carry his goods from 
or to a port, to or from any place 
m the interior, however distant 
upon paying only 2% per cent in 
the form of transit dues. Further- 
more, the system does not take into 
account the circumstances and re- 
quirements of the provinces of 
China, each of which is a small 
State in itself, attending to its own 
finance and taxation. The likin is 
one of the chief sources of provin- 
cial revenue. The exemption of for- 
eign goods from this tax has caused 
sonic derangement to the provincial 
administrations, inasmuch as the 
transit dues (inwards and outwards) 
and a part of the likin are collected 
by the Maritime Customs and paid 



to the Central Government, and of 
whatever goes to Peking the prov- 
inces receive nothing. Owing to 

this impracticability the inland tran- 
sit question has given rise to much 
dispute and ill-feeling between 
China and the treaty Powers. 

The duty of a modern government 
is to encourage and not to check 
home industries. Inland taxes on 
domestic products arc rare. For a 
long time the Chinese govern men I 
has realized that the system of levy- 
ing the likin and other taxes oil 
merchandise is vexatious to the peo- 
ple and detrimental to the interests 
of trade, domestic as well as foreign; 
and hence it should be abolished. 
The financial needs of the nation, 
however, makes it imperative thai 
the Wcin f which is one of the main 
sources of revenue, •amounting to 
something like Mex. $60,000,000 a 
year, should be retained until an 
adequate substitute for it is found. 
The Mackay Treaty of 1902 with 
Great Britain and the Commercial 
treaties with the United States and 
Japan in 1903 provide for the com- 
plete abolition of the likin and the 
increase of the Customs duties as a 
compensation. But on account of 
the lack of unanimous approval 
among the Powers these treaty stip- 
ulations have remained "paper re- 
forms" to this day. Several times 
during the last fifteen years, es- 
pecially at the Washington Confer- 
ence in 1922, China has brought up 
the question before the various gov- 
ernments, but she 'has not, as vet, 
succeeded in getting a solution from 
them. At the Special Tariff Con- 
ference which is now convening at 
Peking, however, the Powers have 
agreed to consider this subject and 
it is earnestly hoped that some ar- 
rangement will be made for the 
abolition. 

Similar in nature to the transit 
due is the coast-trade duty, which 
is levied on goods transported from 
one port to another. The rate is 
fixed at 2% per cent ad valorem. 
Like the inland transit due the 
coast-trade duty constitutes an ob- 
stacle to local and foreign trade, 
and the sooner it is abolished the 



t a b oh i n t: s e q r e St to x 



17 



bettor it will be for the materia] 

transformation of China. Here also 
the continuance of the tax Is due 
to the country's lack of revenue. 

The present Chinese tariff is utt- 
, scientific for it does not take into 
consideration the economic and 
social as well as the fiscal "needs of 
China. The rate on imports is put 
on a uniform five per rent basis. 
It makes no distinction between 
manufactured goods and raw ma- 
terials, or between luxuries and 
necessaries. For. instance, machin- 
ery and similar merchandise ought 
to be admitted at a lower rate of 
duty in order to accelerate the in- 
dustrial development of China, 
while the importation of 'such lux- 
uries as wine and tobacco ought to 
be discouraged by the imposition 
of a higher tax so as to mitigate 
the unwholesome effects on the 
habits of the Chinese people. 

Moreover, the tariff is unsatis- 
factory from the fiscal standpoint. 
Everyone will admit that the five 
per cent duty is far too low for 
revenue purposes. Contrast this 
with the duties imposed on Chinese 
goods abroad- Tn Great Britain, 
tea is taxed at 1 shilling per pound, 
or about 25 per cent; in Japan 
Chinese tobacco is assessed at 350 
per cent and raw silk at 30 per 
cent; while in the United States 
silk and its products, even under 
the Underwood Tariff Law of 1913, 
have to stand a rate of duty rang- 
ing from 35 to 60 per cent ad. va- 
lorem, Chinese products exported 
abroad must pay such duties as for- 
eifcn countries choose^ to levy, but 
foreign articles import'ed into China 
can be subjected to only such taxes 
as are sanctioned by the iron hand 
of the treaty Powers. This explains, 
why in 1913 Germany obtained 
about 45 per cent of her total ord- 
inary income from customs and ex- 
cise; why during the fiscal year of 
1913-1914 some 39 per cent of the 
total Federal revenue of the United 
States was contributed by customs 
receipts; why in 1914 customs in 
France returned some 20 per cent 
of her total revenue, and duties on 
imports into free-trade England 



amounted to more than 22 per cent 
of the total revenue of Great Bri- 
tain, while Customs in China yielded 
only about 6 per cent of the total 
income. 

Although China is in sore need of 
revenue and her Customs are not 
contributing their due share, never- 
theless she cannot make them do 
so. The live per cent duty is fixed 
by the Powers and can he raised 
only with their consent, one and 
all, and for that consent each power 
can exact a price. Such a proce- 
dure is practically impossible of at- 
tainment, for however good an ad- 
justment may be shown to be, every 
government would make its own de- 
cision and reject if it sees fit. For 
example, the Chinese Customs Ta- 
riff Treaty, which was signed by 
the nine Powers represented at the 
Washington Conference in 1921- 
K)22, provides for the calling of a 
Special Conference to take up the 
question of the increase of the Chin- 
ese tariff "within three months af- 
ter the ratification of the treaty." 
and France, because of China's re- 
fusal to accede to her views on the 
so-called Gold Franc Question, was 
able to delay the holding of the said 
conference for more than three 
years by withholding her ratifica- 
tion to the Washington Treaty. 
Kven a nation like Denmark, or 
Sweden, whose trade in China is 
insignificant, can obstruct any pro- 
posed change in the Chinese tariff 
system, by refusing or failing to 
give its .approval. Moreover, the 
policy of most of the treaty Powers 
is purely selfish. They permit China 
to develop only in such a way as 
will give them enormous advant- 
ages. Japan, for example, has been 
blocking any revision of the Chin- 
ese tariff which would assist China 
in manufacturing her own cotton 
textiles and cotton yarn at a Smal- 
ler cost than similar goods import- 
ed from Japan- Tu0 reason why 
some of the Powers have withheld 
their approval of the increase of 
the tariff and the abolition of the 
Jilin as promised in the British 
treaty of 1902 is because they argue 
that such a change would jeopardize 



is 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



their commercial interests in China. 
The method of giving every power 
a vote on any modification of the 
tariff is absurdly rigid, and makes 
it impossible for China to obtain 
relief from the injustice of the 
treaty stipulations,' and . to adjust 
the Customs revenue according to 
her requirements. Thus writes 
Chester Holcombe (The Ecal Chin- 
ese Question, p. 15): 

"The conditions under which for- 
eign commerce was established and 
is carried on are a serious interfer- 
ence with the revenues of the gov- 
ernment. So far as the en' ire h\u]v 
of foreign export and import trade 
is concerned, there is no flexibility 
or power of adjustment left by 
Whu h the government may regulate 
the income from that source in ac- 
cordance with its needs. No mat- 
ter what exigencies and consequent 
demands upon the treasury must be 
met, no help can be looked for in 
that direction. It fluctuates in 
"mount only as the commerce upon 

loss 1C '> U ' S l0Vied sh0WS gain or 
But to say that the tariff is too 
OW and that China cannot raise 

o *u y highor wit »™t the consent 
oi the treaty Power is merely half 
M the story. What is still " worse 
] s that the 5 per cent is, in realitv, 
only nominal. This accounts for the 
jact that while the total direct 
trade of China multiplied itself 
more than seven and a half times 
between 1867 and 1913, the rev- 
enue on the entire trade increased 
less than fivefold in the same period. 

revious to the revision of 1918 the 
tanfi on imports was based on the 
average values of the three years 
1897-1899, as fixed by the Tariff 
Revision Commission of 1902. Af- 
ter the revision of 1902 the values 
of the different imported commodi- 
ties changed and new imports were 
introduced into China, and as a re- 
SUK of this, most of the goods paid 
very much j )e ] ow tho stipulated rate. 
Although the tariff of 1902 on for- 
eign imports was to be "cinq pour 
cent effectifs"— as provided bv the 
Protocol of 1901— it was ineffective 
from the very start, as was shown 



by Sir Robert Breden, formerly Act 
ing Inspector-General of Chinese 
Customs and one of the principal 
supporters of the tariff -revision 
movement. This ineffectiveness in- 
creased as time went on. An inves- 
tigation conducted by the Chinese 
government several years ago OH the 
values of a number of representative 
articles and the duties collected 
thereon revealed the interesting re- 
sult that while the prices of foreign 
imports increased very considerably 
during the period 1911-1&17 the rate 
of the import duty steadily dwind- 
led- In 1911 the average rate ue- 
tually levied was 4.02 per cent; in 
1912 it was 4 per cent; in 1913, 
3.98 per cent; in 1914, 3.96 per 
cent; in 1915, 3.60 per cents in 
1916, 3.13 per cent; and during the 
first three-quarters of 1917 it 
amounted to merely 2.89 per cent 
— a loss equivalent to over 4 2 per 
cent. The revisions of 1918 and 
1922 have rectified the discrepancy 
somewhat but not completely. Such 
is the situation, and yet everybody 
takes for granted that China has 
been receiving a full 5 per cent 
duty on imports all the time. 

The ineffectiveness of the tariff 
means, of course, a material loss to 
Chinese revenue every year — a loss 
that has been actually shown, lor 
1912, by Sir Robert Breden. Dur- 
ing that year China had a total 
foreign import trade of Tls. 425,- 
390,257, excluding the import of 
foreign opium (Tls. 47,700,774), 
which was subject, to a special duty 
and was not taxed on a 5 per cent 
basis. If this import of general 
merchandise had paid the legiti- 
mate 5 per cent, except in cases 
where a special reduction was legal- 
ized, as the rebates on the import 
trade along the frontiers of Jap- 
anese Korea, Russian^ Siberia, Bri- 
tish Burma, and French Tongking, 
the duty would have amounted to 
Tls. 20,595,090. The actual sum col- 
lected was, however, only Tls. 14,- 
275,764. The evasion of the legal 
tariff on both the maritime and 
frontier trade was, therefore, Tls. 
6.319,326, or about 31 per cent. This 
shortage in the Chinese revenue is 



T H EE 0 H ! N B S B Q 0 E S T I 0 N 



19 



now keenly felt, for with the dis- 
appearance of the legitimate opium 
traffic in China, there has GOme the 
consequent loss of the receipts from 
the opium duty, which, in consolida- 
tion with the WMw on opium, con 
tributed approximately per cent* 
to the total charges on the import 

trade in 1908. 

Tn accordance with the treaty 

provision for a decennial revision^ 
an attempt was made by the Chin- 
ese government, in 1913-1914, to ad- 
just the import duty in order thai 
it alight give the full •"> per cent 

yield. Unfortunately, this met with 
failure, on account of the unrea- 
sonableness of Japan, Russia, and 

Italy, all of whom endeavored to 

secure some more special privileges 
even for this much overdue revision. 
It was not until November, 1917. 
after China had joined the war 
against the Central Powers, thai 

the Entente governments consented 
to the revision of the . import tariff 
to an effective per cent. The 
values of merchandise used in this 
adjustment were those ruling dur- 
ing 1912-1910, two years before, 
and two years after the commence- 
ment of the European war. This 
import tariff came into force on 
August 1, 1919. but inasmuch as the 
1918 Tariff Revision Commission 
agreed that "this tariff be subject 
to revision in whole or in part two 
years after the war, ' ' it was again 
revised in 1922, with the Shanghai 
market values for the six months 
from October, 1921, to March, 1922, 
as the basis. After some delay the 
new tariff was put into effect on 
January 17, 1923, and this is the 
present import tariff of China, 
while the export tariff with slight 
modifications is based on the aver 
ape values of 1860. 

It is worth stating that while, on 
the one hand, China is denied the 
full benefit of the Customs as a 
legitimate source of income; on the 
other, she has to pay the heavy 
foreign indebtedness which she was 
compelled to incur by the treaty 
Powers in order to meet their ex- 
penses for carrying on aggressive 
wars against her. Furthermore, the 



countries which have raised object 
tion to a revision or an increase of 
the tariff are also the very ones 
which have been most insistent 
upon the retention and prompt pay- 
ment of the indemnities. 

The difficulties in connection with 
the regulation of commerce in China 
are further complicated by the pres- 
ence in all the important conven- 
tions between China and Other 
states, beginning with the British 
supplementary treaty, of October, 
1S43, of the moat-favored-nation 
clause in its unilateral and absolute 
form. By this provision China ac- 
cords to all treaty Powers ami their 
subjects, without reciprocity, what- 
ever privileges that may have been 
or may hereafter be granted to any 
one of them. That is to say, no 
distinction is to be drawn between 
one foreigner and another in the 
conferring of commercial rights; 
whatever is accorded to one nation 
is to be shared by all of them alike. 
And the French government nas 
even gone as far as to demand par- 
ticipation in all the benefits con- 
ceded without being bound by the 
conditions whereunder those con- 
cessions were made, basing its claims 
on the most-fa vored-nat ion clause 
and on two Bpecial stipulations of 
the French Treaty of Tientsin, L858, 

In some cases the most-favored 
nation clause goes further than 
merely requiring China to treat all 
aliens on an equal footing; it for- 
bids her to give special privileges 
even to her own subjects. For ex- 
ample, by the Japanese Protocol of 
189(5, Article III, goods manufac- 
tured by foreigners in the open 
ports may be liable to such a tax 
only as "shall neither be other 
than that payable by the Chinese 
subjects nor higher." Again, if the 
Chinese government wishes to close 
some particular inland waterway to 

the navigation of foreign launches, 
il can only do so ''provided that 
Chinese Launches are also prohibited 
from using it." Once more. Arti- 
cle III of the Supplemental Treat'. 

between Chins and the United 

States in 1880 provides that "nq 
other kind or higher rate of ton- 



20 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



nage dues, or duties for imports or 
exports, or coastwise trade, shall be 
imposed or levied in the open ports 
of China* 1 upon American vessels 
or cargoes "than are imposed or 
levied on vessels or cargoes of any 
other nation or on those of Chinese 
subjects.' ' In 1890 this stipulation 
was cited by the British minister 
in his protest against China's at- 
tempt to give a bountv to native 
-hipping by reducing the import 
duties to Chinese merchants who 
shipped their merchandise in vessels 
belonging to the China Merchants 
Steam >.ayigation Company, the only 
C hinese steamship company of anv 
importance competing with foreimi 
concerns. In face of the protest 
the exemption was rescinded by the 
Chinese Government. 

This method of granting privi- 
leges has deprived China of the 
ordinary advantages of independent 
negotiation and has forced her to 
concede many valuable privileges 
and immunities to foreigners with 
out obtaining anything from them 
in return. Thus writes Sir RoW 
Har , Inspector-General of Chinese 

3m toil . US i t0ms durhlg the Period 
1863-1911 and a competent author- 
ity on the existing commercial and 
administrative situations i n Chin., 
(ftai from the Land of SSg 

"The 'most favoured nation' 
Clatwe has always stood in the 
way of change, and prevented the 
Chinese Government from securing 
and conceding various ameliorations 
in exchange for special advantages 
sefing that, although new necotia! 
tors might be willing to gi ve 
quid pro quo their predecessors 
would claim the advantage but 
ject and refuse to be bound hv iSl 
conditions." y lhe 

Such an arrangement is mostun 
just and it should be promptly 
abolished for the simple reason thit 
it takes two to make a bargain 
and that if the relations between 
two countries are to be permanent 
and beneficial to both parties,' thev 
must be founded on the principle of 
reciprocity and not on that of one- 
sidedness. 



All that China receives for ex- 
tending the inost-favored-ii.it ion 
treatment in its absolute form to 
aliens within her territories is the 
" least-favored-nation " treatment 
of her own subjects abroad. In the 
treaty engagements between China 
and other states it is U8ually pro- 
vided that just as foreigners in 
China shall enjoy full protection in 
person and in property, so Chin- 
ese subjects in foreign countries 
shall be accorded a similar protec- 
tion. Nevertheless, Chinese labor- 
ers are excluded by law from the 
United States and its possessions 
and those that are expressly exempt 
— merchants, students, anil travel' 
ers — are subjected to the humilia- 
tions of minute inquisitions into 
their character and of anthropome- 
tric measurements of their person 
for the purpose of ascertaining that 
they are not laborers under camou- 
flage. Then upoii their arrival 
they are treated as if they were 
criminals and are "detained in the 
pen on the steamship wharf or im- 
prisoned like a felon until the cus- 
toms officials are satisfied." Very 
much the same procedure is followed 
in all the other countries from 
which Chinese are excluded. In 
Canada, Chinese are admitted upon 
the payment of a poll-tax of $500. 
From South Africa all classes of 
Chinese, with the exception of of- 
ficials, are excluded, at the discre- 
tion of the Immigration Depart- 
ment and in case of failure to pass 
a dictation test in any European 
language. They are also denied ad- 
mission in Australia and New Zea- 
land if they fail to satisfy a read- 
ing or dictation test. 

Moreover, the status of Chinese 
residents in foreign countries is in- 
secure. In matters both of res- 
idence and of trade they are 
specially discriminated against and 
are deprived of the rights, privi- 
leges and immunities enjoyed by 
subjects of the most favored nation. 
For instance, in the State of Cali- 
fornia, Chinese children are forbid- 
den to attend the schools for white 
children. In the Canadian prov- 
inces of Quebec and Saskatchewan, 



T H K C H I X B 3 B QUESTION 



2] 



discriminatory laws arc enforced 
against Chinese laund ties. And in 

South Africa, Chinese are subjected 
t r » the most humiliating restrictions, 
such as the limitation of their res- 
idence and business within certain 
locations, the prohibition of their 
Using the same post -office, street- 
cars, etc., as Europeans, ami their 
exclusion from mining enterprises 
or dealing in precious metals. All 

these restrictions and discrimina- 
tions against Chinese abroad are in 
utter disregard of international law 
as well as violative of the treaty 
stipulations between China and the 
Powers concerned. It may be ex- 
pedient and even necessary from the 
foreigners' standpoint to exclude 
Chinese from their territories Rhd 
to treat them with severity and un- 
reasonableness, but to the Chinese 
such measures constitute an abuse 
of superior force, and a flagrant 
outrage on the dignity of their na- 
tion. To them the cry of the open 
door is indeed a hollow mockery, 
for theirs is the door that is kept 
open, and it is kept open by the 
nations which close their own doors 
against them. It is hardly con- 
ceivable that the unjust treatment 
of the Chinese in foreign countries 
Can be indefinitely continued, and 
it is high time that the wrongs be 
redressed and the innocent sufferers 
be placed on a footing of equality 
with other aliens. Until this is 
done the intercourse between China 
and outsiders will remain unhealth}' 
with a festering sore. 

So, to return from our partial 
digression, the regulation of the 
foreign trade of China by means 
of dictated treaties constitutes a 
marked interference with the su- 
preme authority of the Chinese peo- 
ple on their own soil. The exist- 
ence of the one-sided conventional 
tariff has rendered the entire Cus- 
toms system of China absolutely 
rigid and inflexible. The Chinese 
government cannot of its own ac- 
cord adjust the tariff to the needs 
of the country, for an alteration 
of it involves the consent of the 
treaty Powers, one and all — a condi- 



tion which is insurmountably dif- 
ficult to obtain in practice. Not- 
withstanding the fact that China 
is badly in need of revenue, she 
is forbidden by the treaties to make 
foreign imports hear their proper 
share of the country \s tax burden. 
The inability to raise the Tariff 
above the nominal 5 per cent has 
forced her to continue the suicidal 
policy of taxing domestic trade 
more heavily than foreign com- 
merce, and of retaining those haras- 
sing levies which are an obstacle 
alike to her foreign and domestic 
commercial expansion. Such a sit- 
uation is certainly detrimental to 
the development of China. The 
young Republic is at present pass- 
ing from the stage of local econ- 
omy to that of national economy. 
During this transition economists 
would consider it a most sound pol- 
icy for her to promote infant manu- 
factures at home and to revive the 
old staple industries like tea, which, 
owing to Oppressive taxation and 
lack of scientific cultivation, are in 
a state of rapid deterioration. That 
is as it ought to be. As it is, pen- 
alty is imposed on native industry 
while the advantage is all in favor 
of imports from foreign countries. 
Xo check is placed on foreign goods 
and China has always been the 
dumping ground for the surplus 
products of all nations in the world. 
In face of such competition from 
outside it is extremely hard to start 
any new industry or to resuscitate 
an old one, and as a result the in- 
dustrial progress of China is greatly 
retarded. Thus, at every point na- 
tive merchants and native merchan- 
dise are discriminated against and 
the whole arrangement from A to Z 
is equivalent to the management of 
China for the sole benefit of for- 
eigners. And here, like Chester 
Holcombc (The Real Chinese Ques- 
tion, p. 15), we ask: 
4 'What government, except it be 
that of angels, could be expected 
to regard with favor, or to fost r 
with open hand, a commerce thus 
protected solely in the interest of 
aliens! 99 



The Chinese Question 



The Underlying Cause of the Present Crisis 
in China 



ARTICLE 111 



Tariff Autonomy and Abolition of 
Extraterritorialihj 



In spite of the hampering restric- 
tions and petty tyrannies which we 
have described in the two preced- 
ing articles, the international inter- 
course of China has widened and 
her foreign trade has grown apace 
until it reached the figure of Tls 
1. '»7G,320,303 in 1923. Now, if the 
foreign trade of China could 
triumph over adverse conditions 
what a wonderful progress it would 
have made if those conditions were 
non-existent! However, so long as 
they stand unremoved, the natural 
growth of the trade cannot but be 
seriously hindered. 

The time is now far advanced 
for the abolition of these impedi- 
ments to trade and intercourse. It 
is generally recognized that all 
treaties are concluded under the 
tacit eondition of rebus sic stanti- 
bus unci they shall cease to be 
obligatory so soon as the state of 
facts and conditions upon which 
they were founded has substantially 
Changed, Professor L. Oppenkeim 
(Intei-national Law, vol. I np 
550-551) says: ' 1 

4 4 When the existence or the 
necessary development of a state 
stands in an unavoidable conflict 
with such state's treaty obliga- 
tions, the latter must give way, for 
self preservation and development 
in accordance with the growth and 
the necessary requirements of the 
nation are the primary duties of 
every state. No state would con- 
sent to any such treaty as would 
hinder it in the fulfilment of these 
primary duties. The consent of a 



state to a treaty presupposes a con- 
viction that such treaty is not 
fraught with danger to its existence 
and development, and implies a con- 
dition that, if by an unforeseen 
change of circumstances the obliga- 
tions stipulated in the treaty 
should imperil the said stale's 
existence and necessary develop- 
ment, the treaty, although by its 
nature unnotifiable, should never- 
theless, be notifiable." 

Besides being obscure in their 
phraseology, the conventions be- 
tween China and the Powers have 
long been antiquated and have al- 
ways hindered the free develop- 
ment of the Chinese people. They 
are not in harmony with the spirit 
of the times, and must, therefore, 
be speedily revised and overhauled 
so as to meet the new world order 
that is dawning upon us, one in 
which every peace-loving nation, 
whether strong or weak, shall have 
the right to live on equal terms of 
safety and liberty with the other 
peoples of the world. Such a revi- 
sion cannot be denied to China 
any longer unless the treaty Powers 
choose to disregard the dictates of 
justice and pure common sense. 

In the revision is to be borne in 
mind the first principle of interna- 
tional trade, that nations are inter- 
dependent and that their prosperity 
is promoted by the unfettered ex- 
change of their produce; hence all 
obstacles to such an exchange must 
be swept away. Moreover, the 
third of the late President Wilson's 
famous fourteen conditions of 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



28 



world peace reads: "The removal, 
so far as possible, of all economic 
barriers and the establishment of 
an equality of trade conditions 
among all the nations consenting 
to the peace and associating them- 
selves for its maintenance. 1 ' inas- 
much as the restrictions imposed 
upon China by the Powers operate 
against her untrammeled Belf -de- 
velopment, do they not constitute 
economic barriers? Is not the 
denial of China's right to regulat > 
her own tariff inconsistent with 
the establishment of the equality 
of trade conditions! No impartial 
observer can answer these questions 
except in the affirmative. That 
being the ease, it is, therefore, 
essential that the system of re 
gulating commerce by menus of 
unilateral treaties be annulled, so 
that the trade between China ami 
the other countries may be pro- 
moted and the peace of the world 
bo made just and stable. 

The Special Tariff Conference, 
which has been meeting in Peking 
since October 26, 1925 in accordance 
with the Washington Nine-Power 
Treaty of 1922, is charged with the 
following duties: (1) to prepare 
the way for the speedy abolition 
of the likin taxes with a view to 
levying a duty of 12% per cent 
ad valorem on foreign imports ami 
one of 7Yj per cent on exports, as 
provided for by the British treat y 
of 1902 and the American and 
Japanese commercial treaties of 
1903; (2) to consider the interim 
provisions to bo applied prior to 
the actual abolition; (3) to author- 
ize the levying of a surtax on duti- 
able imports at the uniform rate 
of 2% per cent ad valorejn, with 
the exception that on certain 
articles of luxury the surtax may 
be 5 per cent; (4) to continue the 
present charge for transit passes at 
the rate of 2% per cent ad valorem 
until the likin is abolished. It is 
our earnest hope, however, that the 
scope of the Conference will not be 
limited to the strict letter of th° 
Washington Treaty but will be ex 
tended so as to include the more 
important question of the removal 



of all trade restrictions hitherto 
imposed upon China and the resto- 
ration to China of her tariff auto- 
nomy at the earliest practicable 
date. 

The tariff autonomy must be 
restored to China in order that she 
may rormulate and put into force 
an economic policy in harmony 
with 1 the interests of her people. 
This does not mea?i any desire oil 
the part of China to impose prohi- 
bitive customs duties which will 
drive out foreign goods from the 
Chinese market. That this is so is 
amply homo out by the schedule of 
the National tariff which was pro- 
mulgated on December 25, 1917 and 
which is now applied to countries 
not enjoying the conventional uni- 
form duty of 5 per cent ad valorem. 
Under the National Tariff imports 
are classified and taxed as follows: 
(1) luxuries, 20 to 25 per eentj (2) 
non-necessaries, 17^4 per cent; (3) 
ordinary articles, 12% per cent: 
(4) necessaries, which comprise the 
largest part of Chinese imports, 5 
per cent; and (5) a big list of 
articles entitled to exemption. 
China is not so foolish as to pursue 
the suicidal policy of destroying 
her international trade by a higli 
tariff wall. All that she wants is 
what each of the treaty Powers has 
assumed for itself as a matter of 
course, namely, a tariff that is 
sufficiently responsive to changes 
both at home and abroad, such a 
one as will meet her fast-growing 
fiscal needs and satisfy her awaken- 
ing industrial and commercial re- 
quirement*. To deprive China of 
her tariff autonomy is certainly an 
open attack upon her independence, 
for the right to regulate the tariff 
is a part of the larger right of 
taxation, which belongs to the 
sovereign authority of every state. 
r?il ess the repeated proclamations 
of the Powers on the sacred ness of 
the rights of all states, whether 
they b 0 strong or weak, are to be 
mere barren form of words, this 
encroachment open the territorial 
sovereignty of the Chinese people 
must be promptly removed. Justice 
demands that China shall have the 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



power to fix her own tariff, and 
when this is restored, for restored 
it must be, we can look forward to 
an unprecedented development in 
her industry and commerce in gen- 
eral. 

If the foreign trade of China is 
to have an unimpeded development 
it is necessary that, in addition to 
the restoration of the tariff auto- 
nomy, the whole country be thrown 
open freely to international trade 
and residence. But this requires 
the abolition of the present pre- 
carious system of conducting rela- 
tions between the Chinese and the 
foreigners— an arrangement which 
was thrust upon China by the ille- 
gality of brute force— and its re- 
placement \>y an equitable regime 
which all will accept and maintain. 
In short, this means th e relinquish- 
ment of all extraterritorial privi- 
leges and immunities by th e treaty 
Powers and the introduction of a 
more uniform system of Chinese 
jurisprudence and administration. 
This change is doubtless Tadical, 
but it is one which strikes at the 
root of the mischief that runs 
through every article of the 
treaties, the one factor that has 
undermined the authority of the 
Chinese Government and blocked 
all permanent good relations be- 
tween China and the outside world. 
In this connection Sir Robert Hart 
writes (These jrom the Land of 
Sinim, pp. 145-146): 
"Siich a change of principle in 
the making of treaties would widen 
and not restrict the field for both 
merchant and missionary, and 
would simplify and not complicate 
flu work of both consul and min- 
ister — would do away with irritat- 
ing privileges and place native and 
foreigner on the same footing — and 
would remove the sting of humilia- 
tion and put the Government of 
China on the same plane as other 
governments*.* It may have been 
— and may still be — expedient and 
even essential from the foreigner's 
point of view and the necessities 
of commercial law to stand on 
Chinese soil with the aegis of ex- 
traterritoriality and the procedure 



of their own courts; but to the 
Chinese eye this is a spear and not 
a shield, and until it is withdrawn 
there can be no assured dwelling at 
ease — no real welcome for foreign 
intercourse. Bestore jurisdiction, 
and the feeling of the responsibi- 
lity to protect as well as the appre- 
ciation of intercourse will at once 
move up to a higher plane. 99 

The abrogation of ext ra territo- 
riality in China is conditionally as- 
sured by Great Britain, the United 
States, and Japan in their treaties 
signed with China in 1902 and 
1903. Each of these Powers has 
promised "to give every assist- 
ance" to China 's judicial reform 
and "will also be prepared to re- 
linquish her extraterritorial rights 
when she is satisfied that the state 
of the Chinese laws, the arrange- 
ment for their administration, and 
other considerations warrant her in 
so doing. ' 9 

In view of these promises China 
brought up the question of the 
abolition of extraterritoriality at 
the Paris Peace Conference in 
1919, but the Powers rejected the 
proposal and, what was still 
worse, sanctioned Japan's control 
over the German interests in Shan- 
tung. It was not until 1921, at the 
Washington Conference, that the 
Powers recognized that the problem 
deserved serious study and conside- 
ration and adopted a resolution to 
the effect that the governments of 
the signatory Powers, including 
China*, shall establish a Commission 
to which each shall appoint one 
representative "to inquire into the 
present practice of extraterritorial 
jurisdiction in China, and into the 
laws and the judicial system and 
the methods of judicial administra- 
tion of China, with a view to re- 
porting to the governments of the 
several Powers their findings of 
fact in regard to these matters, 
and their recommendations as to 
such means as they may find suit- 
able to improve the existing condi- 
tions of the administration of 
justice in China, and to assist and 
further the efforts of the Chinese 
Government to effect such legisla- 



* 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



25 



tion and judicial reforms as would 
warrant the several Powers in re- 
linquishing, either progressively or 
otherwise, their respective rights of 
extraterritoriality." Each of the 
Powers and China "shall be deem- 
ed free to accept or to reject all 
or any portion of the recommenda- 
tions of the Commission. ,J This 
Commission, which has been delay- 
ed for over three years, is schedul- 
ed to meet in China on December 
18 of this year and it is our earnest 
hope that the legitimate aspira- 
tions of the Chinese people will be 
respected and steps will be taken 
to remove the existing limitations 
upon China's political, jurisdic- 
tional, and administrative freedom 
of action at the earliest practic- 
able date. 

The Chinese have long desired 
the recovery of jurisdiction over 
aliens within their borders and 
have been earnestly working to- 
wards that goal. They have been 
reforming their judiciary and re- 
vising their civil, criminal, and 
commercial codes in accordance 
With modern, principles of juris- 
prudence. The Law Codification 
Commission has been sitting since 
1904 and has completed the codi- 
fication of the Civil Code, the Cri- 
minal Code, the Code of Civil Pro- 
cedure, the Code of Criminal Proce- 
dure, and the Commercial Code, 
some of which have already been 
put into force. The new system 
does away vr ; th numerous anachro- 
nisms and heralds many changes. 
Among the important innovations 
introduced are the establishment of 
a competent independent judiciary 
and the creation of three proper 
grades of courts with their cor- 
responding procuratorates, namely, 
(1) District Courts (Ti Fang Shm 
Pan Ting) in each prefecture 
(Fu) t (2) High Courts (Kao Teng 
Shen Pan 'Ting) in each provincial 
capital, and (3) The Supreme Courr 
(Ta Li Yuan) at Peking, which ia 
the highest Court of Appeal for the 
whole of China. The system also 
provides for the admission of quali- 
fied lawyers into the courts to £^t 
for litigants, the adoption of the 



principle of reformative punish- 
ment, and the institution of model 
prisons throughout the country. 
Although the Chinese judicial ad- 
ministration is still in t lie transi- 
tional stage and falls short of the 
requirements of modern jurists, yet 
a review of what has been accom- 
plished shows that China has made 
great progress in the path of legal 
reform. 

Moreover, Germans, Russians, 
Austrians, and the subjects of the 
states grown out of the dismember- 
ment of Russia and Austria, such 
as Poland, Czecho-Slovakia, and 
Rumania, are now under Chinese 
law and jurisdiction. A number of 
important cases involving the in- 
terests of these foreigners have 
been tried by the Chinese courts, 
and, as far as the facts are Known, 
there has been no miscarriage of 
justice. As a matter of fact the 
Germans and the Austrians claim 
that they have actually benefited 
by the relinquishment of their ex- 
traterritorial privileges in China. 

Progress has also been made in 
other directions, more particularly 
along educational, industrial, and 
commercial lines. This advance is, 
however, very little known, much 
less appreciated abroad, where tne 
political affairs of China have been 
monopolizing public attention to 
the exclusion of every other phase 
of Chinese life, and especially, 
where exist the powerful publicity 
agencies of certain imperialistic na- 
tions, whose aim is to make the 
world at large believe that Onina 
is in a state of semi-anarehy, ana 
therefore needs their guardianship. 
Commenting on the real growth of 
China during recent t-es the 
North-China Herald (July 13, iyi», 
v. 65) writes: 

"The permanent improvement 
which have been made in hundreds 
of Chinese cities during the past 
seven vears, the roads built, the 
thousands of small ami large in- 
dustrial plants erected, the improve- 
ments in sanitation, the schools, 
colleges and hospitals endowed and 
opened, the hills reforested, the 
mines developed, the newspapers 



• 



26 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



established and the remarkable 
growth of knowledge of foreign 
affairs during a period of unceasing 
political turmoil punctuated by a 
scries of natural calamities and 
blanketed by a war-trade depression, 
are conspicuous evidences of whole- 
some progress and of a genuine in- 
terest among the people in improve- 
ments and innovations. Although 
an administrative scandal in Peking 
is cabled to every Occidental capital 
while the erection of a new factory 
in Wuhu or of a new girl's school in 
wanking i s described locally in an 
^conspicuous paragraph, we all 
Know, if We 8top to consider, that 
t&e building of a school or a factory 
w the provinces is a much more 
M^nificant omen of the tendencies 
ot the Chinese people than a squab* 
Me within the mandarin ranks: but 
with politics so blatantly conspi- 
cuous, it is exceedingly difficult to 
pe just and fair to the people who 
haye yet to make their influence 
teit upon the administrative svs- 

thcni " ^ 110 SC11Se re P res « nt 

♦w^jf 1 ? observers often complain 
that China's progress has been 
slow. This may be freely admitted. 
However, if we consider the on- 
erous restrictions forced upon her 
by the treaty Powers and realize 
the vastness of the country, it will 
at once be seen that the slow rate 
is inevitable. As a matter of fact, 
wo shall be wondering how any 
growth at all has been possible un- 
der such circumstances. Subjected 
to all sorts of foreign interference, 
and inhabited by a population ap- 
proximately greater than those of 
the United States, the British 
Isles, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, 
Austria, Belgium, and the Con- 
tinent of South America combined, 
speaking several dialects, and as- 
similating modern culture from dif- 
ferent sources, the problems now 
facing China may ho appropriately 
compared with those of Europe as 
a whole. It is evident that the 
prompt solution of these problems 
would require the best efforts of a 
super-nation, and as there is no 



such a nation in existence the solu- 
tion can only come slowly. 

Moreover, it is a political maxim 
that all reforms, in order to bo 
lasting, must be gradual. A nation 
rests on existing laws, customs, and 
practices, and to alter these at one 
stroke would throw society into a 
state of chaos and lawlessn B8. 
Whatever betterment is to be in- 
augurated should not fail to take 
into consideration the character of 
those participating, the soul of the 
people concerned, which is always 
hard to change. In other words, re- 
forms must be built on old founda- 
tions, and hence must be gradual 
"It is better to be slow than sor- 
ry," runs the wist 1 0,1(3 saying; and 
we must not forget that in the 
Bast more haste always means less 
speed. Nevertheless, the rate of 
progress in the past constitutes no 
criterion for that in the future. 
Being a large body, the Chinese na- 
tion moves slowly only at first, but 
it progresses it is bound to in- 
crease its momentum. So hence- 
forth China will advance more 
rapidly than heretofore. 

Then the foreigners who pretend 
to be friends of the Chinese inces- 
santly harp on the disturbances in 
China, saying that the country is 
in a state of anarchy, that the 
Chinese people are not fit for self- 
government, and that they must be 
placed under international tutelage. 
Arguments like these have been 
widely circulated by interested 
parties, whose sole aim is to see a 
weak China, one which will allow 
them to perpetuate their control 
find interference in the affairs of 
that country. The Chinese arc now 
in the midst of a great transforma- 
tion. Everywhere the old order is 
changing, giving place to the new. 
The ancient ideas and hoary tradi- 
tions and customs are being discard- 
ed and a new scheme of life that is 
foreign in origin is being gradually 
absorbed. Sueh a transition neces- 
sarily brings forth discord and dis- 
sension. For national transforma- 
tion is fundamentally a struggle 
for advancement; it is a conflict 
between the new and the old ideals 



THE CHINESE Q D E S T I O N 



27 



of a people, and the conflict will 
go on until a now system is evolved 
and incorporated into the life of 
the nation. Viewed in this way the 
various ills which have rendered 
China unsightly before the eyes of 
the foreigner are nothing but the 
natural outcome of the attempt to 
adjust a nation, that has for hun- 
dreds of years been isolated from 
the rest of the world, to the new 
environment created by the inva- 
sion of extraneous ideas and the 
introduction of Western culture. 

Although common to the history 
of every nation during its period 
of creative change, the internal dis- 
orders in China and the different 
complications thai constitute what 
is known as the c< Chinese Ques- 
tion" have suffered severe criticism 
at the hands of many n foreign 
writer. There is really no cause fur 
discouragement at China's struggle 
for a reformed and stable central 
government. Home was not built 
in a day. Neither can a modern de- 
mocracy bo instituted in fourteen 
years in a country which has had 
centuries of absolutism. It is to be 
borne in mind that those Latin- 
American republics, which today are 
stable and prosperous, were for 
many decades in a state of confu- 
sion and distress, and we must not 
forget that it took the long years 
between 1776 and 1865 for the great 
American nation to establish itself 
firmly. However hopeless the pres- 
ent political situation in China mav 
appear to be, it is encouraging to 
note that the Chinese people, both 
at home and abroad, are taking an 
increasing interest in the public af- 
fairs of their country, and there has 
developed in them a feeling of na- 
tionalism, which, though still ill- 
defined, is making itself felt in a 
positive way, and will in time over- 
throw the militarism of the selfish 
war-lords and give to China a truly 
democratic government. Early in 
1917 there was published in Shang- 
hai the largest book yet issued on 
the geography, the economic re- 
sources, and the commercial develop- 
ment of China. The Xar Atlas an<! 
Commercial Gazetteer of China, as 



the hook is entitled, is surely the 
best work on the resources of the 
Oriental Republic, and nobody can 
go through it without being im- 
pressed by the splendid future that 
is before China, provided she is 
given a chance to develop herself 
without shackles. 

China has not been negligent of 
her duty. She has bten trying to 
set her house in order to the end 
that some day her complete auto- 
nomy may be recovered. But con- 
sidering the stringency of her finan- 
cial situation and the vastness of 
her territory, the problem is a stu- 
pendous one and she cannot solve 
it single-handed. She needs the ef- 
fective assistance of the treaty 
states, one and all- While we do 
not expect any nation to be altruis- 
tic in extending its national inter- 
ests in China, we nevertheless look 
for a spirit of friendly reciprocity 
in its dealing with the Chinese peo- 
ple. If the unimpeded development 
of trade is to be attained the treaty 
Powers must work together with 
China. Botli parties must approach 
each other with respect and not 
contempt, with compromise and not 
coercion. They must proceed in a 
spirit of give-and-take and not of 
take alone and no give at all. In 
short, there must be intelligent and 
sympathetic cooperation through 
mutual concession. Cooperation and 
not opposition spells success to ev- 
ery undertaking. It must, there- 
fore, be the key-note for the reha- 
bilitation of China. 

Thus far, however, there has 
been too much preaching on the 
part of the Powers with scarcely 
any encouragement. As a matter 
of fact, China has never been per- 
mitted to develop herself peacefully, 
for across her path of reform there 
is ever falling the shadow of for- 
eign interference and aggression. 
She is encircled by enemies (lis- 
guised as friends, who are always 
insistent upon onerous conditions 
in their financial transaction? with 
her and in whose actions are con- 
cealed plans for territorial aggrari 
di/ement. China's task is, thus, 
made intolerably hard. She has, on 



28 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



the one hand, to reconstruct her 
internal administration in the light 
of modern requirements, and, on the 
other, to preserve the country 
against the forces of disintegration 
from without. 

It is the profession of all the 
great Powers that they favor the 
rejuvenation of China into a first- 
class nation, and they have agreed 
"to give every assistance" to her 
reforms, and "to provide the fullest 
and most unembarrassed opportun- 
ity to China to develop and main- 
tain for herself an effective and 
stable government." But in prac- 
tice they are all more or less op- 
posed to any change which will tend 
to strengthen the young Republic, 
although they never cense to cla- 
mor about the inconveniences re- 
sulting from the archaic methods of 
Chinese administration. Their ac- 
tions indicate clearly that the kind 
of reform they desire for China is 
only so much progress as would 
create opportunity for foreign en- 
terprises and yet retain China in 
leading strings, so that her alleged 
backwardness may always serve aa 
a pretext for the carrying out of 
their selfish designs in her domin- 
ions whenever they deem it neces- 
sary. A few instances will make 
this obvious. One of the most con- 
spicuous examples is the refusal of 
the Powers to give China a flexible 
tariff, which will meet her require- 
ments and permit the introduction 
of those reforms without which she 
cannot develop fully in any direc- 
tion. This has been sufficiently 
discussed in the preceding article 
and it is needless for us to dwell 
on it again. Another is the policy 
of weakening the Chinese Govern- 
ment by burdensome indemnities 
and other financial exactions. Then 
there is the pursuance of the dog- 
in-the-manger policy in what each 
power regards as its "sphere of in- 
fluence." In the first part of 
1917, for example, the French Gov- 
ernment lodged a protest, at Peking 
against the construction of a rail- 
road by an American firm in the 
province of Kwangsi, where France 
claimed exclusive rights by virtue 



of an arrangement which give her 
financiers the first privileges <>f sup- 
plying capital for all railway and 
mining projects in Kwangsi. Al- 
though the money for the enterprise 
had been subscribed by the Amer- 
icans, and the French were not in 
a position to furnish the requisite 
capital, because at that time they 
were borrowing heavily in the 
United States for war purposes, 
nevertheless the scheme was forced 
to be withdrawn to nobody's real 
advantage, but to the great loss of 
China, who is sorely in need of an 
adequate system of transportation. 
Similarly, Japan has blocked many 
a legitimate American project in 
China, and in 1913 the Japanese 
successfully shut the door in Fu- 
hicn against the Bethlehem Steel 
Corporation, which was then at- 
tempting to assist the Chinese Gov- 
ernment in constructing a dock- 
yard in that province; and again 
the growth of China was checked. 
Such instances of the selfish and 
disruptive policy of the Powers may 
be greatly multiplied, but space 
will not permit the attempt. Fin- 
ally, we may mention the fact that 
the scramble of foreign equipment 
contracts hinders the industrial 
development of China. In con- 
tracting foreign loans for railway 
and other industrial purposes the 
Chinese are invariably required to 
promise expressly that the funds 
so obtained will be spent in the 
country of their origin. According- 
!y, large quantities of materials 
have to be imported from abroad 
every year, which would otherwise 
be supplied at home as much as 
possible, to the end that the devel- 
opment of Chinese industries may 
be quickened. 

The hostility of practically all 
the treaty Powers to genuine re- 
form in China is to be explained 
by their apprehension that some of 
the tendencies and necessary results 
of the Chinese renaissance are dan- 
gerous. Seeing that their so-called 
"interests" in China are in a large 
measure based on conditions which 
real autonomy will sweep away, 
foreigners contend that the rehabil- 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



29 



itation of the ancient Empire and 
its establishment on n footing of 
equality with other states would 
impair their special status in the 
country. To some extent this is 
true, for every reform carries with 
it a vicarious sacrifice. If the world 
is to be ruled by law instead of 
by self-interest arid force, latent or 
expressed, then the highly priv- 
ileged aliens in China must be will- 
ing to give up their peculiar rights. 
But for whatever loss they may 
have to suffer the foreigners will 
be fully compensated, inasmuch as 
China's regeneration will accelerate 
her industrial and commercial de- 
velopment, the enormous profits of 
which will be reaped by all nations 
alike. 

In discussing the development of 
China it is often asserted that with 
the advance of the Chinese into a 
manufacturing nation the chances 
for outsiders to sell goods in that 
country will be gradually reduced. 
Such statements are erroneous and 
find no support in fact. It has been 
demonstrated that the American 
share of the foreign trade of Japan 
has increased hand in hand with the 
rise of Japanese manufactures. 
Moreover, in its final analysis, the 
question of foreign trade expansion 
n nd the internal development of 
China are closely connected. The 
former is dependent upon the lat- 
ter. International trade is, in es- 
sence, barter. In order to be per- 
manent it must be reciprocal and 
not mainly one-sided. If the great 
manufacturing nations expect China 
to continue to buy their products, 
they must enable her to sell her 
goods in return. What she can buy 
from them is limited by what they 
can buy from her. The purchasing 
power of the Chinese people must 
be raised, or else they cannot buy 
foreign imports in large and increas- 
ing quantities and the way to do 
this is to encourage them to pro- 
duce those commodities which they 
are especially qualified to supply. 
In other words, the growth of Chin- 
ese industries must not be hinder- 
ed, but must be facilitated and fos- 
tered, if foreign trade is to expand 



freely in the Celestial Republic. 
Industry is a veritable hnmdmaid 
to commerce. 

The fallacy that the regeneration 
and industrialization of China will 
operate to the detriment of 
foreigner's commercial interests in 
that country was exposed in a vig- 
orous fashion by ex-President Taft 
during his visit at Shanghai in Oc- 
tober, 1907. On that occasion he 
averred (The Xarth-China Herald 
October 11, 1907, p. 101): 
"The United States and others 
who favor the open-door policy 
sincerely will, if they are wise, not 
only welcome, but will encourage 
this great Chinese Empire to take 
long steps in administrative and 
governmental reforms, and in the 
development of her natural resources 
and the improvement of the welfare 
of her people. In this way she will 
add great strength to her position 
as a self-respecting Government, 
mav resist all possible foreign ag- 
gression seeking undue, exclusive 
or proprietarv privileges in her ter- 
rirorv, and without foreign aid, can 
enforce an open-door policy of equal 
opportunitv to all. I am not one 
of those who view with alarm the 
effect of the growth of China with 
her teeming millions into a great 
industrial empire. I believe that 
this instead of injuring foreign 
trade with China would greatly 
increase it, and while it might 
change its character in some re- 
spects, it would not diminish its 
profit. A trade which depends for 
its profit on the backwardness of a 
people in developing their own re- 
sources and upon their inability to 
value at the proper relative prices 
that which they have to sell and 
that which they have to buy is not 
one which can be counted upon as 

stable or permanent 9f 

"For the reasons I have given, 
it does not seem to me that the cry 
of 'China for the Chinese' should 
frighten anyone. All that is meant 
bv that is that China should devote 
her energies to the development of 
her immense resources, to the eleva- 
tion of her industrious people and 
to the enlargement of her trade and 



30 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



to the administrative reform of the 
Empire as a great national Gov- 
ernment. Changes of this kind 
could only increase our trade with 
her. Our greatest export trade is 
with the countries most .advanced 
in business methods and in the de- 
velopment of their particular re- 
sources. In the Philippines, we 
have learned that the policy which 
is best for the Filipinos is best in 
the long run for the countries who 
would do business with the Is- 
lands." 

Under existing conditions the at- 
tempt of the foreigner to expand his 
trade in China is simply ridiculous. 
Jt would redound more to his com- 
mercial intelligence if he would 
stop putting obstacles in his own 
way and discontinue his selfish pol- 
icy of paralyzing the internal de- 
velopment of a most promising mar- 
ket by all kinds of hampering re- 
strictions. 

Of all the great Powers which 
have declared that they want China 
to become a strong and virile na- 
tion, able to maintain her own place 
iu the world, there is only one, it 
is to be frankly admitted, which 
actually desires such a consumma- 
tion, and that is the United States 
of America. America has never 
committed any act of aggression in 
China nor has she ever attempted 
to secure unfair and exclusive com- 
mercial privileges there. On the 
contrary, her avowed policy towards 
the Oriental Republic has always 
been one of friendship and helpful- 
ness, showing intelligent sympathy 
for China and her cause. It aims 
at the promotion and protection of 
the legitimate commercial interests 
of American subjects in China and 
supports the open-door doctrine of 
equal opportunity for all. It is, 
therefore, strictly in keeping with 
American liberal traditions and dem- 
ocratic ideals that the United 
States should recognize the justice 
of the Chinese demand for the aboli- 
tion of all impairments of their 
sovereignty and the removal of all 
treaty restrictions which have made 
their country an economic slave of 
the great commercial nations; and 



she should lead the way in accord- 
ing China the equality of treatment 
by the Powers of the world who 
claim to be civilized. 

The European War has widened 
the international interests of the 
United States and it is now dif- 
ficult to conceive how the Amer- 
ican nation can remain indifferent 
to the fate of the Chinese people. 
The Pacific Ocean is becoming tho 
center of human interest and com- 
mercial activity, and China, with 
her four hundred million people, is 
its true axis. From whatever un- 
dermines China's independence and 
integrity the United States cannot 
hope to escape unaffected. For 
with their economic progress and 
their advance as a Pacific power, 
and also as a nation determined to 
keep alive the spirit and forms of 
democracy in the world, the future 
peace and prosperity of the Amer- 
ican people is bound up in the satis- 
factory solution of the present 
precarious situation in the Far 
East, more particularly in China. 

There is no time more fitting and 
more opportune than the present for 
restoring to China the full* liberty 
appertaining to a sovereign nation. 
The Great War has taught nations 
the value of peace, and they are 
now willing to think and even to 
act in terms of peace. People ev- 
erywhere today are more disposed 
to heed the voice of reason and 
justice. Firmly convinced that the 
unparalleled sacrifices which have 
been made in the battlefields of 
Europe shall not have been made 
in vain, they are all in one accord 
that the peace which is to be at- 
tained shall be just and permanent. 
They are strongly resolved that the 
new era which is dawning upon us 
shall be one in which the world 
will receive the blessings of order 
and liberty, of justice and lasting 
peace. In short, there has been de- 
veloped a new and powerful feeling 
of community of interest among na- 
tions; and peoples, regardless of 
color and creed, and even at some 
sacrifices of national pride and am- 
bition, are cooperating in a way 
hitherto unknown, to the end that 



T B B G ll I N E B B QUESTION 



31 



the * ' unprecedented things'' men- 
tioned by the late President Wil- 
son may bo accomplished* A great 
moral wave for the reign of justice 
and peace towards all men is in- 
deed encompassing humanity. But 
w<- must make use of the wave 
while it is still at the crest, for 
waves flatten out rapidly and dis- 
appear. 

As an ally of the victorious En- 
tente during the European War, 
fighting to make the world safe 
for demoeracy, safe for every peace- 
loving nation, which "wishes t<> live 
its own life, determine its own in- 
stitutions, and be assured of jus- 
tice and fair dealing by the other 
peoples of the world as against 
force and selfish aggression,' 9 
China, the most populous and one 
of the youngest among the repub- 
lics of the world, as well as the 
most peaceful of them all, is justly 
entitled to the full recognition of 
her real autonomy by the great Pow- 
ers. If the War was indeed a war 
for democracy, for the liberty and 
equality of weak and strong na- 
tions, and if it is the duty of the 
associated Powers, as the late Pres- 
ident Wilson said at Paris in his 
plea for a League of Nations on 
January 25, 1919, ' ■ to see that ev- 
ery people in the world shall choose 
its own masters and govern its own 
destinies, not as wo wish, but as 
they wish, » then the Powers can- 
not deny to China the complete free- 
dom to work out her own national 
development in accordance with "the 
welfare of her people.. "A consist- 
ent democracy," says Lord Bal- 
four, "leaves the people of each 
country the right to form their own 
government according to their own 
ideas, and based on their own his- 
tory, character, and hopes." If the 
peace of the world is to be endur- 
ing it must bo based upon justice 
and righteousness towards all na- 
tions, be they great or small, power- 
ful or weak. And the voice of 
prudence and justice counsels the 
great Powers to treat China with 
consideration and to show some re- 
gard for her just claims and in- 
terests. It is to be remembered 



that the Chinese arc normal hrrman 
beings, swayed by the same feelings 
and purposes which influence other 
peoples; and as such they must be 
given a fair chance to live and to 
demonstrate their spirit of initia- 
tive and enterprise in their own 
land, a chance that has been denied 
to them by the mailed fist of the 
treaty Powers. 

But if in solving the Chinese 
Question the great Powers choose to 

continue the old selfish and disrup- 
tive policy of subjugating Ohina 
and exploiting her for their own 
Chief benefit, " thereby keeping her 
in a state of political and economic 
semi-paralysis, rather than to ap- 
ply those principles which they all 
were vociferous in announcing as 
their objects in the War and those 
which they adopted at the Was* 
ington Conference in 1922 for deal 
ing with matters concerning China, 
then China will surely be the scone 
of ^ approaching commercial 
ousies among nations, the arena of 
coming diplomatic wrangles, and the 
Beat of future world wars. If. 111 ' 
stead of boin^ handled justly and 
equitably, the problem is simply 
glossed over, as of old, with the 
fallacious and mischievous i^ t:l 
widely prevalent among foreig& orB 
thai anything "goes" in rln : ,:l 
and that anything will do for tjj? 
Chinese, the evil day cannot W 
long averted. Now that China is 
demanding for the removal of *" 
impairments of her sovereignty tn* 
acid test will be applied to all pro- 
fessions of disinterestedness ana 
humanity 

The Chinese are now pMa»« 
through n great national transfor- 
mation, and what they *nll bc 1 
the future depends largely 
*hat policy the other conntne 
adopt towards them today. Wnetner 
peaceful China will remain V* lCCtu [ 
and progressive or become a " nr , 
ring nation, menacing the rights ot 
other peoples, depends upon net 
present treatment by the Powers 
in these days Of creative rhan«re. 
To be more Specific, China's future 
relation to the world depends upon 
the spirit with which the great 



32 



THE CHINESE QUESTION 



Powers tackle the whole Chinese 
Question at the Special Tariff and 
Extraterritoriality Conferences in 
China this fall. 

So the destiny of China and the 
future peace of the Far East, and 
hence of the world, lie in the deci- 
sion of the treaty Powers as to their 
policy vis-a-vis the voung Oriental 
Republic. Their choice is a simple 
one. They may choose to obstruct 
and destroy, as they have been do- 
ing since the mid'dle of the last 
century, or they may choose to re- 
store and cooperate, as the new 
world order demands. The first 
violates and cripples China's au- 
tonomy, diminishing her power of 
resistance against the constant for- 
eign aggressions aiming at her sub- 
jugation and at the wresting of ex- 
clusive commercial privileges within 
n f r ^"itory, and so leads to the 
clash of antagonistic ambitions and 
designs among the Powers. The sec- 



cond stimulates the development of 
China into a strong and progressive 
nation, capable of holding her own 
position in the world and of main- 
taining, without outside holp, the 
open-door policy of equal opportun- 
ity for all, thereby eliminating in- 
ternational jealousies and intrigues 
from the Far East. The one creates 
international rancor and race-hat- 
red, and is destructive alike of for- 
eign trade and other foreign inter- 
course. The other is conducive to 
the good-will and comity among na- 
tions, and permits the unlimited ex- 
pansion of all foreign intercourse, 
commercial and otherwise. The one 
is productive of evil, the other of 
good. The one leads to war, the 
other to peace. The one is for the 
misery and downfall of mankind, 
the other for its happiness and ad- 
vancement. Which shall it bef 
Obstruction and Destruction or 
Restoration and Cooperation? 



Tsekimg asked, saying, <<I 8 there 
one word which may serve as a rule 
of practice for all one's lifer' 

C1FBOCITY such a word? What 
you do not want done to yourself, 
do not do to others." 

—Confucian Analects. 



