Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




The Crowded City 



Aq uino 

MANAGEMENT 



Of The 



PRESIDENCY 




The Crowded City 



Published by the 
Presidential Management Staff 
Office of the President 
Manila, Philippines 
June 1992 



Project Director 

Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 



EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD 
Chairman 

Secretary Aniceto Sobrepena 

Members 

Asst. Secretary Mary Ann Fernandez 
Asst. Secretary Demetrio Ignacio 
Asst. Secretary Narciso Inlong 

Production Manager 

Director Nicanor Torres 
Production Support 

Felicitas Estrella 

Office of Special Concerns - PMS 

Writers/Researchers 

Minerva Generalao 
Gloria Georgina Jota 
Merci Biluan-Tabafunda 

Editorial Consultants 

Hugo YonzonUI 
Guia Tecson Prado 
Minerva Quemuel 

Book Design 

Fusion Media 
Special Thanks 

Resource Persons/Institutions 

Executive Director Maria Montelibano - RTVM 

General Manager Roberto Nacianccno 

Leonardo Cruz 

Ronnie Gosiengfiao 

NCR - Special Operations Unit - PMS 

Amor Castillo - RTVM 

Photos 

Photo Lab - Office of the Press Secretary 
Undersecretary Lourdes Siytangco 

Logo 

Philippine Information Agency 
Editorial and Visual Office - PMS 

Printing 

NEDA Secretariat -APO 



Foreword 



"OURS IS A government that came to power borne on the shoulders of our 
people; we must, therefore, govern on the basis of that same people power". 

These were the very words of President Corazon C. Aquino - words that 
laid the foundation of the highest office of the land. For six years and four months, 
her people-powered presidency reflected itself in the very nature of the executive 
branch and on the implementation of several projects closest to the President's 
heart; closest, because they touched the warp and woof of our people's aspira- 
tions. 

To document in part her people-powered presidency, we have compiled this 
series of volumes titled The Aquino Management of the Presidency. The first 
part of the series attempts to outline the evolution of the support offices and the 
various management tools and technology employed in the decision-making and 
decision dissemination processes in the Office of the President. The second part 
of the series, to which this volume belongs, provides a chronicle of some specific 
undertakings initiated by the Office of the President which, now, constitute part 
of the legacies of the Aquino government. The third part of the series is a summa- 
tion of the Aquino government's performance during its six years in office. 

This volume, "The Crowded City", focuses on what measures the President 
of the Republic initiated to solve the gamut of problems that plagued Metro 



Manila. It relates how she constituted herself as a "committee of one" in order to 
transcend the seemingly endless disagreements among the elected local officials 
of the contiguous cities and to adopt a common program for the growing me- 
tropolis. This volume also talks of the fate of the Metro Manila Commission. 

This series of volumes, The Aquino Management of the Presidency, is by 
no means a complete coverage of the legacies of the Aquino presidency. Some of 
tl ose not documented here are contained in materials better covered by other 
line agencies or academic groups. 

Some of President Aquino's legacies, however, will find no archive to pre- 
serve them for posterity. One would have to look at the faces and listen to the 
earts of the people she touched in order to find them. 



Aniceto M. Sobrepena 

Cabinet Secretary 
and 

Head, Presidential Management Staff 



"The People did not vote me to the presidency 
to take charge of the garbage. That is true of 
every government in the world. But it is equally 
true that the presidency must be concerned with 
the problems that affect the welfare of the 
citizenry . . . 

We now look to people to transform Metro Manila 
from a dying and dirty Metropolis to a vibrant, 
clean and healthy home of about 8 million Metro 
Manilans. " 

President Corazon C. Aquino 

Meeting With Metro Manila Barangay Officials 

And Metro Aides 
Heroes Hall 
September 18, 1990 



The Crowded City 



3 



THERE WAS EDIFICE frenzy in those days of the mid- and late 70s. Several 
five-star hotels were rushed simultaneously in Metro Manila. The government and 
the business sector were expecting waves of visitors ranging from international bank- 
ers, financial analysts and their wives, film producers and stars, and investors of all 
shapes and sizes. The cities must put on a show that they were bankable. 

The then First Lady and Metro Manila Governor Imelda Marcos probably 
thought, too, that her City of Man must put on that cosmopolitan air. As her entou- 
rage knifed through the monstrous Manila traffic surveying the probable routes of 
the visitors, she noticed the colonies of squatters along the esteros of Tramo in Pasay 
and on the huge lots of Paco and San Andres Bukid in Manila. They were such an 
eyesore. 

Poor Manilans, she must have thought. They must be saved from such stench 
and ugliness. Forthwith, she ordered her lieutenants to come up with a quick solu- 
tion to the growing problem. And her bright boys came up with an answer: fences. 
In Manila, they built hollow block fences to cover the colony from sight. In Pasay, 
they built wooden fences and washed them generously with kalburo. As Aquino 
administration Cabinet Secretary Aniceto 'Chito' Sobrepeha would later remember: 
"It was a 'snowpake' solution". 



4 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Imelda Marcos was appointed governor of Metro Manila in 1978. Political observ- 
ers believed that the position had been invented to give her a legitimate power base. 
That was partly true. 

Roberto Nacianceno, Metro Manila Commission General Manager from 1990 
to 1992 says: "Let me correct the impression that the Metro Manila Commission was 
created on the whim of Mrs. Marcos. There was a serious study made by the U.P- 
College of Public Administration and by then Human Settlements Commission. A 
commission was necessary to put order and efficiency in the delivery of basic serv- 
ices to such a large and contiguous urban area. The choice, however, to have Mrs. 
Marcos as governor was something else". 



The Growing Metropolis 

Manila in the past 40 years or so after World War II had transformed from 
being a semi-rustic and progressive Asian city into a behemoth urban center now 
known as the Metro Manila Area, beset by sociocultural and moral decadence. It is 
not an entirely negative thing to say this was a result of massive rural-urban migra- 
tion. After all, such migration was the result of development and economic progress 
too. 

The lure of the big city had always been irresistible. Its cliche image of bright 
lights and rollicking good times obscure the grim realities of everyday survival. It is 
then understandable that provincianos flock in droves to Manila in search of the 
good life, hoping to make their fortunes in a place where they envisioned "streets 
paved with gold". And often, they end up in the warrens of slum cities worse than if 
they went up to settle in the mountain jungles of the provinces they used to call 
home. 

From an estimated 1 .2 million residents in the cities of Manila, Pasay, Quezon, 
and Caloocan in the 1950s, Metro Manila in 1990 had 7.2 million people living in the 
cities of Manila, Pasay, Quezon, and Caloocan and the municipalities of Las Pinas, 
Makati, Malabon, Mandaluyong, Marikina, Muntinlupa, Navotas, Paranaque, 
Pasig, Pateros, San Juan, Taguig, and Valenzuela. The Metro Manila Area is geo- 
graphically defined by four contiguous cities and 13 municipalities. 



The Crowded City 



5 



According to the May 1990 census, 13 percent of the national population was 
concentrated in Metro Manila which was only 0.2 percent of the country's total land 
area. This meant that in this crowded city, 12,467 Filipinos occupied every square 
kilometer while the national average was only 202 persons per square kilometer. 

Metro Manila, therefore, was not only a local concern. Its sheer dimension 
merited attention on a national level. 



The Demands Of Development 

As the seat of government power, Metro Manila became formally designated 
and officially known as the National Capital Region (NCR) in June 2, 1978 as per 
Presidential Decree No. 1396. But it is not only by simple government decree that 
the NCR occupied a premier position in the hierarchy of development priorities. 

Ninety percent of the country's biggest corporations and 50 percent of the 
nation's manufacturing industries are concentrated in the NCR. Likewise, all the 
major publications and national radio and television stations are based here. 

The strategic international seaport of Manila handles 55 percent of the coun- 
try's exports. The Ninoy Aquino International Airport in Paranaque, on the other 
hand, is the country's main gateway to international air traffic. Being a center of 
commercial and industrial activities, the NCR boasts of the highest Gross Domestic 
Product or GDP among the regions and accounts for 32 percent of the nation's 
Gross National Product or GNP in 1989 (at current prices). 

These impressive facts and figures, however, do not and can not give us a true 
picture of the NCR. Development pundits would say that economic progress can 
not be taken as the lone measure of development, but rather should include the 
sociocultural aspects that define the human conditions as well. 



This is where we stop to ask, was Metro Manila's rapid urbanization too costly 
a price to pay for its people? 



6 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Industries have killed NCR rivers with their effluents. The hundreds of thou- 
sands of vehicles that ply the streets choke and make the residents sick. The people 
themselves compound the problems with their trash. 

Much as there was plenty of job opportunities, the multitude who came to the 
big city still could not be accommodated. This resulted in numerous and large squat- 
ter colonies that became fertile breeding grounds for social decay. 

Secretary Jose Ting' de Jesus says of the migration: "...The reason you have a 
lot of people in the squatter areas is because you have a lot of people, poor people 
coming from the provinces in search of jobs or other opportunities in Metro Manila 
with no place to stay or to live. And the most convenient place to go to is the open 
spaces or those areas near the esteros". 

Newspaper columnist and cultural doyen Rolando Tinio once commented that 
despite Metro Manilans' much vaunted sophistication, they remain essentially 
bamotic'. Cultural norms and behavior carried over from the rural areas often 
prove to be inappropriate in an urban setting. This is evident in jeepney drivers who 
unload their passengers almost anywhere, pedestrians who cross the streets as they 
please, or even men who urinate in public. 

As the development of Metro Manila reached greater heights, so did the prob- 
lems that plagued it. Uncontrolled heavy migration and limited resources had re- 
sulted in overpopulation, traffic congestion, pollution, unsanitary environmental 
conditions, and lack of employment opportunities. The continuing expansion and 
modernization of the metropolis gave rise to more difficulties in addressing the 
needs of its people. It was a nightmare in urban administration and management. 

A day m the life of a Metro Manilan is an exhausting one. He wakes up at 6 
a.m. to prepare to go to office in Makati. He jostles with other commuters to chase 
after jeepneys spewing black smoke. His ride gets stuck in the traffic jam as thou- 
sands of students, workers, and other employees from other cities, towns, and prov- 
inces converge to start their own day. Jeeps laden with fish from Malabon going to 
Cubao, or trucks filled with bananas from Laguna going to San Andres join the 
lines. It is sheer madness. 



The Crowded City 



7 



In the afternoon, the same suffocating experience occurs. Dump trucks from 
Divisoria going to Payatas, or container vans from Intramuros going to Las Pinas 
complicate the congestion. By night, Makati, for example, is a ghost town - with 
people back in their 'boarder' towns. 

The enmeshed problems of the cities and municipalities in the metropolis re- 
quired an integrated approach. Wholistic, if you will. 



Settlement Planning Gone Sour 

The human settlements concept, with the management of Metro Manila as an 
integral part, started on a high plane. It had beautiful plans on creating other growth 
centers in the country, on setting policies for zoning, on designating industrial areas, 
on environmental and ecological rationalization, and more. But political and busi- 
ness agenda seeped in to what could have been brilliant and noble development 
plans. 

With a single stroke of a pen, President Ferdinand Marcos created the Metro 
Manila Commission which defined a political jurisdication and a governor to head 
it. A Presidential Decree justified its creation by citing the need to coordinate the 
delivery of basic services in the 13 towns and cities. 

The decision to have Mrs. Marcos as MMC governor was perceived as a politi- 
cal maneuver. Without question, she was primus inter pares among the local lead- 
ers. The turf and the position were seen even by member of the ruling party as a 
training ground for the dictator's likely successor. As Nacianceno narrates: "It had 
its plus factors and negative factors. The plus factors, of course, are you get the 
other agencies to get things done and those in position to contribute to the budget of 
the Commission. In 1 986, the budget of the MMC was one billion. Seven hundred 
million came from direct taxes and contribution from the municipalities. But the 
other three hundred came from the Office of the President for money and, on a 
marginal approval, she was given 300 million for her office". 

The first governor of the MMC had easy access to power and resources which 
she could have easily used for real urban renewal. But alas, extravagance marked 



8 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Mrs. Marcos' management of the crowded city. She spent more money for her film 
festivals than on the squatters problem. 

By the time the new government took over, the Metro Manila Commission was 
marked by stigma so bad that no local official dared think of assuming the gover- 
norship. Nacianceno continues: "We came from a setback ... in the very beginning 
we had a monkey on our back, that was Mrs. Marcos. And so most of those who 
came after the February revolution had a mindset about the Authority. Basically, 
people were against Mrs. Marcos, and since the MMC at that time was identified 
with Mrs. Marcos, they tend also to put down the organization". 



Democratic Intervention 



On February 1986, the President appointed Jose D. Lina Jr. as the OIC Gover- 
nor of the MMC. He was to see whether MMC needed to be reconstituted. If so, in 
what form and substance. Lina probably realized the urgency in putting order in 
the metropolis. A year later, Lina resigned as governor, ran for senator and won. 
Picking up from his experience, Lina filed a bill in the Senate calling for the creation 
of the Metro Manila Authority (MMA) to replace the MMC. As contrasted with the 
MMC, the MMA would be composed of the mayors of the affected cities and mu- 
nicipalities. The local leaders were to form a council. This democratic structuring 
became its Achilles Heel. 

The bill gathered cobwebs in the legislative. In January 1 988, the Office of the 
President certified the Lina bill as administration bill, and therefore, must be acted 
upon promptly. Nothing happened. In fact, it encountered more problems. 

President Aquino took note of the paralysis of Metro Manila management and 
took note of the enormous problems that had to be tackled immed lately. 

She realized that the Office of the President could set things moving for the 
cities while the local officials decided among themselves what to do with scarce 
resources like pooling them and reallocating them among the cities. 



The Crowded City 



9 



In the countryside, the cry was for devolution. That was for the central govern- 
ment to transfer or relegate its powers to local government units for them to func- 
tion efficiently. 

But Metro Manila posed a different challenge. It called for the 13 autonomous 
units to constitute a whole to be able to respond to the needs of the burgeoning 
metropolis. 

Pending the act of Congress, the President created the MM A. Like in Lina's bill, 
it was to be governed by a council, composed of the mayors. In what was perceived 
as power sharing, the Council was to select a chairman from its ranks. The chairman 
was to serve six months. But as scenarios unfolded, most of the mayors wanted to 
drop the chairmanship like a hot potato. 

The President had to take the initiative. Although the remedial measures she 
needed to take were drastic, the President had to proceed along democratic lines. 
She was for consensus building. Any decision that she had to make that would 
affect the people must be done in consultation with the people. The President tack- 
led the problems of waste management, environmental care, city traffic, 
streetchildren, low-cost housing, drug abuse, flooding, and more. She constituted a 
"one-man committee" whenever her back was against the wall. 

One of the President's first moves to meet the problems head on in Metro Ma- 
nila and the other cities in the country was to create the President's Commission on 
Urban Poor in December 1986. This body became her venue for consulting directly 
with the bottom 30 percent of the urban population. 

She called on the Metro Manila mayors for problem-solving sessions. She also 
required the heads of concerned agencies like the National Housing Authority 
(NH A), the Philippine Estate Authority (PEA), the Department of Social Welfare 
and Development (DSWD), and the Department of Transportation and Communi- 
cation (DOTC) to be present to provide immediate response to whatever questions 
that may arise. 



The President was met by mountains of problem. 



10 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Levelling The Mountains 

Garbage has always been a headache. Whenever international media want to 
illustrate the extent of Manila's impoverished state, it showed the grim landscape of 
Smokey Mountain in Tondo. Smokey Mountain had taken the place of monkeys on 
coconut trees as the description of how "uncivilized" the Philippines was. 

But Smokey Mountain is no more. Metro Manila's garbage disposal system 
was one of the President's priorities. Showing impatience with parochial wranglings, 
the President herself inspected the dirty streets of Divisoria to get a firsthand ac- 
count of the problem. At one time, she directed Mayor Jejomar Binay of Makati, 
who was then concurrent chairman of the Metro Manila Authority, to transfer the 
garbage collection task to Mayor Mel Lopez of Manila who was demanding for it. 

After a few months, the gargantuan task apparently choked the Manila mayor, 
for he asked the President to revert back the task of garbage collection to the Au- 
thority. 

On March 1988, the President formed the Task Force for Solid Waste Manage- 
ment. Her strategy was to mobilize nongovernment organizations (NGOs) and con- 
cerned government agencies to determine, design, and build infrastructure for proper 
solid waste disposal. In particular, the task force was to develop sanitary landfills 
and build transfer stations that will accelerate the transfer and the storing of waste 
in bulk before bringing them to identified landfill sites. 

The Task Force recommended the acquisition of modern compactor trucks, 
the building of at least five transfer stations, and the development of two major 
landfills to eventually and completely stop using Smokey Mountain and other 
dumpsites which endangered the health of their adjacent communities. 

Two sanitary landfills were developed - one in Carmona, Cavite and another in 
San Mateo, Rizal. The choice of the sites were not arbitrarily made. The leaders and 
the people of the towns had to be consulted. As expected, resistance arose from the 
Rizal residents. But eventually, after realizing the scientific and safe manner through 
winch wastes will be disposed, the people gave their go signal. Nevertheless, the 



The Crowded City 



11 



Department of Environment and Natural Resources had to give its clearance on the 
projects. 

The San Mateo landfill had been finished, while construction was still going on 
at the Carmona site and at the Las Pinas Transfer Station when President Aquino 
finished her term. 

The Task Force also acquired 40-footer vans which were to be used to trans- 
port garbage from the Las Pinas Transfer Station to the Carmona sanitary landfill. 
A grant from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) was used to pur- 
chase 141 compactor trucks for distribution to major cities and towns nationwide. 

The issue of waste management, particularly the operation of landfills, was 
taken up by the Cabinet several times at the President's direction. She said: "The 
people did not vote me to the Presidency to take care of the garbage. That is true of 
every government in the world. But it is equally true that the Presidency must be 
concerned with problems that affect the welfare of the citizenry". 

The President also met with barangay officials and Metro Manila 
streetsweepers and urged them to talk to their constituents on proper garbage dis- 
posal. The President remarked: "We now look to people power to transform Metro 
Manila from a dying and dirty metropolis to a vibrant, clean and healthy home of 
about 8 million Metro Manilans". 

With waste management in control, another challenge was banging at the Presi- 
dent's door. 



Declogging Congestion 

Going through Metro Manila traffic at any hour of the day was a horrendous 
experience. For motorist and plain commuter alike, going to and from work ate up 
precious manhours. This was a result of many factors - increased number of motor 
vehicles, deteriorating and /or inadequate roads, increased population, and lack of 
discipline. 



12 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Thus, the Traffic Management Plan or TRIP was created on September 1988 
by virtue of Memorandum Order (MO) No. 191 . The Plan aimed to basically re- 
duce vehicular traffic time in Metro Manila. It called for the development and im- 
provement of the public transport system, improvement of traffic enforcement, and 
instilling public consciousness of correct traffic behavior. 

The President herself presided over the meetings of the concerned government 
agencies to thresh out the nagging problem of traffic congestion in Metro Manila. 

On July 1989, the President directed then Executive Secretary Catalino 
Macaraig Jr. to constitute the Metro Manila Land Transportation Coordinating Coun- 
cil to ensure the implementation of the TRIP. The council was chaired by the MMA 
and co-chaired by the DOTC, with the DPWH, Land Transportation Office, Metro- 
politan Police Force, Land Transportation Franchise Regulation Board (LTFRB), 
and the chairman of the Metro Manila Mayor's League as members. 

Morale of the police, favorite whipping boys of the traffic problem, was raised 
by the teamwork. Bgen. Levy Macasiano says, "In the history of policing, this is the 
first time that DOTC came in to help. The DPWH, too, came in to help resolve 
conflict on the road". The teamwork of the agencies prevented expected traffic con- 
gestion during the construction of the flyovers in EDSA. 

The council came up with short- and long-term measures. Among the short- 
term solutions was the Pook Batayan project that was implemented in selected in- 
tersections of the cities. It called on the private sector to join hands with government 
in restoring "sanity" on the streets. The Pook Batayan approach was cultural - it fed 
on the Filipino's hiya to instill proper pedestrian and driving behavior. 

Another short-term solution was the delineation of yellow lanes in main streets, 
called yellow lanes, solely for the use of buses and jeepneys. During the first days, 
drivers and operators threatened to pull off the streets in protest against what they 
claimed were restrictions of their rights. But when the bus operators in EDSA, for 
instance, saw that their buses were making four trips instead of two trips a day 
because of their exclusive lanes, all the howling stopped. 



The Crowded City 



13 



Other measures implemented were the construction and the upgrading of traf- 
fic facilities which included pedestrian overpasses, more signal lights, and lesser 
breaks in road islands. To disciplined drivers and safety-conscious commuters, these 
improvements were perceptible and a welcome relief. 

When the Aquino administration took over, many bus companies in Metro 
Manila had gone bankrupt. Those which survived, including the government-con- 
trolled Metro Manila Transport Corporation were running lean, if not dilapidated, 
fleets. The effect of this situation on the commuters was nerve-wrecking. Day-to- 
day commuting proved to be traumatic. Many commuters had to wait for hours on 
the streets, even at such a late hour as 11 in the evening. Children and women were 
the prime victims. 

To meet the problems squarely, the President immediately approved the prac- 
tical approach of acquiring hundreds of buses. Again, the private sector was invited 
to join in. Through easy-installment plans, companies were able to beef up their 
fleets. Tax incentives were also given to companies which could import buses, new 
or used, from abroad. Taxi operators were also given the same elbow room. In just 
a few months, the lack of public transport was solved. 

In addition to the purchases, provincial buses and tourist buses were given 
special permits to ply the routes of the cities. School and shuttle buses, even AUVs, 
were allowed to pick up passengers. New routes in Pasig, Paranaque, Mandaluyong, 
and other areas were opened. 

As the economy began to pick up, foreign car makers came in to get a slice of 
the promising Philippine market. New models began to appear on the streets of 
Metro Manila. The growing number of cars and public vehicles vied for space. 

The administration's quick response to the congestion were the flyovers, all 
built in record time. Commuters who used to report to their offices harassed after at 
least two agonizing hours in traffic now have more productive hours. Commuting 
time has been reduced by almost 40 percent. 

The flyovers in EDSA have eased up seven choke points: East Avenue, Kamias, 
P.Tuason, Santolan, Ortigas, and Buendia Extension, including the Roxas Blvd.- 



14 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



EDS A junction. Another flyover constructed was where Buendia ends on Roxas 
Boulevard. The Sta. Mesa-Nagtahan interchange has made life easier particularly 
for students of the University Belt in Manila. 

The inauguration of the flyovers were media events. But the improvement of 
roads and bridges in Metro Manila quietly preceded the fast track construction of 
the "bridges in the sky". Radial and circumferential roads, or roads that go in and 
out and around Metro Manila had been much improved. 

The most well-known of these were the widening and extension of the Araneta 
Avenue, now open from San Juan going all the way to Talayan in Quezon City; the 
extension of Ortigas Avenue, also from San Juan through Pasig to Cainta - opening 
to the towns of Rizal; the EDSA extension from Taft to Roxas Blvd.; the widening of 
Commonwealth Avenue from Q.C. Circle to Fairview, opening to Novaliches and 
Bulacan; the widening and improvement of the Coastal Road, linking Manila and 
Pasay to Paranaque, Las Pinas, and Cavite. 

'Fast track' became a byword in speedy and efficient public works. Yet, the 
growth of the city seemed to outrace it. There are no permanent solutions to any 
metropolis. 

The long-term measures for the traffic problem in Manila included the installa- 
tion of railway system in the cities. Also included were plans for the massive educa- 
tion of Pinoy drivers. 

Yet, good roads, or even correct driving habits, are actually useless without 
tackling another of the metropolis' age-old problem: flooding. 



The Cities Under Water 

Flooding is one of the most serious problems in Metro Manila. About 4,400 
hectares or 7 percent of Metro Manila's total area of 63,600 hectares are flood 
prone. These include parts of the City of Manila, the fishing towns of Malabon and 
Navotas, Valenzuela, even hilly San Juan and Mandaluyong. Talayan-Tatalon, and 



The Crowded City 



15 



Tagig-Pateros. The recurring floods affect 1.9 million people and inflict losses 
amounting to about P900 million annually. 

There are two main causes of flooding in Metro Manila. First, because of 
overbank flows from the Pasig-Marikina River, San Juan River, Malabon-Tullahan 
River, and other main rivers. Second, because of water accumulation from storms 
which Metro Manila's existing drainage system can not carry. 

The increasingly frequent inundations are further worsened by the citizens 
themselves. The litany of aggravations seems endless. These include: uncontrolled 
dumping of garbage and solid wastes on natural and man-made open waterways 
and road ways which causes serious clogging of the existing drainage systems; en- 
croachments on esteros, creeks, and rivers by illegally constructed private build- 
ings, houses, squatter shanties. If the rich and the poor are equally guilty, so was 
their government. For some structures were built by the previous administration 
over the waterways. 

Increasing the problem are inadequate waterways under some existing bridges; 
obstruction of drainage mains, outfalls, and laterals by underground water, sewer, 
and gas mains and pipes, electric and telephone cables and LRT foundations; con- 
struction of subdivisions and housing development projects on natural flood plains 
and low-lying areas; rapid urbanization and population growth in Metro Manila. 

When the Aquino administration took over, the flood drainage system of Metro 
Manila had already outlived its usefulness. DPWH Secretary Ping de Jesus explains 
their immediate task: 'The drainage system was inadequate and we aimed to make 
it work to near 1 00% efficiency as possible. But even if we hit 1 00%, we would still 
experience flooding. The only thing to expect was for flood waters to recede faster". 

While it is true that floods continue to inundate Metro Manila because it is 
below sea level, de Jesus and engineers point to the poor discipline that worsened 
the working condition of the city esteros. 



16 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



Esteros are the natural waterways of Manila, by which floods within the cities 
may be brought to the open sea. Esteros, however, have become dumping pits of the 
urban residents. 

Against these obstacles, the government was methodological. 



Dismantling Obstacles 

The DPWH completed numerous projects to minimize floodings in the me- 
tropolis. It constructed 1,144 kms. of drainage laterals and canals for local storm 
run-off; constructed 42 kms. of drainage, outfalls, mains, and interceptor; dredged 
and improved banks of 56 kms. of esteros to complement 390 kms. of creeks and 
open channels; and constructed 11 pumping stations and floodgates which serve 
about 4,300 hectares and 200 major streets, five independent floodgates, and two 

automatic trash rakes and screens located upstream and downstream of the Buendia 
Outfall. 

The DPWH also completed the 9.5 km.-long Manggahan Flood way which mini- 
mized the overflowing of the Pasig River and the Marikina River. It completed the 
Napmdan Hydraulic Control Structure to regulate the outflow of stored lake water 
m order not to overload the Pasig River during floods. 

Also, the DPWH formed a Task Force to remove illegal structures within the 
right-of-way of about 21 major public highways, streets, and waterways. The Task 
Force, according to Macasiano, was able to demolish 30,000 shanties in the esteros 
and roadways. They also demolished a police station in Balon Bato, and a fire sta- 
tion in Baclaran. 

Macasiano commended local leaders for not interfering in their work, but de- 
scribes the situation thus: "May problema diyan, kasi kung ikaw man ang Mayor 
palagay ko hindi mo ide-demolish iyon, makakalaban mo iyong taong bayan. I 
know that, kaya sila naman, kung kami nandoon hindi naman kami iniistorbo, 
tinutulungan nila kami sapagkat politicians sila. Ngayon, mayroon silang mga build- 
ing officials under the Department of Public Highways na hindi rin makakilos dahil 



The Crowded City 



17 



sa mga Mayor dahil ang mga appointment niyan ay galing sa Mayor. On the other 
hand naman, we should understand the Mayor, they are politicians, na kung gigibain 
nila iyan sa dami ng squatters - it's about half a million in Metro Manila - ay makikita 
ninyo naman na mga counter-productive iyan as far as their municipality is con- 
cerned". 

Even with socio-political questions hanging like the sword of Damocles, the 
DPWH proceeded to increase the capabilities of pumping stations and to restore 
existing drainage systems which included rivers, creeks, esteros, man-made canals, 
and laterals. Funding from Overseas Economic Community Fund (OECF) and JICA 
were arranged for long-term implementation. 

Shelters For Settlers 

The national government also embarked on programs to contain the prolifera- 
tion of squatters and to relocate them to sustainable resettlement areas outside Metro 
Manila. 

Measures to address the complex problem of squatting were pursued by the 
government through various programs. The truth was, despite the enormous re- 
sources of the previous administration's Human Settlements Program and the old 
Metro Manila Commission, the squatter problem remained unabated. There were 
274,270 families, or 1,645,815 residing in slums and blighted areas in 1986. 

The government launched the National Shelter Program which had three ma- 
jor components. The first was the Sites and Services Program of the NHA where idle 
or unoccupied lands were acquired for low- and marginal-income earners. Second 
was the Slum Improvement Program which undertook onsite improvement of oc- 
cupied lots for the same income group. Third was the Relocation and Resettlement 
Program where settlement sites were made available to families displaced from 
danger areas and from land needed by the government for development projects. 

The President instructed the creation of the Task Force Katarungan for Social 
Housing under the Department of Justice to go after professional squatters and 



18 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



syndicates in Metro Manila who systematically and fraudulently claimed owner- 
ship over parcels of land, then sold or leased them to innocent victims. 

The President conducted dialogues with the urban poor and directed the cabi- 
net secretaries and administrators concerned to meet as often as possible to come 
up with far-reaching solutions. Thus, multisectoral dialogues under the President's 
Urgent Services for Housing or PUSH were held. Guidelines on demolition and evic- 
tion of squatter families were formulated and followed. 

The six years of Aquino leadership had made possible the creation of more 
shelters for the masses than in the 20 years of Marcos regime. This is not a hollow 
claim. 



The National Housing Authority, the National Home Mortgage Finance, the 
Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board, and the Home Insurance and Guaranty 
Corporation worked in concert with the two government social security insurance 
companies - SSS and GSIS - in providing affordable housing to 79,339 families from 
Bongao, Tawi-Tawi to Vitas, Tondo. 

New hope had come to Vitas, Tondo, a stone's throw away from the Smokey 
Mountain. A row of four-storey tenement houses, called the Katuparan Condo- 
minium, was built to accommodate low-income families in the area. It was de- 
signed to serve 1 ,700 families. Today, 1 ,644 doors of 27 buildings had already been 
awarded mostly to migrants who have found dignity in having a proper roof over 
their heads. 



The Cajudo family, originally from poverty-stricken Samar, was one of the 
lucky recipients. Mrs. Lourdes Cajudo says: "Life was hard, and we couldn't think 
of ways to send our children to school. So we thought of coming to Manila. God was 
kind. My husband got a job at William Lines as a porter. Our children were able to 
study. One day, NHA came and we were included in a census for government 
housing. Soon, the Katuparan (condominium) was built by President Aquino. We 
were very happy of course, to have our own home. Our future looks very bright". 



The Crowded City 



19 



NHA General Manager Robert Balao says: "One of the criticisms against the 
old housing program was that units ended up with people who can well afford to 
avail of themselves of housing from the private sector. The social housing thrust of 
the Aquino administration, in contrast, addressed the needs of the lower 30 per- 
cent". 

The President also turned her attention to other problems resulting from depri- 
vation. These included drug abuse and child abuse. 



Into The Heart Of The Future 

Drug abuse is a continuing menace to urban centers all over the globe. Metro 
Manila is no exception. In fact, the metropolis is under worse condition. The Philip- 
pines is being used as a corridor by international syndicates for drug trafficking. 

Drug abuse is a social malaise that permeates all sectors of society, though 
more prevalent among the poor and the desperate. It has become a common occur- 
rence for Manilans to be greeted by the grisly news of innocent people and even 
families being murdered by drug-crazed youths. 

Drug abuse, however, could not be answered by police action alone. Neither 
could it be tackled solely by the government. Hence, the Dangerous Drugs Board, 
the government arm tasked to combat drug abuse, got together with other govern- 
ment agencies, civic and professional groups, and religious and volunteer organiza- 
tions to form a multisectoral and multidimensional program against the growing 
drug problem. 

The Board, bolstered by the active role of the NGOs, undertook four major 
activities: education, information, and communication; drug law enforcement; pre- 
ventive education and information; and research, treatment, and rehabilitation. 

The President's concern for the Filipino children was not limited only to those 
who had been or could be pounced upon by the ogres of the drug world. She was 



20 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



concerned, most of all, with children whose innocence were shattered as they fought 
for everyday survival. These were the streetchildren. 

Surveys in the late 80s indicate that there were 75,000 streetchildren in Metro 
Manila alone. Proliferation of streetchildren had been attributed to economic depri- 
vation which forced the parents to turn their children out to the streets to earn for 
their own keep. Director Rosario Marasigan of DSWD says: 'There is a big influx of 
migrants in Metro Manila, and they're from provinces. And these families are not 
ready for Metropolis living. And so, they end up either in the streets or in the squat- 
ters area". 

The President, on January 30, 1987, ordered the Department of Social Welfare 
and Development (DSWD) to conduct a balanced approach to the protection of the 
welfare and interest of the streetchildren. The DSWD established eight day care 
centers all around Metro Manila. It also opened the Lingap Center in Alabang as a 
way station for streetchildren who wished to get out of the asphalt jungle. As in all 
endeavors of the Aquino government, the NGOs were tapped to contribute 
manhours and resources to the projects. 

The President tapped the President's Social Fund to help NGOs augment their 
capabilities in extending welfare assistance projects to streetchildren. Some P50 mil- 
lion was allocated to NGOs for them to conduct new programs for streetchildren. 

* °l^7 a t0tal ° f P19 - 6 mi]lion had been released, benefiting 14,181 
streetchildren and their immediate family members in Metro Manila. 

. a I* ° Ct ° ber 1989 ' durin S the awarding of the PSF grants, the President reiter- 
ated her call to alleviate the plight of the streetchildren. On Christmas of 1 989, the 
" 3 7 g ,; a A " ak Lans ^gan Project was started, generating a total donation of 
P3.40 million from 1989-1991 . The fund, which came from the President's friends, 
went into the educational needs of some 450 streetchildren in the elementary and 
high school levels. These streetchildren were under the care of 36 different NGOs. 

With the success of the Handog sa Anak Lansangan Project, the President di- 
rected the continuation of the program through the sale of specially-crafted greet- 
ing cards to businessmen and sympathetic idividuals. The project, "Concern for a 




nFniCATION. The President visits a 
Sepressli community in San An omo, 
Singalong, Manila. It was loneo 
several depressed commumt esin iv. 
Manila which she visited during ner 
59th birthday. 




HEAVY TRAFFIC. The President meets 
with the Task Force on Traffic 
Management at the Malacananq 
Guesthouse, June 30, 1988. Among 
those present are Capital Regional 
Command (CAPCOM) Chief Gen 
e B X rla n i d d o^ 9Uirre ' Que2 °n City Mayor 
rn f Dh 5' mon ' PMS Director Elfren 
Cruz, Philippine Information Aqencv 

Je!om a °/ R Wi,,iam ESP0S0 ' MakltlKyS 
Jejomar B.nay, and Executive Secretary 

Catalino Macaraig, Jr. 



TACKLING THE GARBAGE PROBLEM. 
Father Bonifacio De Vera blesses one of 
the garbage trucks donated by the 
Japanese International Cooperation 

Agency (JICA) to the Philippine 
government. Also with the President 
are from left: Manila Mayor Gemiliano 
Lopez, Baguio Mayor Jaime Bugnosen, 
Angeles Mayor Antonio Abad Santos, 
JICA official Morita Mikimoto, MMA 
Chairman and Makati Mayor Jejomar 
Binay, Japanese Ambassador Toshio 
Goto (behind the President), and 
Executive Secretary Oscar Orbos 



FLY-OVERS. To address the massive 

PresSerX on the plans. With them are 
DPWH Undersecretaries Edmundo M.r, 
?eodoro Encarnacion, Directors Jose 
Pendoza and Prudencio Baranda. 




FAST TRACK. All 
planned fly-overs are 
finished in record 
time. The President is 
shown here with de 
Jesus enjoying the 
view of Malacanang 
atop the Nagtahan 
Interchange during its 
inauguration on 
Dec. 2, 1991. 

LEAVING HER MARK. 

President Aquino 
imprints her hands on 
the cement marker for 
the EDSA-Ortigas 
fly-over during the 
inauguration of the 
northbound lane on 
May 9, 1992. 





Preceding page. The President checks th* 
changing landscape of Pasig fr 0m \ht 
southbound lane of the EDSA-Ortiaa! 
fly-over on Oct. 1, 1991. With her are 
(from left) de Jesus, contractor 
Filsystem President Felipe Cruz, Jr., and 

Felipe Cruz, Sr. 



Circumferential and radial roads in 
Metro Manila were also improved. The 
President is escorted by de Jesus along 
EDSA Extension which she inaugurated 
on April 15, 1991. Also in photo are 
(from left) PNP Director General Cesar 
Nazareno, Pasay Representative Lorna 
Verano Yap, and Pasay City Mayor 
Pablo Cuneta. The P70 million EDSA 
road intersects Roxas Boulevard and 
serves more than 50,000 vehicles daily. 




The President pays a surprise visit to the 




In celebrating her 1,000th day in office, Aquino launches 
Luntiang Kamaynilaan program. 




With one of the families residing in another 
housing program, this time in UP. 



The President picks out a lucky award* 
in the ceremonial draw of ^NHA s . Panp 
sa Lote' held at Quezon Me"jor.a c«c 
on August 30, 1986 With her are ^NMA 
Genera. Manager Lrto AUea* P**^ 
Mario Raymundo, MMC Oiu 
and (partly hidden) Quezon C.ty 
Brigido Simon, Jr. 



Architect Manuel 
Manosa presents a 
scale model of the 
National Government 
Center housing project 
to the President. 



The President poses 
with the family of 
housing beneficiary 
Inigo Ababa, a Metro 
Manila Transit Corpo- 
ration (MMTC) 
mechanic, after she 
inaugurated the P8.2 
million Commonwealth 
Townhouses in 
Fairview, Quezon City 
on November 11, 1991. 
From left are Inigo's 
wife Helen, children 
Richard, Richelda and 
Analyn, and NHA 
general manager 
Robert Balao. 




ANOTHER RECORD-BREAKING F EAT - 
The President receives a Special Awara 
from Eduardo Yap (second from rigm;, 
chairman of the Subdivision Hous- 
ing Developers Association (SHDA; tor 

the record-breaking mass housing 
program under her administration, ine 
Aquino administration built more iow- 
cost housing in six years than in tne 
twenty years of the previous regime, i n 
developers are accompanied by ^ ou *'"y 
and Urban Development Coordinating 
Council Chairman Teodoro KatigbaK 
(extreme right). Also in photo are Jose 
de Guzman, SHDA president; Ben.gno 

Cabrieto, Jr.; Virgilio Cervantes, 
Benjamin Agleham; Andrea Bernhard, 
and Gerardo de Leon. 



The President turns on a faucet to 
launch "Alkantarilya at Tubig, Bigkis ng 
Kabisig' Project of the MWSS 
at Barrio Magsaysay, Tondo on 
March 7, 1991. At left is MWSS 
Administrator Luis V. Sison. 




The Crowded City 



21 



Streetchild", was able to generate about P2.3 million from 1991 to 1992. The pro- 
ceeds were again plowed into the education of more than 2,000 streetchildren. 



Victims Of Pressure 



Adults, too, were victims of urbanization and deterioration of family ties. The 
presence of psychotic vagrants, commonly known as taong-grasa who aimlessly 
roamed the streets of Manila was an indication of this problem. 

On January 30, 1987, the President ordered the National Center for Mental 
Health CNCMI I), an institution under the Department of Health (DOH), to provide 
treatment, care, and rehabilitation of the mentally-ill and emotionally-disturbed peo- 
ple. 

The President also directed the Presidential Management Staff (PMS) Htolnr 
with the DSWD, and the Bureau of Disabled Person Welfare, the ^P 1 ^ ^ 
Command, and the MM A to establish a sanctuary center for the > va & " had 
1989 to March 1992, the Center was able to handle 523 cases, of whom 
been discharged.* 

In December 1988, the MM A together with DSWD, the ™ e * r °J°^™ s in the 
Force, and the NCMH launched a campaign to regularly roun upj ^ . ned at 
cities for proper shelter, treatment, and care. Psychotic vagran s 
NCMH, while the non-psychotic ones were sent to Fabella Center. 



Improving Quality Of Life 

n November 21, 1988, she 
On the President's one thousandth day m ^ ajmed t0 CTeate a visu . 
launched the Luntiang Kamaynilaan ^f^™^ % Metro Manila through the 
ally pleasant and soothing environment ^ compounds , or any other 

planting of trees in open spaces, V^^^^ emb ^ ied a baslc tene t of 
area. Charming in its simplicity, the program nevertneiesse 

. . , fh At of letting nature into man's self-made world, 

sound environmental management - tnat or lenuig 



22 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



An interagency committee was created to monitor and coordinate the pro- 
gram implementation. It was chaired by the DENR with the Metro Manila Author- 
ity as co-chairman. 

The Office of the President held the key role during the first year of implemen- 
tation particularly by providing technical and institutional support. The PMS as- 
sumed preparatory responsibilities for the Luntiang Kamaynilaan, even to the ex- 
tent of digging holes for the tree planting. 

Once more, the NGOs were mobilized for the greening of Metro Manila; so 
were private corporations, the scouting movement, homeowners associations, and 
the military. In a concept called "adopt a tree and a site", each group was assigned 
areas, which were called Hardin ng Bayan, for planting and caring. 

But what could be the more significant effect of the Luntiang Kamaynilaan 
project was its impact on the consciousness of the young Filipinos who were ex- 
posed to it. The primary participants of the project during the first two years of 
implementation were elementary schoolchildren who were mobilized by the De- 
partment of Education, Culture, and Sports (DECS) to plant young trees in their 
areas. This way, twin seeds for the future were sown. 

The Luntiang Kamaynilaan has since been institutionalized and had been turned 
over to the DENR for management and monitoring. As of April 1 992, 429,625 trees 
had been planted and nurtured in various Hardin ng Bayan in Metro Manila. 

The rivers of Metro Manila, or what is left of them, were also looked into by the 
President. 

A young girl once asked her father if she could join her class on a field trip 
which would take them aboard the Metro Ferry along the Pasig River. Perhaps, not 
really wanting to allow his daughter for fear of her safety, he gave his girl a creative 
reply: "Sure, if fish start to live in the Pasig River again, you can take the boat ride 
anytime". The girl's face fell. She knew what Pasig River was like. She always saw it 
whenever her family went to Chinatown to eat. And she was sure that, with dead 
cats and trash floating all over it, no fish can ever survive in its waters. She felt sad 
about the boat ride. 



The Crowded City 



23 



But maybe she can go after all, in a few years time. The Aquino government 
launched through the DENR the "Hog Mo, Irog Ko" project on November 17, 1988 
to restore the quality of water in Pasig so that it can sustain fish and aquatic plants 
once again. The project aimed to reduce organic pollution by at least 50 percent by 
1992. 

The President called on several government agencies to get involved in the 
riverine project. The DENR was tasked to look after industrial pollution, the Metro- 
politan Waterworks Sewerage System (MWSS) to look after the septic tank prob- 
lems, the NH A to oversee the squatter problem, and the DPWH to conduct continu- 
ous dredging works. 

As marine life was extinguished almost entirely out of Metro Manila's water- 
ways, so were its people slowly being strangled in its foul air. Studies show that 
upper respiratory ailments account for the first four most common causes of deat 
in the NCR. 

A foreign diplomat once complained that his expatriate employees were hav- 
ing trouble adjusting to Manila conditions. They suffered from sore eyes, skm a er- 
gies, and throat and lung infections. 

A project called the Anti-Smoke Belching Project was launched in l9S8 J^* 
ant to PD 1181, it called for the control, protection, and abatement oJ J^P^ 
coming from motor vehicles which accounted for about 70 percent o 
lution load in the air of Metro Manila. The project was undertaken 
group which signed a memorandum of agreement. The agencies we 
LTO, MMC, and Constabulary Highway Patrol Group (CHPG). 

From 1988 to December 1991, a total of 98,275 vehicles had been apprehended 
for violation of the anti-smoke belching law. 

The campaign against smoke belching was just like an ant's bite at Metro Ma- 
nila's elephantine problems. 



24 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The MMA: An Objective Assessment 

At the outset, the Metro Manila Authority was weighed down by two major 
problems: The Marcos albatross which was the old MMC and the persistence of 
myopia among many of the cities 7 local leaders. 

Though many Metro Manila mayors gained dramatic achievements in their 
territories, they apparently could not rise above protecting their turfs. 

The Metro Manila mayors, through the President's patient refereeing, were 
able to sit down and recognize their differences in running the crowded city. All 
agreed to the need for a higher body to administer and coordinate common and 
integrated basic services needed by the people. All agreed that the basic services 
that could be addressed as one were: waste management and disposal, pollution 
control, traffic management, flood control, and zoning. 

On January 26, 1988, the President certified as administration bill Senate Bill 
No. 40 sponsored by Senator Jose Lina. .Essentially, the bill sought to abolish the 
autocratic nature of the old MMC and establish, in its stead, a democratic council- 
type of management. 

Throwing a monkey wrench at the situation was the Lower House's version of 
the MMC bill. It called for its abolition and proposed that a plebiscite be conducted 
in Metro Manila, to ask the residents whether they would want to restore the cities 
and municipalities into separate, self-contained units without an overall body to 
oversee all of their affairs. 

By June 1990, the Bicameral Conference Committee was able to hammer out a 
compromise bill which, unfortunately, gathered cobwebs in both chambers. 

Time and opportunity ran out of the Metro Manila mayors. The push and pull 
of different viewpoints took its toll, with the residents of Metro Manila at the receiv- 
ing end. 

Nacianceno says: "In MMC, the legislative aspect was done by Mrs. Marcos 
and no one else. When the new government took over, no legislation was done with- 
out consulting the mayors. 



The Crowded City 



25 



In the Metropolitan Authority, we had the Metro Manila Mayors Council which 
could legislate by way of resolution. We could not have the chairman legislate by 
her mere signature. That was no longer done. The quarrel was that the municipal 
councils complained: Why should we legislate when they were already doing that? 
That was correct. But there were laws that were, in a sense, of local application. 
Like there were laws for Quezon City and good for Quezon City only. On the other 
hand, we had to contend with the fact that everybody else moved around the me- 
tropolis in a day. Not a single municipality was self-sustaining by way of providing 
whatever amenities or services a person in the city would need. 

I have voiced my opinion that the Metropolitan Mayors Council could under- 
take legislation. It could best be viewed, parallel to the Senate and the House of 
Representatives. The House legislated laws of local application and the Senate, laws 
of nationwide application. 

That was possible and ideal in the setup of the Metropolitan Manila Mayors 
Council and the Municipal Council. In case of conflict, then like the Congress, we 
could have representatives from both meet to come out with a compromise' . 

Nacianceno also adds: "The mayors of Metro Manila were entirely of a differ- 
ent kind of breed, in a sense. As a mayor of a city or municipality m a metro P he ^ 
they had their reasons to think they were better off than some m *y° rs S °™* the 
else. Remember, we were tagged as the capital center. They tend to thin ^ 
Philippines is Manila. Ganoon ang thinking ng mga mayors. Ever y mayo p ^ 
bought that his municipality could stand out by itself. And so 1 mnK 
lot of parochial interests. The quarrel with us, is that our interests cann v ^ 
chial but basically, metropolitan. There would always be conti.ct, g 
situation. 

There are certain things that need to be done at 
sense that power must be devolved from the national to a middle term organization 
- we can conceive of the Metropolitan Authority as parallel to a provincial govern- 
merit in Metro Manila". 

Nacianceno suggested that for a Metro Manila Governor to have clout, he or 
she must be elected by the people in a genuine and honest election. The mandate will 
give that person legitimacy to lead the other mayors. 



26 



The Aquino Management of the Presidency 



The passage of the New Local Government Code (RA 71 60) in 1 991 was con- 
sidered a milestone in the administration of cities and municipalities. It devolved 
power to local units in order that local resources redound to local benefits and 
services may be delivered faster and more efficiently. The code, however, was an 
ambiguous development for the growing metropolis. It, instead, highlighted the 
very problem that confronted the MMA: that of parochial interests getting in the 
way of common concerns that needed to be addressed collectively. The Code's Im- 
plementing Rules and Regulations provided that: "Beginning calendar year 1992, 
cities and municipalities within MMA are no longer required to make such contri- 
butions to MMA". Several mayors used this provision to justify their refusal to remit 
to the Authority, including their past obligations incurred the last few years. 

As a result of these nonremittances, basic services in some areas have stopped. 
This was evident in the case of garbage collection. Some of the mayors had prom- 
ised to remit to the MMA after President Aquino, Executive Secretary Franklin Drilon 
along with current MMA Chairman Mayor Ignacio Bunye had made repeated re- 
quests. But Mayor Jejomar Binay of Makati remained adamant. His reasons: al- 
leged mismanagement of MMA and that his municipality's contribution was way 
out of proportion to the services that it actually required and was being given. It 
was ironic that Binay, when he was MMA Chairman, faced the same recalcitrance 
from the other mayors. 

Nacianceno rationalizes the reality this way: "I live in Quezon City and I go to 
work in Makati. In the course of a day, I may go to a meeting in Pasay and maybe 
go out to dinner in Manila. A lot of people in Metro Manila may live in a municipal- 
ity and work in the adjoining city, with their children going to school in yet another 
city. We can not say that these people should compartmentalize their basic services 
requirements. It's impossible". This argument for the greater common good is like a 
refrain in the course of administering the metropolitan authority. 

The mayors of the metropolis were apparently dwarfed by the challenges. But 
treating them like members of the family, the President gave them support and 
counsel. She gave them room for growth. While the cities they headed continued to 
grow at a rapid rate, most of them had visions that stopped at their boundaries. 



The Crowded City 



27 



The President believed that, in the same manner that the people will be the ones 
to decide on who would be her successor, they will also be the ones who will judge 
the mayors for giving them the cities and neighbors and leadership that they need. 



