
V*T W r.'fi/oR 6? A/ GRP 

**' l/c^u r> FR££j)9n " 

REORGANIZATION OF THE 
PHILIPPINE ARMY 
AND 

REOPENING OF POST OFFICES 




ec 



/?<//. 




\ ,■ 




Shortly after the surrender of all U. S. Army forces in 
the Philippines , on May 1942, a number of officers and' men of 
the Philippine Army who had escaped to the mountains organized 
various units of resistance called guerrillas. Many young 
civilians who refused to submit themselves to the Japanese 
domination Joined these guerrilla units. Un der proper lead er^ 
ship these organizations harassed and f ought A r t he Japanese 
throughout the Philippines. There were areas in which the 
guerrillas ran all governmental agencies existing under the 
Commonwealth before the war. In spite of endless hardships 
and untold privations these groups' of patriots continued their 
magnificent resistance, proving to the whole world that the 
Filipino people were not willing to give up the democratic 
way of life and the freedom that they had enjoyed under the 
American flag. At this time and as long as military operations 
continue these recognized guerrilla organizations will remain 
under the control and command of the U. S. Army commander in 
the field. 



Shortly after President Osmena and his cabinet landed 
In Leyte, President Osmena issued an executive order that all 
those, Irrespective of nationality, who belonged to the recog- 
nized guerrilla units were members of the Philippine Army. 

The General Headquarters of the Philippine Army was reestablished 
and a United States Army officer designated as Acting Adjutant 
General. I appointed a board of officers whose duty it is to 
process all ex-USAFFE officers and men who fought In the early 
part of the war. This board determines whether the applicants 
really have been members of the Philippine Army or Constabulary, 
whether they served under the Japanese or under the puppet 
Republic, and if they did serve, what was the nature of their 
work. Careful inquiries are made of the past services rendered 
by these applicants to the Japanese authorities, whether or not 
they have worked as informers or as leaders of patrols against 
the guerrillas. After the board has recommended the reinstate- 
ment of the applicants these are assigned to a replacement 
depot as a part of the replacement battallion. They are 
physically examined and if found physically fit are retained 
for future assignment. 

The 1st Leyte Company of the Philippine Constabulary has 
been created with station in Tacloban. Major Ramon Gavlola, 
an old Constabulary officer, hds been designated Acting Com- 
manding Officer. Other Constabulary detatchments have been 
organized in other towns in Leyte to cooperate with U» S. Army 
authorities in the maintenance of peace and order. 



- 1 - 



/ 



9 



♦ 






. 



■5 



Postal facilities in the Province of Leyte have been re- 
established* The Post Office of Tacloban, Leyte was officially 
reopened November 8, 1944 and mail system reestablished between 
Tacloban and Palo* The Post Offices in other towns will also 
be reopened as soon as appropriate personnel has been selected 
and apoointed. Mail communications will soon be reestablished 
with the towns of Tanawan, Tolosa, Dulag and Abuyog. The 
telegraph lines between Tacloban and other towns have been 
severly damaged by three typhoons which lashed this island 
during the months of October and November* Operation of these 
lines will be resumed as soon as repairs have been made* The 
Signal Corps U* S, Army has very kindly agreed to furnish the 
material needed for this repairs* 



i# 



<=» 2 



/ 



