9 






» 



* 



y. 



j 



Colonel Sanchez, 

Dr. Angangco, 

Ladies and Gentlemen: 

We are gathered here this afternoon to honor 
distinguished persons who, for no other reason except 
love and charity, have contributed immeasurably in our 
important work in this hospital for the cure and comfort 
of our sick and disabled veterans. It is humanly impos- 
sible to evaluate the services which these good Samari- 
tans have rendered to the patients here. The services 
that they have rendered are not tangible, not measurable 
in terms of money but in terms of that inner satisfaction 
one feels when he sees that he has helped to save human 
lives. It is said that the present is built upon the 
past and that what is achieved today determines what we 
can expect of the future. If this is true, judging from 
the magnificent work you have done in the past, we can 
all hope for a bigger enthusiasm and greater achievements 
in the future. 

We Christians must welcome the fact that the sense 
of responsibility toward our neighbors is not confined to 
the area around our homes, but is extended to hospitals 
and similar institutions and has become a sense of duty 
toward mankind. Our neighbor whom Christ has directed 
that we love as we love ourselves is to be found every- 
where and has become a national responsibility and a 



2 



Christian duty. The good Christian who has a right un- 
derstanding of his task in community service is constantly 
aware that he is only an instrument and a servant of God. 
Only in this way he will rightly understand the service 
which as a Christian, he must render to suffering humanity. 

An earnest, sincere and devoted volunteer has an 
important place in a hospital program in which the treat- 
ment is a total staff responsibility. The volunteer fills 
a unique role as a representative of the community at large, 
which has an important meaning to the patients. The fact 
that the volunteer does not receive financial remuneration 
and yet is deeply interested in helping the sick and the 
unfortunate has a powerful and beneficial effect on the 
patient . 

Allow me to narrate to you an impressive story written 
by William Sidney Porter. Jim and Della married very young. 
They had just two possessions in which they both took great 
pride. The one, a gold watch that Jim had inherited from 
his father, and the other, Della's hair, beautiful and so 
long that it would reach below her knees when she would 
let it down. In her weaker moments, she wished to possess 
a beautiful set of combs, but because of their poverty, she 
could not hope to get. They were expensive combs. 

When Christmas came and Della counted her money to get 
Jim a present, she found she had just one dollar and eighty- 



/ 



G 





- 3 - 

seven cents. What could she do with this meagre amount, 
to buy something worthy of Jim? Suddenly, she had a won- 
derful idea, and before she could change her mind, she 
dashed out of the house and offered her hair to Madame 
Sofroni in her "Hair Saloon". Twenty dollars she received 
for those beautiful, rippling locks, and then she ransacked 
the stores for Jim’s present. She found a platinum fob 
chain, simple and chaste in design but worthy of Jim's 
watch. She thought that Jim would now be able to look 
at his watch in any company instead of concealing it be- 
cause of his shabby, old leather strap. 

She arranged what was left of her hair the best she 
could and as Jim came in, she prayed: "Please, God, make 
him think I am still pretty". 

When she saw his stupefied looks, she said: "Yes, 
dear, I sold it, but be good to me, Jim, for it went for 
you. Don't you like me just the same? I am me without 
my hair, ain’t I? May be the hairs of my head were 
numbered, but nobody could ever count my love for you." 

"Don’t make any mistake about me, Dell", Jim answered. 
"There is nothing in the way of a haircut that could make me 
like my girl any less. Unwrap that package, you may see 
what I had for you." Sure enough, there in the package 
were the combs. She never thought that such lovely things 
could possibly be hers. 

"It will be all right, Jim. My hair grows so fast," 



( 



«3 • 



« * * 



- 4 - 



she said at last. And in her exquisite happiness, she 
presented her present to Jim. "Isn't it beautiful, Jim? 

I hunted all over town to find it. You'll have to look at 
the time a hundred times a day now. Give me your watch, 

I want to see how it looks in it." 

But just as there were no adorning tresses for the 
beautiful combs, neither was there a watch for that worthy 
little fob. 

These two young people were the greatest and noblest 
givers on earth. It is a wonderful thing to convince another 
that he or she is dearly loved, and it is a worthy emollient 
to a tired heart and a drooping spirit once in a while to 
enjoy that revelation. 

This, distinguished volunteers, you have succeeded in 
doing. You have shown to these poor and unfortunate veterans 
that they are not alone in their sufferings, and that there 
are many kind persons, who, like the good Samaritan, try to 
bring comfort and happiness to the sick and the unfortunate. 
There is plenty of love and sweetness in us all. I urge you 
to continue giving generously of your kindness and friend- 
liness. This is a challenge for you, volunteers, and for all 
fellow citizens. Can we, in conscience, count our blessings 
without a thought for those less-blessed than us? Your 
sacrifices constitute an assurance to all that this shall 



never be. 



5 



* - • t 





The life of every man or woman is a diary in which he 
or she means to write one story, but writes another. And 
his or her humblest hour is when they compare the volume as 
it is with what they hoped to make it. The best story of 
our life is told not in writing, but in deeds; not in statis- 
tics, but in the lives of people whom we have helped to make 
more comfortable and happier and their sufferings more bear- 
able. And as we reach the snowy winter of our life from 
which there is no more return to spring, we can look back 
in retrospect with the poignant awareness of our mistakes, 
but conscious of the fact that through our inspiration, en- 
thusiasm and understanding kindness, we have enriched the 
lives of those poor patients who are less blessed than us. 

Henry Ford, the automobile magnate, once wrote: "Coming 
together is a beginning; keeping together is progress; work- 
ing together is success." In congratulating you all, dis- 
tinguished volunteer workers, for the excellent work per- 
formed, I wish to give you this parting message: Continue 
working together without rest in the fulfillment of your 
noble objectives and always remember the words of Jesus: 

"FOR THEY SHALL BE KNOWN BY THEIR WORKS." 



Speech delivered at the 
Veterans Memorial Hospital 
re: Appreciation Ceremony for 
Volunteers 

Thursday, November 19, 1959 



