
TO : Chief of Staff, Philippine Amy* 

THrtU : Coi.- ending Officer, Military Police Cosaand, AFTliPAC, IPO 501. 



1. The following has coro to the attention of this office: 

a. That senae officers of the Philippine A ruy -:o not carry in their 
possession identification cards. 



b. That saue enlisted personnel of the Philippine Arsy do net have 
in their possession identification cards or taps. 

c. i That sane organisations of the Philippine Arny are not i 

to their enlisted .can passes authorising th.er.: to be array frar t; eir wsts of 

duty. 



2. It is inpoesibie to check oersons wearing the uni for::, o’’ i!'- 1 ”ilip- 
'.ine .iRv to deiaxuine whether tjioy jre authorised to near such i.mifcrr: unless 
those authorised carry stae seans of identification. Tn addition, it is "V: 
oeaihle to apprehend aaoteers of the Philippine Away absent without leave 

if no fen. of toss is issued to authorised absentees. 






m 

i 



3. It is recoaaendod: 

a. That all neabers of the Philippine Arey crrrr ot rl tines r-ouo 
; :eano of identification. 

b. That enlisted personnel of the Philippine . than, 

when they are ewey froia their post of duty, a p--.se which rhoMld include the 
iaa»Va nane, rani:, organisation, serial ntmber and period for 

authorised to be asrc»y froa his duties. 

c. Bat officers at (knap Vurphy awaiting assirnrert to unite bo 
detailed in the City of Manila to check passes, uidforr. s, identification and 
gencr.il conduct of ihilippine Arcy persoraiel visiting the city. 

d. That a snail pernanent nllltery police detsehjcent, organized 
froa the Ihilippine Army enlisted non in Cmp Murphy,. be detailed to police 

A.he conduct cf the Ihilippine Amy personnel and work* In close cooperoiio: *7ith 
Vfche U.S. Aity xdlitary p-licc^ei; in the City of Manila. 

e. TLat a Philippine Arscy irovost iiarshal and necessary officer 
is si slants be detailed for duty in the City of Manila to supervise the work 

tho officers and nilitary police ietsciment centioned in paragraphs 3-c 
3 -d ;bove. 




- !•- 





The U. S* Array Provost Marshal of Manila will make available 

facilities for temporarily detaining members of the Philippine Artsy who arc 
arrested. Office space for the Philippine Army Provost Marshal and Military 
Police Detachment can also be made available. 



J. P, HOLLAND, 
Colonel, CUP, 
Provost Marshal. 









