The Sixth Annual Report 

of the 

United Stales High Commissioner 
lo the Philippine islands 

to th<» 

President and Congress of the United States 

Covering the Fiscal Year July 1, 1941 
to June 30, 1942 

+ 

Washington, D. C, October 20, 1942 



I 



78th Congress, 1st Session 



House Document No. 1 I 1 



SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UNITED 
STATES HIGH COMMISSIONER TO 
THE PHILIPPINE ISLANDS 



MESSAGE 

FROM 

THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES 

TRANSMITTING 

THE SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UNITED STATES 
HIGH COMMISSIONER TO THE PHILIPPINE 
ISLANDS COVERING THE FISCAL YEAR 
JULY 1, 1941, TO JUNE 30, 1912 




February 15, 1943. — Referred to the Committee on Insular Affairs 
and ordered to be printed 



UNITED STATES 
GOVERN IV 110 NT PRINTING OFFJCE 
WASHINGTON : 1943 



LETTER OF SUBMITTAL 



To the Congress oj the United States: 

As required by section 7 (4) of the act of Congress approved March 
24, 1934, entitled "An act to provide for the complete independence 
of the Philippine Islands, to provide for the adoption of a constitu- 
tion and a form of government for the Philippine Islands, and for 
other purposes," I transmit herewith, for the information of the 
Congress, the Sixth Annual Report of the United States High Com- 
missioner to the Philippine Islands covering the fiscal year beginning 
July 1, 1941, and ending June 30, 1942. 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
The White House, February 15, 1943. 

m 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Page 

L General Statement _ l 

II. Military and Naval ACTIVITIES and Civilian Defense 14 

Military developments _ 14 

Naval activities.. _ 17 

Civilian welfare and defense 20 

III. Office or thi: High Commissioner 22 

Foreign funds control... 23 

freezing of Chinese and Japanese assets 23 

Method of enforcement of foreign funds control _ 24 

Census of alien property _ 25 

Remittances by Chinese in the Philippines |to their families 

in China 26 

Examination of effects of persons Leaving the Philippines 27 

Special blocking of persons acting on behalf of or in the in- 
terest of the Axis 27 

Administrative organization and personnel 28 

Export control 29 

Federal Loan Agency program 32 

Administration of priorities 33 

United Service Organizations program 34 

Sugar relief program 35 

Background of the sugar problem 36 

Proposed Export -Import Bank loan 37 

The adjustment plan 38 

Establishment of Welfare and Whereabouts Section 42 

Relations with foreign consular representatives 43 

Supervision of enemy properties 4o 

Requisitioning of enemy-owned supplies 46 

Custody and administration of enemy properties 48 

Location of offices of Coordinator of Enemy Alien Property 

and Administrator Of Enemy Alien Propert y 48 

Program for safekeeping of currency, gold, securities, and other 

valuables 49 

United States currency, bonds, and Treasury checks 

accepted for safekeeping 49 

United States Treasury checks held by Philippine 

Treasury 50 

Valuables taken to prevent them from falling into the 

hands of the enemy 51 

Collection and transportation of valuables to Cor- 

rcgidor 52 

Inventorying of valuables taken in custody by the 

office of the High Commissioner 53 

Recording and destruction of paper currency 53 

Weighing and recording of gold bullion 55 

Listing of securities obtained under First War Powers 

Act •_ 55 

Dispatch of valuables by submarine to the United States.. 56 
Bullion and currency held by Commonwealth Government on 

Corregidor 57 

Welfare of civilian internees III™ 58 

Moratoria on obligations IIII™™ 59 

Personnel of the office of the High Commissioner" _~ 59 

Changes in personnel 61 



v 



VI TABLE OF CONTENTS 

III. Office of the High Commissioner — Continued. Page 
Personnel of the office of the High Commissioner — Continued. 

Location of staff on June 30, 1942 * q± 

Washington staff Q4 

American staff detained by the enemy llllll _ g , 

Filipino regular staff detained by the enemyllZIII" 65 

Filipino household staff detained by the enemv C6 

Export control staff 6 ^ 

Foreign funds control staff lllll ft? 

Liaison staff 1L 

Treasury staff 22 

Federal Loan Agency staff I . I l l po 

Other officers and employees 

Appropriations and expenditures of the office of the lliVh 

Commissioner b 

Emergency fund ~"~ «}j 

Official property i° 

IV. Commonwealth Government 70 

Federal legislation affecting the Philippines! II I 71 

Amendment of Tydings-McDuffie Act III I Z 1 

Congressional appropriation of sugar funds — $10,000 00ft ~* 
allocation from emergency fund of the President ar I 

reimbursement thereof 1 

Extension of war damage insurance to the Philippines ^ 

Application to Philippines of United States law regulatino ^ 
entry and departure of persons from the United States 

Special session of the Philippine Assembly _ 7 ^ 

Commonwealth bill requiring approval by the President of 75 

United States the 

Elections of November 11, 1941 - 76 

Appeals from decisions of the auditor general 7G 

Personnel of Commonwealth cabinet on Corregidor andin thZ 79 

United States ie 

V. Collaboration With Japanese Government 79 

VI. General Economic Conditions and Overseas Trade J J 79 

Overseas trade ~ VL~~ |4 

Exports of gold and silver | 7 

Predominance of trade with the United States ' £8 

Reexports H 2g 

Trade by countries ESj 

Balance of trade I 

Exports by commodities " ^2 

Imports by commodities *" W 

Transportation """"" ^ 7 

Shipping J00 

Agricultural production _ J 00 

M ineral production ~ ~ ** 1 02 

Forest production 1Q 2 

Manufacture and merchandising J03 

i'tt a Ecoil omic legislation I J03 

VH. Social Conditions ~~~~ 103 

Employment }04 

Fear of war J 04 

VTTT Pnr Wartime reaction "~ J04 

VIII. Pre-war Japanese Influence |04 

Land settlement in? 

Commercial penetration 1""" }^ 

Mineral product ion ^ \91 

SgSSiES5 - :::::::::::::: ~ $ 

ix. o^SSip^isszxss 'fssissz: :: ::::: :::: \i 

fcZ ~ •' ;;; 2 

- 112 



TABLE OF CONTENTS VII 

IX. Government Finance, Currency, and Banking — Continued. Pa s° 

Public debt 113 

Funds available to the Commonwealth Government upon 

rcoccupation of the Philippines 117 

Funds available for general governmental purposes 117 

Funds available for economic adjustment 119 

Currency reserves in the United States 119 

Funds available for public relief 119 

ArrENDicEs: 

A. Address of the High Commissioner at celebration of July 4, 1941 123 

B. Address of the High Commissioner at celebration of Loyalty Day 

by the University of the Philippines, College of Agriculture, 

October 10, 1941 _* 127 

C Address of the High Commissioner at dinner in his honor, October 

21, 1941 131 

D Address of the Hi^h Commissioner at Armistice Dav dinner, 

November 11, 1941 134 

E Radio broadcast to the United States bv the High Commissioner, 

December 13, 1941 . 137 

F. Address of the High Commissioner at the inauguration of President 

Quezon and Vice President Osmeua, December 30, 1941 138 

G. Radio broadcast by the High Commissioner, March 25, 1942 140 

H Address of the High Commissioner before the United China Relief 

Society, April 9, 1942 143 

I. Article bv the High Commissioner appearing in Life magazine, 

April 20, 1942 145 

J. Address of the High Commissioner before the American Newspaper 

Publishers Association, April 23, 1942 157 

K. Address of the High Commissioner at the annual meeting of the 

United States Chamber of Commerce, April 30, 1942..- 161 

L. Address of the High Commissioner at commencement exercises at 

Bucknell University, May 23, 1942 167 

M. Address of the High 'Commissioner before the Boston Chamber of 

Commerce, June 25, 1942 173 

N. Reports by Maj. C. Q. Marron, United States Army, relating to 

preparations for civilian defense in British Malaya and the 

Netherlands East Indies 1/9 

O. Report to the National Emergency Commission regarding reports 

by Major Marron - - - - - - - 199 

P. Proclamation of President of the United States, August 27, 1941, 

expanding scope of export control - — - 21 1 

Q. Press release of December 23, 1941, concerning the safekeeping of 

United States securities and currency 

R. Radio of December 24, 1941, from the Secretary of the Treasury 

delegating to the High Commissioner powers conferred upon the 

President of the United States by the First War Powers Act 214 

S. Radio of December 26, 1941, from the Secretary of the Treasury 

directing the High Commissioner to take custody of privately 

owned valuables and to destroy them if necessary to prevent 

them from falling into the hands of the enemy 216 

T. List of civilian internees in Manila --- 217 

U. Statement respecting communication with persons in occupied 

areas of the Philippines 226 

V. General ruling of the Treasury Department No. 10- A under 

Executive Order No. 8399, etc., concerning moratorium on 

obligations of Philippine companies in the United States 227 

W. Press release of Treasury Department announcing moratorium on 

obligations of Philippine companies in United States 228 



SIXTH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UNITED 
STATES HIGH COMMISSIONER TO THE PHILIP- 
PINE ISLANDS 



Washington, D. C, October 30, 194$. 
To the President and Congress of the United States. 

Sir: Pursuant to section 7 (4) of the act of Congress of March 24, 
1934, I have the honor to submit herewith the Sixth Annual Report 
of the United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 
The report covers the fiscal year ending June 30, 1942. Because of the 
destruction of confidential files and records in the High Commissioner's 
Office in Manila so as to prevent their falling into the hands of Japanese 
forces which entered the city on January 2, 1942, because of the in- 
accessibility in Washington, where this report was prepared, of all 
papers and documents remaining in the Philippines, and because of the 
lack due to the war of basic statistical data and reports, the present 
report can be at best but fragmentary and incomplete. It covers a 
tragic period, when the American and Philippine flags flying over 
Manila were pulled down and the Japanese flag flown in their place, 
when the High Commissioner in order to continue to function was 
compelled to remove with a skeleton staff to the fortress of Corregidor 
and 2 months thereafter to Washington. 

I. GENERAL STATEMENT 

The crucial and central event of the year under review was the 
invasion and capture of the Philippine Islands by Japanese military 
and naval forces. Compared to this everything else was of minor 
importance. During the course of the year the functions of the 
High Commissioner's Office, which are of a distinctly civilian character, 
came to assume more and more of military significance until finally 
direct control and administration by the military largely superseded 
the ordinary civilian functions of government. Nevertheless, the 
transition from civilian to military control was marked by no formal 
procedure; at no time was martial law declared in Manila nor did the 
United States find it necessary under the powers provided by section 
2 (a) (14) of the Independence Act to intervene by Presidential proc- 
famation. Up to the very end the Commonwealth Government con- 
tinued, within the limits fixed by the Independence Act, as amended, 
to carry the responsibility for the civil government of the islands. 

Because of the outstanding importance during the year of military 
and naval activities in the Philippines, a brief separate section of this 
report has been devoted specifically to these activities. 



2 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



MILITARY COMMAND 



The military defense of the Philippines at the opening of the fiscal 
year was under the direction of Maj. Gen. George Grunert in com- 
mand of the Philippine Department, General Grunert, an able and 
effective officer, pressed the work of preparation and reorganization 
in the I hihppinc Department and at the same time kept vigorously 
requesting additional supplies, ammunition, and equipment from 
Washington He held the deep loyalty and admiration of his troops 

On July 26, 1941, the President of the United States ordered X' 
incorporation of the Philippine armed forces into the United States 
Army and on the same day appointed Gen. Douglas Mac Arthur 
formerly Chief of Staff of the United States Army, the 'n Vn l 1 -v 
adviser to the Commonwealth Government, to be commam!?. *n 
chief of a new organization to be known as the United States L ! 
Forces m the Far East. As such, he assumed supreme com ( U • 
the Philippine Department and all United States troops £ M i V 
East. At a tune when Japanese war clouds were growino- om L„ i 
black the President thus pfaced in command of American fore a* n y 
East a man whose brilliant career placed him Lri the forefront <Vf n 
military leaders of the world. It was a significant move 2) f 
affected the entire military situation of the East. General Mac At l 
with characteristic vigor and initiative threw himself at once iru^ fY* 1 ' 
work of building up our defense forces and calling for add H ? 
material and supplies from Washington. At the same time h e KiS5j 
forward the work of inducting Philippine Army troops into u 
service of the United States Army, and giving them intensive trai * 
under regular United States Army officers. By the time war ferS^ 
out the bulk of Philippine reservists had been so inducted; and il° 
of these, together with the Philippine Scout troops, played a liero'^ 
part in the later defense of Bataan and Corregidor. lc 



NAVAL COMMAND 



The Asiatic Fleet customarily sails from Philippine waters 
North China waters in April of each year; but due to the uncerta f * 
of the international situation during 1941 the fleet remained i i 8 
Philippine area continuously until the outbreak of war in Deon** 1 ^ 

Admiral Thomas C. Hart, the able commander in chief nf? r ' 
United States Asiatic Fleet, who normally would have retir ] ■ 
July 1941, was continued in his assignment as commander mi - m 
and made his headquarters at Manila. n cln ^ 

Bear Admiral H. M. Bemis, who had assumed command on T 
ary 10, 1941, continued as commander of the sixteenth naval Hicf* 1 *~ 
Work was pushed on the expanding navy yard at Cavite on 11 • 
base at Sangley Point, and on the installations on CorrWirW ai T 
at Mariveles. In July the entrances to Manila and Subic IW ^ 
mined by the Army and the Navy, and at the same time tl Z VZ^i 
industrial establishment at Olongapo was abandoned and tL T 
dock Dewey moved to Mariveles. In November the Asiatir .ffi 
was remfoi-ced by 12 large submarines and a submarine tender 

£' % S - durin S the same month thc 2 battalions of 

the Fourth Marines which were then stationed at Shanghai were with 
drawn and landed at Olongapo. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



3 



Owing to ill health Admiral Bcmis was compelled to return to 
the United States and was succeeded by Rear Admiral F. W. Rockwell, 
who assumed command of the sixteenth naval district on November 7, 
1941. 

CIVILIAN WELFARE AND DEFENSE 

During the summer and fall of 1941 the High Commissioner's 
Office continued to do everything possible to coordinate and assist in 
the work of civilian welfare and defense. After the Commonwealth 
Government organized the Civilian Emergency Administration in ac- 
cordance with the recommendations of the Carswell report, the High 
Commissioner assigned his military liaison officer, Col. Robert Cars- 
well, and later Maj. Cyril Marron^ to attend the Civilian Emergency 
Administration meetings and help in the work. On September 7, 
1941, the High Commissioner sent Major Marron to British Malaya 
and the Netherlands East Indies to observe and report on the prepa- 
rations for civilian defense in those areas. Copies of the report pre- 
pared by Major Marron as a result of this trip were forwarded to 
President Quezon and to General MacArthur. Constant and inti- 
mate contacts with the Philippine Red Cross and other groups work- 
ing for civilian defense were maintained. In spite of considerable 
difficulties the work of civilian defense preparation was pushed for- 
ward unceasingly, and these months of planning and preparation 
served the civilian population in good stead when the war broke out 
in December. 

ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

Economic conditions in the Philippines for the calendar year 1941 
were good. By reason of price levels rather than quantities the total 
value of foreign trade, over 491,000,000 pesos for the first 9 months 
of the year, was well above the value for the entire previous year. 
Similar situations were reflected in the visible and invisible balances 
of trade which were in favor of the Philippines in comparatively largo 
amounts. The war in Europe and Asia forced more than usual 
dependence on the United States. Domestic trade was brisk and 
profitable on slightly inflated price levels. The Commonwealth Gov- 
ernment applied ceilings to necessities including foodstuffs, some cloth- 
ing items, and construction materials. 

Social conditions prior to the outbreak of hostilities showed an in- 
crease of unemployment in particular industries which were adversely 
affected by shortage in shipping tonnage and export control. Among 
the general population there were some fear of war and feeling of 
defenselessncss if war should come. However, the strain was well 
withstood and when war broke there was no disorganization of the 
social structure. Even after the defeat of their arms was evident, 
the people as a whole exhibited a fine degree of courage and willing- 
ness to do their best against unusual odds. 

SHORTAGE OF OFFICE SPACE RESULTING FROM INCREASED WORK AND 

ADDITIONAL STAFF 

During the period under review, the functions and personnel of the 
Office of the High Commissioner increased to such an extent that the 
offices in the High Commissioners building were not adequate to ac- 
commodate all of the staff, and space over the garage in the grounds 



4 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

was adapted for use by the Foreign Funds Control Division. During 
the summer the entire Export Control Division was transferred to 
space made available by the Commonwealth Government in the ( w 
£rn S p?S n ?i in thc P 0 ^. area a„d after the war began the Staff con- 
cerncu with the supervision of enemy properties was shifted to the 
Commonwealth Government's new Agriculture and Coerce til - 

the staff ° was occup cd h y lhc JaP«"cse, however, Ul of 

the staft, except those evacuated to Corregidor, were brought back to 
the office-residence budding of thc High Commissi,, ,„•,-. 

INCREASING TRADE RESTRICTIONS 

. The shadow of the international situation falling across H> n 1 
civdian activities of the High Commissioner's Office constant 1,aI 
darker and darker. One could sense the comin- storm bv {„ - y gTOW 

, trade Actions winch had to bTiSposed? 
unrestricted exports had been moving from the Un teclStnf 7.1" V Ca ly 
Phdippines; and there was a growing dange? tSbelSeS,? *? ' 'V 
tZ Hi,S' a n * Way - the Phui PP in ° ^ervoh c f gOOds^rCfe 0 ^ 

« • , gh Comm,ssloner > assisted by the appropriate Comm Ilc<> of 
officials, administered a program restricting the export of , mvci,llh 
other materials from the Philippines. Up until the Zthll V lV imd 
war between Russia and Germany, a watffil tye had S ^ 
open to prevent exports going from thc PhilippinVs to Si,.? , ke P* 
Japan, destined for transsliipment across Siberia into Gernin , nghai or 
tlus gap had been closed, our efforts were increasingly direct?^". After 
preventing shipments to Japan, occupied China; Indoch , ° Wi,t<l 
InaiJand wluch might assist or strengthen Japan in her wa n-' ^ 

■in the summer of 1941 control was markedly tightened Iv, U ° r t- 
extending thc lists of exports from the Phdippines for whir-fT £ re atly 
were required so as to include most goods. In addition, licen S o C ° nscs 
required for most financial transactions covering overseas shir> S W ° r ° 
except to friendly destinations. Except with reference to such nts 
tries no payments for exports or imports, no transfer of fu n C i° Un ~ 
securities abroad, no banking transactions based upon foreign ov ° r 
shipments, were permitted without license. By this means n 7 Se as 
unlimited power was exercised over exports; and as the weeks » "}\°st 
under instructions from Washington, we clamped down ti<>J t fc V, 
tighter upon commerce witli Japan. &nter and 

nv^If i SC i°, pe of foreign funds control in the Philippines was „ 
expanded by the inclusion on July 26, 1941 , of China and Japan^' 0 ^ 
Philin^H" countries. The greater part of the retail trad^ 0 ** 
imnnff U10S , 18 handlcd h y Chinpse an(l thc y cn ZW< oxtensiv 11 , 1 th ° 
Ser2t»- d , ex P° rt tradc Thc Japanese have importa, fTS? in 

nVnTlV"! 110 islands > the most outstanding being the abaca a? m *? s 

iffl pla ? tations of Davao. a Manila 

rhfSSiW tl \ e 0ffice of thc Hi £ h Commissioner took steps to nv 

e nTce si , Ca i busincsses conducted by Chinese and Japanese °/ npt 

■r u o J n y ,° f makin ^ r P eriodic re P° rtS 0f thoir bllsillcs s transact 0111 
ftS, ; I** «»?e number of businesses and individuals toS^' 
lS?5S lc? f u,atl ons were a considerable burden. This was i?V he 

/i: and Japanese, who did not uiKtend 

S JC;^ t0 familiarize themselves with the extreme y 3? 
cated freezing regulations and to file applications for licenses Tnd T P t 1_ 
pcnoaic reports m English of their business transactions. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



5 



From the standpoint of the economy of the Philippines as a whole, 
however, the freezing regulations did not constitute a seriously 
depressing factor. When they were extended to China and Japan, 
trade and, consequently, financial transactions with these countries 
constituted but a small part of the whole foreign trade of the Philip- 
pines. Such effect as they may have had was obscured by the stimu- 
lating results of the strong United States demand for important 
strategic materials and heavy expenditures by the United States for 
its armed forces in the Philippines. 

CENSUS OF A LI EX PROPERTY 

A major task of the High Commissioner's office during the several 
months preceding the outbreak of war was the taking of a census of 
alien property in the Philippines. One of the requirements of the 
foreign funds control regulations was the making of a detailed report 
of the property holdings of certain classes of aliens in American terri- 
tory, including the Philippines. This affected many thousands of 
individuals, mostly Chinese and Japanese, scattered throughout the 
Philippines. In the outlying Provinces, Commonwealth Government 
officials did much of the work of distributing forms and explaining the 
requirements of the law. As these returns were required to be made in 
English, assistance was secured from the local Chinese and Japanese 
consulates and from t rade and other associations throughout the islands 
in interpreting and assisting persons who did not know English. 
Unfortunately, the war broke out just as the property census was being 
completed and it was therefore impossible to forward the reports to 
Washington. Nevertheless, the information with respect to Japanese 
properties so obtained was of great value in the work of supervision 
over enemy properties after the outbreak of war. 

INTERNMENT OF ENEMY ALIENS 

On a number of occasions prior to the outbreak of war the High 
Commissioner had discussed with General Grunert and others the 
problem of interning enemy aliens and controlling enemy property 
in the event of war. Particular consideration had been given to the 
latter problem and communications concerning it had been exchanged 
with Washington. 

Immediately upon the outbreak of war, pursuant to authority re- 
ceived from Washington and in accordance with previous plans and 
carefully prepared lists, United States military authorities took steps 
to intern enemy aliens, and place under arrest such as were considered 
dangerous. In Manila the internees were placed in clubs and other 
suitable buildings, including the premises of Japanese business con- 
cerns, and also in a newly constructed prison compound at Muntinlupa 
in Rizal Province. They were fed by the military authorities. The 
internment of enemy aliens being regarded as a military rather than 
a civil function, the High Commissioner took no part in the intern- 
ment work other than to keep in touch with what was being done and 
to assure himself that the treatment accorded to enemy aliens was in 
every respect humane and in keeping with international usage. 
Through his Foreign Service officer he kept in touch with the 
Japanese consul, who assured him that he had no complaint of the 
treatment accorded to Japanese in Manila. 



6 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

CONTROL OF ENEMY PROPERTY 

Upon the outbreak of war it also became necessary to take im- 
mediate steps looking to the supervision of enemy-owned properties 
rending the enactment of legislation on the subject, the staff of the 
Foreign lunds Control Division of the High Commissioner's Office 
and certain others who could be made available were Sfened I to thU 
work. Arrangements were made for the requisitionS bv tlS 
2255? ™rgency Administration of all foodstuffs found tc Tbc one nv 

° v P n rty f, nd . f ? r thc , requisitioning by the United States niilita r n d 

stores ! U r iUCS ° f r SU n pHeS nCedcd by them 1,1 enen v- u ; , 
stores o! other properties. Arrangements and plans were also « , J 

SUf tak '. ,1 i s ovcr and ' where advisable, operating ene mv 0 £ „ 
factories ; and businesses; but before these plans could be consmnn V 
Manila fell into the hands of the Japanese. consummated 

THE DECEMBER DAYS 

„ -^. he December days following the outbreak of war were i i 

with activity. The members of the High Commissioner's °t n ff°T dc , d 
American and Filipino, worked day and night under liffivS'* b ° tb / 
trying conditions. Their outstanding loyalty and devotion * , and 
are unforgettable. Their work suffered constant interruption f° ty 
of an raids and bombings. Throwing themselves wholchcart* ?, ecau8e 
whatever task or emergency arose, working incessantly thm, \ mt ?, 
the daylight hours and doing guard duty on watches tlY, ? h aU 
night, always dependable and faithful and careless of Dersnn«i Us " lllc 
*X P«> v cd themselves through those gruelling days a st^r saf ety, 
of the best American traditions. ys a staf T Worthy 

After the outbreak of war, the High Commissioner confers i 
naval authorities in the endeavor to find some possible mear, Wltu 
evacuating civilians from Manila by sea; but the Japanese from *iP r 
outset held such mastery of both air and sea that the risk involv ] • 
attempting evacuation by sea was considerably greater than °tl * U 
involved in remaining in Manila. Since naval vessels were 3 ( i 
time engaged in intensive naval operations none could be son,, i , o 
convoy duty for the evacuation of civilians. The naval aut 51 • ■ 
were therefore firm in refusing to participate in any plan for tl^ nt ics 
ation by sea of civilians from Manila. ue evacu- 

Uuring the last 10 days of December it became more a™ i 
evident that Manila could not hold out much longer. I u JF? i m ° re 
part of December a radio message from Washington brouo-iV! latte i' 
iiom the President directing and authorizing the High Comm • Void 
to gather and take into his custody gold, valuables, securitie^T 11 ^ 
assets, and negotiable paper and the like, and, if in his jud«mS & nk 
essary to destroy these to prevent their falling into enem'T 'T" 
numht 1 " V Carry out this duty the High Commissioner SH&ft 
seeuwr ° f ageuts t0 assisfc in S atherm S together such valuaBSp ? 
HS 68 ' and du ™g the last few days before Manila fell mffife**? 
dollars worth of securities and other valuables were gaS 0 T-° 
£ the Subsequently taken over to Corregidor and Ce Lot 
wenlth rl gh Commissioner's possession. In all this work Common 
wealth Government officials gave splendid assistance and cooperation 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



7 



Instructions were issued by the High Commissioner to the staff to 
go through aU the office files and to remove therefrom all the secret or 
confidential documents so that these could be hurriedly burned or 
destroyed UO case of forced flight. This work was earned on during 
spare moments in daylight hours at times when no bombing raids were 
in progress. 

EVACUATION FROM MAXiLA 

On the morning of December 24, about 9:30 a. m., the High Com- 
missioner received an urgent telephone call from General Mac-Arthur 
savin"* that the fall of Manila was imminent and that he desired the 
1 1 ^^Commissioner and President Quezon to leave the city for Cor- 
regidor within 4 hours and to set up at Corregidor a temporary seat 
of government. He added that President Quezon had already prom- 
ised to o-o, that all arrangements had been made and that he himself 
with his staff would proceed to Corregidor that same evening. 

If the collapse of the civil government was to be avoided, no other 
practicable course seemed open. Accordingly, the High Commis- 
sioner agreed to move to Corregidor, gave instructions to Mr. Buss to 
destroy all papers and files which were confidential or which should 
not tail into enemy hands, and upon his departure issued the following 
press release: 

In order to field to the security of the government, I am today temporarily 
transferring toy office out of the city of Manila in accordance with General 
Mac Arthur's direction and in full agreement with the officials of the Common- 
wealth Government. ^ r , . ... _ 

At the same time a portion of mv staff will remain in Manila charged witn tnc 
duty of carrying on the functions of this office and looking after the welfare of all 
so far as military necessity permits. . J 

We will fight* to the last man. We know that our fight is America s tight. 
America's help is sure. There can be no shadow of a question as to ultimate 
victory. • 

General MaeArthur informed the High Commissioner that the ac- 
commodations at Corregidor were so very limited that he could take 
with him only nine of his staff, together with Mrs. Snyre and his 
1 5-year old son. Bill v. The executive assistant to the High Commis- 
sioner, Mr. (Maude Buss, requested that he be allowed to remain in 
Manila to look after the welfare and protection so far as possible of 
the civilian population of Manila and of the staff who remained. Mr. 
Buss had before the outbreak of the war been assigned to the task of 
Coordinating and assisting in the work of civilian welfare and defense. 
The High Commissioner thereupon placed Mr. Buss in charge of the 
Hiirh Commissioner's Office in Manila during the enforced absence of 
the High Commissioner, authorizing and directing him to take what- 
ever action was necessary to protect and care for the civilian popula- 
tion to look after the High Commissioner's staff remaining in Manila, 
and to care for the property and buildings of the Government. Ever 
since his arrival in Manila, Mr. Buss had proved himself a man of 
outstanding talents, ability, and loyalty; and particularly under the 
ordeal of the December days when all lived under constant and 
terrible strain Mr. Buss displayed the highest qualities of leadership 
and devotion to duty. 

The High Commissioner took with him to Corregidor, in addition 
to his wife and son, the following skeleton staff: Mr. Evett D. Hester, 
economic adviser; Mr. Woodbury Willoughby, financial expert; Mrs. 
Willoughby; Mr. Cabot Coville, Foreign Service officer; Mr. James 



8 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

J Saxon, Treasury expert; Mr. Robert HulTcut, economic assistant; 
Miss Anna Belle Newcomb, private secretary; Mrs. Jane! Whit,- 
offiter " ; Capt - WiUiam J - PriesfcIe y> military liaison 

«Jfe Hi f gh Comm ,i. s sioner also took with him to Co*re*idor the 

oiAM :3 ? P " n h' ° n thc afte ™oon of December 24, following a Jananese 

SndfeS SS T fc aroa ' thP H / gh to™**** wit h s ; i S3 

H J ^^^' ^^ above-mentioned members of his staff mel PxSidmt 
Chief Justice Jose Abaci Santos, Col. Manuel Emm hS 

luimel they hved for the next 2 months. 1 Mahnta 

ENTRANCE OF JAPANESE TROOPS INTO MANILA 

During the first week on Correeidor the HMi r^™., • ■ 
ffi^.^tl^ wi& Mauila by ' iT Hi i " S™i 0n, ' r U;,S 
t bed £. V n , ,ghtly b ° ats - 011 JalllIa, y 1 the H gh SS 01, °' by 
talked for the last time with Mr. Buss, who renSit.^l , lss,olu l ' 

3££i£ thC Staff Was WeU ancI that the cit^SaTaSff ^ 
Japanese were expected to enter on the morrow. 7 quict - The 

after ente / ed Manila on thc ni S ht of January 1-9 ~. 

alter all communication with Manila ceased. y *' ?Oere- 

INTERNMENT OF AMERICANS 

tn^r^ i? m Y- Intc "igcnce sources and from Filipinos who m»», 
in^ v . < h ° hnes ' il was leai »ed indirectly that after the St? 8 *^ 
off ' «* hC i C,ty a11 Americans were ordered to register and [ Sft 1 ** 
some S£SS& ? hose Americans who remained in Manila wel° 
la," e 2 T' in the buildings of Santo Tomas TJm ' *. ith 

skifts SfeW^. 8, ^ unded by s P acious grounS on i? sity ' 
been l?m h f ty . ? f Man 'la. It was unofficially reported that \i e °"t- 
gooS as ould l h ble b Manila and that in general tSaS^S^ 
motbeis 3 ;„ bc ,f p ?, c cd - Ifc was sported that elderly neL^ as 
Earlv n mal1 cImdren wcre all(wed t0 re main in theu-E i" 8 and 

infprnorl ot q„ 5 tlle names Ql over 1,500 Americans ronnrfn . \ a 
or n?aranteed n S T 0m ° 8 - Statin * ^ the list was in Do?2e^& ft 
aftefhSSn n W a , CCurate ' , th ? High Commissioner pubhsho f'-/ 
S V in 0 ;V a slimgton the latter part of March s " ed lfc 

Legat.on at Tokyo telegraphed that 36 men and women of tt Hfch 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



9 



Commissioner's Staff, including Mr. Buss, were interned at 911 Calle 
M. fit. del Pilar in Manila, and that all were in good health. 

MESSAGE FROM PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT 

On December 2S, 1941, the President sent a message to the people 
of the Philippine Islands. It was broadcast by short-wave radio 
direct to Manila where it was rcbroadcast and given to the press. 
The text of the message follows: 

The People of the Philippines: 

News of your gallant struggle against the Japanese aggressor has elicited the 
profound admiration of every American. As President of the United States, I 
know that I speak for all our people on this solemn occasion. 

The resources of the United States, of the British Kmpire, of the Netherlands 
Kast Indies, and of the Chinese Republic have been dedicated by their people 
to the utter and complete defeat of the Japanese war lords. In this great struggle 
of the Pacific the loyal Americans of the Philippine Islands are called upon to 
play a crucial role. 

They have played, and they arc playing tonight, their part, with the greatest 
gallantry. 

As President I wish to express to them my feeling of sincere admiration for the 
fight they arc now making. 

The people of the United States will never forget what the people of the Phil- 
ippine Islands are doing this day and will do in the days to come. 1 give to the 
people of the Philippines my solemn pledge that their freedom will be redeemed 
and their independence established ami protected* The entire resources, in men 
and in material, of the United States stand behind that pledge. 

It is not for me or for the people of (his country to tell you where your duty 
lies. We are engaged in a great and common cause. I count on every Philippine 
man, woman, and child to do his duty. We will do ours. 

president Quezon's second inauguration 

The end of December 1941 witnessed an impressive ceremony. 
Close to the entrance of Malinta Tunnel into which all could with- 
draw in case of bombing attack, before a small group of Filipinos 
and Americans, President Quezon and Vice President Osmena, on 
December 30, 1941, were inaugurated for their second terms of office, 
Secretary Santos administering the oath. President Quezon delivered 
a short inaugural address, followed by brief addresses by the High 
Commissioner and by General MaeArthur. (The High Commis- 
sioner's address is attached hereto as appendix F.) The High Com- 
missioner concluded with a special message from President Roosevelt. 
Seldom, if ever, has an inauguration taken place under such dramatic 
and impressive conditions. 

safekeeping of gold and securities 

During the 2 months spent on Corregidor constant radio com- 
munication was maintained witli Washington, One of the major 
tasks which occupied the time of the High Commissioner's stall' was 
the custody and careful inventorying of the valuables, currency, and 
Securities which had been gathered together in Manila before the 
capture of the city and brought to Corregidor. This work was 
placed under the charge of Mr. Woodbury AVilloughby, who with other 
members of the staff worked long hours under difficult and dangerous 
conditions, often under shellfire. Their accomplishment was out- 
standing, and all interested in these securities owe a debt of gratitude 
to him and to them. A more detailed description of this work is 
given in part III of this report. 

83018—43 2 



10 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



EVACUATION FROM CORREGIDOR OF PRESIDENT QUEZON AND OF THE 
HIGH COMMISSIONER AND HIS ST A B I ' 

About a week after their arrival at Corregidor General MacArthur 
called the High Commissioner and President Quezon into conference. 
The General stated that he had received a message from the President 
of the United States suggesting that if it could be accomplished with 
a reasonable degree of safety, President Roosevelt would be glad to 
have President Quezon and his family evacuated to the United States 
President Quezon, after careful consideration, informed General 
MacArthur and the High Commissioner that he would be dad to follow 
whatever course of action President Roosevelt desired : but since due 
to war conditions and to the state of President Quezon's' ho-i ill, V 
seemed doubtful whether an evacuation could be effected with s- r !k 
no steps toward evacuation were taken at that time ™ 

On or about the 10th of February, General MacArthur received « 
message from Presulent Roosevelt again suggesting President n,, ,„ » 
cvacuatjon. President Roosevelt slated that Fresh lent O u (inn ? 
his Cabinet would be honored and welcomed in the United Si /. *3 
evacuation seemed reasonably safe. The President also a tnt„?i ,i' 7 
evacuation plans should include the High Commissioner 1 -? fc 

aSvisahh.. MaeArto > P rovided thc Qeneral^dSS^ 

On February 11, 1942, the High Commissioner, in acknn^i i • 
the President's message relative to his evacuation, requeued Ti g,n - 
opportunity offered he be allowed to evacuate those of h\kJn if 
Corregidor with himself. staff on 

In a personal message to the High Commissioner, dated T?„i 
12, 1942 President Roosevelt said (paraphrased) : "If conditio, « ^ l! V' v 
it possible and there are sufficient accommodations vou J ul< ° 
evacuate your staff with you and your family." J sl >o u l cl 

President Quezon's health was so visibly sinking under thc hards!,- 
and difficult living conditions of tunnel life that he decided to <'o 
possible to one of the southern islands, such as Xcgros, and U K . rc J? ?» 
developments, perhaps accepting at a later date President RoosevMi > 
mvitation to come to the United States. Accordingly, President n s 
zon, accompanied by his wife and three children and bv Vice Pre ; i °~ 
Osmena, Chief Justice Santos, General Valdes, and other memlt nt 
Jus stafi, left Corregidor by submarine on the night of Februn r» 
A surface vessel preceded him carrying the balance of his staff 2 °; 
baggage. The party reached one of the southern islands earl* L d 
morning of 1< cbruary 22. The submarine then returned to Corrol; i 
for the High Commissioner and his party. 1 1 eglcl °r 

Colonel Koxas remained for a time at Corregidor to act as the 
sentative of the Commonwealth Government there. tUe ****** 

I nc HJgn Commissioner left Corregidor by submarine at 3 a m ~ 
the monung o February 24. With him, he took Mrs. gfeyi and*u£ 
son, Billy, and the following members of his staff: Air. Evctt D HesW 
economic adviser; \ b , Woodburv Willbughby, financial expert \& 
Woodbury Willoughby; Mr. Cabot Co ville, Foreign Service officer 
Mr. James J. Saxon, Treasury expert; Miss Anna Belle Newcomb £ I' 
vatc secretary; and Mrs. Janet VVTiite, clerk-stenographer. ' Pn ~ 

Before lea ving Man,h,, U. Comdr. T. C. Parker, Naval Aide to the 
High Commissioner, had been released so that he might engage in active 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH C0MMI6SI0OTVB 



11 



service and was assigned to the staff of Rear Admiral Frank Rockwell, 
commandant of the sixteenth naval district. Maj. Cyril Marron and 
Oapt; Williatil J. rriestley, military liaison officers to the High Com- 
missioner, had each been released at Corregidor by the High Commis- 
sioner so that they could take their places as they desired among the 
combat troops at the front. All three of these were outstanding officers 
and upon their loyal and splendid service the High Commissioner had 
leaned heavily. Lieutenant Commander Parker was sent to Australia 
in May and, subsequently, to the United States. The last word heard 
of Major Marron and Captain Priestley was that each was fighting at. 
the front in Bataan. Since the fall of Bataan it has been impossible 
to obtain news of either of them. 

Mr. Robert HufFcut was invited by the High Commissioner to 
accompany him to the United States, but Mr. HufFcut, competent, 
dependable, loyal, and unselfish as ever, asked to be allowed instead 
to enter the armed forces and remain at Corregidor. The High Com- 
missioner recommended him for a United Statec Army commission as 
second lieutenant, and the last word of him was of heroic work in the 
Army at Corregidor. No word of him has come since the fall of 
Corregidor. 

The High Commissioner with his party proceeded south by sub- 
marine some 3,000 miles through the Sulu and Celebes Seas, through 
Macassar Strait, through the Netherlands East Indies barrier at Sape 
Strait and on south off the western coast of Australia to Perth. The 
High Commissioner and his party desire in this public way to express 
their deep and abiding appreciation to the captain, officers, and crew 
of the submarine for their unfailing kindness, forbearance, and constant 
care during the perilous 13-day trip. Unforgettable was their quiet, 
unassuming heroism and cheerful courage in the face of most difficult 
living conditions and ever-present danger. 

Landfall was at dawn on March 9 in the harbor of Freemantle. As 
the fog lifted the sun broke out and shone on a sandy shore lined with 
pine trees. Rear Admiral Glassford met the High Commissioner and 
his party and took them to Perth. 

From there the High Commissioner returned by Navy bomber to the 
United States, flying from Perth to Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney 
and thence via the Fiji Islands to Honolulu. He reached Honolulu on 
March 16 and San Francisco on March 18, from where he traveled by 
train to Washington, arriving on the morning of March 23. The 
other members of the party returned to the United States by naval 
transport, reaching San Francisco early in April. 

President Quezon and his family, together with Vice President 
Osmena and members of his staff, flew by bomber in April from north- 
ern Mindanao to Australia, and from there proceeded by naval trans- 
port to San Francisco, where they arrived on May 8. The party 
crossed the continent by train and reached Washington on May 13. 
Included in President Quezon's party were his wife and three children, 
Vice President Sergio Osmena, Maj. Gen. Basilio J. Valdes, Secretary 
of National Defense for the Commonwealth, Col. Andres Soriano, 
Secretary of Finance for the Commonwealth, and Col. Manuel Nieto, 
aide to President Quezon. 



12 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION B R 



WORK IN WASHINGTON 



During the months of April, May, and Juno, the High Commis- 
sioner and his staff, with offices in the new Department of the Interior 
building, were at work on the problem of how to get relief to the 
civilian population interned in the Philippines. Frequent confer- 
ences were held with representatives of the Department of State the 
American Red Cross, the Provost Marshal General, and others in the 
effort to find ways and means (a) of establishing communication with 
internees in the Philippines and securing actual knowledge of their 
needs and the conditions under which they are living, (6) of sendin.r 
relief ship to Manila carrying food, medicines, and needed sunnlie* 
and A c ),. of arranging through exchange or otherwise for the evan-ii inn 
of civdians, particularly of sick people and of women and cl.il.l - . 
Due to the refusal of the Japanese Government up to the end of Yl , 
period under review to agree to the appointment of a represent •. I i f 
the International Red Cross in Manila, to a safe conduct f 01 1 l," 
ship sading from the United States to Manila or to an cvd, , 
prisoners embracing the repatriation of Americans from onn/n, i 
Amei ican territory, it proved impossible up to the end of fchi V , 
year to achieve any one of these three objectives. scal 
tt -r e i¥. lgh Commissioner, immediately upon liis arrival i» *.i 
United States, was flooded with hundreds of telegrams and 
inquiring as to the welfare of relatives and friends in the P 111, °- tcrs 
These inquiries kept pouring in in such quantities that upon tl L pi . nes ,- 
of his staff members from Corrcgidor, a "Welfare Sect o„^" nval 
organized under Mr. Hester to answer inquiries, to keep in to,,,.i ^ as 
those having Philippine connections, and to do everything nJ2S i Wlth 
help those in this countiy needing help and dependent upon It to 
from Manila. Valuable assistance in welfare work was renrW i 1 ^ 055 
Mrs. Janet 'White, Mrs. Leila M. Pool (Division of Tcrritowlo b F 




THE FALL OF B ATA AN AND CORREGIDOR 



Coircgidor was compelled to surrender on May 6. 8 Vas 
«n« Jf tl tcnse ° f Bataan and Corregidor will go down in hi*t„ 
SliSS S9 and hcroic ^Ptevs of human courage and e nd.,? y as 
AmlTT,l th0 , SC who there will never be forgotten endur "»ce. 
IfcfS-SSti!! memories that which will outlive them all ! * 
1 \ l0 T alty 10 America of the rank and file of m£LS f g 
en i inns and soldiers After 40 years of colonial adminSS, f 
• test came when Japanese troops, sweeping down from he ' ih 
mth superior numbers and equipment, sought to win the Filinmo^ 
oyer and force them to renounce friendship for America. The Fili 
pinos stood firm. Then gallant defense alongside the Americans of 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 13 

Bat ann and Corregidor and the unwavering loyally of the great rank 
and file of peasants, townspeople, and soldiers are a high tribute to the 
Filipino people and to the kind of colonial administration which 
America lias tried to give them during the past 40 years. 

RESIGNATION OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Upon his arrival in Washington on March 23, 1942, the High Com- 
missioner handed to the President the following letter: 

My Dear Mr. PRESIDENT: In view of the present military situation which has 
caused the work of the High Commissioner's Office in the Philippines to be largely 
Supplanted by military activity I should like to tender my resignation to take 
cllect at your pleasure. I shall never lose my deep interest in the Filipinos nor 
my hope* that our country may lead them wisely to the independence which we 
have promised them. Bu1 1 :un sure you will Understand my desire in view of 
present circumstances to serve our country in a more pressing and active work. 

With appreciation for the confidence which you have shown in me, believe me, 
Ever sincerelv yours, 

Francis B. SaTRB, 

The President on June 30, 1942, wrote to Mr. Sayre the following 
letter: 

Dear Frank: In accepting your resignation as the United States High Com- 
missioner to the Philippine Islands, effective as of today, I am complying with your 
urgent request which I have had before me for several weeks. 

Your release from this post is merely a commutation since wc have a mutual 
understanding that you are available for any call that is made on you in the war 
effort. 

It is unnecessary for me to tell you of my appreciation for the fine and loyal 
service you have rendered. 

I do want to see you just as soon as the pressure on me cases up a bit. 
Very sincerely yours, 

Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

Upon July 2, the day when he received the President s reply, Mr. 
Sayre issued the following press release: 

I am resigning from the office of United States High Commissioner to the 
Philippines with a sense of regret for I shall always have a deep interest in the 
Filipino people and in their struggle for independence. I shall always feel grateful 
for having had a small share in America's effort during over 40 years to impart to 
the Filipinos the great conceptions and ideals of liberty and democracy. It is 
only a question of time until Japanese uggressors will be driven out of the Philip- 
pines. As we look forward I hope that as a result of American and Filipino 
effort democracy and liberty have gained a foothold in Asia that will never be lost. 

THE TASK OF REHABILITATION AFTER THE WAH 

The Philippines will be faced with difficult problems of rehabilita- 
tion when the islands are reoccupied. It is not possible to anticipate 
in detail the situation which will be found at that time, but it may 
be confidently concluded that deterioration particularly of economic 
conditions will be extreme and that it will be necessary to turn every 
energy toward the reestablishment of normal social, economic, and 
financial conditions. 

The chief effect of the war upon the agricultural output of the 
Philippines will presumably be the sharp reduction of the sugar crop, 
which will in all probability have been reduced to approximately 
local requirements. Inasmuch as sugar was the industry most re- 
liant upon artificial protection in the American market and the one 
which recent Federal legislation has particularly sought to adjust to 
a position independent of trade preferences in the United States, it 



14 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 

may be found undesirable to reestablish in full the former volume of 
production for export to the United States. In all probability most 
gold and copper mines will have been flooded and their reconstruc- 
tion will require financing in amounts which cannot be covered by 
treasury reserves of many of the companies. Lumber and logging 
concessions and the offshore fisheries presumably will be bnind 
practically abandoned. For the fisheries, it will be "necessary to sup- 
ply vessels and train personnel in order rapidly to bring the" catch to 
normal market requirements. General import and export connec- 
tions with the United States will have been disorganized or dissolved 
Stocks of goods, including foodstuffs, will be sadly depleted or non- 
existent. 

At the time of rcoccupation serious and difficult questions must also 
be faced with regard to banks and to the local currency situation 
Fortunately, however, the Commonwealth Treasury will have a 
relatively large amount of funds which are now on deposit in the 
United States, including ample reserves upon which to base n now 
currency system. 11 

Conditions of law and order may be found to demand extensive 
policing of cities villages, and the countryside. There may be serimw 
social unrest and aggravation of criminal activities. The ft n n 2 
sum of criminals and the quieting of disorders will be costly 

Whatever the outcome of the independence program, a conshW«Kl« 
volume of legislation either by the United State! by the SI ,° 
™* lth Government or by both, will have to be framed andTnTY 

This will Dresnmnhlv inr- nrln c „pK »yU««J,^ ~„ ~ U " U c "acted. 



ment ot industrial and agricultural enterprises; an act for a Tr 
operation loan; an act for a public-works reconstruction loan- Sl } ry 
special act for the immediate support of schools and health tti • a 
The rehabilitation of the Philippines will not be an easy fcSb 10 ?? 
meeting it the American people will want to give in the mn «T Iu 
structive form possible their aid and assistance to the Mining co , n ~ 
because of the fact that American effort in the Philinn i 1 P eo P le > 
past 40 years is at stake, because of the brave loyalty of th* v# ^ he 
people to America in the present crisis, and because of the mlL U J pin ° 
importance of building for future stability in the Pacific. ° nal 

H. MILITARY AND NAVAL ACTIVITIES AND CIVILIAN DEFENSE 

MILITARY DEVELOPMENTS 




Manila date), Preside* WvXoriere^ & 
Philippine armed forces m the United States Army and Anointed 
Gen. Douglas MacArthur as commander of the United Statci Tmy 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



15 



forces in the Far East. Shortly after General MacArthur received 
this appointment his headquarters issued the following statement: 

The general plan for the integration of all the armed forces in the Philippines 
has been formulated bj* General MacArthur. It envisions a progressive incor- 
poration of the reserve divisions of the Philippine Army into the service of tiie 
United States. It comprehends eventually all elements of the Philippine Army, 
but until an actual outbreak of hostilities will not include these echelons which 
are engaged in the normal yearly training activities. This will enable the Philip- 
pine Army to continue its uniform development in accordance with the national 
defense program of the Commonwealth and at the same time muster for prompt 
American Army training and service the other components of the Common- 
wealth's forces.* The constabulary will not be taken over with the exception of 
certain selected elements. 

The plan envisions an immediate construction program at strategic localities 
to house the thousands of reservists involved as well as the intensive development 
of new air fields for the rapidly expanding air forces. All Philippine elements 
which come under American control will maintain their national integrity. They 
will retain their own uniforms, their own scale of pay, their own promotion list, 
their own ration, and their own code of military law. Their training, however, 
will be under the immediate direction of the officers of the American Army. ^ On 
muster into the American service they will be paid and supplied from American 
sources. The class of trainees whose induction was suspended in July is expected 
to be called in January, from which time the normal course of Philippine Army 
training will continue, barring contingencies. 

The plan is a most comprehensive and complete one and will go into effect 
immediately. Its details involve military information which cannot be made 
public and the press has been requested not to reveal numbers, localities, and 
other data involving military secrecy. However, information on general progress 
will be reported together with all details which are not regarded as confidential. 

The program has been heartily endorsed by President Quezon and is expected 
to effectuate in a most comprehensive manner the purposes underlying President 
Roosevelt's proclamation. 

Steps were taken immediately to call into service reservists and to 
train them, as well as Philippine troops on active service, as rapidly 
as possible. On August 2 an order was issued calling to duty 1 regi- 
ment of reservists from each of the 10 military districts plus the 
personnel of the training cadres from the remaining units of 1 division 
in each of the 10 military districts. On August 15, following a brief 
ceremony, the Philippine Army Air Corps, involving 6 squadrons and 
some 500 officers and men, was incorporated into the American forces. 
Reservists not included in the first call were subsequently called up as 
fast as quarters and training facilities were ready and by December 
1941 most qualified reservists had been inducted into the United States 
Army. Considerable reinforcements, both men and material/ were 
received from the United States and military installations in the 
islands were improved. Notable increases were made in the air force 
and ground aviation facilities. 

The calling into the service of the armed forces of the United States 
of the Commonwealth government military forces necessitated the 
assumption by the United States of expenses previously borne by 
the Commonwealth. At the same time, the expenses of our military 
establishment in the Philippines were being augmented by the in- 
creased number of American troops in the islands. To finance the 
calling of Philippine troops into the service of the United States 
armed forces and to maintain them until regular appropriations had 
been made, the President of the United States advanced $15,000,000 
from his emergency fund. 1 In December 1941 2 Congress appro- 

1 Hearings before the subcommittee of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 
77th Cong., 1st sess., on third supplemental national defense appropriation bill for 1943 ffl R fil. r A». pt, 2, 
pp. 47 and 53. 

2 Public Law 353, 77th Cons., eh. 501, 1st sess 



16 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

priated $269,000,000 "for all expenses necessary for thr mobilization, 
operation, and maintenance of the Army of the Philippines, ineludin- 
expenses connected with calling into the service of the armed force! 
of the United States the organized military forces of the GovernmerS 
of the Commonwealth of the Philippines' * * * of which not to 
exceed 815,000,000 may be restored to the Emergency Fund for the 
President * * * in reimbursement of a like amount advanced 
therefrom * * *.» This appropriation was to remain available 
until June 30, 1943. 

Hostilities in the Philippines were opened with bombing attacks 
by Japanese planes at Malalag in Davao Gulf shortly after day breal 
on .December 8 (Manila time). On the same morning attacks were 
made upon airfields in northern Luzon— Iba, Clark, and Tuguel 
garao— and many planes were destroyed on the ground. Shortly 
thereafter heavy bombing attacks were made on airfields near Manila 
especially Nichols Field, and were repeated frecau 'lit iv as loner as 
these fields were used by our Air Force 

^?u eSe - tr0 ? 1 ?r W( ' rerc P 01 ' tcd t0 ^ve landed in northern Luzon 
? f pam and V igan on December 10 and at the southern tip of the 

SraJd^KnfcW ° n the ^flowing <I«.V. These troops advanced 
S,Sr^ d Wer , C assisted b 7 additional troops landed several 
She st '° f \f he . northwest part of Luzon and on the east, coast, 
also wi lS JS ' # Anti . m °™« a "d Mauban. Japanese troops 
troops which fil ? r Da ) ra ° in southern Mindanao. The Japanese 

tio7and soor ™ > — * LegaSpi puslu ' d north ' mcctin * litfclc °PP osi " 
No iaSe concemS "N** the troops landed at Antimonan, 

Japanele force? 85™? °[ U l Uted Stat ? s - fcroo P 8 T were sent against 
because of thn ,1™ fi at the extremities of Luzon presumably 
Ipanese t room > rCr , tl , mt thc y mi * ht be cut ofF and surrounded by 
Japanese wireThlh ndcd V Manila - Ifc is bdieved that the 
the Philinnine Jl ■ D!c a »nelds m occupied areas of Luzon early in 

Unit IS ^''nipaign. 
I^/feSfctoSSS^' WWch Were concentrated in the central part of 
Lingayen Gulf S .l ei V emy on a lar g° scale north of Manila near 
After some i tial ^ the heaviest attack by the enemy developed, 
air, were obwj W our troops, being without control of the 
United States for^ «« A b -? w *?ward Manila - Simultaneously, 
meeting our iiorfW« e of MamIa retired northward, ultimately 
drawingtoBat'i- m T°T Sn ? arSan Fernan do, Pampanga, and with- 
and stocked With LvS"? Peninsula had long before been prepared 
joining of the , n P P for a last stand. Maneuvers leading to the 
Bataan wereconmlo) T* nnd southcrn forccs and their retreat to 
is believed to h,^ 0 f , K ood order and the most essential equipment 

Beginning Dec • reached the peninsula. 
untiLsevorai davs^fV o. thc Manda area was bombed frequently 
bv davlHit and w«i r Um stmas. Most' of the bombing was done 

afrfieS), though ci t , ,rPC ^ d al Ni, ' h0,s F \ dd (Unitc(1 Statcs A »»y 
property On Doco'i, ' damage was done to nearby residential 
and the industrial r>Jli.v\ 10 ' tllc naval base at Cavite was bombed 
SoSs Afc^ thee almost wholly destroyed. On 
and after Christmas bomlST and l sl,1 P s ^ the harbor were bombed 
fitv nenr the m«™ D0 f m , s were dropped in the congested Walled 

center of Umih Th! S c Pasi s Rivo1 ' which flows throu " h th * 
centei 01 Manila. lh e Commonwealth Treasury was struck and 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



17 



other properties damaged or destroyed. The last bombings occurred 
lifter Manila had been declared an open city and evacuated by United 
Smtes troops. 

During January our forces on Bataan sustained heavy attacks and 
at one time were obliged to fall back a considerable distance in order 
to shorten their lines. For the most part, however, Japanese attacks 
were repulsed and heavy losses were inflicted upon the enemy. The 
Japanese had undisputed control of the air, our few pursuit planes 
being conserved chiefly for essential reconnaissance and other highly 
important tasks. Antiaircraft guns, especially on Corregidor, were 
reported to be unusually effective in destroying enemy planes. 

A heroic and memorable defense by our forces on Bataan against 
repeated attacks by fresh Japanese troops supported by airplanes 
continued throughout February and March. It was not until April 
9, after our troops had become greatly weakened by casualties, disease, 
undernourishment, and fatigue, that the Japanese were finally able 
to- break through our lines and force the capitulation of Bataan. 
The island forts at the entrance of Manila Bay, that is, Fort Mills 
(Corregidor), Fort Hughes, Fort Frank, and Fort Drum, held out 
nearly a month longer against a vicious cross fire of artillery from 
both shores and bombardment from the air and finally capitulated 
on May 6, ending effective resistance in the Philippines. 

Reports from islands of the Philippines other than Luzon have been 
very meager. Enemy troops were landed near Davao soon after 
the war began. It is known that they weir engaged by advance 
elements of our One-hundred and First Division, but were successful 
in taking the city in a short time, lloilo City is reported to have 
been bombed on December IS, but no landing in force appears to have 
been made on the island until April 10. The city of Cebu is reported 
to have been bombed several days after the war began but was not 
subjected to determined attack mil i I April when it was captured by the 
enemy. Previously, on January 2, Japanese troops had made a suc- 
cessful landing at Jolo and on March 3 at Zamboanga. On March * , 
Japanese troops are repotted to have landed on Mindanao Island and 
on March 24 at Romblon. Enemy forces landed on Panay Island at 
lloilo and Capiz on April 1G and at San Jose de Buenavista on April 20. 

NAVAL ACTIVITIES 

The following brief statement of United States naval activities in 
the Philippines leading up to the outbreak of tin* war in December is 
arranged chronologically by months. 

Juiij 1941. — Early in the month the commander in chief of the 
Asiatic Fleet moved his command post from the flagship Houston, to 
rent od space in the Marsman Building on the Manila waterfront. 
The commander in chiefs move from shipboard to a shore command 
post gave him greater freedom in the use of radio communications for 
purpose of strategic command of separated forces and also greatly 
improved the possibilities of cooperation with prospective allies, Ita 
addition, the location in Manila facilitated conferences with the 
United States High Commissoner and with the United States Army. 

The Asiatic Fleet had for some time been mostly in the southern 
part of the Philippine Islands. From July 5 onward, this became 
the fleet's established practice and its seagoing ships were, as a rule, 
in Manila Bay only for brief periods in order to replenish supplies. 



18 REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 

Ships needing longer periods at Cavite for maintenance and repairs 
visted that establishment, or the one at Olongapo, as necessary to 
accomplish same; but the effort was to keep the number so cn?a?e(l 
at a minimum. 0 0 

During the latter part of July the Army and the Navy beean 
laying mines for denying the entrance to Manila and Subie Bays 
Subic Bay had be^n a "closed harbor" for many years and this "t'en 
closed it physically except for one narrow entrance whiH sn . 
Navy ships only could use. The mine fields at the entranc o 
Manila Bay were however, so laid that all shipping could com nue 
they navigation of the entrance but only under nival super I 
Such supervision, and patrol off the. mine fields to keen S, 5 ^ 
from being blown up, consumed much effort on the part of U ^ fi 
ships of the Asiatic Fleet over a long period. Concurrent v • , T " 
mining, Olongapo was abandoned as far as the industria f ?2 1 V 
ment was concerned and the drydock, Dewey, was moved to Mariw" 
Whereat continued to operate with its usual personnel , ,; f'^ 
from Olongapo. The *avy continued to exercise juris • H " lU ' d 
the arge Navy reservation at Olongapo and its 11,000 inlmb ,/ ,V,T 

The federal Government arranged during the period to S 
service four Danish freighters which had been laid up i n th P. 
pines for over a year; they were put into operation unoer 1 e U !' llp " 
ment of the American President Lines In «nag c . 

August 1941.— During this period the work of establishing the Nr 
section base at Manveles began progressing at a higher rate * - v 
was also the case with important underground naval proi'ect cl * 
Corrcgidor. The contractor for the rather extensive naval a ?r k ° n 
on bangley Point also began to show more rapid progress . thi« ° s o 
however, was still so incomplete that the new base could not K ° rl <, 
when the war begun). The Navy's industrial establishment Us cd 
Pbdippmes had by this time worked up to the full capaeitl ln . 
plant and was employing more men than ever before y °* the 

September 1941. —The Navy Department began sending 
escorts with Army transport and certain important mere », F?»er 
on their voyages between Hawaii and Manila. The Ash!? ij'ips 
was locally quite active toward keeping all fuel tanka-o ^^et 
that which was commercially owned as full as possibfr ' ^S^ding 
ticularly applied to the tankage around Manila Bav $ lls Par- 

flSes'oiik no tit Pro"S°n a C H tain FT"? Snffl* 
to make up some arrears o t S • , th ° son ^.°Z lsla ^d ports and 
distribution of muniS s °^ a " ^? nce 8? ^ %** J «>«nJS and 
air patrols, pntiaSS?^ -SS^t Dunn S J he month thfiW? 
considerably. The S&rSirSE 7 W*> V T * «.ic Kd 
been employed ertfi^gftg gjfft "J**,** « long time had 
largely discontinued tha KcnkSfiS' llfl , d ^ this ti2S 
their efforts primarily SS*?™? ^ activity and Wei* devoS 

sir ess- A3 :«s^ toSS 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 19 

Admiral Harold M. Bemis as commandant of the Sixteenth Naval 
District. Owing to ill health Admiral Bemis was obliged to return 
to the United States. On November S authority was received to 
withdraw the Navy gunboats and the Marines from China. The two 
battalions of the Fourth Marines were withdrawn from Shanghai 
and were landed at Olongapo late in the month. The 200 Marine 
and Navy personnel in north China were not gotten out because time 
did not suffice before hostilities began. At the end of the month the 
only three gunboats which could possibly make the voyage from China 
to Manila were en route to that point. Early in the month the removal 
of explosives from the very dangerous magazines at Cavite was taken 
in hand and a great mass of it, with other inflammables, was out by 
the end of the month. It was necessary to store most of tins material 
in open dumps on the beach a few miles from Cavite. Most of the 
Navy's gasoline supply, including a large quantitv- of aviation gasoline, 
was in drums of which there were several thousand. Those drums 
were rather widely dispersed at various points in central Luzon but 
it was necessary to retain a considerable supply on Sangley Point. 
On November 24 the commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet directed 
a movement of Ins forces which disposed all cruisers, most of the 
destroyers, and some of the auxiliaries to the southward and in 
various ports, including Balikpapan and Tarakan. 

December 1941. — During the first week of the month units of the 
fleet still present in Luzon waters were kept widely dispersed and 
preparations, particularly as regards dispatching the remainder of 
the auxiliaries to tho southward, were pressed. Information of the 
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor was received at 3 a. m. on December 
8 (actually only a few minutes after the attack on Pearl Harbor began). 
Such information was transmitted to all concerned with directives as 
regards the Asiatic Fleet. Tho first attack on the Philippines was at 
Malalag in Davao Gulf, at early daybreak that morning. The attack 
was upon a small patrol plane unit: The tender and two of the Planes 
escaped from the attack which came in with considerable power, botn 
in the planes and in surface ships, but two of the patrol planes were 
lost. The submarines, which constituted the most powerful arm oi 
the Asiatic Fleet, sailed for their assigned initial deployment stations 
during December S. Some of the remaining fleet auxdmries sailed lor 
the south that same night under proper escort. The industrial estab- 
lishment, Cavite, was almost wholly destroyed by Japanese planes 
which attacked with bombs from high altitude at about noon on 
December 10. It was by then quite evident that the Japanese had 
control of the air over northern and central Luzon and the adjacent 
waters. By this tune Manila Bay had become very full of merchant 
ships many of which were strangers to the port. Their masters and 
agents were advised that all such ships would eventually be destroyed 
or captured if they remained in the bay and were advised to escape 
to the southward, sailing immediately after dark, as soon as possible. 
The remaining auxiliaries and certain small craft of the fleet which the 
commander in chief of the Asiatic Fleet decided could be spared, sailed 
that same night as did certain of the merchant ships. Eventually 
most of them departed and all but one, which was burned by one 
Japanese plane, succeeded in reaching ports on the Malay Barrier, 
from which they were given further directions. The fleet's surface 
ships covered these movements in part but they were made without 
assembling into convoys with regular escort. 



20 REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

On December 15, following a movement out of Luzon by all of 
*i 4™??' S . lons " range Plants, the fleet's palm! win- withdrew* from 
tne lhihppmcs and went south for further operations with all if* 
tenders and the remaining planes. Concurrently the commander in 

hf^/rf 110 !^" FlftC V VaS di8 P'\l<-'»'W « -nsiderabl, p , o" 
his staff to Java because the v were there required to handle t u con- 
siderable portion of the fleet which was in or nearin- th waters 
On December 19 Sangloy Point was in turn ruined Cv , „ ,] 
opposed bomb attack and the dangers to shins even m< 
marines in Manila Bay, had become rathe? nigh By fc^fS 
attempts to use the facflitics of Cavitc, Sangley Point etc b.i 
practically abandoned and the fleet's loca efcmSu uiro „*„ (1 . hcen 
proceeding to Marivclcs and Corregidor U 11,1 m or 

Kt? t n D ^ e l m J cr 24 .- Admiral Hart was informed that tlm TT, , 
States High Commissioner, the Philippine Common ]t\ V LmU ' tl 
ment, and the general headquarters of the United Stat «, ^°, ve ^ 
m the Far East were moving to Corregido^ -Sat d™ ^ TfT' f °, r ?? 
Manila was to be declared an open cfty. The fl kJ?' if . wl,u h 
proceeded to abandon the Manila harbor water front wL lmcf k atol y 
used by the one remaining submarine tender in servicing „,u 03 b . em S 
t C a A l m ? al - Hart turned the command of all naval uniu I. 1 * ,nes > 
in the Philippines, including the Fourth Marine ReirimSJ mamin S 
Rear Admiral Rockwell on December 25. Admiral HiT 1 ° Vcr to 
Bay early the following morning. aifc left Manila 

CIVILIAN WELFARE AND DEFENSE 

For more than a year preceding the war the High Commi • 
Office was doing everything possible to push and stimulate i 8101 ^'^ 
of civilian welfare and defense. (See Fifth Annual Report nf ? T w <*k 
btates High Commissioner, pp. 12-16.) an ited 

Under the provisions of the Philippine Independence Act 
general jurisdiction over matters pertaining to civilian w„ir 1 »34 
vested in th,. Commonwealth Government; and recognizing . was 
!L f . C( K-? 1,10 Pt %Pi»e National Assembly, the duty of£, that > as 
mg inhabitants against hunger, pestilence, lawlessness V"' 1 - 1 ' <1- 
dangers which the nature of modern warfare mtSPStJ**. other 
Oovernmeiit of the Commonwealth, President Quezon I Y Uh the 



pointed on July 12 1941 the ho^i «f ^/n- -r » ' who was ap- 
»cH, »»■ ttgb Commission,-,-'* s,nior mili,,,,,- EB*2fi2^& 



KEPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



21 



Major Marron, who succeeded Colonel Carswcll, wore in constant at- 
tendance upon the meetings of the C. E. A., stimulating and assisting 
in the work wherever possible and devoting to it the major part of 
their time. At the same time Mr. Claude Buss, Executive Assistant 
to the High Commissioner, was working with the Philippine Red 
Cross and other groups engaged in civilian defense work. 

On September 7 the High Commissioner sent Major Marron to 
British Malaya and the Netherlands East Indies to observe and 
report back to him on the civilian welfare activities in those places. 
As a result of this trip Major Marron after his return prepared an 
excellent report, copies of which were given to President Quezon 
and to General MacArthur. (Sec appendix N). This report helped 
to give new impetus and direction to the work of the C. E. A. (For 
a copy of the report which the National Emergency Commission issued 
with respect to Major Marron 's report, see Appendix O.) 

In addition to the C. E. A. other groups were also at work, acting 
in cooperation with the C. E. A., on problems of civilian welfare and 
defense. The Philippine Red Cross entered into extensive plans and 
preparations directed particularly to general instruction in first-aid 
work and to the evacuation of civilians from danger zones in Manila 
to districts prepared to receive them. An American Committee, and 
committees for other national groups, also actively participated in 
preparations for civilian defense work. The High Commissioner and 
members of his staff held constant meetings with these various groups 
seeking to assist and coordinate the work wherever possible. 

The low-lying character of most of the areas in and around Manila 
made the building of underground bomb-proof shelters generally 
impracticable. There was not a sufficient quantity of gas masks for 
general civilian use. Evacuation problems were rendered exceedingly 
difficult by the impossibility of knowing from which direction the 
enemy would come. For instance, immediately prior to the outbreak 
of the war, Baguio had been chosen as one of the evacuation centers; 
yet Baguio was bombed the first day of the war. Similarly, Pag- 
sanjan, which had been chosen by the Red Cross as an important 
evacuation center, later proved to be in the line of enemy advance 
from the southeast. The result was inescapable uncertainty and 
considerable confusion on the part of the general public. 

Nevertheless, the work of civilian defense was constantly carried on 
and pushed forward. Practice black-outs were instituted, the first 
one being held in the Manila area on July 10. Air-raid alarm systems 
were set up and air-raid warning services were organized. Rehearsal 
evacuations were carried out. Men and women were enrolled for 
emergency services. Volunteer guards were orgamzed. Neighbor- 
hood district meetings were held to plan and prepare for emergency 
needs. First-aid stations were set up and hospital units organized. 
Large-scale evacuation transport and care were planned and prepared 
for. Special lists were tabulated of Americans and others qualified for 
particular work; and the preparation of a census of food and other 
necessary supplies was undertaken. 

This work of preparation and planning stood in good stead when 
war finally came. Large numbers of civilians were evacuated from 
the more dangerous zones of Manila. During the time that Manila 
was being bombed, civilian welfare work was intensified and much 
suffering thereby avoided. Particularly active among the unofficial 



22 



REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



groups was the American committee, of which Mr. Fred Si evens W;> 
chairman and Mr. Stanley Turner, executive secretary. This ctiifl 
mittee, in close cooperation with the High Commissioner's Offices 
worked incessantly, between and during bombing raids, for t ho wel- 
fare and protection of Americans living in Manila. Efforts v., 
directed toward insuring adequate food supplies for the coniini 
months, making preparations for emergency first aid ami hospitaliza- 
tion cases, organizing volunteer groups for special services, and tl 
like. 

Duru 1 >g the bombing it was constantly feared that the Japan 
w u 1 nonmi litary areas, such as the Tondo district or the 

VValied City, where the overcrowded, flimsy buildings and the lack 
ot sufficient air-raid shelters would have resulted in indescribable 
tragedy had a heavy attack been directed against them. FortW 
nately, m the main the Japanese directed their bombing attacks againsl 
military objectives, such as Nichols Field and the port area; and t! 
destruction laU nonmuitar y P arts of the city " sun " crctI no wholesal 

n ^n lfc H r ci 7 uian suffering and destruction of civilian properties weit 
tlTnt ;t b y declaring Manila an open city. When it became evident 
5S*5J would be "^Possible to prevent Manila falling into the hands 
north lliT 36 attacking forces, then approaching from both tl 
loss of lif Z SOUth ' in order to s P arG needless civilian suffering an 
announ^ri'ti e . ne ^ al MacArthur declared Manila an open city and 
from and Z ( al military and naval forces had been removed then 
Althoueh thn t there fore no longer constituted a military objective, 
the whole tf,^i Panese did some bombing after this declaration, on 
and destriwi P , Was successful and Manila was spared the atrocities 
ance and iSSl ■ i lch ofton accompany the desperate last-stand resist- 
ing to report, fi ^ 8 T tmg dwm S the capture of a capital city Accord- 
loss of life he Japanese entry into Manila was without wholesale 

The ° FPICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

functfonfof 1941 witnessed a substantial expansion of the 

growing empr^L lce of the High Commissioner. As a result of the 
of the work flh? Cy ^ nd ' subsequently, of war conditions, the nature 
years. Even ged ra dically from what it had been in previous 
the High Com™; 6 the war broke out, the major part of the time ot 
connected diriwi ner and many of his staff was devoted to work 
expert and thl » 0r directly with the emergency. The financial 
of senior advis^ 01 ^ 0 adviser, whose functions normally are those 
of interest, camr/J^* 1 Aspect to policies falling within their spheres 
sions, supervising 1 " 6 and ™ore to function as heads of expanded divi- 
Control, involvfZ gr , ams such as Foreign Funds Control, and Export 
The United Stnt«? F ela tively heavy administrative responsibilities 
High Commission!,, i my lia ison officers detailed to the staff of the 
with civilian defend , oted their time largely to matters connected 
other senior officers M similar changes occurred m the functions ot 

An important ml m Hi gu Commissioner's staff, 
nornic Tntrofe notnK the of the office was concerned with eco- 
TliTLm! i!' ^ i ! y ^eign funds control and export control, 
chieflv Z nvn^H h fK ad been iSituted by the United States in 1040. 
cnieny to protect the interests of nationals of countries invaded bj 
Lrermany and to prevent Germany from disposing of quick assets 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS 



23 



looted from occupied regions, had been vastly extended in scope and 
toward the end of 1941 was used as an aggressive weapon of economic 
warfare to prevent, wherever possible, transactions advantageous to 
Axis powers and correspondingly disadvantageous to the United States 
and friendly powers. Similarly, export control, which originally had 
been instituted in a limited degree for the purpose of enforcing the 
neutrality laws of the United States, had, by the latter part of 1941, 
become a comprehensive system of direct control of exports for the 
purpose of conserving supplies of strategic materials as well as prevent- 
ing them from reaching unfriendly countries. 

The two programs were closely coordinated with each other and 
with similar programs administered by nearby British and Nether- 
lands authorities. The Office of the High Commissioner exchanged 
information freely and maintained an effective liaison with other 
governmental authorities which concerned themselves with the activ- 
ities of nationals of unfriendly powers and others whose activities were 
harmful to the interests of the United States. 

In the Philippines, foreign-funds control and export control were 
increasingly directed toward preventing financial transactions and 
shipments to Japan, occupied China, Indochina, and Thailand 
which might assist or strengthen Japan in her war effort. Immedi- 
ately upon the extension of export control to the Philippines, export 
of strategic materials needed by the United States, such as high-grade 
chrome and manganese ores, copper and cordage grades of abaca, 
were shut off entirely. A quota was placed upon exports of iron ore. 
As the situation became more critical in the summer of 1941 the num- 
ber of articles subject to export control was greatly expanded and 
exports to Japan and Japanese-controlled territory restricted. As 
exports were curtailed, the number of ships plying between Philippine 
and Japanese ports was reduced until only an occasional Japanese 
ship stopped in the Philippines to take on Japanese passengers, waste- 
grade abaca, and small quantities of other goods of little importance. 
Ships were also sent to get iron ore within the limits of the quota for 
export to Japan. 

FOREIGN FUNDS CONTROL 

In the Fourth and Fifth Reports of the High Commissioner the 
initation of foreign-funds control in the Philippines and its administra- 
tion up to the end of the fiscal year 1941 are described in some detail. 
It was pointed out that this work was assuming increasing importance 
and, with the inclusion in June of Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and 
Switzerland and 11 other countries among those subject to control, was 
greatly expanded in scope. 

Freezing of Chinese and Japanese assets. — In the second half of 1941, 
foreign funds control became one of the major functions of the High 
Commissioner's Office. On July 26, 1941, control was enormously 
enlarged by the blocking of China and Japan. Subsequently, 
Thailand, Hong Kong, and all other invaded areas, eventually 
including the Philippines, were blocked. 

The greator part of the foreign-funds control work during the latter 
months of 1941 was concerned with Chinese and Japanese business. 
Chinese merchants control the greater part of the retail trade in the 
Philippines and they engage in export and import trade, as well as 
other businesses, extensively. A large volume of remittances has for 



24 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



" _ ~1 . — * "ui|<|«ni;3 illl- I (1.1 I 1 \ OJ \ 

large and include extensive abaca plantations in Mindanao, a Inr«*e 
brewery near Manila, two banks in Manila, lumber concessions In 
various regions and small factories and stores in Manila and rise- 
where. Before the war Japanese firms exported abaca, lumber and 
n-on and other ores on a large scale and imported nuinv Japanese 
products for sale in the Philippines. 

Method oj enforcement oj Foreign Funds Control.— An important part 
of thel<oreign Funds Control work of the office consisted of explaining 
the freezing regulations to those interested and scorn- thai thai 
were obeyed. Most of the action taken by the United Si a tea Treasury 
Department to implement the so-called freezing order (\<\- < 
Order 8389) was applicable to the Philippines as well as to { 
can territory. The various regulations, Treasury decisions l 
rulings, general licenses, public circulars, press release 1 , . 
documents were necessarily extremely complicated and diflfcult even 
for persons trained m finance to understand In the P ; ! ? 
where the greater number of aliens read or understand UmZ^Jli$ 
the difficulties were greatly increased. c j! - n ? llsl, > 

Freezing regulations were brought to the attention of tl,„ ~ ur 
by publishing them in the press and by circularizing banK K V - uhhc 
men's associations, foreign consulates, appropriate Q,mml, ^ni' 
officials and others. In many cases groups of persons n ff m " n Y^ alth 
particular regidation were called into conference and b T , a 

interviews were held with individuals seeking clarification "liable 
particular point To reach individuals, however the o ffi f ° f B H 
heavily upon banks, trade associations, and consuls Tiff 06 rollcd 
ticularly true in the case of Chinese and Japanese & PW> 
the respective consulates cooperated with their local banks n^ J Cas ?* 
associations to translate and bring to the attention of their ««!- traclc 
the requirements of the law. «»tM>n«fl 

One of the first steps taken in connection with the f.-n • 
S^ e r CtS WaS thc Alignment of American bank exWT' ,nfr of 
the two Japanese banks. Mr. Reynolds B. North was «/ , • (TS ,0 
the Yokohama Specie Bank and Mr. Albert E. Pr ce in H £ m>(1 in 
Taiwan. Both of these men are experienced national bll Bank of 
who were detailed to the Office of the KoZi? examiners 
United States Treasury Department T^TxmSS° n& & ** 
banks were closed upon the outbreak of" ^^nS^ 1 " 1 ** 1 ,h ^ e 
transactions with a view to insurm- that ' foroX f IS,0 , n of 
regulations were not violated. ° mgU fllnd « control 

thi i» \ ? asc generally with laws of Congress whirl, n . 
™e Philippines, the law pertainine to Foreign i„n /''^''^'^vc in 
regulations issued under ft wer? enforcSSS I n Contro1 
courts. With one exception how( ver itwS 1 1 Com '»onwealth 
to the conns. Paaur^to^mSI^ISi VFZS&S?"*** to resort 
Qoaber of caaea which ( , n T '5 ,,ol « occurred in a 

» WW Relieved (hat I he v a ous we d ,? 1)111 "sumIIv 

make (he | aw effective was hid.lv gratifying " community to 

the' I':;,;;;: .n^ot'lTiune 1 !:^^''^ 11 ^' 0113 reached 

$14,000 Pn, ted S a s c , t ev of S«°PK to 

• "ewasappreha „ R^S^cS^? 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



25 



1941, departing for Hong Kong and on November 24 pleaded guilty in 
court. The court rendered a decision setting a line of S750. 

Census of alien property. — One of the major tasks undertaken in 
connection with Foreign Funds Control was a census of alien owned 
property in the Philippines, Section L30.4 of United Stales Treasury 
Regulations of June 14, 1941, provides that: 

(a) On or before July 14, 1011, reports shall be filed on Form TFR-300, duly 
executed under oath, containing the information called for in such form, with 
resped to all property subject to the jurisdiction of the United States on the open- 
ing of business on June F 1940, and with respect to all property subject to the 
jurisdiction of the United States on the opening of business on June 14. 1941, in 
which <m the respective dates any foreign Country or any national thereof had any 
interest of any nature whatsoever, direct or indirect, regardless of whet her a report 

on Pprm TI K -100 With respect to any such property shall have previously been 
filed. Such reports shall be filed by — 

(1) livery person in the I'ni:ec! States, directly or indirectly holding, or 

haying title to, or custody, control, or possession of Mich property on either 

or both of the aforementioned respective dates. 

(2) Every agent or representative in the United States for any foreign 
country or any national thereof having any information with respect to such 
property. 

Provided, That no report on Form TFR-300 need be filed where the total value 
of all property interests of anv foreign country or national to be reported is less 
than §1,000. 

Without any limitation whatsoever of the foregoing, reports on Form 1 C R-300, 
filed as required above, shall be filed by every partnership, trustee. ;i->oei.>? ion, 
corporation, or ot her organization organized under the laws of the United States 
or any State, Territory, or district of the United States or having its principal 
place Of business in the United States, with respect to any shares of its slock or 
any of its debentures, notes, bonds, coupons, or other obligations or securities or 
any equity therein, in which anv foreign country or any national thereof bad on 
cither or both of the aforementioned respective dates, any interest of any nature 
whatsoever, direct or indirect. 

(b) Reports shall be executed and filed in quadruplicate with the Federal Reserve 

bank of the district or the Governor or High Commissioner of the territory or 
possession Of the United States in which the party filing the report resales or lias 
his principal place of business or principal office or agency, or if such party lias no 
legal residence or principal-place of business or principal office or agency in a tear 
oral Reserve district or a Territory or possession of the United States, then w itn 
the Federal Reserve Hank of New York or the Federal Reserve Batik of ban Fran- 
cisco. A report shall be deemed to have been filed when it is received by tne 
proper Federal Reserve bank or other agency or when it is properly addressed ana 
mailed and bears a postmark dated prior to midnight of the date upon wbicn tne 
report is due. Kach Federal Reserve bank or other agency shall promptly lorwara 
three copies of every report filed with it to the Secretary of the lreasur\ . 

(c) (1) All spaces in the report must be properly filled in. Reports found 
not to be in proper form, or lacking in essential details, shall not be deemed 
to have been filed in compliance with the order. . 

(2) Where space in the report form does not permit full answers to ques- 
tions, the information required may be set forth in supplementary papers 
incorporated bv reference in the report and submitted therewith. Supple- 
mentary documents and papers must be referrred to in the principal state- 
ment in chronological or other appropriate order and be described in such 
manner that they can be identified. 
(d) A separate report under oath must be filed by each person required to 
file a report except that persons holding property jointly may file a joint report. 

(«) The Secretary of the Treasury may, in his discretion, grant such extensions 
of time or exemptions as he deems advisable for the making of any or all of the 
reports required bv these regulations. 

(.0 Report Form TFBr-300 may be obtained from any Federal Reserve bank, 
the* Governor or High Commissioner of a Territory or possession of the United 

States, or the Secretary of the Treasury* Washington, D. C. 3 

i Regulations under Executive Order NFo. B899. n amended, relating to transactions in foreign exchange 
and Foreign-owned property, the reporting of all forctan-ownci property and relate i matters. 

83018—43 3 



26 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

As is seen from the above quotation, the regulations placed responsi- 
bility upon the individual for obtaining appropriate forms and making 
the required reports. The reports required for (lie census of ;dien 
property were very detailed and presented many difficulties to certain 
classes of persons subject to the reporting requirements. This was 
particularly true with respect to Chinese and Japanese of which there 
were many thousands who could not read English. Difficult niol.lems 
also arose in connection with insurance companies, especially tho«»« 
doing business in other countries, as well as the Philippines 

With a view to helping Chinese and Japanese residents the assist 
ance of their respective consulates and trade associations was enlkte,! 
They prepared translations of the forms and printed in Chinese «n!i 
Japanese respectively, instructions on how to make the reoiiir^^ 
ports. Members of the staff of the Hidi Commissioner's Office vi ; / ' i 
the capitals of each province containing large numbers of alienc £ 
important alien business interests and conferred with the lonlll) t 
the alien groups and with public officials with a view to ex n 1„; • 
the requirements of the law! explaining 

The Commonwealth government and the Philippine Nnt;« i 
Bank rendered invaluable assistance in connection with the e' 
of alien property. The nrnvmeml bnoc^rc ;„ • census 




Commissioner for work on the alien property census only n ,: ll SU 
staff, all of whom had to be in Manila most of the time, it \voi,l i mnl1 
have been practicable to take the census without the assisln not 
the : provincial officials of the Commonwealth government n?, i Ce of 
Philippine National Bank. ^ the 

Although the original regulations, quoted above, reauir^ , 
reports of alien property holdings must be filed by July ** &at 
was necessary to postpone this date in the Philippines bocaiU V> St 
lays in obtaining the required forms and in distributing K ° f d «- 
gether with information and instructions in Chinese and T^°' m ' to " 
to points distant from Manila. Th e census was completed on ft P i ancse > 
before the war broke out and, unfortunately, it was StSZ^S^ 
send the reports to Washington. They did however n ° ble to 
vVl !l m n C0 r i0Ct , ,On with case by case blocking of cS/? 0 . Verv 
«S as , des ™ b <>d later in this section of the report £ ^ 
2 ° J 1 " 1 supervision and requisitioning of enemy n -n" COn - 
SfSfUS SSR^S December 24 when it Sas"^?^^ 
f . i 7 ulu ln to the hands of the Japanese, msl nmf;^ nat 

Ssuled by\ S he°i aI1 in 0ldcr to pW'&fcH 

Znittalces h % anese authorities. ° m h ^ S 

no of the m<^4^±^fe\^^ <W- 




»d business associated ffi Ch a would ^Tm^h^f 
the Chungking Government and would not fall under 3 fcInftfS&i 0 
Japanese authorities or Japanese puppets in occupied areafof Cl in^ 
TfieSO renuttances were very substantial in amount S^Sto 
several millions of pesos per month. Consequently, the P I nn es 
were a very impor ant link in the system of exchange contrXXch 
had been instituted by the United States Treasury to assist China in 



REPORT 0? THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 27 

acquiring United States dollars and in stabilizing her currency. Pro- 
tracted negotiations were carried on by radio with A\ ashmgion and 
with Treasury officials who came through Manila on their way to and 
from China where thev were engaged in work connected with the 
stabilization loan to China. On two occasions the late Manuel l;ox, 
who at that time was a member of the Stabilization Board of China, 
ilew by clipper from Hong Kong to Manila and discussed the problem 
of Chinese remittances from the Philippines. 

As finally worked out and put into effect by means of a general 
license issued by the United States Treasury, all family remittances 
from Chinese in the Philippines were funneled through one Manila 
bank (the Bank of Communications) which acted as an agent for the 
Central Bank of China. It was required that the foreign exchange so 
acquired he made available to the Stabilization Board of China against 
delivery of an equivalent amount of Chinese national currency at the 
official rate. No remittances to either occupied or unoccupied China 
were allowed unless they were effected in this manner. In this way it 
was assured that dollar or peso exchange arising out of these remit- 
tances would help support the Chinese national currency instead of 
finding its way to the black market. t • 

Kmnn nation of effects of persons leaving ike Philippines. — As foreign 
funds control regulations became more stringent and, more particu- 
larly, after remittances to China were prohibited except through 
specified channels at pegged rates, it became necessarv to institute 
an examination of the effects of persons leaving the Philippines- An 
especia lly strong incentive to export United States and iniiippmo 
currency existed during the last several months preceding the war as 
the result of the establishment by the Stabilization Board ol UMtta 
of an "official rate" and the development outside of black markets 
at which foreign exchange brought considerably higher prices , in 
terms of Chinese national dollars than the "official rate Wrtn J a 
view to assisting the Stabilization Board in maintaining ttoe omcuu 
rate, and insurinc that remittances by Chinese m the fhjlippmes.xo 
their relatives and associates in China would be eficcted a f P 1 ^™ 
by foreign funds control regulations, efforts were made to " c ™ 
passengers on steamships and airplanes from taking with them more 
currency than was required for their personal expenses. < 

The examination of baggage was conducted ^ Commom ealth 
customs inspectors. In Manila a representative of the UOM MB vae 
High Commissioner, assisted by five former Commonweal , olhc a 
cmploved temporarilv by the High Commissioner for lore^nlunas 
control work, were on the docks as each commercial ship ^£>J™ 
at the airport as each plane left for Hong Kong or Sing apoie, ^ assist 
in supervising the inspection.. In outlying ports the collect or* of 
customs were charged with entire responsibility for enforcing {he law. 
The examination of outgoing passengers' baggage (ppe^lJJ 
deterred attempts to export, currency as no large ^^ e J°g£ 
except the $14,000 to which reference is made elsewheic m tins 
section of the report. , , , . , . 

Special blocking of persons adlna on behalf of or mi the vnterest oj trie 
Axis.— Another problem of considerable importance that arose in 
connection with foreign-funds control in the Philippines id the summer 
and fall of 1941 was that presented by Axis or Axis-controlled turns 
and Axis nationals and sympathizers. Vnny of these had been in 
business or had resided in the Philippines for a number ol year* 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONEB 

vw!r^ 10St ? f thcir activities wove not automatvcaWv suVject Vo super- 
^dWA^ ,\ ree ^ T CS u\aUor.s. E,ach sikAi rase had toW 
^tWcSrm& ^» dcteimino whether the lirn, .„■ individu? 

avai! ^l' , ""I"' consideration of all pertinent informal* 

femtM*?: ™5 iUt ™g information derived from the census of «l3 



Soperty anS *riT . from <••• sus of alien 

tion to r/nVi, • t,ie hcl P of other government au.-uries i„ a 29 
indivU,, U ( { ^?: ,Sin ^> 8 W ° f som ™ha< over -oo fh-rns^ 
1941 thaT *u COm P lled and tllc J r wt ' rc "otilied on Xov. n.her '» 
Tie doL Gy I Vere consid « *•<•'' blocked. ' " " 

Nazis wlio° M blocked consisted mostly of those believed to b© 
were "hln^T 6 res P°nsible officers or employees of concerns which 
A few perso nati °nals" as defined by the five/in- iv uu let ions! 
Pb ^ippinee?t S ; ° n e I* 8 * were Germans who had become naturalised 
natioi.-ili-i ■ / ' ( ' n , s ;,!;<l ' t lien- were :i !cuiini;siii,il mdi\ iduals of otH 

a PPeared to l,^ lud , in ?, Un i ted State f and Philippine citizens, who 
wiih ' "i- closely identified- or to haveclo.se business (•niu^„(^««i 



i!i lUe "censes 01 lllc islands. It was anticipated that extension 
tlle expiration' r ? ll>lv - vitl > modification, would he granted upon 
|' vc , n to these n?i tUc 3 °- da y licenses A fcw s '" h extensions wen] 
16 > but the nJ ns an<l linns 10 authorize business after i r ,|,.. r 
^chbusinr.J J ly situation had become so grave by that time thai 
^continued ' s a1 a standstill and licensing work had to !><> ]., r „,.] v 

. y '' / '" ; ' ;-./,,;/-. e ■ 

m the PhihnniY: 0r a a nizalion and personnel.— Foreign-funds control 

carried on u n , , ^timied during tbe period under review to to 

financial expo,./ " ,e W"U'ral supervision of Mr. Woodbury W"H| olIfr j lby 

aummer sevS 8ta « of the ffieh Commissioner. During tlio 

mcnt were s „ n ' ^r office! s of the lulled Slates Treasury iWinS 

oie,gn funds i„ n "1° Fa r East to assi t temporarily in administering 

Si? X?" C'i Phi liPPinos and to perform work for the Treasury 

Air. L ' n August 7, 1941, until his departure on August "8, 

Jnmds Control Tv 4 ar ons was in immediate charge of the Foreign 

August 28 to R lv *sion. Mr. Richard P. Aiken was in charge from 

September 8 to n ptcm ber 5, 1941, and Mr. Eugene C. Clay f ro ni 

after October 2 l , ot)(, r 2, 1941 Mr. T. M. Anderson was in'char^ 

also detailed hy'n 0tI| or principal staff members, all of whom were 

.Price and ReyLiT 5 United Stales Treasury, were Messrs. Albert E. 

anese and other i • North, who supervised the activities of j fl p- 

assistance and afe£ a ? ks ; Mr. James J. Saxon, who was of general 

Mr. Lawrence B i\ han <U('d special hanking and currency problems; 

property in the H& erd > who was in charge of the census of ;t i i( . n 

most special licem^ 1 **; a «'l Mr T Page Ne son who drafted 

Oreuse who had bti Mr - wmiam Jj. Stl,m P? and , Mls - B °nha T. 
' " i)0 naa l)Ce n employed locally, continued to answer mos t 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



29 



inquiries and to advise persons seeking information in regard to 
foreign-funds control and, during the last few weeks preceding the 
war, the former supervised the examining of the effects of outgoing 
passengers to insure compliance with forcign-fimds-control regulations* 

EXPORT CONTROL 

The control of exports from the Philippine Islands was inaugurated 
on May 28, 1911, pursuant to Senate Joint Resolution 76 of the United 
Stales Congress. This resolution made applicable to the Philippines 
the Export* Control Apt, 4 which bad been in effect in the United States 
since July of the preceding year. Export control in the Philippines 
was administered by the Office of the High Commissioner with the 
assistance of the appropriate Commonwealth odicials as an integral 
part of the program for the United States as a whole. 

As originally applied to the Philippines the commodities subject to 
export controi were chiefly those of special importance to the United 
States in connection with its program of preparedness and aid to 
friendly nations. They included a number of important Philippine 
products; notably, abaca (Manila hemp), chrome, coconut oil, copper, 
copra, iron ore, and manganese. The policy adopted With respect to 
these commodities was described in the Fifth Report of the High 
Commissioner. 

As time went on, export restrictions were progressively tightened. 
The growing needs of consumers both at home and in friendly coun- 
tries impelled the United States to curtail more and more shipments 
from American territory to other destinations. In line with its policy 
of refusing aid to aggressor nations, the United States also pro- 
gressively cut down exports to the Axis countries which might assist 
their war effort. From a relatively small number of the most im- 
portant strategic materials the export control list was expanded by 
additions from time to time and ultimately included most classifica- 
tions of articles exported from the Philippines. 

The greatest extension of export control in the Philippines was 
occasioned by circumstances peculiar to the islands and in practice 
did not apply in the continental United States. In the spring and 
summer of L941 there developed a strong tendency to dram American 
products away U\ru the Philippines by reexport to nearby areas, lo 
a large extent the Far East was cut off from European sources ot 
supplv; and priorities, shipping shortages, and allied factors greatly 
reduced imports from the United States. Acute .shortages developed, 
chiefly in Japanese-controlled areas, of a number of commodities nor- 
mally imported from abroad. . 

Being part of the United States, the Philippines were given prefer- 
ential treatment in the matter of priorities and shipping and continued 
to receive American goods which were unobtainable by other Asiatic 
countries. As a result of these factors prices in Shanghai and other 
commercial centers on the mainland rose far above Manila prices. 
This disparity in prices extended to a large variety of commodit ies, 
including many not subject to export control, and made it highly 
profitable to purchase American goods in Manila for reexport to 
other far-eastern parts. 

* Sec. 6 of' 4 An act to expedite the strengthening of t lie national defense," approve! July 2, 1910; 51 Stat. 7M; 



30 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

The drain of American goods from the Philippines became a matter 
of serious concern in the spring of 1941. Shipping was Ixmiilc curtailed 
progressively even to the Philippines and the replacement of stocks 
was becoming increasingly difficult. It was known thai war with 
Japan would be accompanied by a blockade which might cut the 
Philippines off entirely from imports for a protracted period and, as 
the Philippines are dependent upon imports for many staple com- 
modities, it was essential, from the viewpoint of national defense, 
that stocks of such commodities be maintained at high levels. The 
most critical commodities were foodstuffs. In most, years it is neces- 
sary for the Philippines to import rice, which is the staple diet of the 
bulk of the population. Other foodstuffs of great importance aro 
canned milk and flour. 

With a view to preventing the depiction of foodstuffs wliieh would 
be vitally necessary in the event of a blockade, the Commonwealth 
Assembly j passed a bill, approved June 9, 1941, which would authorize 
the President of the Philippines to prohibit by proclamation the expor- 
tation of food products and other articles or commodities of prime 
necessity. 5 As it affected exports, the bill required the approval of 
the 1 resident of the United States before becoming law. Before 
action was taken by the President, however, it became evident that 
u ^oukl not provide a satisfactory solution to the problem. It would 
w C ^ a i n po f s i ble an embargo upon exports of specified commodities 
S <U in lu n °v h ^ VC i P rov ided a flexible means of regulating exports 
et-noru I lr 1 ^ cx P orts to friendly destinations *rhile prohibiting 
Commt^ Accordingly, in July the High 

; * ed thc President of the USted States as follows, 
requesting action to meet the situation: 

exbtsmiiMr to*! nrtJr^u** 1 ** Critical situation demanding immediate actiou 
not on export o^irt li?^^^ P^? t ^ orta l rom Phi, jPPin<* of materials 
the existing law I ^ 't,f ,Kl Probably could not under the language of 

goods in atit cipa or of l w OI ?n that hst * Accumulation of supplies of imported 
shipping faciUties i L n?? S v le emergency urgently necessary. United States 
Arr.nV,tn. which cS^hSTv^t rt ? ke avai,ab,c in PhlMpptaen. Roods, chiefly 
where in Far East \ V ° ! tain< r fl or Iirc available only at higher prices else- 
thus partly nulHfrfnfT™. mt 8 £ ca 8°pds are being reexported from Philippines 
trade and^drairn^#hC? se of f s P ccial facilities for ( ailed States-Philippine 
event of on ' ,± / «« Ppmes of goods which will be urgently needed in the 



regarding Commonwealth 1 > i 1 1 to 
*ts of certain commodities. For 



nails needed for mS" an 7 r V' cre a,s0 shi PI 

P'ease refer tn Z ni- 1 , civi,lai1 purposes. 
autho^ePre^ of ™ y 17 re* 

reasons pointed out i , r, , i ]> W nes . t ^ prohif>it sports of certain commodities. For 
provide onlv an embarflrn w *' • 18 defective in important respects and would 
to unsatisfactory cWinnV; w important that we have power to stop exports 
and Other friendly mil in llon * wlthout cutting off all exports to British Umpire 
foodstuffs and ''other lit", A 7- >roovcr ' il would provide control only over certain 
my letter convince me thni a # . lcle ? of P rimc necessity." Developments since 
delay comprehensive bnf Vi m I s thc utmost importance to establish wit hout 
not onlv foodstuffs but r S» Vlill contr< ? 1 over wide ran « e of products, including 

most if not all goods imiSrted fi&f^iSSf t0 * Xp0T * hCenSe ' includin * 

In order to cone v ill U \ . rom the United States, 
sentence of vour mcsV-,™ £ Ua 1 and blowing out suggestion contained in last 
I surest f^o^on^ m 5 86nt in radio No ' 20S froni May 5, 1941, 

iimBmm ?J Kl commend that, if politically feasible, 

you secure am endment to Export Control Act so as to empower you ,o control, 



* Bill No. 3217. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 31 

during the existence of present emergency, exports from Philippines to foreign 
countries of such foodstuffs and other commodities as may be found necessary 
to the defense of the Philippines. In the interest of better administration, 
probable legislation should empower you to delegate power to determine what 
article shall be subject to license to some oflicial in Philippines such as High 
Commissioner. 

I have discussed this matter with President Quezon who agrees to the need 
of some such remedy to meet prevailing situation. 

After consultations among the interested departments in Wash- 
ington it was decided to provide flexible control over exports from 
the Philippines by extending the list of commodities subject to export 
control to virtually ail articles of necessity which might otherwise be 

exported or reexported from the Philippines because of higher pivices 
elsewhere in the Far East. This was done hy proclamation of the 
President of the United States dated August 27, M> I I, makim: subject 
to export control all military equipment or munitions or component 
parts thereof, or machinery, tools or materials, or supplies necessary 
for the manufacture, servicing, or operation thereof, which had not 
been made subject to such control under previous proclamat ions. 
At the s;ime time the Administrator issued an export schedule listing 
specifically ail articles which it. was felt desir&mfe to control. This 
list had been prepared after careful study by the Office of* the High 
Commissioner in collaboration with appropriate officials of the Com- 
monwealth Government and military and naval authorities in the 
Philippines. General licenses wen 4 then issued which allowed expor- 
tation of the articles covered by the proclamation from the t nited 
States, its Territories and possessions but not from the Philippines. 
The practical effect was to make possible regulation of the exportation 
of these articles from the Philippines while allowing them to How 
freely from the United States, The full text, of the Presidents 
proclamation of August 27, 1941, is giyen in appendix P. 

During the summer of 194 i the administratis m of export control in 

the Philippines presented a considerable problem because of the large 
number of small shipments involved and the inherent difficulties in 
coordinating the policy pursued in the Philippines with that adopted 
in the United States. ' Hv fail, however, the work became more rou- 
tinized. Specific directives had been received from v Washington co\er- 
ing most articles exported from the Philippines and as porters 
became acquainted with the policy followed, they stopped app lying lor 
export permits which would have been denied. Drastic curtailment 
of Bhipping between the Philippines and other far eastern poits 
coupled with greatly tightened control of foreign exchan-c tians- 
actions also reduced sharply exports to countries other than the 

United States. . , . , i olw i i: 

Throughout the year applications continued to be received and - 
censes Lslued only , at Manila. Commonwealth customs officials at 
Manila and other ports of exit enforced compliance with {helawfi tad 
With the provisions of the licenses. In November the < hief C^Hjj 
Division of Export Control made an inspection trip to ^e prm^pal 
ports in the Vi^avan Islands and Mindanao and instructed customs 
officials as to the requirements of effective control 

Close cooperation was maintained with authorities of the United 
States Navy engaged in the enforcement of neutrality regulations. 
Naval officers rendered especially valuable assistance in the measure- 
ment and certification of bunker-oil requirements of vessels clearing 



32 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION 

from Philippine ports,' Their certification was made n pi-c-rcquisn 
to the licensing of fuel for all vessel^ of foreign regisl ry« 

In order to minimize the possibility of inequitable Irentmont, aj>. 
plicants for export licenses were granted the right to api>e;il to tb# 
High Commissioner from decisions of the Chief «>!' the Division (| 
Export Control. In order to assist him in naehimj: just derision 
m the case of such appeals, the High Conur issi< m er. I>v onh r i 

•l P li 941, S0t Up aU Ex l )0lt Control Hoard of Kevie'w, which con- 
sidered all appeals of rejections of applications for lie >nses an I recom 
mended the action to be taken upon such applications }>v the Hie* 
Commissioner. Th« hoard was composed of the financial expert the 
economic adviser, and the lecral adviser. The financial pxprr! servj 
as chairman from the date of establishment of the board until Sefl 
cember 12, 1941, when the chairmanship was transferred to th 
nomic adviser. Dicing the period of its opera: ion not more th 3 
cals were made by applicants from the dccisi(3 



di^Vi^no,r vv " 4 V-" , / ,vi(!( ' nl th«l export-control won; wouki dwindled 
J ' ( i' ly ' the ^port-control office was moved f rom th 
vS^S^"^ m &6port area, where it had been located for 
umol ^ buUding, and the export- 

A in " 1 ^Pned to emergency work. 

£S control program was i.mler the general 

£e of its \L /• U0(Klll,,r . v WiUoUghby, financial expert. f roin (hc 



time of its it,p ,'• VVoo ' u '"iy Willoughby, financial export, r rom the 
transferred to SfTn^ October I, 1941, when supervision was 
immediate ,vn, ' ' D - Hester, economic adviser It was under the 
ffiefrfa a TSS^ ni P ttt of Mr - Frederick H. Noble who served as 

Pe,Hlin< ,i!; 1V, r on . of Export Control. f , , x 

United sLtt ?t? lectlon of a Permanent assistant for Mr Noble, the 
BueU.aF^rSn^?* 1 ^ 6 ^ « State temporanlv detailed Mr. Robert 
for export KolT'T O, 5 cor > to th,> 0(Ik ', •*' V,"' /' 0,n t '»i*Wr 
to November li \°/, k - ^ h> - Bw ' n s, ' | Vr(l ,n M * nda from August 27 

Mr. Dona d S' ? 4 ' when h( ' left for hi . 9 neXt S£f ' ~ 
1941, to assist Mr w u was appointed junior officer on October 9, 
Gurney, exnort l\' r . lc " 0tlu>r personnel consisted of Mr. Robert 
Filipino messem 0 n * tro l clerk . one Filipino statistical clerk and three 
believed to W, l My P Isls - The entire personnel of the Division is 
Japanese force- T* n < 111 Manila at the time that it was occupied by 
housed, under s,'„. -., ,s ro P<>rted that part of the American stah" is 
sm^eillance, at 911 M. H. del Pilar Street. 

p BX>BBAL LOAN AGENCY PROGRAM 

Government's^dJ? 6 H jgh Commissioner requested the Federal 
policy for stimulat e an ^l assistance in formulating and financing a 
to the iron mining P T" duct i on of strategic materials and for relief 
considerably redueff " Stry ' ; vhich was suffering the effects of quotas 
was referred to tho & n , orm »l exports of ore to Japan. The problem 
request of the H? g fe al Lo ™ Agency ^Washington arul at the 
adviser then on ]onXl ■ omi mssioner, Mr. E. JJ. Hester economic 
acl\ iscr, then on leave m the United States, was called to Washington. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIOXEJR 33 

During the last week in July, Mr. Will Clayton, Deputy Federal 
Loan Administrator, called a conference of representatives of inter- 
ested offices including the State Department, Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation, Metals Reserve Company, Defense Supplies Company, 

and the Board of Economic Warfare. As a result of this and other 
consultations, Mr. Henry Grady and Mr. Hester were senl to Manila 
in August by the Federal Loan Agency for the purpose of interview- 
ing interested producers and Government entities and recommending 
a program along the lines suggested by the High Commissioner. 

On September 2, a complete report was filed and approved in 
principle by the Federal Loan Agency, Mr. Hester was Later ap- 
pointed representative in the Philippines for the Federal Loan Agency 

and Subsidiary Companies* Mr. Charles A. Miike was retained as 
consulting mining engineer and Mr-. Llise Flahaven. as secretary. 
An office was opened in the High Commissioner's building. 

The program as finally adopted Was for the Federal Loan Agency 
acting through the Metals Reserve Company to purchase certain 

mineral raw materials such as could not be sold through normal com- 
mercial channels and to accept the responsibility for shipment of 
chrome, manganese, and copper to the United States. Production in 

excess of a specified tonnage and delayed shipments were to be placed 

in stock piles and covered by warehouse receipts, thus providing 
revenue for further operations by the mining companies and smelters. 
The limits set for immediate acquirement were: (>.000 short tons of 
COpper, measured as copper content of matte or blister; 350,000 long 
tons of metallurgical and refractorv grades of chrome; 40,000 long 
ions of manganese; and 900,000 long tons of irott ore. Commitment 
was also made to guarantee purchase during a 3-year period ol 27,000 
short tons of copper, measured as copper content of blister, to be 

produced by new installations. . 

During October and November questions of specifications, allot- 
ments to various producers, site- for stock' piles, forms 01 contract, 
transfer of credits, and all other details respecting the program were 

completed. However, no contracts were Signed or purchases made 
prior to the outbreak of war on December 8; 1941, After that time 
the program was indefinitely suspended. . k . 

Mr. Charles Mitke and Miss Flahaven are detained m Manila hy 
enemy action, the latter at 911 M. H. del Pilar Street, 

ADMINISTRATION OF PRIORITIES 

In midsummer 1041 approximately 70 percent by value of average 
annual imports into the Philippines from the United States came 
under the various war production controls instituted m the I W ec 
States. The application of these controls by various offices coupled 
with the shortage in shipping, seriously interrupted public and private 
construction and the installation, repair, and replacement ol industrial 
equipment, Large quantities of goods previously ordered for ship- 
ment to the Philippines, in some instances paid for, were either held 
at clocks or diverted to other customers from Atlantic, Pacific, and 
Gulf ports. By late September the "draw-off" had alarmingly 
reduced and in some instances eliminated local stocks, even of materials 
needed for the military and civilian defense of the Philippines. At 
the beginning, governmental agencies in Washington considered the 



34 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Philippines as a foreign area for purposes of issuance of priorities. 
This position was challenged by the High Commissioner as well as by 
the Philippine Resident Commissioner in Washington and a better 
understanding was speedily achieved. 

Administration of priorities was in part assigned to the High Com- 
missioner and placed by him under the supervision of the Economic 
Section with Mr. Robert J. Huffcut, economic assistant, serving as a 
priorities officer. Little success was achieved in securing priorities 
expeditiously from Washington and during the comparatively shorf 
time intervening between the establishment of controls and the decla- 
ration of war, confusion reigned. The reasons for thi< failure v.eiv 
numerous. Among them: frequent changes and duplication of author- 
ity in Washington: sudden changes in forms, procedures, and policy, 
in many cases without timely notification to the Office, of the High 
Commissioner; the multiplicity of detail required in most procedures, 
coupled with the distance between the two areas and an unprece- 
dented delay in radiographic correspondence; and the handicaps and 
frequent duplication arising from the acceptance by priorities author- 
ities in v\ ashington of applications from the Philippines through four 
channels— the Office of the High Commissioner; the Commonwealth 
Government through the Philippine Resident Commissioner in 
Washington for both public and private applications; the United 
btates representative of the Philippine importer; and the United 
btates manufacturer or exporter of goods dest ined for t he Philippines. 
1W !', A 1 ' 1 " ™mphcation was the apparenl inability of the Army and 
cover n Wi S r '] Man,la 10 ^sue prioriti, a in favor of merchants to 
TldVci , ' Uon 0f , , ocal s,0( i;s requisitioned for defense construction, 
furnish \^'\ n - s,lU :''» ! » '••■liiclanc.. on the part of »he dealers to 
ST, r ° m stock for quartermasters and supplv officers. A 
fn l iaCOnl , rol, " 1 » bod y Of dealers in construction materials 
tlli-nii I Cctqber resulted in considerable amelioration of the situation 
in WnS,;i lc f lss,la l nt,> . 1> y High Comn issioner and the acceptance 

Navv nn, T " °t pnOMti V s ccrtifi cd for stock to replace Army and 
JNavy purchases from local stocks 

inrtJJn r«m,n I?b f Cr i 2 v r th ? J I ?« h Commissioner by authority from Wash- 
iov tZ ' 'I • Mr ^f ol >ert J. Huffcut to be Coordinator of Mines 
KnMncsc T J lC ,mncs ' Particularly those producing chrome, 
ns tSTu c °PP° 1,f or shipment to the United States had in several 
KhSib^ST!* 0 rCSpond t0 Fc(,cral Loan ^noy requests 
m n or nvi Utpnt b / Causc of i""'»lily to obtain additional equip- 
Mm ( Vw^?l7 >, ? :U1 '-!, for e° xistin - ^teDations. The Coordinator of 
condition i£ \ hy b k e fi ' sfc of November to regularize this special 
X ' af. it referred to replacements and repairs but ho 
mS ,E 7 u a , bl -° t0 0btain clearances necessary for additional 
C L n ad lfc not bcen for thc intervention of war it would 

SXS^T 17 t0 1( i? l i cst a centralized and fully empowered 
single authority to cover all Philippine requirements. 

UNITED SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS 

In July 1941, the Honorable Paul V. McNutt commissioned Mr. 
".ester, economic adviser then in Washington, to review con- 
ditions in thc llulippmes relative to establishment of recreation 
centers lor men of thc armed forces in the Philippines, and to report 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COM^nSSIOXER 



35 



a plan for erection and management of buildings at Manila and 
Angeles, Pampanga, designed for this purpose, 

A local committee headed by Mr. Sam Gaehes had already organized 
as the Philippine Civilian Services Organization on a basis of repre- 
sentation from the United States Army, United States Navy, Philip- 
pine Army, Y. M. C. A., and various religious and civic bodies. All 
interested elements agreed to a steering committee composed of 
Mr. Hester, Mr. Gaelics, an Army officer and a naval officer. Plans 
were drawn up, sites selected, and' estimates submitted for three units. 
These recommendations wore accepted by Washington authorities 
and a suballotment of §260,000 set aside. Specifications had been 
completed but no contracts let on December S. The plan was 
nccessnrilv suspended at the outbreak of war. No expenditures were 
made and no obligations incurred in respect to the subailotted funds. 



SUGAR RELIEF PROGRAM 

From September to the outbreak of war, the High Commissioner's 
Office gave close attention to the Philippine sugar problem. Iho 
shortage of shipping space had left about S0,000 tons of the 1941 
United States quota in warehouses. The crop for 1942 was mature, 
but the local banks would not extend the customary planters' loans 
for harvesting nor advance working capital to the mills for grinding 
the new crop because: (a) There was little probability that more 
than 30 percent of the 1942 United States quota could find shipping 
space; (b) under existing Federal legislation quota sugar earned over 
from one calendar year could not enter the United States in the suc- 
ceeding year without invalidation of a corresponding quantity oi we 
succeed insr year's quota; and (c) increased taxation, freight, msimmce, 
and handling costs against a low price ceiling in the United 
would consume from a third to a half of the planters usual proiiL. 
In short, planters' notes and warehouse receipts on sugar were no 
longer acceptable security for bank loans. • , ^ * 

The demand for amelioration coming from the country s 
industry was too insistent to be ignored. The first plan sugges tea 
was to pass on the faulty security of the 1941 carry-over and the 
whole 1942 crop to the United States Export-Import Bartk on a 
promise of cover by a Commonwealth Government guarantee \utn 
this would be coupled an effort to amend laws to validate ™ v ^T^l 
where nonshipmcnt was due to emergency conditions. ^V^AA 
only feasible on the assumption that normal world WndiUras^ WOUia 
be Reestablished by the beginning of 1943, an assumption which the 
High Commissioner did not wish to make. Moreover it was ^doubt- 
ful that the United States Sugar Administration would ^^MOend. 
or that Congress would enact measures to legalize, 
anything more than a fraction of an annual quota To do so t icy 
would have encouraged an eventual glut of the American maiket 
which would react against domestic producers and foreign fl"™^- 

A second plan was devised to couple immediate relief with orderly 
retrenchment of production over a period of several years. Althou^n 
the immediate cost of financing the program might be greater tlio 
terms could be made more beneficial to the actual p anter and nis 
laborers, it could form a logical part of the economic adjustment pro- 
gram required by the approach of political independence, and there 
woidd be a reasonable hope to recapture a substantial part of the loans. 



36 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Backs/round of the sugar problem.— The United Stales-Philippine 
sugar regimen in the Philippines rested primarily 0 on the Tvdin^s- 
McDuffie Act (48 Stat. 456) as amended 7 which provides: 

A. From January 1, 103G, to December 31, 1010: 

1. Duty-free calendar year quota of 850,000 long tons of sugar of which 
2 v n°f ni<?r ° \ n 50 ' 000 lon £ tons may be refine d sugars. 

B. From Jamia^ dutiea on a11 °ver-quota quantities, 

1. Prefereni ial calendar year quota of 850.000 long tons of sugar of which 

not more than 50,000 long tons may be refined sugars, subject onfl 
to export taxes at rates equivalent to the following percent of the 
correspoiuhnfr full United States foreign import duties: 

(a) 1941, 5 percent. 

00 J042, 10 percent. 

W 1943, 15 percent. 

W) 1944, 20 percent. . 

(rl }Sf§« 2: > Percent. 
2 Full foroirT Jl, ' v 4 » 25 P er cent on one-half the quota quantities. 8 

C. After July 4 l9w 01 ° tat ® 8 u»port duties on all over-quota quantities. 

1 ' X cnnni f ,!; rent,a ! c l ll °tas as may be prescribed at the time for foreign 

2. Fuji foSr 1 ^TT i 8 ot], ' ,nvisf! provided as a result of 3, below. 

othr>TM,.; ! ^ n *- ni,(!r J States import duties on all quantities, unless 

3. At wT prov W*d as a result of 3, below. 

confer • V( '; u ' before independence (prior to July 4. in in) a joint 
purpan nf # callcd b >' the President of the Unit - ! Sti 
relatin»,". u [ovulating recommendations as to the future trade 
From th f behveon th e United State and the Philippines. 

of the sujrar indu^? n f dcration in 1034 of li3naitatio . n and adjustment 
clitions hncl aclvocat I* Scvcra * students of Philippine economic con- 
rather than the sv t as y sfcGTr i of annually declining duty-free quotas 
ing export taxes) ^2 °* nnnua 'b r increasing (iu<i< v s (or correspond 
were summarized nf 0 11 00 a ^ ixecl quota. The reasons for this policy 

t TT . as follows: 

l - under a system f 

mcnt could be gradual! T. ]inin - duty free quotas, land, labor, and capital invest- 
would be ^stained iV 1 V' r, " ri to other crops and, because the per-unit profit 
economic adjustment Planters would have resources available for private 

2. Under a system 'of s 

the area of land, the hmlSf^^S duties (or export taxes) against a fixed quota, 
would remain practi^m? of labor » ai ' rl *he amount of capil-d devoted to sugar 
dtimateltf to zero, anrt « patent while the per-unit profij would diminish, 
m ^ et rl r !?dcten doman 5 V j>:, . nl:r "l>t planters would have no private means to 

3. Hie theory th* K , for Mediate adiustment; 

ot marginal planters wr u i lnc . r . oasiT ^ r duties (or export taxes) successive group! 
factonly as (individual a ret . ire from industry could not work out sat& 
ferable and, in any ev^^^under the quotas were found bo be legally trans- 
remaining number of nlo I ' the flxed quota would bo annually allocat ed to the 

4. Ihe transferabiiit anieP8 « 

hands of a few j a * % of allotments tended to concentrate the quota in the 
Steaders, new tenatite > iT 1 *!; ancl created agrarian unrest among home- 
the monopoly. ri an « freeholders who were unable to buy their wav into 

5. Under declining fnmf 

date of independence Iroiiif'u Quantity admitted to the United Stale-; at the 
and it might be possible t i . ri °ncritical in respect to American sugar policy 
on a duty-free or preletei ?* i a,n a concession for its continuance for some time 
— — — — ; Ulal wads. Otherwise, the anticipated increase in 1946 

« The CTufted States Sugar Act of R 
docs not alter the terms under dkBiSP te ^ bcr ] » 193 ~. as amended, affects Philippine surrnr control hut 
suparin the world market In the imVrn hcrcin - See also the practical prohibition against Philippine 
and protocol annexed to the Rproomont a i ! on ^ a&Tecment regarding the regulation and marketing of suear 

" In respect tosupar. by the Kcorjoini^ A Lo . mJon » May G f 1987. 

9 The Tax and Quota Suspension \ ( r V hnstT nont Act, Public, 300, 70th Cone, August 7. 1039. 
for 1012 to 1946 to bo :is follows: 1042 n\ UdU< ? 367, 77tb Cone. December 22, 1941. altered t n<< percent rates 
percent; the act was not considered 7n fri« rco ? t: 1043 r > Percent; 1041. 10 percent; 1948 and 1946 to July 4, 15 

,r «iuiatinK plans for relief of the sugar industry. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



37 



from 25 (o ICO percent of the full United States foreign duty would result in coinci- 
dence of independence with the complete and immediate destruction of the 
Country's Leading export industry. 

Proposed Export-Import Bank loan. — On September 17, 1041, the 

High Comnussioner learned through the press thai fche Federal Ex po r t- 
Cmporl Bank was considering a Loan to the Philippine sugar industry of 
$20,000,000 to alleviate difficulties due to inability to maintain export 
to the United States. The Bigh (Commissioner queried Washington 
by radiogram dispatched on September 23 and on October S he was 
informed that the loan was under active consideration.^ 

In order to place the views of his office before the Export-Import 
Bank, the Sign Commissioner forwarded a radiogram on October 11 
reading as follows: 

Proposed sugar loan raises major and prove underlying questions of policy 
which :ire of concern not only to Export-Import Hank but also to Departments of 
Agriculture, State and Treasury, as well as to Interior and High Commissioner's 
Office. Highly important that all agree on a unified policy, and I am sure you will 
take appropriate steps to see that all interested department - and agencies consult 
together before commitments are made on sugar loan. The shortage of shipping 
has created a difficult problem for United States-Philippine quota sugar and some 
plan of relief is desirable in order to sustain Philippine economy in this time of 
emergency. I believe that to accomplish this purpose certain considerations 
must, be faced and thought through. Among these are the following: 

1. Under sugar provisions of Tvdings-McDuffie Act and United States Sugar 
Act validity of annual Philippine quotas expires on December 31. I understand 
that it is probably impossible under existing laws to reclassify unshipped quota 
sugar of one vear as quota sugar of succeeding year. Consequently carry-over 
quota sugar would not seem to be bankable security unless these acts are amenaea. 

2. The value of stigar as a security is also impaired by fact that sale of 1 hilippmc 
sugar in free world market is restricted by London Sugar Agreement 

3. If value of sugar as a loan security is to be sustained, presumably duration 
of United States Sugar Act, which limits mainland, Cuban, and other foreign 
competition will have to be extended. e c9 

1. While Philippine sugar loans have customarily been made on basis ot 9f per 
picul (10 piculs to the long ton) concerning approximately °ne-thira oi uie 




should be at a lower rate— perhaps $1.50— and restricted to disbursement 

pav rolls, seed, machinery, fertilizer, and other productive ends nrtr(M . ln , r 

5. Loans have already been marie by local banks and merchantrlende ts < sovi a i ng 
the 1941-42 crop (on 1942 quota year) and any effective Ig™**^*™!^ 
would presumably involve rediscount of sugarpaper held by banks and m rcna m.. 

In this conne ct ion, one of the largest merchant-lenders is a foreign compain WHOSO 
account is blocked. . . ,. , i,;,,!, ,.„u cft f 

». Customarily, loans made by merchant-lenders Ureal ^^^^^5 

interest include obligations of plaater to sell his sugar only through helm ; 
to buy fertilizer, supplies, and services from the lender; consequently an vproj a m 
which contemplates rediscount or other tor,,, of cove rage of putetending 1 a s 
would be subject to criticism as sustaining profits of merchaiiWenders wthout 
substantial benefit to tenants, sharecropper*! and laborers who bear a heavy 
burden from dislocation -in the industry. 

7 If I correctlv understand view of State and Agriculture Departments, It is 
that program of relief for Philippine sugar should be conditioned on progressive 
diversion of sugar land to subsistence crops in order to accord with economic 

adjustment to Independence program of rycttngs-McDuffie Act and with require- 
ments of national defense. Wit* this view I concur. I bave discussed and read 
this entire telegram with Henry Grady and he fully agrees with the views therein 
expressed. 

On November 5 information was received from the Export-Import 
Bank that the Commonwealth Government through its Resident 
Commissioner in Washington had request ed a loan to the Philippine 
National Bank to be secured by sugar in warehouse in the Philippines 



38 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER | 

to cover, at P4 per picul (16 piculs to the long ton): (a) not to exceed 
100,000 long tons of the 1941 quota carrv-over; (6) 700,000 long tons 
of the 1942 quota; and (c) 400,000 to 500,000 long tons of the 194§ 
quota. Officials of the Export-Import Bank indic ated rhnt th t >v were 
willing to cover (a) and (6) provided the President of the Commori 
wealth would agree to sponsor a bill before the next Philippine Na- 
tional Assembly which would author ize a full Government guaranty 
of the loan. Further comment and suggestions from the Ili^h Cora 
missioner were requested. 

The High Commissioner complied with the request for further 
consideration m his radiogram of November 10 reading: 

Viewing situation from angle of Philippines, I believe that some plan of reli 
is highly desirable and ! that every effort should be made to find some construct 

ni , eet £ hiIi PPine needs and yet avoid permanent injury to Philiril 
pme economy and to Philippine nonsugar interests. See mv radio of (October 7. 
M" J1} ; ro ?V? » however, that responsibility for rrachin- decision as to form this 
r n <\ , » f >w rests in \Va>!iii,wton. IW way of l« nera! conuncnt on plan 

E L y ° Ur radl ° P erh »PS I should point out that the requirement of a 
^n n fi guaranty wiH fa effecf . transfor thc unropaid indebtedness of a smaffl 
ruM^ l citizens to the general mass of the Filij ino people. With- 

ti L mi, \,Vr i' * 005:0I \ ,he r, *<"l expiry ouota year dated and with shipping faeffi 
St ~< v^T thcir pr f^ ,lt; ^ :itl ^ jt not unlikely that the C&ven? 

SSntn79°n ai18 totaling over 50,000,000 pesos may m^vns.. the net 
£s of \r«v ?i P to ? percent (net public debt exclusive of Manila Railway bonds 
fhm^I^hian^U^ J i?i.?? der 7( >,000,000 pesos) and/or impose upon the 
its ^ iy <™ and — ! - lf ' — ^e amount of 

in feTpTe g of h Ex, mdi S indicates, plan suggested therein has the approval 

anSTtatK tt » d " f '^-'tn-enls of Imerior, Agne^ltui? 

3. A legal debt limif ^ y u rcc l lIC5;t ma . v 1 offer following comments: 
bv CongiSss <oJ *r \ iV n P^ced upon the Commonwealth Government 
Ordinance aDnenlL* *^^: l6 ? uffi S Act, section 2 (a), subsection 6, and also 
raises quest ion* of i t\ PlJlnc Constitution, section 1, subsection 6. This 

2 I nresun^ +hn+ * ave scc ured competent legal advice, 
pine N-Jtionil P ,a \ ou ? att °meys have also passed on charier power of Philip- 
S™to^§&2SL£ h £ nd ! c , Ioan * S " ffi,,n 10 °" ot Cha ^er of Philippine 
harvested and storiS nk . f° takc loans on > or to discount notes secured by. 
and stored crona *ES P r P vl dcd that no loan on the security of such harvested 
the loan " 1 excecd '° Percent of the market value thereof on the date of 



3, W hile it 



between different hn^?. resu ? ! ? d ,. that there is no thought of discriminating as 
It would be iva.s,,^ ' (:rs , believe that for the protection of hanks and others 
effecc that loans shonld ho o lnc -i K v i ln loan *g*eement some specific stipulation to 
other than the Philinn!n« v ai J ahlc to a11 borrowers on equal terms and that banks 
andJL942 quota sin^r ni Antlonal Bank having loans outstanding against 1941 

4. You inay wisTi I to GT} \° y Gqual u » der the lo;m - 

inent to insure eoualit v°nf lf ? r aclv, ' sal>i lhy of inverting provision in loan agree; 
connection it occurs to mn I? a * ,Tl .5 nt in sngar mar koling arrangements. In this 
prioritv for sugar under n measures should be taken to assure shipping 

small relativelv provido„+ °y crnn, cnt loan it would mean heavy injustice to the 
planters and who nrodnn pianters who number approximately 00 percent of all 
course to bank loans. approximately 20 percent of quota sugar without rc« 

menU, these should be°conH eHeve that if you should decide to make any commit- 
diversion to other subsist !^ Kent U P on some P lan / or reduction of sugar land and 
I hope you will not hes titL?** 8 to X masons «et forth in my radio of October 11. 
t j me . "mutate to call upon me if I can bo of any service at any 

mar/jvs^r.t plan^0 n N o vem ber 18 High Commissioner Snvre 
*?i m -v ' ■ " ( ' ZOn " prmJ "Pon «■ pl«" for tlx- .vliH' an,! adjustment 
©J the I hilippine Sugar industry. A digest of the plan was included in 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 39 

a radiogram from the High Commissioner to the Division of Territories 
and [gland Possessions on November 22. The complete text of the 
draft act embodying the proposed plan follows: 

An Act to Meet Emergency Conditions in the PhTUPPIMB Stgar Industry 
and to Provide i or the Orderly Readjustment Thereof, and for Other 
Purposes 

Sec 1 There is hereby appropriated to the Government of the Common- 
vc 'hh of the Philippines the sum of s2S.SOO,000 to be paid as benefit payments to 
simar mills and sugar planters exercising the right to fill allotments made under 
'(In. mioia of BUgar coming into the United States from the Philippine Islands 
ratoWished in section 6 of the Act of Matron 24, 193-1 (48 Stat. 456), as amended, 
in the manner hereinafter provided. . , 

8 ec 2 The Government of the Commonwealth or the Philippines shall with- 
draw allotments covering not less than 450,000 long tons from the quota ofsugar 
eomtaginto the United States from (he Philippine fslands established ... section 6 
of he Act of March 24, 1934 ( IS Stat. 45«), as amended, in such manner that the 
q m a of sugar coming into the United States from the 'PJW™ Ifta* ^ £°* 
exceed 700,000 long tons during the calendar year 194.3 nor 550.000 long tons 
during he calendar year 1944, nor 400,000 long tons during the calendar year 
1945. nor 200.000 long tons during the period January I through JuW J. 1946. 

Sec 3 Benefit payments as provided for in section 1 of th - Act ana wren 
drawals of allotments as provided for in section 2 of this Act shall be governed by 
the following additional provisions: 

(a) The Government of the Commonwealth of &**Wg&J*!£ £8*! 
benefit payments to sugar mills and planters whose a lot met ts be ^ 
drawn at the rate of SSS per long ton for t he first laO.000 lo"**?™ 'Tig, 
drawn, SG I per long ton for the second 150,000 long tons ft**^*^*" 
per long ton for the third 150,000 long tons > withdrawn and i nj 1 ea*»l o or 
tionately for fractions of a long ton: Provided, W]^ARSS™2SSSS of 
divided as between sugar mills and planters on the baste ^.f.P^PpSS 
sugar to which the mill and planters are r f P ,f 'r^n?Kbh divided Is 
further, That benefit payments to planters shall be equital »> ™™ dcr 
between plantation owners, and any lessen . or team ■ Cgg^H 
written or oral contract) lawfully exercising rights loJ '^Siw* 
provided further, That no benefit paymen shall be made ttoany P^g^on* 
on certification by an official designated by t he ^^"Xl ^o the product ion 
wealth of the Philippines that the area previously dg"&&£fXbM 

of sugarcane to fill the allotment withdrawn, or frac ion tacreoi, u 
planted to other crops, or turned into pasturage, or left ""ffiiippines shall 

(b) The Government of the Commonwealth of Wa Th . lt no 
provide terms for the abolishment of sugar mill **^JgS*S2i Awfully 
sugar mill district shall be abolished without the consent of aUO cc ^ 

provide terms governing merger or °^bdafaonm^eor 

sugar mill district with one or more o he rs ga n i 1 ^tncts / »« ^ 

such mergers or ^^one^^t^d^^^oM ^ ; 

or the owners of the sugar mills m ^ suigarn " 11 .„ aWr i<. t . to be 

Prided further, Wat Uo*^ ob j e t 

merged <»«ig^d^dwa o e oygow^^ of thc Ph aippines shall 

thereto, the ^^S 1 l Sr t a touig to the planters who so object and make 

^MS^X^&L%^SS^SutOmmA shall be less than thc nmumum 
Sua^ream^febTwrehdrawn under the provisions of section 2 of tins 
Tct thoS mi Sent of the Commonwealth of thc Philippines shall withdraw 
&££?33Stad allotments and make 

as provided in subsection (a) of this section: Prowled, lhat such additional 



40 REPOKT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

withdrawals shall be made proportionately from all allottees as <.f record oa 
October 1 of the year preceding the year in which the withdrawals are to 
become effective. 

Vhnt«U& "r 11 ! ^ u ? ta f °f s "g a . r permitted to come into the United States from (he 
Bte^Wj f/ 1 " ,JC allocated on the basis spot-ilicd in section! 

iflntrLntc ( Ct of , Ma J C ? 24 ' 1934 < 48 Stat. 450), as amended: Provided, That 
Sttwff from one district to another voluntarily or p /rsuantS 

district fa ffiien.™M,°«i? S' th 'f Act> • Sl,a " he as if located wi« i.in the sugar mOl 
oi.uitt in \\ Inch such allotments were originallv made. 

pine MandTthSt tt\ °" l WW$ ad States Sigh Commissioner to the Phuipl 
whole SSffi%^^ WJ^^H" h ia ^possible to transport tS 
S3o^5ffi«Sh^5^♦?^SSW , ^ , ^ ,, for anv commodity contfS 

of the auota ^ s m, ^ f r° m V 1C Pllll >PP'ne Islands prior to the date of expiration 
dKSJtott SUC 1 f,, ,'V ta « ha » be Permitted to enter the United StaS 
Phi "pp inc i" a mis w7" IKl b >' tl,c Ulli ted States High < ommissioner to 

calendar year 1041 section shall bo retroactive to ever quotas for thc 

of the 'A^^fy^ZSXSS"^ 1 to thc Governmenl of thc Commonwealth 
of 1937, as amend™] rh. S collc ( . c V ; . c L or accrued under title I V of thc Sugar Ad 

loans tnroughttte r&b&Sw'?. «W>».000 for the pur, ,f making joint 

section 8 of this Act PP National Bank on Philippine sugar as provided in 

OOO^tothePfa^^Jf 1 ]^ Bank is hereby directed to loan thc .sum of $10.- 
Pbiiippine sugar asToviH ( a l tl? ' ,aI ^ ank £ or , th ? P" r Posc of making joint loans on 
years and shall be ar intor. f '» section 8 of this Act - The ,oan sh:l11 be for 5 
of all transactions under thli c f at .? 8 f four Pe r ,centura Per annum. Details 

*Sh2* Kg* 0 52 >*S2ti££r. Ba^k! !eported quarterry by fche Phi,ipp i 

the Philippine Natl! ,V/'V ''!'• "', r '"'"nonwealth of the Philippines shall direct 
nurnosA nf fino«x: «*' i>anK to make direct loans to sine - n1»iifai>s r,-.i- *i,« 



National Bank to the FvnV? an sha11 be re P 01 
Sec 8 The 1 Ex Port-Import Bank. 

purpose of financinir mndi^?^ ? lni ' ko dlrc . ct I ? ftna to wl « Gr planters for the 
from the PhiUppino Hp n ^ is Vw;° f ' s ,V^ ir P'- ri ' 1,n(,fl U) ( ' umt? ihto the United Staid 
Philippine National l>-V - the calendar yeara mm:;. L944, and 1945. IM 

from the funds provirC ;, • UKik( ' J° int Ioan herein provided for equally 
of the joint loans sl^l „ lur^'^ *\ aii ;l 7 . ? f <l:is Arl - C ' os,s of ^ministration 

Sec. 0. John loans to ti^T 10 hy 6he Philippine National Bank, 
governed by the following ^Sl£& ftS P r °vided for in section S of 1 1 is Art shall be 

aamtional provisions: 

Expori-Tinpo, . 1 ] "l (Note.- Terms to be agreed upon by 

(b) Joint \o?nl i ..n 1 Philippine National Bank), 

ton, fractions i\/ ,';;*" luar] <- ^ tho rjilo of no! In exceed $21 per long 

airainsf «„™,. : P ro POrtlon. No ifjinr Inun nhfl.ll hn m-,1. ,.i 9 



against sugar in f u \ n - No faint loan shall be made t( 

come into the United ? ne /Wantity of his allotment of Bugar permitted to 
(r) Jointloan.Tl i f,um tne Philippine telai 

W Proceeds of hi , ,n V T n S ! a< the rate of fivc P er centum per annum, 
(c) Joint loans mav hT?5 Bh 5 U J0 upended only for agrieult ural purposes 
of the Bugar held as L- lu X,< 'l uU ' i{ u> ^ te of shipment to the United Stated 
Sfo in n t , ' y therefor, 

^?n%wt ] f^nsfer fc 0 »h, S p ' ov, 'r l,,,irnl of bhe Commonwealth of the Philip^ 
? f * 10 W000 appropri^ Treasury of the United States the sum 

rl m section 6 Of this Act less ."mounts I h.-roof outstand- 

tli the 



s rnuippmes is a 

visions of this Act, e^enf ) an ^ regulations for putting into effect the pro! 
thereof. KceDt section 5, and shall provide for the administration 




KKPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



41 



The complete draft was transmitted to the Honorable Harold L. 
Ickes, Secretary of the Interior by air mail, December 1. The 
covering letter read as follows: 

Tin; United States High Commission uk. 
• Manila, December /. 19 At. 

The Honorable Harold L. Ickes, 

Secretary of ike Interior, Washington, />. C. 

Mv Deab Secretary Ickes: Following my letter to you (hired November 13, 
1941 j enclosing correspondence between myself and President. Quezon, and my 
radiogram No. 967, November 22, in reference to a plan for relieving the present 
critical condition of the Philippine sugar industry, I am enclosing two copies of a 
draft in legislative form embodying the proposed plan. 

Tin 1 draft is quite unofficial. It was drawn up by technical men of my sta(T and 
of the Philippine Sugar Administration who are acquainted with the rather com- 
plex but practicable system of allocation of quotas established in the Philippines 
under the Agricultural Adjustment Act. the Jones-Gostigan Act. the Tydings- 
McDuffie Act, as amended, the United Stales Sujjar Act of 1037, and various BCtS 
of the Philippine Legislature as amended. The draft is being sent by air mail 

today as a basis for future radiographic correspondence. 

I may point out briefly that sections 1 to 4 of the draft, provide for: (a) The 
reduction over a 3-vear period of the United States-Philippine sugar quota from 
its present limit of Sf>0,000 tons to one of 000.000 tons; (b) compensation of allottees 
by benefit payments under direct appropriation to be made by Congress; (c) 

requirement of crop diversification. W hile the appropriation appears large, the, 
United States Government would recoup more than the amount of the appropria- 
tion in customs duties if the (plot a reductions or a major portion of them were 
reallocated to foreign countries. It may also be noted that provision is made for 
benefit payments on a declining scale. This 18 because allotments lifted for 1943 
would cover portions of the quota otherwise valid for three and one-half crops; 
those for 191-1. for two and one-half crops; and those for 190."). one and one-half 
crops. While the reduction need not proceed at a rate exceeding loO.OOO tons, if 
the Commonwealth Government and the industry so desire; the annual rate of 
reduction may be advanced. This provision, however, is so drafted thai an ad- 
vance in the annual rate of reduction would not operate to cause a deficit in the 
appropriation for benefit payments* . . 

Section 3 (a) and (b) are greatly desired by the Commonwealth so that the in- 
dustry may be made more efficient by closing out some of the marginal districts 
and merging others. In this connection it should he held in mind thai in tne 
Philippines an economic unit is formed by each one of the sugar districts, con- 
sisting of a mill, operating on a toll basis, owned by industrial processors, ana <>t 

nmnen us adherent sugarcane plantations owned by independent tam ers. I BUS, 

the mill may not close without damaj ing the adherent planters, and planters maj 
not withdraw without impairing mill investment. Therefore, rcdiui'on by dis- 
trict closure, transfer or merger, must proceed pari passu with both the mill ana 
its bt( up of adherent plantations. „ mi . . .... , - 

Section 5 Is perhaps the most important article in the draft. I he inability oi 
the holders of allotn ents under certain of the United States-Philippine commo cui y 
quotas to obtain sufficient cargo space to transport their shares to the l mted 
States prior to fixed expiry dates is chargeable to conditions of war and the ne- 

fense policy of the United States rather than to any lack of foresight of these 

producers The Philippines is loyally sustaining the defense policy of the United 
States and I believe it is only fair to lessen the destructive effect of the fixed 
expirv dates by permit tine: post -quota-year shipment of annual <•.•< :r\ -r vers. 
\Yitlmut such a provision, apparently there is no legal v. ay pf sustaining the value 
of the crops as security for any form of financing, either that presented in this 
draft or tnat previously under. discussion by the Export-Import Hank. At least 
loans' could not be safely made without a general Commonwealth Government 
guarantee which would threaten a gfaire increase in the public debt of the Phil- 
ippines. Unless annual carry-overs can I e legalized, I believe that the Common- 
wealth Government will oppose reduction of the quota and that it will become 
impossible to effect a sound readjustment of the industry, 

Sections 6 to 9 provide for capital to cover loans on sugar of the 1943 to 194f> 
reduced qtidtas. xhe loans would be safe only because of the provisions of sec- 
tion f>. The plan would enable Local financial institutions to withdraw their own 
capital from the sugar industry prior to the date set for independence and thus 
avoid possible disastrous consequences in the financial community. 

8301S— 43 i 



42 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Section 10 provides for the eventual deposit of the principal <>f t lie loan fulif 
derived from appropriation of sugar processing taxes in the supplementary 
ing fund set up by the Tydings-McDuffie Act, as amended, i<> guaranteed 
public debt of the Philippines incurred prior to tin- establishment of t lie Coa* 
monwealth. This provision offset? in part the decrease in accruals to the sup- 
plementary sinking fund resulting from the reduced quotas. 

On the whole, the draft appears to me to have the tm rit < f a feasible plan net 
only to relieve present emergency conditions but also to cffo< i a sound read- 
justment of the Philippine sugar industry. The draft is iu,\ to bo taken as it 
any sense final. It has not yet had the full test of Legal opinion and the Com- 
monwealth authorities have not as yet reporter! in detail on the dvntt. 

I shall greatly appreciate your comments on this plan. Will you please MB 
the Division of ^ Territories and rsland Poi sessions make copies and distri! 
them to other interested departments, particuiarlv Slate and Agriculture, tc- 
gether with copies of this letter. 
Sincerely yours, 

Francis B. Sayre. 
On December ^' tuc BBgb Commissioner received information that 
^l:?fJ?:Y tments °, f t-ho Interior, State, and Agricult ure felt that ( . : 

secured 




reserves, 

_ plan a large-^-nle reduction of Philip- 
. pine acreage; and that the Export-Import Bank would proceed with 
negotiations for a loan. 

- f 7 lie f l nt ? rvcntion of the war prevented further consideration of 
either the loan or the adjustment plan. On December 15 Secretary 
lckes addressed the following letter to the High Commissioner: 

The Secretary of the Interior, 
Hon. Francis B. Sayre Washington, December 15, ln',1. 

United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 
My Df A Manila, P. I. 

for\voTviir^o Sayre: I have received vour air-mail letter of December 1 
Yo r nrnl, Rested draft of legislation to relieve the Philippine sucar industry! 
riven P^rof?,i Uf T of November 13 and vour radiogram of November 22 wet* 
conforon^ Wmsideration in this Department and were the subject of various 
and of tt representatives of the Departments of State and Agriculture 
result of VSo port / Im P° rfc Bank - The conclusions which were reached as a , 
KSkS conferences were forwarded to vou bv the Direction Division of 
The even?!? f • ♦\ an ? Possessions, in his radiogram (Xo. 71 1) dated December 0. 
cive tlu^o 0 ast few cla 3 rs have made it impossible for the time being to 

copies of vnnr^fl° I,S a 27 further consideration. However, I have forwarded 
and Acriciilt irA ; , Dece niber 1 and its enclosures to the Secretaries of Stata 
when it beeomL that > r ° ur views ma > r be available to those Department! 

Sincerely yo°u? t0 C ° nslder thesC c l uestions - 

Harold L. Ickf.s, 

Secretary of the Interior. 

ESTABLISHMENT OP WELFARE AND WHEREABOUTS SECTION 

nS^SfL^ 6 int , erv ,al between the first attack on the Philippines on 
Y' ,'^ 0 ' ? . a . nd the occupation of Manila on January 2, many 
3^ civilians were moving from one place to another seeking 
™S,,in themselves and their families. Heavy bombing in the 
™ v £ lr are -f ° f lasa * adjacent to Nichols Air Field bad driven 
, to ^anila or to other suburbs not close to military objectives 
borne went or sent their families to places in the country which they 
believed safer than Manila 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



43 



It was felt that American authorities should, insofar as possible, be 
able to contact American civilians if the exigencies of the situation 
demanded it. It was also clear that, if the islands continued to be held 
for any considerable period of time, it would be highly desirable to 
utilize available civilians for emergency work. A [any American 
businesses virtually ceased operations after the war started and 
owners and employees were eager to help in any way they could. 

The staff of the Office of the High Commissioner was working to the 
limit of its capacity. It so happened, however, that there were a 
number of Foreign Service ollicers, caught in Manila as passengers on a 
ship, detained when the war broke out. These officers offered their 
services and, accordingly, an informal arrangement was made under 
which the American consulate in Manila formed a "Welfare and 
Whereabouts Section" staffed by Foreign Service officers Samuel 
Sokobin, Karl L. Rankin, Horatio Mooers, and Filipino clerks. 

This section originally functioned as a part of the consulate but, 
at the suggestion of the Department of State, subsequently was 
considered a part of the Office of the High Commissioner, the per- 
sonnel being detailed for that purpose. Although the section was not 
in operation long its work was of real value. A considerable part 
of the American colony was classified on card indexes and a number 
of men with special qualification were located and assigned to emer- 
gency work of various kinds. Several assisted the Coordinator ol 
Enemy Alien Property in connection with requisitioning oi enemy 
goods by the armed forces and the Civilian Emergency Administration. 
Arrangements were made for notification to A\ ashington oi casualties 
among the American civilian population but fortunately there were 
very few. 

RELATIONS WITH FOREIGN CONSULAR REPRESENTATIVES 

Relations with foreign consular officers stationed in the Philippines 
continued to be, on the whole, amicable up to the outbreak 01 the 
war The Office of the High Commissioner was in frequent contact 
with foreign consulates in Manila, especially the Chinese and Japanese, 
because of the important Chinese and Japanese financial mterests m 
the islands, in connection with the administration of foreign tunas 
control and 'export control. 

Pursuant to order of June 16, of the President of the United btates, 
the German consulate in Manila was closed on July 9 and the Italian 
consulate on Julv 10. The German consul, together with members 
of his stall* and families, totaling eight persons, sailed for bhangliai 
on Julv 16 on the steamship d'Artagnan. Their departure was de- 
layed 6 days beyond the time limit set by the President s order by 
rams which delayed loading of the vessel The Italian consul, 
accompanied by his chancelor, the only member of the consul s start 
sailed for Shanghai on July 19, on the steamship Dona Nati. lheir 
departure was delayed by rains 4 days beyond the time limit set by 
the President's order. 

Immediately upon the outbreak of war the staff of the Japanese 
consulate general in Manila and their families were placed under 
surveillance by United States military authorities and confined to 
the consul general's residence. While no reports on the subject were 



44 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

received by the Office of the High Commissioner, it imiv be assumi 
that similar action was taken with respect to the Japanese consula 
in Davao, the only other Japanese consular office in the PhilippSS 
Communication between the two offices was not permit t cd. 

The surveillance and internment of enemy aliens v. as regarded as 
military rather than a civil function and, therefore, was not primarffl 
a responsibility of the High Commissioner. Members of his sts J 
however, advised the military authorities concerned and assui 
themselves that the treatment accorded the Japanese consular p< 
sonnel ami other enemy aliens was equitable and in keeping wi. 
international usage. On several occasions during the interval 
between the outbreak of war and the occupation of Manila by Japa- 
nese lorces memhers of the staff of the High Commissioner visited the 
Japanese consul general in Manila with a view to making certain 
that the consulate staff and their families were being appropriate! 
treated and taking up with him matters concerning the intcrnmafl 
ol Japanese civilians and the supervision of their properties in Manila 

bnortlv after the outbreak of war, the honorary Swiss eonsul in 
Manila, Mr. Albert Sailer, assumed charge of Japanese interests. On 
December 2t, 1941, he reported to the Office of the High ( onmiissioner 
uiat iie had received the following radio-nun from the Swiss Legation 
in Washington: 1 

resWen^anH^if to fat0 -°{ dj P«<»raaUc and consular personnel and of Japan j 
Kwl^lSno••^n a ^i ^CSa,>,,1,, ■' t, !° V'"" 1 l,v American (iovm,,,,,,,! and a.uhorities 
and a ct' war £fe°^?* rt,C ^ aP ^ difference of treatmenl l.efore 

condition of afore me i' res a,so in fut » re *° kept regularly informed as to 
' 01 ^ore-mentioned persons and eventual modification. 

IhtaSS??^ "I' 011 h r oi V g uo,inc<l ,)V Mr. si(Ii '''' tbal hc '""1 receive^ 
bun to sn^!» ,C, T° r Ule Stnf1 ' of Lho H « h Commissioner wen, vvil 
nvmiLcl T t Ju P luu ' s<! consul general's residence ami all other 
TuT„ Ja ? anesc nationals were detained in the Manila area. 

th\t r ei ? made ?? December 27 and 28. Mr. Sidler stated 

m«Lw?tl com pletion of his inspection he dispatched the following 
message to the Swiss Legation in Washington: 

CivHto,fsTS^ l cZ; , , ,i ' ! : ""! C ° nsular »<>n>s safe and well at consul resident 
Vsit t-d the ovS 

ffi'ASg W „?KKt « »" fl a " we" t rca t d 
d»in«<-vervtlnnanossible^w,) Amencan and Commonwealth authonth* 

Cross arranS . s, 1 1 & " ar< a ' >a V.'« "?>■•* nnd l^vt y. Philippine lied 

released perso,^ ^£^51^^00 SI on— * 

mdS£S^ Commissioner's staff worked 

frienolv e?? \' ' "S^ v«»g«Uup officers in Manila of neutral an.l 
nXnafe f ° rtS to P ,otect thc infc crcsts of their 

in Si*™ •p <,| C al (i i'° oufcbreak of tl'c war 6 foreign countries represented 
sen 1 in !i ,pi y>?- - >y CiU ' ( ' t ' 1 ,' consulftr offi <*w> 20 foreign countries repiS 
j V 1 ' 0 SSfe m ^ b f b ^ m jy consular officers, and 1 repre- 
™ V l \ COU n" ,,U * a - 0I,t r The foreign countries represented by 
Ne he, ° M T ai ' <>«'cc^ were Chma, France, Great, Britain, Japan, the 
Wetherlands, and .Spam. The foreign countries represented only bl 
honorary consular officers were Argentina, Colombia, Costa Pica, 
UzecnosloYakia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Sal- 
vador, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway, Panama, Peru 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



45 



Poland, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, and Venezuela. 
Cuba was represented by a consular agent. 

SUPERVISION OF ENEMY PROPERTIES 

Upon the outbreak of war in the Philippines a critical situation, 
requiring immediate attention, existed with respect to property owned 
by enemy aliens* In accordance with plans previously perfected the 

Philippine Constabulary, acting under instructions from the United 
Stales military authorities, rounded up and Interned Japanese resi- 
dents, beginning early in the morning ol* December 8. The Japanese, 
as well as other enemy aliens who were interned soon thereafter, were 

placed under guard in clubs and other suitable buildings, 

As enemy aliens were taken into custody vesry rapidly j neither the 
( tovernment nor the aliens themseh es dad time u> make arrangements 
for baying their property looked after and guarded. The High Com- 
missioj cr immediate U assigned a member of his staff to each of the 

two Japanese bai ks in Manila. Other Japanese properties, however, 
were for the most pari as their owners left them. The greater number 

were Simply locked by ihe ovvrers before being taken away, while some 
were boarded up or locked by the coj stebulary after the owners left. 
In a few cases, chiefly the larger establishments, regular watchmen or 
other Filipino employees continued to look after the property^ 

Immediately alter the outbreak of war consultations were held by 
the Office of the High Commissioner with representatives of the t nited 
Stairs Army and the Commonwealth Government in regard to the 
policy to be adopted with respect to enemy properties. Supervision 
over such properties affected foreign affairs so directly Unit primary 
responsibility seemed to rest with the United States < tovernment and, 
consequently, it was agreed that the Office of the High Commissioner 
should take such action as was necessary and practicable pending the 
enactmenl pf legislation on the subject. The Commonwealth Govern- 
ment! however, agreed to continue to provide police protection msolar 
as it could under jkisting circumstances, . , 

Although there existed a t the time of the outbreak of war no legisla- 
tion providing for an alien property custodian or equivalent ollice, 
the laws and regulations relating to foreign funds control provided 
sufficient authority for the performance of many of the functions ol 
an alien property custodian. The powers of the High Commissioner 
with respect to alien-owned properties were greatly extended on 
December L9 bv the delegation to him, for the purpose of dealing 
with the Philippine situation, of all powers conferred upon the Presi- 
dent of the United States bv sections 301 and 302 of the First War 
Powers Act, 1941 (Public, No. 354, 77th Cong.). 

The supervision of enemy properties was handled as an adjunct ol 
foreign funds control under the supervision of Mr. Woodbury Y\ il- 
loughby, financial expert on the staff of the High Commissioner 
lie was fortunate in having to assist him a competent staff , comprised 
largely of officers detailed to Manila by the United States Treasury 
Department, which had been engaged for some months on concentrated 
work involving supervision of the financial transactions of aliens. 
The disruption of 'business in the Philippines caused by the impact 
of war was so great that the bulk of the staff engaged in foreign funds 
control could be assigned to emergency work in connection with the 
supervision of alien properties. 



46 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



By far the most important cnemy-owncd or enemy-opera ted pro; 
ties in the Philippines were Japanese. Outstanding among 
were the abaca plantations in Davao where the bulk of i h • Japan 
residents of the Philippines were located. Aside from several li 
companies and a number of stores scattered in various parts of 
Archipelago, most of the remaining Japanese holdings of subs 
size were in Manila. These included two banks, a larue brew< 
a club, a hospital, a school, and a considerable number of stores 
small manufacturing establishments. 

From the beginning of the war the military situation precUf 
effective action looking to the supervision of Japanese proper- 
distant from Manila. Reports were received for several davs fro: 
Davao which indicated that Japanese residents were placed un 
surveillance quietly but the city was occupied by Japanese troops 
few days later. Only fragmentary report s were 'received from ot^B 
outlying areas but it may be assumed that enemy properties in st: 
localities were looked after by local civil authorities or bv the con- 
stabulary. 4 

In Manila, Messrs. R. B. North and A. E. Price, bank examiners 
who had been detailed to the Office of the High Commissioner by : : 
United States Treasury Department in connection with foreign fm 
control, were immediately assigned to the two Japanese banks. Tl. 
reached the banks on the morning the Philippines were attacked 
(JJecember 8), well before the banks were scheduled to open^ 
business, and took charge of records and other properlw No bankin: 
business was conducted in either bank subsequent to the outbivcV 
01 war and it is believed that the principal, if not the only, disbars 
5 r nu? 8 ° f ih(l banks wcrc for salaries of minor Filipino < 
p oyces. These disbursements were made after consultation wit] 
banks ^^P* of P rior approval from, the senior officers of the 

W J P^ e * w ork in connection with the supervision of enemy property 
own 1 l 1 u t0 two main brflncll0S 5 first > tho requisitioning of enem> 
second rt ** lc arrrie( ^ forcos aiuI otn( ' r government agencies am! 

'Reau r Cl . ,st °dy a nd administration of enemy properties, 
Wf)( , ^ %slt Y )nvn 0 oj enemy-owned supplies. — The requisitioning woi 
nnrn^no Unc l er Mr - James J. Saxon who was designated, for tl 
E dpfnV°? rdlnator of Enemy Alien Properly. Mr. Saxon ha 
States Tr t0 the 0ffice of lh " e iri " h Commissioner by the Unit* 
irt Mnnil«5 SUry aml liad been engaged in foreign funds control work 

stocks of n • u °* thc Coordinator of Alien Property was to local 
stens to ni ? orislla Me foodstuffs owned by enemy aliens and to tak 
Ins^oQ K v f l Vent s P°ila<?e. This was important not only to minimi** 
S iZ<>!ua VP**** out also to conserve supplies that would I 
nS 7 / f th « '^ilippines wore blockaded for a protract, 
lo handlc thc mattcr " expeditiously as possibl 
in ^ Gr ? mad « ^r the Civilian Emergency Administratis 

to iequisition and dispose of all foodstuffs found in enemy-own 
rjrerrnscs * 

At the same tune stepg were tftkcn to locate and make availabj 
any supplies needed by the armed forces, arrangements being mad 
for the United States Army and Navy to requisition all nee.!, 
enemy-owned supplies. i n handling requisitions, both by the ( 'ivilu 
Emergency Administration and by the armed forces, every effort w*a 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



47 



made to maintain records of goods requisitioned as complete as was 
practicable under the circumstances, It was required that all goods 
requisitioned be sufficiently identified to make possible an accurate 
appraisal at a later date of* their value. They were delivered against 
receipts executed in quadruplicate by a duly authorized officer or 
official of the requisitioning authority'. One copy of the receipt. was 
retained by the requisitioning authority and the remaining three 
kept by the High Commissioner's office for accounting and filing 
purposes. m 

From the outset about 20 people were engaged in this work, llic 
organization comprised five sections as follows: 

1. The Inventory Section, the function of which was to secure 
detailed information of supplies available in enemy-owned stores and 
Other properties. After examining alien property census reports 
(TFR-300) trips were made to premises which seemed likely to have 
supplies which would be requisitioned. A start was made toward 
assembling, from among civilians in Manila, specialists in various 
lines who could be relied upon to describe accurately goods which 
were requisitioned. In some cases a representative of the united 
States Army or Naw accompanied the representative of the High 
Commissioner's Office in order that he might see precisely what was 
available. Surveys of this nature covered foodstuffs, machinery, and 
other types of goods. , . rp 

2. The Receiving Section, the functions of which were: [a) io 
receive requests for requisitions by hand, by mail, Slid by telephone; 
(b) to execute requisition forms; (c) to maintain a register 01 an 
requisition orders and requisitions delivered; (d) to insure that ieqm- 
silion orders were filled in the order of their urgency; and (c) to super- 
vise clerical detail generally. _ . . • f 

3. The Transportation Section, the function of which was to receipt 
requisition orders from the receiving desks and to collect and clell ™J 
goods ordered to be requisitioned. The first step taken by uus 
group was to obtain, wherever possible, keys to enemy-owned estab- 
lishments. In many cases the keys were in the hands ol the con- 
stabulary and United States Army officers who had been in cnai ? c 
of rounding up enemy aliens. In other cases it was necessary io 
break open buildings and provide new locks. 

In order to avoid any possible interference with military operations, 
which required the use of all trucks available to the army, the Irans- 
portation Section made use of enemy-owned trucks to transport requi- 
sitioned goods to the delivery points specified by the requisitioning 
authority The Transportation Section was instructed to keep a 
record of trucks so used with a view to furnishing a basis for compu- 
tations of rentals due to the owners. ^ . . vfo 

On December 24, the date when the High Commissioner left Manila 
for Corregidor, there were six truck crews operating and, so far as 
known, deliveries were being made to the United States Army the 
United States Navy, nnd the Civilian hnu rgency Administration. 
These materials comprised chiefly medical and biologic supplies, 
surgical equipment, various textiles, office equipment, cameras, 
lenses and other photographic materials, and machinery. 

4. The Accounting Section, the function of which was to establish 
and maintain suitable books of record and account. An appropriate 
accounting procedure was worked out and the necessary ledgers 
ordered but the actual accounting procedure was never put into 



48 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

effect because it was necessary to use most of the aeeount mir | 

nel for more urgent work up to the time that t ho requisitioning work 

was suspended. 

5 i 3r*? Filin 2 'Section: Although a filing system was sot up the 
work did not continue long enough for voluminous files to accumulate 

Custody and administration of enemy properties. — The s »oond pari of 
the task of administering enemy property embraced its custody and 
administration. This part of the work was placed under the charge! 
of Mr. Frederick H. Noble, who was designated by the Hi h Com! 
missioner Administrator of Enemy Alien Property. * Prior to the oul 
break of war Mr. Noble had been in charge of the Export Control 
JJivi?ion oi u.e Office of the High Commissioner. His duties, insoffl 
as existing law permittee!, were such as would fall within the sc >pc<3 
an Alien Property Custodian if and when such an office should he 
created. 

The most immediate problem of the Administrator of Enemy AliJ 
iioperiy was te locate enemy properties and to determine what to do 
witfi them Shortly after {he war began reports were received of 
lootimr ol Japanese stores and a survey was made to determine the 
accuracy of the reports. The survey revealed that while most Jag 
*nese properties appeared to be secure there were n number of stores 
winch evidently had been broken into. [nas« tich as n Inrirc amoimt 
ot housebreaking and pilfering in Manila took place even in p 
Su^ 6 ^?* that m,(l( ' r war conditions (he police would be 
•?! adequate protection for unwatched premises. Con- 
TaJP* appropriate Armv and civUian -ov(M-iment ofli- 
^inrrlin^ r that no actional personnel could be spared for the 
piXwofT.l Cn0:Tly P r °P fi Hies; and it decided, therefore, that spe- 

nPQo 4 Maen would have to be organized and employed for the pur- 
niini^^ fP^al section to handle tin- work was set up bv the Ad- 
S^ I °« ^ Property; bul before suitable watch neii could be 
fi^^rtf 81 ?^ lt bec ^ne evident that Manila would fall into the 
Japanese and conditions became so unsettled that the 
seni n i abandoned. A list of Important enemy properties was 
Eit ^ r of heater Manila with a request that they ho 

SefimSi ate - i Pcd . al ^ olicc protection. 
nnrl n ™r 0 i;/ TO JJMaeratl0ll was given to the advisability of reopening 
wSfcnTSSSS ta . 1U Jt, P« n <>8c enterprises. Officials of'tho ( 'o.nmon- 
and l\ Si . T nt jessed the view that certain Japanese business 
b v aeeno >s Z h" tcr P rises could most advantageously be operated 
* It t Co "»nionwealth Government and a note was 
aSSinhiS^nn i J 11 '?" 080 00118,11 ^"cral in Manila (who was under 

Japanese^wned'nmn^ m ^/ction with any plana to administer 
hr>[x,>w it l 7 P^Pep^S. Before any concrete action was taken, 

the enemy TW JE*? fcha * M:miIi ' ™ M ^ . int0 ^ ,mnt ! 8 ° f 

hVestock and fowl v, > l ° r "5°/*?? ° f minor ™JP° rtftnc ? wher ° 
pnrr.,1 tnr m \ ' removed to Commomvcalth agencies ami 

w^ke^%XljT mt UlCm from SlUrving wh6D LlH>il " ° wnera 

^hffHiZ °l 0 iP CeS °J Coordinator of Enemy Alien Property and Afc 
mmrUratoroj hnemy Alien Property .-Move it was known that the 
United States forces would not be able to hold central Luzon, steps 
Were taken to obtain for the, staff concerned with the supervision of 



!;ki'oi;t of tiii. imui.i ppink hk;h commissioner 



49 



enemy properties more adequate office space than was available in 
the building oi' the Office of the High Commissioner, For this purpose 
the Commonwealth Government generously placed at the disposal of 
the High Commissioner a considerable amount of space in the new 
Agriculture and Commerce Building which is conveniently located 
near the High Commissioner's OHiee. Furniture and equipment 
were I ransferred to the new oflice on the 20th of Decemher. As noted 
elsewhere in this report, however, the military situation deteriorated so 
rapidly that shortly after Christ mas, when it was evident that Manila 
would fall into the hands of the enemy, in order thai the staff of the 
High Commissioner in Manila might he all together when the -Japanese 
troops entered the city, the offices concerned with the supervision of 

alien properties were moved hack from the Agriculture and Commerce 
Building to the High Commissioner's Office building. While no 
definite information on the subject is available, it seems possible that 
some or all of the records pertaining to the supervision ol enemy 
properties may have been desl roved, by members of the stall* remaining 
in Manila, with other records oi" the Office of the High Commissioner 
in order to prevent them from falling into the hands of the enemy. 

PROGRAM FOR SAFKK KKl'ING OF CUKKI.WY, GOLD, SECURITIKS AND 

OTHER VALUABLES 

United States currency s bonds, and Treasury cheeks oca pied for safe- 
keeping. — When it became evident, soon alter the beginning oi the 
war. thai the Japanese were likely to occupy large parts, if not alL 
of the Philippines, steps were taken to protect the owners of I oited 
States Government securities, United States Treasury cheeks, ami 
United States currency and to prevent their property from falling 
into the hands of the enemy. I msuant to authorization reciaved by 
radio from the United States Treasury; Department, the High Com- 
missioner announced by press release issued on December H>41, 
(see appendix Q) that he would accept for safekeeping for the dura- 
tion of the national emergency Tinted Suites Government securities, 
checks, and currency. He stated in the release that m the event ol 

the destruction Of securities, cheeks or currency so deposited, d the 
evidence w#s satisfactory and acceptable to the Secretary of the 
Treasury, and subject to all applicable law, substitute securities, 
checks or currency or check in pavmcnt would he issued by the 
Treasurv Department and he held for the account oi the depositor 
or delivered to a bank, corporation, or individual in the Umted states 
designated by the depositor, ( . 

The program was placed under the supervision of Mr. Woodbury 
WiUoughby, financial expert on the staff of the High Commissioner. 
At his request, the Manila branch of the National City Bank of New 
York made available space and personnel in its building in the finan- 
cial district and deposits were accepted beginning at 10 a. m., Decem- 
ber 23. Mr. F. C. Bailey of the National City Bank was in charge 
of this oflice and rendered highly efficient and valuable service under 
extremely frying conditions. All deposits accepted by Mr. Bailey up 
to noon on December 24 were taken to Corregidor by Mr. WiUoughby. 

When the High Commissioner and the skeleton staff which he took 
with him left Manila for Corregidor on December 24, it was believed 
that the Japanese might break through and occupy Manila at any 
time. Moreover, there was no assurance that transportation could 



50 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION BB 



be obtained to send to the High Commissioner any deposits whid 
might thereafter be accepted. For the following day or two, thai 
fore, Mr. Bailey discontinued accepting such deposits. Later, hod} 
ever, it became evident that the Japanese were not ironic to oecupl 
the city immediately and small vessels continued to make tl 
at night between Manila and Corregidor safely. ( 'onsequently, M 
Bailey recommenced accepting deposits and it is believed that 
these later deposits reached Corregidor in good order. 

On Corregidor it was found that a considerable number of, 
armed forces, as well as civilian employees of the United States An 
and Navy stationed there, had United States ennvney and Unit 
States Treasury checks which they wished to deposit for safekocpi 
and, therefore, the program was continued on the fortress up unt 
the time the High Commissioner and his party were evacuated tot 
United States. 

In these cases, as well as in tho case of deposit 3 accepted in Mani 
affidavits and receipts were executed in multiple counterparts in ortk 
that they might be dispatched to the United States by separate mei 
if and when opportunities to do so arose. It was hoped that by t 
procedure at least one counterpart of each would reach the Unit 
States safely. Inasmuch, however, as it seemed unlikely, during t 
first several weeks at Corregidor, that there would he any opportuni 
to dispatch documents to the United States, the essential in format! 
contained in the affidavits was sent by radio. Subsequent ly, it proi 
possible to send the counterparts of the affidavits i>v submarine iw.i 
ultimately these reached Washington Bafely. 

United States Treasury checks held bv Philippine Treasury: I 
difficult situation arose in connection with United States TreasurJ 
checks which had been presented to the Philippine Treasury for pav- 
ment. The Philippine Treasury acted as agent for the United StfH 
Treasury in this respect and had some 18,000 cheeks totaling near! 
S3S,000 ? 000 which had been paid but not sent to the Tinted Stat 
for credit to the account of the Philippine Treasury with the Pnit 
btates Treasury. A considerable part of these cheeks had been phuw' 
in the post office but, owing to the outbreak of the war, had not her 
sent to the United States. The greater number, on the other harJ 
were still held in the Philippine Treasury and had not been sorted M 
recorded for mailing. The Commonwealth Government wished I 
deposit them with the High Commissioner in order to be able to de 
mine after the war the amount of money owed to it bv the Unit 
btates T reasury on account of these checks. 

Ungina ly it was hoped that it would be possible to make a enref: 
record of these checks in a manner similar to those made with resped 
to United btates Treasury checks deposited by private individuals! 
but the military situation deteriorated so rapidly that only part won 
recorded and the remainder boxed and sent to Corregidor. Mr 
Horatio Mooers, a United States Foreign Service officer who was 
Manila on the way to his post when the war broke out, renden 
valuable service in assisting the Philippine Treasury to prepare and 
turn over to the Office of the High Commissioner for safekeeping the 
United btates currency and United States Treasury checks which i 
had on hand. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



51 



In order to enable the Commonwealth government, after inoccupa- 
tion of the Philippines, to establish as closely as possible the amount 
owed to it in reimbursement of United States Treasury checks cashed 
by the Commonwealth treasury, it was decided that an effort should 
be made on Corregidor to complete the recording of the checks and 
radio the results to the United States. This proved to be a very 
time-consuming task. Possibly owing to the bombing of the treasury, 
which is reported to have done considerable damage and killed and 
injured a number of persons who were in the building at the time, 
some of the checks and papers relating to them were missing. Also, 
in bringing the boxes containing the checks to Corregidor in a small 
vessel, 'two of the three boxes had become soaked with water which 
rendered the contents difficult to read and, in some cases, illegible. 

As the limited staff of the High Commissioner on Corregidor was 
fully occupied with other duties, the United States military authorities 
made available for the task a group of finance department men 
under the command of Lt. Col. William A. Enos, who were not 
urgently needed at the time for military duty. These men devoted 
several* weeks to the work. They labored under great . difiicultics, 
subject to frequent interruptions by bombing and shelling. I hey 
audited the records prepared in Manila and completed the records 
which the Philippine Treasury had not been able to complete, lliey 
made it possible to radio a summarv to Washington and, subsequently, 
to send out by submarine a complete list giving information needed 
by the United States Treasury to identify the checks and to use as a 
basis for determining the amount eventually to be credited to the 
Philippine Treasury's account with the Treasurer oi the United 
States for the United States Treasury cheeks which it had paid. 

Valuables taken to prevent them from falling into the hands oj trie 
enemy. -As has been noted above, the United States currency. 
United States Government bonds, and United States 1 reasurv cuecks 
were accepted for safekeeping from persons (including the 1 ^?P^® 
Treasury) who voluntarily deposited them with the Oliicc oi me 
High Commissioner with the understanding that, nr the event oi 
destruction, they would be reissued by the United Slates Jeasu^ 
or restitution made therefor. Subsequently, the High Commissioner 
was riven authority to take and, if necessary, destroy speeiiiea 
types of private property in order to prevent them from tailing into 
the hands of the enemy. On December 27, the High Commissioner 
received radio advice from Washington (see appendices K and O) 
that there had been delegated to him, for the purpose of dealing witli 
the Philippine situation, all of the powers and authority conicrrcd 
upon the President of the United States by f sections 301 and 302 ! of 
title III of the First War Powers Act, 1941 (Public, Iso. 3o4, 77th 
Concr) These powers were very broad, including the power to 
take-over for safekeeping and destruction any reserves or assets in or 
with banks, brokers, safe-deposit companies, insurance companies, 
or elsewhere, including any form of currency, coin bullion securities, 
drafts, checks, negotiable papers, et cetera. The High Commis- 
sioner was authorized to take whatever steps he deemed necessary 
to prevent such assets from falling into the hands of the enemy. 



52 



REPOKT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Collection and transportation of valuables to Corrcgidor: "When 
authorization was received it was known that Manila would fall I 
the enemy and the High Commissioner and part of his staff hti 
already transferred to Corregidor. However, members of his st 
who remained in Manila, and with whom the High Commissioner si 
maintained telephonic communication, assisted by ( 'ominonweal 
officials and officers of Manila banks, were able to irmv the bulki 
the cash and securities owned or held by Manila banks on behalf 
customers, as well as a considerable volume of other valuables, inclui 
ing most of the gold bullion which had been produced by PhilippL 
mines within the preceding few weeks but which bad noi wi in 
shipped to the United States because of the outbreak of the war. 

The work of collecting in Manila and transporting to CorrcgMW 
the valuables acquired under authority of the Fir.-; W ar Powers A 
was performed under unusually trying conditions with very frequ 
interruptions from air raids and air-raid alarms. The goods collect 
were loaded from docks subject to constant bombings and in eompl 
black-outs amidst extreme confusion caused by last-minute at temp 
to remove to Bataan and Corregidor everything which might 
needed during a siege. The valuables were carried to Corregidor 
night in a number of small vessels carrying supplies of all kinds t 
the military forces. The greater part were brouirhl over bv Mr." 
Page Nelson, United States Treasury oflicial detailed to the'Oflice 
the High Commissioner, at considerable clangor to himself. It 
be levied that despite manifold difficulties, all valuables received * 
behali of the High Commissioner, including both those accepted 
under the original safe keeping program as well as those taken undtf 
authority of the First War Powers Act, reached ( !orregidor safely. 

In addition to the valuables received by the Office of the "J 
Commissioner in Manila a considerable number of gold bars wei 
brought over in small boats bv representatives of the mining com- 
panies which had produced them. These were accepted onbehal 
of the High Commissioner without assuming liability for their saf3 
keeping and were handled in the same manner as ol 1km*- gold which 
obtained m Manila. 

The Office of the High Commissioner also took custody of assets 
oi a small branch bank maintained by the Philippine Trust Co. e 
^orrcgidor The branch had been closed and the person operating 
it had left for Manila shortly after hostilities broke out. The cad 
on hand had been placed in a safe belonging to the United Stat* 
Army which had been loaned for the purpose to the bank by the quai 
termaster at Fort Mills. Pursuant to an agreement reached betweei 
the High Commissioner and Maj. Gen. George F. Moore, commanding 
tj qai ° rt ls ' Corre g^or, the safe was broken open by Lt. ( V 
H. b. O son, Finance Department, United States Army, and James J 
baxon, head commercial specialist, United States Department of tin 
Ireasury, attached to the Office of the High Commissioner, and tin 
contents of the safe, together with other records of the bank, delivered 
to the custody of the Office of the High Commissioner. 

On Corregidor nil valuables acquired by the Office of the Higt 
commissioner were placed in a vault on a reservation belonging to tho 
Commonwealth Government. This reservation held a number e! 
vaults, of which all except one were used by the Commonwealth, 
chiefly to store silver currency reserves and certain Philippine cur 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



53 



rency brought to Corregidor when the President of the Philippines 
and his party evacuated Manila, The vaults wore securely locked 
when, not in use and were guarded by United States soldiers who were 
quartered on the reservation. 

Inventorying of valuables taken in custody by the Office of the 
High Commissioner: The valuables and securities taken to Corregidor 
were in many cases collected in such haste that there was not time to 
make proper records. This applied particularly to the securities 
obtained from the Manila banks, a large proportion of which were 
received in boxes with no inventory. The gold bars for the most part 
were without adequate record of their ownership or value. All had 
been handled in the dark and placed in the Commonwealth Treasury 

reservation under conditions which precluded Hie possibility of 
accurate checki 

During the early days on Corregidor the extremely heavy air raids 
on that fortress and the determined attacks by the enemy in Bataan 
raised a question as to whether our forces would be able to hold out 

more than a short while. At that time it seemed probable thai there 
would be no opportunity to send the gold and securities to the United 
States and that, in order to prevent them from tailing into the hands of 
the enemy, they would have to be destroyed. If these valuables 
were so destroyed the owners hi many eases would in all probability 
have difficulty after the war in establishing proof of their claims. 

To meet this situation, an intensive effort was made to inventory, 
as rapidly as possible, the material brought to Corregidor with a view 
to radioing to Washington SO much of the information as practicable 
and sending out the remainder by any d cans that might later be 
available. Tor nearly G weeks Mr. Willoughby, assisted by Mr. 
Saxon of the United States Treasury Department and other members 
of the party which had accompanied the High Commissioner to 
Corregidor, were engaged in tins task, which involved the counting 
of many millions in paper currency and the listing of details concern- 
ing tens of thousands of securities. During the opening weeks the 
work was done chiefly at the vault. Working conditions there were 
difficult, however, since as a result of bombing, the electric lights 
were out of commission much of the time and few oil lamps were 
available. The vault was often crowded with soldiers seeking shelter 
from bombing raids and the air was extremly bad. Moreover, on 
making trips to and from the reservation members of the stall were, 
on a number of occasions, caught without shelter and exposed to 
considerable danger by bombing raids and shelling. 

Alter the first several weeks, therefore, currency and securities were 
brought in small batches to the Malinta tunnel., where the stall lived, 
and counting and inventorying was done on beds and makeshift 
Office equipment By the first week in February most of the work of 
counting and Inventorying had been completed, and sufficient infor- 
mation to idontifj each securitv or other valuable said its owner was 
transmitted to bhe United States either by radio or by written record 
sent by submarine. 

Recording and destruction of paper currency : The valuables obt ained 
Under the authority of the First War Powers Act comprised paper 
currency, securities, gold bullion, and a few miscellaneous articles. 
The paper currency consisted of $2,741,225 9 United States currency 



' 860 footnote on p. 54. 



54 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



and 5*28,375,420° Philippine currency. Of those amounis, $2,420 
belonged to the Commonwealth Treasury, $281,485 and P27,374| 
belonged to Manila banks and the balance was the property of vai 
private individuals. 

The largest single item of paper currency was one of Pi 9.90 ' 
obtained from the Manila Clearing House Association which is 
sented balances of member banks. This cunvnry was turned c 
to the representatives of the Commonwealth Government on ( 
idor, at their request, on February 20, as it was believed that it n 
be needed to pay the Army or for other governmental purpo-f • 
organized resistance in the Philippines should continue for > 
months. Notice of the transaction was sent by radio to the Ur, < 
States Treasury Department which transferred the dollar equiv; 
of Fl 9,900,000* ($9,950,000) from an account of the Philippine T: 
ury with the United States Treasury to a new account of the Philip; 
Treasury earmarked as being held for account, of the "Manila CI 
House Association. Ultimately it developed that this money * 
not needed by the Commonwealth Government and it is repoil 
to have been destroyed on Corregidor before the fortress capitul: 
to the Japanese. 

With the exception of relatively small amounts involving: nv: 
transactions at Corregidor and currency found in the Kort Mills hi. 
of the Philippine Trust Co., the remainder of the paper currency ■ 
by the Office of the High Commissioner was destroyed by buna 
before the High Commissioner and his staff were evacuated to i) 
United States. 10 The count of the various deposits, as cert ilied by (» 
owners, was first verified and, so far as practicable, lists made shorn 
the types and denominations of currency. The names of the ov 
and total amounts were in each case radioed to Washington and mo 
detailed information sent by letter before the currency was actu 
destroyed. 

The burning of the paper money was effected by a comn 
especially appointed by the High Commissioner for the purpose, 
sisting of representatives of the Office of the High Commissioner, 
United States Army, and the Commonwealth Government. 11 1 
money was burned in three batches. On January 14, the comm 
incinerated 15 cases of United States currency belonsrims to the ( 
monwealth Treasury with a value of $2,04 1 ,000. 12 On Pebruan 
the committee incinerated 28 packages of United States and Philip 
currency containing $310,021 13 and P27 ? 372,120 14 belonging to M; 
banks and private individuals. On February 21 and 22 the commi 
incinerated 3 cases of United States paper currency contaii 
$202,441 an d f>6 1,488 which belonged to the Commonwealth Trea 

•These figures include relatively small amounts obtained under the original program under W- 
private individuals voluntarily deposited currency with tho Office of tho Utah Commissioner f« « 
keeping. 

»* Currency found in the Fort Mills branch of tho Philippine Trust Co. was left in the custody of 
MacArtluir who undertook to see that it was destroyed before Corregidor capitulated to the onemj 
o* * m * D - Hl 7 st,,r « economic adviser of the High Commissioner, Mr. James J. Saxon, officer of th^ \ i 
States Treasury Department detailed to tho Office of the High Commissioner, Col. Howard Smf> i 

.;S2- V. lf,ncy s - Uuff of the United States Army, and I^t. Col. Manuel Nieto of the Philippine A 
L\* L * figure was supplied by tho Commonwealth Treasury, 

JL orlLMnal Contents of these packages had been $320,421 and 1>27,374,120, but were reduced by $.\v • 
P2.000 as a result of telegraphic arrangements with the United States pursuant to which pavmenr.* • 
made to certain Individuals on Corregidor from the funds of one of the banks against payments made L« 
account to the New York office of the hank in question. 

»« The original contents were $379,185; $30,744 which were needed by militarv authorities and oth«* 
Corregidor were exchanged for pesos. For like reasons $140,000 were given to military and naval autr • 
on Corregidor in exchange for checks drawn upon the United States Treasury in favor of tho Common* • 
Treasury. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



55 



In each case certification by the committee of the destruction of the 
currency was dispatched to the United States by radio and subse- 
quently was confirmed in writing. It is understood that consideration 
is being given to procedures which will result in the reimbursement of 
the rightful owners of the destroyed United States currency, and it 
is assumed that the Commonwealth Government ultimately will 
make similar arrangements with respect to Philippine currency. 

Weighing and recording of gold bullion: Gold bars totaling approx- 
imately 10,S00 pounds were obtained by the Office of the High Com- 
missioner from several sources. Nearly two-thirds of these had been 
placed in the registered mail in Manila to be sent to the United 
States, but owing to the outbreak of war had not left Manila. Other 
substantial amounts were turned over by banks, and some gold was 
received from private individuals on behalf of mining companies. 

During the first few weeks on Corregidor, it seemed unlikely that* it 
would be possible to get the gold out to the United States and, conse- 
quently, it was expected that the gold eventually would have to be 
hidden or sunk in the sea in order to prevent it from falling into the 
hands of the enemy. As no inventories were received with the gold, 
every effort was made to record all identifying marks which might be 
useful in the event of the owners' seeking to establish their ownership 
at some future date. In each case it was possible to determine the 
producing mine as Philippine mines use molds which leave distinguish- 
ing initials on the bar. Other data such as the name of the person or 
institution delivering the gold to the Office of the High Commissioner 
and, where available, post office registration numbers and senders 
and addressees were recorded; and an effo.t was made to ascertain the 
approximate weight of each bar. The scales used, however, were not 
accurate, and there was no way of determining the fineness of each 
bar. All available information was sent to the United States by radio 
and by submarine mail. „ 

Listing of securities obtained under First War Powers Act: llie 
securities received by the Office of the High Commissioner are chiefly 
the property of the following Manila banks and brokerage firms: 

Banks: 

Agricultural & Industrial Bunk. 

Bank of the Philippine Islands. 

Chartered Bank of India. Australia & China. 

China Banking Corporation. 

Hong Kong & Shanghai Banking Corporation. 

Monte ie Pit dad. 

National City Bank. 

Nederlandsoh Indisehe Handclsbank. 

Peoples Bank & Trust Co. 

Philippine Bank of Communications. 

Philippine National Bank. 

Philippine Trust Co. 

Brokerage firms: 
Ovejero & Hill. 
Swan, Culbcrtson & Fro*, 

The above banks include all Philippine banks except the postal- 
savings bank, the two Japanese banks (Yokahama Specie Bank and 
Bank°of Taiwan), a small mortgage bank (Banko Ilipotecario Fili- 
pinos), a small commercial bank (Bank of the Commonwealth) which 
had recently changed from a savings bank, and one other small com- 
mercial bank (Philippine Bank of Commerce). The amount of securi- 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS 



ties held by the latter banks for the account of customers would hi 
relatively small. 

The nature of the securities obtained from the several M anil a bank 
varied considerably. For the most part, however, they were held b\ 
the banks for the account of customers or held as security for I 
In many cases they were accompanied by other papers pertaining t< 
the account. Although there were some United States and 
foreign securities, the bulk were certificates of stock in Philippic 
companies, chiefly mining companies. Tens of thousands of certifl 
catcs of stock were received covering many million- of shares. 15 jS 
the present time the Philippine securities probably have little value 
but when the islands are reoccupied by United States forces the valu 
to their owners may be great. 

Dispatch of valuables by submarines to the United States. — Contrar 
to previous expectations, early in February, as a result of radios 
changed between the High Commissioner and Admiral Hart, a 
opportunity developed to dispatch bullion and other valuables to tfc 
United States on an American submarine. This ship which earrie' 
certain military supplies to Corregidor could conveniently take on it 
return trip an equivalent weight of bullion as ballast as well as a 1 unite* 
amount of other cargo. 

The submarine arrived at Corregidor on the evening of February J 
As the night was dark and the likelihood of being seen by the enein 
not great, she was brought to one of the piers at ( iorregidor. She cU 
not complete discharging her cargo until midnight and it was nee. 
that she leave the dock an hour or so before dawn. Most of the st* 
of the High Commissioner with the assistance of a Navy work era 
spent the greater part of the night loading the gold bars into auton 
biles and taking them to the pier to be transferred to the submarjm 

Owing to the 1 imited time available and the necessity ol working in 
complete black-out it was not possible to check each bar by identffvijj 
marks as it was removed from the vault; however, the number of bid 
was checked and members of the staff were so st at ioned that all « v* 
was in sight of one or more of them at all times until loaded on t : 
submarine. The entire amount of gold held by the Office of th 
High Commissioner, as well as certain bullion and currency held K 
the Commonwealth Government, as described below, was loaded we! 
before daybreak. 

Arrangements were made for loading the securities hold by tE 
Office of the High Commissioner on the following night. In order | 
avoid detection by the enemy, the submarine lay on the bottom c 
Manila Bay, off Corregidor, all day. Early in the evening of Februif 
4, the cases and bags of securities were loaded on a small Navy tend, 
and taken to a prearranged rendezvous where they were placed q 
board the submarine. Thus ballasted with many millions in bulliq 
and securities, the submarine made safe its escape and ultimate! 
delivered the entire shipment to another naval vessel which deliver* 
it intact in the United States. Careful audits which wore made aft t 
the arrival of the valuables in the United States and compared wit 
inventories prepared on Corregidor indicate that every ounce of go* 
and every security accepted by the Office of (lie High Commissions 
for safekeeping, or taken on behalf of the High Commissioner undc 
authority of the First War Powers Act, reached the United Stafl 



» Mining shares in the Philippines am customarily of very small p:ir value. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



57 



Bafdy." All valuables sent to the United States by the Office of the 
High Commissioner have been taken in custody by the United States 
Treasury Department. 

BULLION AND CURRENCY* HELD BY COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT ON 

COR REG 1 DOR 

In addition to the valuables taken to Corregidor by the Office of 
the Hfgfc Commissioner, a large amount of gold, silver, and paper 
currency was held there by the Commonwealth Government and 
was aever turned over to the Office of the High Commissioner for 
safekeeping. The gold and silver, which served as currency reserves, 
were oai Corregidor, in the Philippine Treasury reservation on that 
Island, before the war started. The gold comprised 269 bars with 
an indicated weight of 1,343,493.95 grams and was derived from the 
melting of $805,410 face value of United States gold coins held by 
the Commonwealth Government at the time of the devaluation of 
the dollar in 1933. The silver was in the form of 1-peso coins 
with an aggregate face value of P16,422,000. There were several 
small pieces of gold and silver in addition to the above All ot the 
crold and a large amount of 1-peso coins were loaded under the 
supervision of ^Commonwealth officials, headed by \icc President 
Osmena, and were sent to the United States as ballast on the same 
submarine which carried the cold held by the High Commissioner. 

It is believed that the Philippine paper money in the Ireasuiy 
reservation was brought to Corregidor by the Commonwealth officials 
who accompanied President Quezon when he was evacuated irom 
Manila. It appears from records supplied by the Common^ 
Government that there was, early in January 1942, ^,2j>l,<W*m 
Philippine paper currency of various denominations held Of tno 
Commonwealth in its vaults on the Treasury reservation Lto* wa* 
subsequently increased by 1*19,900,000 clearing house funds, as noted 
above, making a total of P98,161,825. - ***nn 

Twenty million pesos, all in Philippine Treasury certificates of I oOO 
denomination, are reported to have been burned on Januai^ 19 and 20, 
1 942, on Corregklor Ey a committ^ 

Philippines. 17 On January 21, 1942, it is repoiitu 1 n t tlio 

were withdrawn from the Treasury reservation and P^f^ at the 
disposal of Mr. S. D. Canceran, special disbursing officer Offic o .of 
the President of the Philippines to be disbursed by b™ foi the 
purpose of paying the salaries and wages of officers, employees and 
laborers of the Government, and for such ^J^SSgL^SS 
be legally authorized. A message received J^£«2F£5iS> 7§25 
indicates that prior to the cap tu ation of the fortress^ WW 7 »^J 
in Philippine paper currency which was m the Jrcasuy JWWJJ 
destroyed as well as PI ,000,000 which was in a e in ^ foimer 
Office of the President of the Philippines at Fort Mills, Concgidor. 

bonds of the Commonwealth ( ' ov, ' r , , ^necessary to send to the Onitod States. These were 

tlwywonW lf«M.lnto the hands of ^^""l^o Osmefta, Vice President of tho Philippines Josft Ahad 
B^J^^^^l^f^&r, economic adviser of the ni R h Commissioner, and Col. 
H. F. Smith, United States Army. 



8:5018—43- 



58 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



WELFARE OF CIVILIAN" INTERNEES 

The High Commissioner while at Corregidor received various 
ports from the Military Intelligence section of the -mil* of the 1'nl 
vStatcs Army Forces in the Far Fast relative to the internment 
civilians in Manila who were citizens of the United States and 
United Nations. The principal information was th.it the majority 
these persons had been interned during the first week of JanuaiJ 
the new campus of the University of Santo Tomas, a fenced site 
40 acres or more lying along Cal'lc Espana within the north 
section of Manila, equipped with several concrete college buildii 
gymnasium, and playing grounds. Farlv reports indicated that 
Japanese permitted the Philippine lied Cross to supervise the fee 
of the internees. 

On or about January 10 the Military Intelligence obtained a - 
list showing the names of room monitors and others assigned toocoi 
rooms in Santo Tomas buildings. The list had been received 
Corregidor under such circumstances that its authenticity could 
reasonably assumed but not guaranteed. Evidence such as t 
accuracy of English name spelling, the names of the per sons appoint 
as monitors, the fact that no person customarilv resident in Mai 
but known by the High Commissioner or members of his staff 
have been away from Manila at the time- was listed, and that in 
cases of interned families the names of wives and of children were 
most cases correct, argued heavilv that the lis! was genuine, so 
as it went. J he list contained 1,580 names while Inter reports pi 
the total interned by the end of Januarv at over .S,2(H), a ii 
probably close to the number of civilian Americans and British Ves 
dent in Manila, at the time of its capture, in view of the heaw exod 
ot women and children prior to December 1941 and the enlistment 
many men of military age in the armed forces. 

On his arrival in Washington in March the Iliirh Commissioner!* 
leased the list statuig that it was the best informat ion obtainable b? i 
that its accuracy could not be guaranteed. Copies were subsequent! 
distributed to interested Government offices, to the press, and to indt 
vidua s and companies who requested copies. 

Following his return to Washington the Iliirh Commissioner reee 
and answered personally hundreds of letters and tele-rams of inuu 
from relatives and friends of those in the Philippines. These 
onirics reached such proportions that on April 20, MM 2, the Hi- 
Commissioner Organized a Civilian internee Welfare Section wh 
correspondence placed in charge of Mr. E. 1). Hester, eeonoiv 
adviser, and Mrs. Janet White/confidential seeretarv, both of wh 
were widely acquainted with the American communilv in Mam! 
Using the list of interned civilians, additional reports of a reliaK 
character, and personal information of the staff members as to J 
dltions and persons m Manila just prior to invasion, it was possibl 
to funrsh carefully guarded but reassuring information as to Uw 
whereabouts of many citizens 

The Higir Commissioner worked in close conjunct ion with the St: 
Department and the American Red Cross to accomplish three olnV 
tives with reference to the welfare of the civilian internees: 

(1) Opening of an unofficial channel of communication with civilian interi* 
The opening of communication with interned civilians is a matter lying w itv! 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMIMISSIONER 59 

the jurisdiction of the Red Cross; and after various conferences between the High 
Commissioner and the Red Cross officials a general announcement as to procedure 
for making inquiries and sending messages \va* adopted and circulated on May 2o. 

(*>) Appointment of an international Red Cross representative m iXlamla. 
While representatives have been established in Japan, Thailand, parts of occupied 
China and at Hong Kong, the Japanese had not, up to June 30, consented to similar 
representation in Manila. . . 

Ci) Sendin" of relief ships with food and medicines for both military and 
civilian prisoners of war or internees under Red Cross auspices. While some 
progress has been made in this direction, Bafe conducts have not yet been granted 
by the enemy. 

The Federal Communications Service intercepted a broadcast on 
unknown beam on May 21 which purported to be a description of life 
at Santo Tomas University internment camp by Mr. Earl Carroll, 
Mrs. Guy Agnew, and Master Paul Schaefer, internees. Mrs. Agnew 
is a British citizen who formerly worked in the British Consulate at 
Manila, and the others arc known to be Americans. The broadcast 
represented genera} conditions at the camp as satisfactory. VI bile it 
was known that the broadcast was under Japanese control there was 
no effusiveness or indication of propaganda under duress m the matter- 
of-fact statements made by the internees. An extract of the broad- 
cast was multigraphed and copies enclosed with subsequent correspond- 
ence with inquirers. . , , 

The activities of the Civilian Internees' Welfare Section helped to 
quiet unfounded rumors and to present as unbiased a picture as pos- 
sible to relatives and friends. The careful composition of replies and 
the inclusion where possible of items of first-hand reliable information 
known to the various members of the High Commissioner s stall served 
to alleviate to some extent the anxiety of relatives. 

The High Commissioner, speaking in various cities, a so held on 
numerous occasions informal meetings with relatives and lncncib ox 
those in the Philippines, bringing to them such reassurance ^" en- 
couragement as were possible. The large attendance at some o hese 
meetings showed how eager and anxious people were lor tnst-nana 
news of the Philippines. , ^ , , „ rtC?T ^^ f 

Copies of the, list of internees and the Red Cross statement res cl- 
ing communication with persons in occupied areas of the L lulippm. 
will be found in appendixes T and U of this report. e~«iriii 
Early in the welfare work a difficult j>roblem aros ^eral 
hundred wives and minor children resident »^.Y^2SJ£^E 
entirely dependent on remittances from husbands ^J"" 
ployed in the Philippines at the date of the outbreak of war . In many 
..stances, before 'interruption of radio conunu.ncations l ea s of 
families remaining in the Philippines wore, able to JJWg 
make other arrangements for the support of their dependents in the 
United States! Several of the larger American firms 
the Philippines adopted a generous policy of supporting for an mdcfi- 
nite period the dependents of their employees detained by enemy 
action. The salaries of all detained Federal employees i the Pluhp- 
pincs-civilian as well as those in the armed services ; Filipinos as . * 
as Americans-are being paid for the duration of the war under the 
provisions of Public Law 490 .Seventy-seventh Congress . L heir 
checks arc made out regularly and deposited with tl,e General Account- 
ing Office. Allotments to dependents axe made under the provis ons 
of the foregoing act. When President Quezon returned to Washing- 
ton, his office agreed in principle to make provision for the dependents 



60 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

of Commonwealth Government employees resident in the United 
States. 

The problem of financing dependents in America was thus consi 
erably reduced, but there remained a number of dependents, parties 
larly on the west coast of the United States, who were in real distress 
The Honorable Paul V. McNutt, Federal Security Administra 
offered the facilities of bis agency and was able through old-aie sur- 
vivors' insurance and other social measures to provide assistance fort 
majority of the remaining cases. 

A considerable number of highly competent American men on leave 
m the United States at the outbreak of war were unable to return - 
their customary employment in the islands. In several instance 
has been possible to obtain either private or public employment for 
these persons, generally in work having to do with the war effort* 

MORATORIA ON OBLIGATIONS 

Early in 1942 the High Commissioner's staff commenced a study 
of the problem of how to avoid, insofar as possible, the sacrifice 
property interests due to the inability of debtors in captured or b3 
sieged areas to pay their obligations. 

Conferences were had with the Treasury Department and with 
representatives of public-service companies in the Philippines re^pe< t- 
mg that aspect of the main problem which concerned (lie liability of 
such companies for interest on outstanding obligations and the result 
which might follow a default in the payn cut of such interest, TBI 
Treasury Department was consulted with a view to the possibility 
of obtaining an order under the Foreign Funds Control pro-ram so as? 
to accomplish a moratorium on such obligations. 17 

A draft was prepared of a proposed war moratorium bill pattern* | 
after the Soldiers* and Sailors' Civil Relief Act of 1940 U\ S. O 
title 50, sees. 501 to 585, 54 Stat. 1178) and designed to provide the 
relief necessary to avoid the forfeiture of property and the adverse 
effects on. the credit economy which might result from st riet ad heron! p 
to remedial rights presently existing for the benefit of creditors. 

Also, consideration was given to the manner in w hich life insurance 
policies of people m captured areas could be protected against defi 
lollowmg the nonpayment of premiums. Extended discussions U 
place between the members of the High Commissioner's staff, lif 0 
insurance executives, and the Veterans' Administration, all resulting 
m the preparation oi a bill intended to afford the desired relief. 

At the time of the writing of this report both proposed bills ar* 
under active consideration by other interested Government officials, 

PERSONNEL OF THE OFFICE OF THE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Outstanding in the work of the High Commissioner's Office during 
the past year were the loyalty and splendid devotion of everv member 
of the stall. Alter the outbreak of the war in December, Manila was 
exposed to constant air raids and bombings, and the work of tie 
High Commissioner's Office during those strenuous and idful days 
had to be ca rried on under grave danger, anxiety, and infinite difficult 

" Sec appendices v ami W for tho lext of General Ruling Xo. 10-A, issued by the Treasury Dopartmeai 
on August 12, iftl2, and for tho pre- release of the same date issued by tho Treasury Department, anuounSI 
mg a moratorium on obligation i of Philippine companies held in tho United States 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



61 



tics. Never once did any member of the stuff fail in his duty because 
of danger or difficulty. All carried on with supreme devotion to duty 
and disregard of personal danger. Even more markedly was bills 
true of those sharing in the grim life on Corregidor. The unswerving 
loyalty and devotion of each member of the staff are things which tho 
High Commissioner never can foregt. 

Changes in jyersonnel. — During the interval between the beginning 
of the fiscal year under review, July 1, 1941 , and the outbreak of 
hostilities, several changes occurred affecting the regular staff of the 
office and a considerable number of new employees joined the staff to 
handle special duties connected with emergency work. Air. Golden 
W. Bell resigned as legal adviser to the High Commissioner effective 
October 21, 1941. He was succeeded by Mr. H. Stewart McDonald, 
who was appointed legal adviser on November 10, 1941. Mr. McDon- 
ald previous^ was a member of the Processing Tax Board of Review. 
He was prevented by the outbreak of the war from going to Manila. 

As the legal adviser was not in Manila and the assistant to the legal 
adviser, Mr. George O. Gray, was ill, the High Commissioner ap- 
pointed, shortly after the war broke out, a prominent Manila lawyer, 
Mr. Clyde C. DeWitt, on a temporary, part-time basis to serve as 
acting legal adviser. Air. DeWitt rendered outstanding services in 
connection with the many important legal problems created by the 
emergency. He remained in Manila and is reported to have been 
interned by the Japanese. 

The United States Federal Loan Agency sent Mr. Henry P. Grady 
to the Far East in August 1941 to devise and report a program for 
greater production, stock piling, and speedy shipment to the United 
States of strategic minerals— chrome, manganese, and copper— and a 
plan of relief for the Philippine iron industry then crippled by export 
control measures which first curtailed and subsequently effectively 
prevented shipment of the ore to its only developed market in Japan. 
Mr. E. D. Hester, economic adviser, then in Washington, returned 
from leave to assist Mr. Grady. In October Mr. Hester was appointed 
representative in the Philippines of the Federal Loan Agency, Metals 
Reserve Company, Defense Supplies Company, and other subsidiaries. 
The services of Air. Charles Alitke, an experienced mining engineer, 
were obtained under contract for temporary service as a consultant, 
and Mrs. Elisc Flahavcn, who had served in a temporary capacity as 
secretary to Air. Grady, was continued as secretary-stenographer tor 
Federal Loan Agency work. Air. Alitke and Airs. Flahaven are de- 
tained in Alanila by the enemy. A report of the program for strategic 
materials is included in this report. 

After his transfer from Alanila to Corregidor, Air. Hester was 
directed by the High Commissioner to perform there, insofar as they 
existed away from Alanila, the functions of the executive assistant 
and budget officer, the chief clerk and accountant and the procure- 
ment officer of the Office of the High Commissioner. Under direction 
by tho High Commissioner, Air. Hester continued to perform these 
duties after being evacuated from Corregidor to Washington. 

As a result of a reorganization in Washington, Alr^ Frederick II. 
Noble, economic specialist in immediate charge of the Export Control 
Division of the Office of the High Commissioner, was transferred 
from the United States Department of State to the Economic Defense 
Board on October 1. As he continued to be detailed to the Office 



• 



62 



REPOUT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



of the High Commissioner, his transfer had no cflVct upon liis duties. 

Pending the selection of an assistant for Mr. Noble, the Departme: 
of State detailed to the Office of the High Commissioner, for export 
control work, Mr. Robert Buell, a Foreign Service oliieer. Mr. Budl 
arrived in Manila on August 27 and left for bis next post on Novem- 
ber 11, 1941. On October 9, Mr. Donald L. Cochran was appoint! 
junior officer by the Economic Defense Board and detailed to thi 
Office of the High Commissioner to assist Mr. Noble. 

Mr. Robert J. HufTcut, who had been appointed Secretary to tht 
High Commissioner in the fiscal year 1911, was transferred on Sep- 
tember 5, 1941, to a newly created position of economic assistant aod 
assigned to work under the general supervision of the economic 
adviser. In September 1941 Mr. Iiufl'cut was designated emergency 
coordinator of mines for the Philippines and performed the function 
of that office in addition to his other duties. On February 23, 104., 
he resigned his position in the Office of the High ( \>mmissioner 
order to accept a commission as lieutenant in the t inted States Army, 
So far as is known he was captured by the Japanese at Corregidc 
Miss Anna Belle Newcomb, who previously was confidential stcnoc* 
rapher to the High Commissioner, was appointed secretary to \m 
High Commissioner on September 5, 1941. 

In the summer of 1941, Lt. Col. Robert M. Carswell was reli 
by Maj. Cyril Q. Marron as liaison officer of the I 'nited Suites Am i 
with the High Commissioner. The excellent work of these offici i 
connection with civilian defense is described in the seeii< 
with that subject in this report and in the fifth report of the Higi 
Commissioner. 

Following the outbreak of the war in December 104 1 the Hid 
Commissioner, upon the request of General MacArt hur, releas< 
Major Marron from his duties as liaison officer to the High Cow 
mission er, so that he could serve as aide to General MacArthur. ] 
the latter part of December the High Commissioner similarly released 
Lt. Comdr. T. O. Parker so as to make his services available for mort 
active naval duty. Admiral Hart to whom be reported assigned lr> 
to the staff of Rear Admiral Rockwell, commandant of the Sixteentl 
Naval District, who took Commander Parker with him to Corregider 
After reaching Corregidor the High Commissioner similarly, at tl 
request of his junior military liaison officer, Capt. William J. lVusth'> 
released him for active service with the combat troops. All three d 
these excellent officers performed outstanding service and it was wii 
keen regret that the High Commissioner felt compelled to release tha| 
from his staff. 

Mr. Lawrence F. Salisbury, United States Foreign Service offte, 
detailed to the Office of the High Commissioner, was relieved 
November, 1941, by Mr. Cabot Coville, also a Foreign Service ottie 
Mr. Salisbury's work as adviser on foreign affairs was of the highe> 
order and his departure on November 23 was deeply regretted. Mf, 
Coville arrived in Manila shortly before the war, on November l 
and was taken by the High Commissioner with him to Corregidv 
where he performed valuable work not only coding and decoding high! 
confidential radio messages, but rendering invaluable assistance 
many ways. 

The staff of the Office of the High Commissioner engaged in foreig 
funds control was materially expanded in the last half of 1941 bo 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



63 



by men sent from Washington by the United States Treasury Depart- 
ment and by personnel employed locally. Messrs. L. C. Aarons, 
R. P. Aiken, and R. B. North, reached Manila on August 7. Mr. 
Aarons was placed in immediate charge of the Foreign Funds Control 
Division from the date of his arrival until his departure on August 28 
and Mr. Aiken was in charge from August 29 until his departure on 
September 5. Mr. North, a national bank examiner, supervised the 
operations of one of the Japanese banks and one of the Chinese banks. 
He was still in Manila when it was occupied by the Japanese. 

On August 18, Messrs. A. E. Price, T. M. Anderson, and Solomon 
Adler arrived in Manila. Mr. Trice, a national bank examiner, 
supervised the operations of one of the Japanese and one of the 
Chinese banks from the date of his arrival and Mr. Anderson was in 
immediate charge of the Foreign Funds Control Division after 
October 2. Both he and Mr. Trice were in Manila when it was 
occupied by Japanese forces and are now detained by the enemy. 
Mr. Adler, after working on foreign funds control in Manila for several 
weeks, was transferred to China to assist Mr. Manuel Fox m con- 
nection with work of the stabilization board of China. 

Messrs. James J. Saxon and T. Page Nelson arrived m Manila 
on August 27. The former ultimately was evacuated to the United 
States with the High Commissioner and the latter is detained in the 
Philippines by the enemy. Mr. Lawrence Hebberd, who was also 
sent to Manila by the United States Treasury Department, is likewise^ 
still in Manila. . , 

In addition to the men sent from Washington, there were employed, 
locally a number of American women for clerical work, mdudingMJSS 
Mary Catherine Connor, Mrs. Virginia B. Hewlett, Mrs. Grace 
Jurgensen, Mrs. Rebecca Karrer, Mrs. Emily Salmon Larson, MISS 
Helen E. Morton, Miss Margaret Pierce, Miss Kathleen C. Watson, 
and Mrs. Marie F. Wolff. Miss Marjorie F. Murdock was appointed 
stenographer on August 13, 1941, and resigned without prejudice on 
October 31, 1941. The last information on the subject dispatciiea 
from Manila to Washington shows, in addition, 17 Filipino employees 
holdimr clerical or custodial positions in the Division ol Foreign 1< unos 
Control. It is known, however, that this number was subsequently 
increased. _ f ^ w 

Foreign Funds Control personnel detailed by the Treasury Horn 
Washington continued to be paid direct by that Department while 
employees obtained locally were paid by the Office of the High Com- 
missioner which was subsequently reimbursed by the ireasuiy 
Department. _ ir T c , # 

In addition to the staff mentioned above, Mr. u ill i am J. btumpi 
and Mrs. Bertha Grcusel, both of whom were first employed for * oreign 
Funds Control work in the fiscal year 1941, continued m that capacity 
up to the occupation of Manila by the Japanese. . , ,* - 

With the exception of Mr. James J. Saxon, who was evacuated to 
the United States with the High Commissioner, all of the above- 
mentioned personnel which were erig&ged in loreign Funds Control 
are believed to be still in the Philippines. 

Subsequent to the return of the High Commissioner to the United 
States in March 1942, Mrs. Dorothy F. Friedman was appointed 
assistant clerk-stenographer, effective April 27, 1942, and Mr. Joseph 
W. Warwick was appointed messenger on May 12, 1942. 



64 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Location of staff on June 80, 1942. — For the purposes of record 
to facilitate the application of any relief measures which may be 
those detained in the Philippines by enemy action, the following 
set forth the details of the personnel of the Office of the 1 1 iirli 
missioner as of June 30, 1942. 

Washington staff: The staff stationed in Washington at the en 
fiscal year 1942 was as follows: 



Narao 


Ofllce position 


Annual 
sal- 


Sayrc, Francis B 


nigh Commissioner 


1*9 

* mm 

10LM 


Friedman, Dorothy F 


Assistant clerk •>t<>nogmphcr . 


Hester, Kvett D 


Economic adviser 


McDonald, II. Stewart 


Lecral adviser 


Newcomb, Anna lielle 

Warwick, Joseph W. 


Private secretary . 

Messenger 


White, Janet 


Senior clerk-stenographer 


Willoughby, Woodbury 


Financial expert 



The salaries of the personnel listed above arc chargeable to the JK 
sonal service allotment of appropriations for the lliirh Commission! 
Mr. McDonald, Mrs. Friedman, and Mr. Warwick were appointed 
Washington and did not serve in the Philippines. All the others wi 
evacuated from Manila, first to Fori Mills, Corrcgidor, on DecemU 
24, 1941, and subsequently to the United Stales via Australia. 

m American staff detained by the enemy: The following America 
citizen personnel were detained in Manila by enemy action: 



Name 



Burke, Helen 

Buss. Claude A. 

Copcllo, Thomas O 

Cropper, William II 

Davis, Thomas 

DeWitt, Clyde C 

Drumraond, Mark G 

kin, Gordon W 

Franks, Charles W 

Gray, George O 

Kidder. Lucia B 

Lautzenheiser, Ora E 
Lovell, Ruth Patterson.' 

Mack, Edward L 

Moses, James 

Raymond, Mona. 

Boss, Ervin C 



Wot known. 



Office position 



Principal clerk (office accountant) 

Executive assistant 

Caretaker " " " " 

Watchman 

do 21 

Acting legal adviser.. 

Watchman 

Chief clerk. . 

Chief statistician , . 

Assistant to legal adviser II 

.Stenographer 

Cable clerk 

Confidential stenographer. __ 

Watchman 

Caretaker... I 

Clerk 

Chief, Passport Unit._ 



Arm 
salanr 



6, 



(') 

! 

1. 
1. 

3k 



The salaries of the American personnel detained in Manila ai 
paid from the personal service allotment of regular appropriations f ' 
the High Commissioner and held in Washington under the provisio 
in Public Law 490, Seventy-seventh Congress. The same measui 
covers authorization for allotments to relatives and assignments • 
depositories in the United States. 

Information from the Swiss Legation at Tokyo through the Amor 
can Legation at Bern to the State Department at Washington, May 
and 20, 1942, was to the effect that all the above except William 1 
Cropper, Mark G. Drummond, and James Moses were interned | 
911 Calle M. H. del Pilar in Manila, and were all in "good health 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



65 



Mrs. Charles W. Franks and Mrs. Gordon W. Ells were interned in 
Manila with their husbands. James Moses was caretaker at the 
residence of the High Commissioner at Bagnio, Mountain Province, 
and it is presumed that he is interned at that city. 

Information received by the State Department early in July 
reported that Claude A. Buss, who was left in charge of the per- 
sonnel and property remaining in Manila, was in Tokyo. The 
reasons for his transfer are not known. 

Filipino regular shift' detained by the enemy: The following Fili- 
pinos (American nationals) are detained in the Philippines by the 
enemy: 



Name 



Acselud, GiTonimo. 

Alcj 'iulro, Constaueio 

Aquino, JtUUO 

Arrrjon, Jose 

Raltazar, Victor 

Broqueza, Conrado 

Bruno, i^eopoldo 

Cabrera, Francisco l 

Campana, Teofllo 

Cancio, Rieardo 

Can las, Ricrirdo 

Cobancn. Oil. 

Cuison, Leonardo 

Dlmalanta, Rlcardo J 

Dominpuez, Alfonso 

l tominguez, Valentin 

Kisrna, Maximino _ 

Evangelista, Kickie 

Ferrer, Hilario 

Ouo vara, Macario 

( tubman, Avelino de 

Guzman, Fabian de 

Gunman, Pedro de 

Guzman, Victorlno do 

3 fill. Joaquin 

line. Bifenveitido 

IJagan, Vicente 

Itlione. Iemcio 

Jacob, Donato A 

Lebap, M tones -. 

Llaivta, Floro 

Lopi»z, Arsenio 

Lota, Roberto , 

Manuel, Vicente 

Marquez, Pablo . 

Oiler. Cristlno 

Orti/.. Pablo... 

Faeuiriuan, Alipio Y 

Palapala. Manierto 

Ramos, Vicente 

Rceacho, Ambrosio 

Rieardo, Salvador 

Santos, Quint in dc los 

Taple. Antonio 

Tenorfo, Julio 

Tioeson, Santiago 

r rirona, Constantino _ _ 

Triunfo, Macario 

Villanucva. Maurlolo 



Office position 



Laborer 

Gardener 

Mes^njier 

C!.Tk 

St :im -t ical clerk 

Janitor 

Messenger.. 

Laborer 

Messenger 

Clerk 

Maintenance laborer — 

Gardener ■ 

Laborer 

Statistician 

Laborer 

Janitor 

Laborer 

Chauffeur 

Laborer 

Stenographer — — 
Statist leal draftsman 
Stenographer 

Clerk 

laborer 

CbaufTeur 

Janitor 

Gr.nl»ncr 

Laborer 

Clerk 

Gardener. 

Watchman 

Laborer - 

Junior draftsman-clerk. 

Clerk 

do -- 

Gardener 

Laborer - 

Telephone operator 

Janitor 

ChautTeur 

Chief porter 

Telephone operator 

Laborer.. - 

Gardener 

.... do 

Messenger. 

Record clerk 

Gardener 

Laborer.. 



The salaries of those appearing in the foregoing list arc paid from the 
personal service allotment of regular appropriation for the High com- 
missioner and held in Washington under the provisions of 1 ubhc J^aw 
490, Sevcntv-seventh Congress. ' _ . , ; -aiJu 

Kickie C. Evangelista and Pablo Ortiz accompanied the High 
Commissioner to Fort Mills, Corregidor, and they are assumed to 
have been there at the time of the capitulation of Corregidor. JSo 
information is available as to the present addresses of other members 



6G 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



of the Filipino staff, but it is thought that some arc in Manila o: 
vicinity, and that others are in Baguio. 

Filipino household staff detained by the cnemv: The following- 
Filipinos (American nationals) and Chinese einploved as housebofl 
servants in residences of the High Comii.issionei- ; m Manila ani 
Baguio are detained in the Philippines by the enemy: 



Name 



Abanador,Macario 

A too, Dajiiel 

Baldonado. Alejandro... 

Bascara, Amado 

Cruz, Lorenza A 

Dontogan, Cirilo 

Lee Wong Ivit 

Lock Ron Lim 

ttos, Francisco . . . 
Santos, Leocadio de los.. 

Tunay, Carlos 

Zee, Anna (Chinese). . 

(Chinesc)i. 



CJ cranio . 



Position 



Laborer 

House boy 

.do 

Laborer 

Laundrywoman 

Laborer 

Cook 

do 

Laborer 

House boy 

. ..do...;. 

Maid 

Cook 

Housoboy 

do. 



A nnnaj 

siUry 



m 

sot 

■ 



1 Name unknown. 
* Surname unknown. 

The salaries of the household staff, listed above, are paid from the 
contingency allotment in the regular appropriations for the Hufl 
Commissioner and held in Washington under the provisions of Public 
Law 490, Seventy-seventh Congress. Lee Wong Kit and Carlos 
lunay accompanied the High Commissioner to Fori Mills, Corn - - 
dor, and they are assumed to have been there at the t ime of the capit- 
ulation of the fort. No report is available as to the addivssrs of other 
members of the household staff, but it is thought that sonic are in 
Manila and others in Baguio. 

Export Control staff: The following employees of the Export Coil 
trol Division of the Oflice of the High Commissioner are detained in 
the Philippines l)3 r enemy action: 



Name 


Office position 


Annual 
s ilary 


Alvarez, Rfcardo V 




m 


Andmdo, Manuel V 

Bauti;ta, Felixberto L 

Cochran, Domid L 
Gurney, Robert ._ 


do 


Clerk 


Juni ir officer export control.. 
Statistical clerk 


flaw 


Noble, Frederick Tl 

Pascual, Domingo I> 


Economic Rpecl tflst 

Messenger-typist 






3CV 



The salaries of the above listed personnel arc paid from the appro- 
priations for the Pligh Commissioner to be reimbursed by the United 
States Board of Economic Warfare. The payments are made in 
Washington and held under the provisions of Public Law 400 
Seventy-seventh Congress. In the case of the American members' 
allotments to relatives and assignments to depositories have been 
made. 

Information from the Swiss Legation at Tokyo to the State Depart- 
ment, May 12 and 20, 1942, reported that Frederick H. NobP. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



07 



Donald L. Cochran, and Robert Gurncy and Ins wife and intent 
daughter Melissa, were interned with other American personnel at 
Carfe 911 M. H. del Pilar, Manila. The present addresses of the 
Filipino (American nationals) personnel of the export control section 
are unknown, but they are presumed to he in Manila. 

Foreign funds control staff: The following employees of the Foreign 
Funds Control Division of the High Commissioner's office are detained 
in the Philippines by enemy action: 



Name 



Arccpa, Vicente L 

Astoria, Santiago P 

Braganza, Vietorino 

Bueno, Konuilo 

Coloso, Rodrigo 

Connor, Mary C 

Dimalanta, Hennogenos 

Espos, Ramon A 

Fernandez, Joaquin J 

Garcia, Jesus — 

Oavino, KeynaMo ■ 

Coco, Carlos 

Grciisd, Bertha T 

Gutierrez, Dominador 

Guzman, Cecilio A. de 

Hewlett, Virginia B - 

Juane, riiol A 

Jargenssen . Q race - - — 

Karrcr, Rebecca - 

Larson, Emily Salmon 

Lorenzo, Jovino s 

Mereatlo. Rafael -- 

Morton, Helen E 

Pierce, Margaret - 

Beraflca, Amaodo Q 

Btompf, William J., Jr 

Watson, Kathleen C 

Wolff, Marie F 



Office position 



Typist 

Clerk 

:""^lo""".""I"---"- 

Stenographer 

A pent 

Janitor 

Telephone operator 

Securities clerk 

Messenger 

Bank examiner 

Stenographer 

Fiscal accounting clerk 

Stenographer — 

Bank examiner 

Agent 

Stenographer 

Messenger , v 

Foreign Funds Control agent 

Stenographer 

do 



Annual 
salary 



$300 
4S0 
900 
300 
300 
1,440 
filiO 
240 
000 
240 
000 
600 
2.100 
210 
1.800 
1,680 
4S0 
i.OSO 
1.0S0 
1.0S0 
1,440 
000 
J. so 
1.0S0 
240 
3, 000 
1.6S0 
1.CS0 




Pierce, and William J. Stumpf, Jr., ^^^jSilSSXSSS 
personnel at 91 1 Callc M. H. del Pilar, Manila P u S 

of the Filipino (American nationals) personnel are unknown but they 
are thought to be in Manila. . , . ., n f the 

Liaison stair: Four liaison officers were •S^^lZooSS^S 
High Commissioner by departments of the ^^^^SSS 
These, were: State Department, Cabot Cov«llc, loie.gn Service 
Officer; War Department, Lt. Col. Cyril Q.: Nlar ro i, Capt. Wuhan* 
J. Priestley; Navv Department, Lt. Comdr. T C. t aike 

The War and Navy attaches were released by ^J^itaifffi 
sioner so that they would be free to enter combat or other u mte o ^thcii 
services. Mr. Coville accompanied the High Commissioner to 
Australia and later came to the United States where he reported to his 
Department for foreign duty. 



68 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Treasury staff: The United States Treasury Department in 104' 
assigned a number of employees to the stair of the High ( 'ommi^ion - 
to assist m the work of the Foreign Funds Control Section These 
men were in Manila at the outbreak of the war: Anderson. Maxwe'" 
Hebberd, YVdham; Nelson, T. Page; North, Reynolds; Price Allur 
and Saxon, James J. 

Mr. Saxon accompanied the High Commissioner to Fort Mills and 
was later evacuated to the United States where ],,■ returned to'hU 
Department. The others are detained by the enemy and wei» 
r i ei ?°£-i y thc State Department to be interned at v,lle M H 

del Pilar, Manila. Their salaries arc paid by the Treasury Denir- 
ment. 1 

Federal Loan Agency staff: Mrs. Elisc Flahaven, secretary, and 
Mr. Charles Mitke were employees of thc Federal Loan .\ ;;<•:,. • 
attached to the office of thc High Commissioner detained I, v eV.enr 
action. Their salaries are paid by the Agency. Mis. Flahaven 
r i C ?°Tj-i Statc Department as interned at, 911 Calle M | 

del 1 ilar Mr Mitke and his wife are thought, to I.,- interned atti 
Umvcrsity of Santo Tornas, Manila. 

Other officers and employees: The information given above has 
been m large part obtained from personnel records maintained in th* 
United States by the Division of Territories and Island Possessions 
United States Department of thc Interior. The last correspondent 
on the subject received by that Division from Manila is dated N T <v 
vember 25 1941. After that date a few other employees were a£ 

pointed and changes made by the High < o .issioner. ' Moreover ' • 

tne time of evacuation from Manila to Fort Mills, Corre<ddor 'on 
December 24 194], the High Commissioner deleted authority tS 
ivn. v..iaucle A. Buss, executive assistant, to appoint such additional 
Clerical and custodial employees as might, be necessary to meet ih« 
emergency caused by war. " Office communication between Manila 
9? i«?? r< i gl i 0r Was ex tremely limited dumm; the period December 
25, 1941, to January 1, 1942, as all channels were needed for militan 
purposes, it , is, therefore, possible that some clerical and eusto 
soefinT^' Wl L° Se namcs do not a P near in th «' presented in 

Mr Bus Toit^X he ° n ad(1 r d t0 t ?, , °, V ;,V ,0 , Us ^ 'appointment in 
jvir. ijuss, ot which no record is available at this time. 

TWtnr'vr 1942 ,'J ho r *'<i'i"g High Commissioner wrote to thd 

%GB£^£!S^ - d IslaDd Sessions, DepartmS 

Th/> r devnl „ ,^ t, l " an co in .service be extended to the personnel of t he Of i^T 

STomwSfe ave^J J ' as J?" « American personnel, under u »S 

«f i„ o iv in i hi iu - "\ ! ,ore tha " thrcc a dav - was !l " inspiring demonstrating 

of then i ..» de trins T l Statcs Government. None deserted their poMs. M am 

the Office 7m h1 r"""' ! U ' c areaa " ,,cIer clir . CCt r "' c to Perform the duties, 
' „ , " ,f '"ercy. Thcv organized and stood wa.eh over Gover-' 

They Sro' the Efffc £ ^V" 8 ^ 3 neglecting their families ami ^ 
inej smiu e ne loss of practicallv all their personal property. In manv r<u»* 
all or a substantial part of their .savings ai d checking account* were ,eftT 
Manila banks and cannot be recovered until after the war. if at all For the2 
reasons I wish o bespeak in their behalf vhe greatest, possible consideration an 
Whatever remedies may be provided for loss of property. " OD 

Appropriations and expenditures of the Office of the High Conn 
sxoner. — The appropriation of the Congress for the Office of the 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 69 

United Stales High Commissioner for the fiscal year ending June 30, 
1942, was $160,000, of which $4,500 was for the purchase and ex- 
change of three automobiles to replace official cars in use for the past 
several years; The not operating; Office budget was thus $155,500 as 
compared with $154,000 for the previous fiscal year. The appropri- 
ation was divided administratively as follows: 

Personal services, field S11S, 600 

Supplies and materials 3, 600 

Communications service 3, 600 

Travel expenses 8, 000 

Transportation of things 2, 000 

Furnishing of heat, light, power, and electricity 6. 400 

Repairs and alterations 1, 000 

Special and miscellaneous expenses (contingent fund) 10, 000 

Equipment, general 2, 300 

Equipment, 3 automobiles 4, 500 

Total.- L 1^0, 000 

Of the three automobiles provided for in the appropriation, one, a 
seven-passenger Cadillac, had been purchased in Manila. It was 
left in custody of Mr. Claude A. Buss, executive assistant, who 
remained in Manila. The High Commissioner authorized Mr. Buss 
to destroy the car if such action seemed necessary to prevent its 
capture or requisition by the enemy. Another unit, a five-passenger 
car, is understood fed have been purchased by the Washington Quarter- 
master Depot for account of the High Commissioner's Office and to bo 
awaiting orders for disposition at Fort Mason, San Francisco. The 
third unit has not been purchased. 

On December 9, 1941, working much of the day in basement shelters 
during air raids, Miss Helen Burke, office accountant, closed the books 
for the period July 1 to November 30, 1941, and reported her accounts 
by radiogram to the Division of Territories and Island Possessions. 
This report places total expenditures from the fiscal year 1942 appro- 
priation at $47,095.52; outstanding obligations estimated at $2,592.88; 
expenditures for the account of the United States Treasury Depart- 
ment covering salaries, wages, supplies, and equipment for the 
Philippine office of Foreign Funds Control at $2,236.77; simdar ad- 
vances for the Philippine office of Export Control at $28.50 lor account 
of the State Department and $2,034.23 for account of the Economic 
Control Board. Miss Burke is detained by enemy action in Manila 
at 911 M. H. del Pilar Street. , _^ , 

Accounts covering office expenditures from December 1 to December 
28, 1941, were reportedly taken by Lt. Col. J. R. Vance, Finance 
Department, United States Army (whose office in Manila had dis- 
bursed for the High Commissioner's Office since its establishment) on 
his evacuation from Manila to Corregidor which occurred December 
31. In Corregidor, Lt. Col. J. R. Vance made additional pay-roll 
disbursements in respect to the several American and Filipino officers 
and employees who were evacuated with the High Commissioner to 
Fort Mills' on December 24. It is not known at this time whether 
any of these records were sent out before the capitulation of Corregidor. 

On December 15 all officers and employees who desired it were paid 
in advance to March 15, 1942. After his return to Washington the 
High Commissioner certified to the Philippine Section of the Division 
of Territories and Island Possessions the names, positions, and salaries 



70 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



of all officers and employees known by him to have been detained 
the Philippines by enemy action. As required by Federal Goveri 
ment legislation their salary checks are being drawn regularly and bek 
for their account. In the case of most of the American personnel i 
detained in Manila the whole or major part of their salaries wi 
covered by allotments to families or by assignment to deposits in bank 
in the United States. 

Emergency fund: On December 9, 1041, anticipating possible d:- 
ruption of communicalions with the Army Finance Office, the Hi,: 
Commissioner requested the Director of the Division of TerritoiS 
and Island Possessions to obtain authority for emergency expendl 
turcs up to $200,000 for bombproofing, salaries, loans, costs of evacu* 
tion, acquirement of foodstuffs, employment of guards and spec:-- 
laborers, and other charges which might be occasioned by t he war 
the Philippines. The sum was made available from the 14 Kmergor. 
Fund for the President" contained in the Independent ( Mlices Apnr;. 
priation Act, 1942, approved April o, 1941, as uiim-ikIim] by the Firs 
Supplemental National Defense Appropriation Act, 10 12, to he chare, 
to the limitation of S2,500,000 specified for unvouchered expendituqE 

On December 23, 1941, on the eve of evacuation from Manila, tb 
High Commissioner signed and delivered to Dr. Howard F. SmiW 
disbursing officer (United States Public Health Service), ManjM 
two vouchers against the emergency fund and received $05,000 
cash. Of this amount, $35,000 was turned over to Mr. Claude B^H 
executive assistant, with authority to make such expenditures 
might be necessary to meet emergencies affecting the property 
personnel of the office remaining in Manila; $:>(), 0(H) was taken by tl 
High Commissioner to Corregidor, thence to Australia and the I'nit, 
States; $2,766.32 was expended for subsistence, travel, supplies, ar 
equipment of the evacuation party. The balance of s 4 J, .L\">:5.f>S wai 
refunded to the President's Emergency Fund on July (>, 11) 12. 11 

The fund had been requested in the amount of $200, 000 at a tim* 
when it was considered probable that the entire Ofiiee would 
moved to Baguio or some other interior point where it should be pre- 
pared to maintain itself for an indefinite time without eoniaet wu] 
disbursing officers. The subsequent evacuation of a limited numl 
of the staff to Corregidor proved inexpensive, particularly because 
transportation and much of the lodging for the evacua t ion party \\ t 
supplied by the Army and Navy. It is realized, however, that tl 
amount of $35,000 left with Mr. Buss may not have proved ample f v v 
the support of personnel detained in Manila beyond 6 months. A 
Dr. Howard Smith was also evacuated to Corregidor on December 31, 
it is extremely doubtful that Mr. Buss was able to obtain any furtht 
sums from the emergency fund. It is possible that foreseeing t! 
need of additional funds he may have obtained advances from the 
Manila branch of the National City Bank or other sources. If s<3 
these should eventually be repaid from the emergency fund. 

Official property. — Due to the emergency of war and the. conditions 
surrounding evacuation under fire, first to Corregidor and thereafter 
Australia b3 r submarine, it was possible to bring out very little Govei ; 
ment property. Two locker trunks of confidential files and code 



is Letter of the President to the Secretary of tlx- Treasury, December 13, 1U41. 

»• Letter of the Hiph Commissioner to Mr. E. K. Jitirlew, tirsl assistant secretary and luuluol o:V.. 
Department of the Interior, July G, 1942. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



71 



books and one automobile were taken to Corrcgidor. The automobile, 
a Pontiac purchased in 1938, was used for official purposes at the 
fortress and it was turned over to the Army at the time of evacuation 
to Australia. The files and copies of official correspondence and 
memoranda received at, and sent from, Corrcgidor were taken to 
Australia and subsequently to the United States. 

The value of Government property left in Manila and Baguio 
chargeable to the High Commissioner's office may be conservatively 
estimated at $150,000 exclusive of buildings and other permanent 
improvements such as the sea wall, dock, roads, and fences 

IV. COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT 

FEDERAL LEGISLATION AFFECTING THE PHILIPPINES 

Amendment of Tydings-McDuffie Act {Philippine Independence 
Act) —The Philippine Independence Act of 1934 provided for an 
export tax upon goods exported from the Philippines to the United 
States equivalent to 5 percent of the United States duty, to come into 
effect on January 1, 1941, and to remain in force during the calendar 
year 1941, with an annual progressive increase of an additional 5 
percent of the United States duty each January 1st thereafter until 
a maximum of 25 percent should be reached which should remain 
hi force until July 4, 1946. It provided also for certain declining 
quotas and for specified quantities of certain products to be exempt 
from the export duty. 

The provisions requiring the imposition of export taxes and declining 
duty-free quotas have never been popular in the Philippines and 
agitation for then* postponement began before the date when they 
became effective. Voice was given to this movement by the Common- 
wealth Secretary of Finance^who in a widely pubhewed statement 
made on September 17, 1940, urged the revision of the Independence 
Act and a suspension of the increasing export taxes and declining 
quotas. His stand was endorsed by the President of the 1 lnlippmes 
and in May 1941 the Commonwealth Assembly passed a resolution 
(No. 108) petitioning the President and the Congress of the United 
States to suspend the effect of the provisions imposing export taxes 

ai By the a act of December 22, 1941 (ch. 617, 55 Stat. 582) the collec- 
tion of the export tax and the progressive reduet ion pi quotas, as 
prescribed by section G (as amended) of the Philippine Independence 
Act, are suspended through December 31, 1942, and are to be 
resumed on January 1, 1943. The amendment provides as lollows: 

Be it enacted by the Se?iatc and House of Representatives of the UniUd State^ * of 
America in Congress assembled, That the imposition and collection the export 
tax orescribed bv section 6 of the Act of .March 24, 1934 entitled, "An Act to 
SvSTfbl 'the ^complete independence of the Philippine Islands, to provide for 
tto^OpSon^Of * constitution and a form of government for the Philippine 
Bands and for other purposes" (18 Stat, 456), as amended by the Act of August 

E C, Supp. V, title 48 sec, 1230), shall be suspended for 
a period commencing on and after the date following the approval of this Act 
and ending on December 31, 1942. 

On January 1, 1943, the imposition of such export tax shall be resumed the tax 
rate effective for said calendar year to be the same as the rate in effect at the time 
the tax was suspended; on each succeeding January 1 thereafter the export 
tax shall be increased progressively by an additional o per centum of the United 



72 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION KR 



States duty, except that during the period January 1, 19 1G, through Julv ; 
1946, the export tax shall remain at 15 per centum of the United States i 

Sec. 2. That the progressive reduction of the quotas of the Philippine an, 
of a class or kind in respect of which a quota is established by subdivision 3 t 
section b, section G of the said Act of March 24, 1934, as amended, shall be 
pended for a period commencing on and after the date following the approvm 
this Act and ending on December 31, 1942; the original quotas established I 
that subdivision for the year 1940 shall be in effect during the suspension. 

On January 1, 1943, the progressive reduction <>f the (plot as provided" for 
subdivision 3, subsection b, section 6 of the said Act of March 24, 1 934, as amend 
shall be resumed, the rate of reduction effective f«>r said calendar year to be I 
same as the rate in effect at the time the said quota were us] ended; 
calendar year thereafter through the calendar year 1945, each of the sa'id qu 
shall be the same as the corresponding quota for the immediately preceding i 
endar year, less 5 per centum of the corresponding original quota* 

For the period January 1, 194G, through July I 9 16, each of said cjuotasj 
be one-half of the corresponding quota specified for tin- calendar year 1945. 

Sec. 3. Nothing in this Act shall change in any respect not herein cxnr 
provided for the provisions of the Act of March 24, 1934, a^ amended. 

Congressional appropriation of sugar funds — $10,000,000 allocatic 
from emergency fund of the President and reimbursement thereof- 
October 1941 there was introduced in the House of Rcprescntnti 
a bill (H. R. 5825) to amend section 19 (a) of the Tydings-McDuS 
Act, as amended, and to amend the act of June 19, 1934 , so as to author 
lze the use of sugar funds and gold devaluation funds for mili- 
aria! naval defense purposes in the Philippine Islands. Under tl* 
bill the appropriations authorized would he available for paymc: 
to the Commonwealth Government, as authorized by the Comiiiandiwj 
General of the United States Army in the Far East or the CommandaBfc 
of the Sixteenth Naval District, United States Navy, 

Section 503 of the Sugar Act of 1937, as amended, authorize 
appropriation, for use in financing a program of economic adjustment 
in the Philippines, of an amount equal to the amount, of taxes collect, 
on sugar of Philippine production manufactured in or brought iin> 
the United States on or prior to June 30, 1945. The act of June 
1934, entitled "An act relating to Philippine currency reserves { 
m?°o S1 o - n t,lc United States/' authorizes an appropriation 
$-o,8G2,750.78 for the purpose of establishing on the books of tl 
rreasnry a credit in favor of the Treasury of the Philippine Ishu 
such amount representing the increase in value of t he cold oquivah 
on January 31, 1934, of the balances maintained in banks in tl* 
United btates by the Government of the Philippine Islands for 
gold standard fund and its Treasury certificate fund, less cert 
specified interest. 

^ke House Committee on Insular Affairs, in its report on the bill 
stated that the total amount which may under this legislation he 
S^WSn 1 ? estimated to be approximately $52,000,000, of win, 
S>2«5,»Ow ,7o0.78 represents the Philippine currency reserves funds, tM 
remainder representing the amount of sugar excise tax funds. 

non\ Pt i M,llM r 1941 thcrc was introduced in the Senate a bill (S 
1929) authorizing appropriations to be used for the defense of Out 
I hihppme Islands, and for other purposes and repealing the act e 
June 19,1934, referred to above. 

Extended consideration was given by the High Commissioner toil 
proposed legislation and to the possible effect upon the Philippines , 
the passage of the bills. 



REP OUT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



73 



As of the time at which this report is being written, II. R. 5S25 was 
pending, on recommittal, in the House Committee on Insular Affairs, 
and S. 1929, which passed the Senate with amendments, was pending 
in the same committee. The Senate amendments eliminated all refer- 
ence to the BUgar excise tax funds and provided that any appropriation 
made in connection with the act relating to Philippine currency re- 
serves shall be deemed to reduce pro tanto the credit in favor of the 
treasury of the Philippines standing on the books of the United States 
Treasury. 

On December 15, 1941, the President of the United States made an 
allocation of $10,000,000 from his emergency fund- 
to be expended bv the Secretary of War, in his discretion, for each and every 
purpose connected with the rendering of assistance to the Government of the 
Commonwealth of the Philippines for public relief and civilian defense in the 
Philippine Islands * * *. 

The allocation is understood to have been made in response to an 
appeal by radio from President Quezon to President Roosevelt. (See 
also Fluids Available to the Commonwealth Government upon Re- 
occupation of the Philippines in pt. IX of this report.) 

On December 23, 1941, House Joint Resolution 25S (Public, 371, 
77th Cong., ch. 621, 1st sess., 55 Stat. 855) was approved. Ihc 
resolution carries additional appropriations incident to the o ^ at "?™ 
defense for the fiscal years ending June 30, 1942, and June 30, 194,3, 
and provides as follows: 

Relief of the Philippine Islands: The moneys authorized to be appropriated 
in accordance with section 503 of the Su-ar Act of 1937 (50 Stat. 91o) . as ^amended 
but not exceeding the amount of taxes referred to in such section 503 COUec*ea 
prior to the date of enactment of this Act, are hereby appropriated, and in addi- 
tion thereto the sum of $10,000,000 is appropriated, out of any money in tne 
Treasury not otherwise appropriated, to enable the Secretary of War to meet 
expends for each and every purpose necessary to provide for public relict ana 
civilian defense ill the Philippine Islands, fiscal year 1942, to remain available 
until expended: Provided, That this appropriation shall be available for payment 

to the\iovernnien( of the Commonwealth of the Philippines, either in advance 
of or in reimbursement for all or any part of the estimated or actual cost, as 
authorized bv the Commanding General, United States Army m the bar Kast, 
of DUbtto relief and civilian defense in the Philippine Islands: Provided further, 
Thai tttifl appropriation may be expended without regard to the provision- ot 
law regulating the expenditure or accounting for funds of the United states: 
And vromded further, That of the amount herein appropriated the sum of si 0,000,- 
000 shall be Wored to the emergency fund for the President, created by the 
Tndenendent Offices Appropriation Act, L942, in reimbursement of a like amount 
R vaneecl therefrom for the purposes herein authorized, and any expenditures 
heretofore or hereafter made from that fund for such purposes are hereby author- 
ized and validated. 

It is also of interest that the Act of December 26, 1941 (55 Stat. 
87*) amended section 5C3 of the Sugar Act of 1937, which authorizes 
an appropriation, to finance a program of economic adjustment in 
the Philippines, of a sum equal to the amount of excise taxes collected 
on PHfopine sugar to and including June 30, 1945. Prior to the 
amendment the date specified was June 30, 1942. (See High Com- 
missioner's fifth annual report, p. 33.) m TXT-k -rt 

Extension of war damaqe insurance to the I hUippwes. — 1 he VYai 
Damage Corporation (originally entitled "War Insurance Corpora- 
tion") was created under the Reconstruction Finance Corporation 
Act for the purpose of providing indemnity against loss of, or damage 



83018—43- 



74 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



to, real and personal property as a result of the war. Funds for * 
Corporation were directed to be provided by the Reconstruct] 
Finance Corporation, and by the act of March 27. 10 • 2 (< h. IDS, 
Stat. 174) the aggregate amount of such funds was fixed at not 
exceed $1,000,000,000. 

That statute also provides as follows: 

Sec. 5g (a> * * * The Rcr-omi rur-i inn l » " Corporation is autbfli 
used to and shall empower the War Damage Corp< ration to use its funds ;<» ; - 
vide, through insurance, reinsurance, or otherwise, reasonable protection as-;!- 
loss of or damage to property, real and personal, which may rr-ult from ene3 
attack (including any action taken by i lie military, naval, <»r -ir f« r es of [ 
United Stale- in resisting enemy attack), with BUch general exceptions as 3 
War Damage Corporation, will) the approval of the Som-tary of ( '< < n mrrve, n\i 
deem advisable. Such protection shall he made available throm h the' V 
Damage ( ; , on and afier a dale to ho determined and published hv tS 

Secretary of Commerce which shall not be later than July 1, ! 4 .t fj. up,,,, tl oY 
• ment of such premium or other charge, and subject to such terms and conditi. 
as the War Damage Corporation, with the approval of the S»*cr.i :nv «>f ( '<>mm< - 
may establish, but. in view of the national intercut involved, I ho W ar Dan 
Corporation shall from time to time establish uniform rates fen- each type of 
erty with respect to winch such protection is made available, and/ in orde^B 
establish a basis for such rates. BUch Corporation shall estimate the average ril 
of loss on all property of such type in Me I'm'ted Sta.tes. Sm-h protection T ' 
applicable only (1) to such propertv situated in the 1'nitefl >t. to- (includim* t v i 
several States and the District of 'Columbia), the Philippine Islands, the CaS 
Zone, the Territories and possessions of the United States, and in <nch otl 
places a< may be determined by the President to be under the dominion and <^ 
trol of the United States, (2) to such propertv in transit between any poir 
located in any of the foregoing and (3) to all bridges between the United St3 
and Canada and between the United States ami Mexico: Provided That <ii 
protection shall not be applicable after the date determined hv the Seerctan 
Commerce under this subsection to property in transit upon "which the Gnil 
SJ f ;"i. r '" I,H ' Commission is authorized to provide marine war-risk insuraj 
Ihe War Damage Corporation, with the approval of the Secretary of Comraen 
may suspend, restrict, or otherwise limit such protection in any aren to the e\tV 
that it may determine to be necessary or advisable in consideration of the loss 
control over such area bv the United States making it impossible or in practical 
to provide such protection in such area. 

(b) Subject to the authorizations and limitations prescribed in subsection (• 
any loss or damage to any such property sustained subsequent to December 

1941, and prior to the date determined by the Secretary of Commerce under m- 
section (a), may be compensated by the War Damage Corporation without f 
quiring a contract of insurance or the payment of premium or other charge m 
such loss or damage may be adjusted as if a policy covering such propertv waS 
fact in force at the time of such loss or damage. - 

Under regulations issued by the Corporation and effective July 

1942, insurance will be written, for the present, on properties situat* 
in the continental United States of America, Alaska, Virgin IslancS 
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Canal Zone. Thus it would appear tha 
property in the Philippines is not at present eligible for insurance hi. 
that losses to such property sustained between December (5, 1041, aH 
July 1, 1942, might be compensable under section oo- (b) above quoted 

On June 18, 1942, a bill (FT. R. 7201) was introduced in the Hous 
to amend the act of March 27, 1942, so as to extend war damage in 
surance protection to the Philippines after July 1 , 1 942. At thcTtiir 
this report is being written that bill had not been reported out of the 
Committee on Banking and Currency to which it had been referred, 

Application to Philippines of Cnitnl States law rraalathuj cntra <: 
departure of persons from the United States .—As stated in the fifth re- 
port of the High Commissioner (p. 20) the Second National Assembh 
passed the Philippine Immigration Act of 1940. The act was uj 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 75 

proved by the President of the United States and took effect on Jan- 
uary 1, 1941. It contains extensive provisions relating to the entry 
of immigrants into the Philippines and establishes a Bureau of Immi- 
gration to administer the act. 

On June 21, 1941, the President of the United States approved 
Public Law 114, Seventy-seventh Congress (ch. 210, 55 Stat. 252) 
which amends certain sections of and supplements the act of May 22, 
1918 (ch. 81, 40 Stat. 559; U. S. C, title 22, sees. 223-226). The 
latter act authorized the President to issue wartime restrictions upon 
the departure of persons from and their entry into the United States 
which was defined to include — 

Che Canal Zone and all territory and waters, continental or insular, subject to 
the jurisdiction of the United States. 

By the amendments additional restrictions arc imposed and the 
term "United States" is redefined to include the Philippines. Under 
the authority contained in the act, as amended, the President issued 
a proclamation on November 14, 1941 (6 F. R. 5821) containing rules, 
regulations and orders, governing the subject and delegating certain 
powers to the Secretary of State and the Attorney General.- 

It would appear that the. Federal statute and regulations issued 
thereunder have, superseded the Commonwealth Act to the extent 
that any conflict may exist. 

SI'KCIAL SKSSION OF THE PHILIPPINE ASSEMBLY 

An extraordinary session of the Assembly was called in Manila on 
or about December 11, 1941, at which time it is reported to have 
approved (1) a resolution pledging to the United States the support 
and cooperation of the Commonwealth Government m the war 
against Japan and (2) a bill making all "W^JJ^gSsiJ 
general and special funds available for national defense and protection 
of the .civilian population. „i^„t n^m 

The Assembly also is reported to have approved, on or about l^ecein 
ber 10, 1941, a resolution declaring a state of total emergency and 
authorizing President Quezon to promulgate rules and regulations to 
moot the emergency,. The President's first act was to commandeer 
food Fuel, building materials, and other necessaries and to auUionze 
severe pens 1 1 ies for hoarding. Also, he authorized the organization of 
a labor corps to serve as a military unit. , 

ft is of interest to note that Commonwealth Act No. 620 wh ch 
was approved June 6, 1941, amended section 1 of Commonwealth Act 
No GOO (the so-called Emergency Powers Act, approved August 19, 
1940 Which is referred to in the fifth annual report of the High Com- 
missioner) so as to give the President of the Philippines extraorchnary 
Sowers and authority to promulgate rules and regulations haying the 
force an i effect of law "until the date of adjournment of the next 
regular session of the First Congress of the PHtopmes unless sooner 
amended or repealed by the Congress of the Philippines. No 

' , session of the First Congress of the Philippines has been held. 
^PSSSaX ConSionwelltii Act* Nos. 600 arid 620 may be 
found I on pages 24 and 28, respectively, of the Fifth Annual Report of 
the High Commissioner. 

— „„ ; : ,.,„ ri „ mrlm( , nt of State and the Immigration ami Naturalization Service, issued under 

ttoStS^ttSSSSbfteUBOta OF. K., at pp. 0009 and 59.1, respectively. 



76 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



COMMONWEALTH BILL REQUIRING APPROVAL BY THE PRESIDENT OF TBI 

UNITED STATES 

Bill No. 3217, which was passed by the Nation.nl Assembly • 
session, on May 22, 1941, and which authorized the President oFfl 
Philippines to prohibit, by proclamation, the exportation of fow 
products and other articles or commodities of prime necessity ws 
submitted to the President of the United States for his approval 
disapproval (see fifth annual report of High Commissioner pa°>cl3M 

The President withheld approval of the bill for the reason that tl» 
act of July 2, 1940 (ch. 508, 54 Stat. 712; U. S. C. title 50 see 701* 
an act to expedite the strengthening of the national defense " 
thonzed the President to prohibit or curtail the export of stra't«2 
materials, and by the act of May 28, 1941 (ch. 134, 55 Stat aS 
U. b. C. title 50, sec. 702), the provisions of the act of July ° 1~' 
were made to apply to "all Territories, dependencies, and possessioij 
ol the United Stales, including the Philippine Islands * 
As stated by the President in. a Tetter to President Quezon: 

As you know, however, an act of the American Congress, providing tn* 
control of exports of strategic materials, has recently been extended to the Phil- 
Maes and is already functioning. It appears to ofTcr the neccs-arv m-icb' ■■ 
f t ? r c ° n .tr o,, . ,n 8 exports of foodstuffs and other articles of prime- necessity £S 
the Philippines, without the need of setting up a parallel Admini ' V t i ,,V . • 
Commonwealth Government. From the standpoint of e 1 < ie ev ™ "wPth*" 
view to the avoidance of any possibility of duplication or contliet bet 
export control administrations, it seems to me best that the an h. r tv <1 
be centralised under the administration alreadv established a,1Ulo »ty shou* 

1 he High Commissioner, after consultation "with vour Government has riJi 
me a 1 st of articles whose exportation from the Philippines should be subiSS 
to control and I have signed a proclamation adding those art id " bt 
controlled exports Any additions to the list that n.av seen, U . -'d, , 
future can be handled in the same way. 1 am sun, von will find tl V . 'VA, 
solution to your problem, during the emergency, and 1 am, 1 ln ref, v • i i", V . 
action on bill No. 3217 for the time being. rc ' ™ K >»g OS 

In reply, President Quezon expressed agreement "on the advisability 
of concentrating the administration and control of these exnort 
one single authority for the tune being." ' H 111 

ELECTIONS OP NOVEMBER II, 1941 

Amendments to the Constitution of the Philippines, which wer* 
approved by the President of the United States on December " V 
changed the Commonwealth unicameral legislature to a bieam'oi 
body and altered the terms of office of the President and Vice Pi " 
dent, flections were held in November 1941 for the 24 members!- 
the newly created Senate as well as for President, Vice President i»5 
98 members of the House of Representatives. 

a ♦ ^ 0 PY en , t " m of tllc Nationalist Party was held in Manila froi~ 
August lb to 19 and nominated its candidates for the Presidency Vie* 
Presidency, and the 24 members of the Senate. The HonorafcZ 
Manuel L. Quezon and the Honorable Sergio Osmena were renominate 
for President and \ ice President, respectively. 

I he convention, numbering some 500 delegates, submitted a list of 
81 names to the nominating committee. The committee then select, 
24 from among the 81 thus submitted and these 24 were approved ! 
the convention as the party's senatorial candidates without, a di^en 
ing vote. It was currently believed that the candidates had bo« 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



77 



selected by President Quezon and other party leaders even before the 
convention convened. The nominees were: 21 

Antonio de las Alas, former Secretary of Finance. 

Sultan Sa Romain Alonto, Lieutenant Governor of Lanao Province. 

Melecio Arranz, former senator. 

Nicolas Bucndia, assemblyman. 

Mariano J. Cuenco, former Secretary of Public Works and Com- 
munications. 

Ramon J. Fernandez, shipping magnate, former senator. 
Carlos P. Garcia, Governor of Bohol Province. 
Domingo Imperial, justice of the court of appeals. 
Vincent e Madrigal, shipping magnate. 
Daniel Maramba, assemblyman. 
Jose Ozamiz. 

Quintin Paredes, floor leafier of the National Assembly. 

Elipidio Quirino, former Secretary of Finance and of Interior. 

Claro M. Recto, former senator. 

Kulogio Rodriguez, mayor of Manila. 

Esteban de la Rama, shipping magnate. 

Norberto Komualdez, former Justice of the Supreme Court. 

Manuel Roxas, Secretary of Finance. 

Emilio Tria Tirona, former senator. 

Ramon Torres, Governor of Negros Occidental. 

Jos6 Yulo, Speaker of the National Assembly. 

Candidates of the Nationalist Party for the 98 seats in the lower 
house were not nominated in the national convention, regional 
conventions being held in the legislative districts. As a general rule, 
it was required that 60 percent of the delegates to a regional con- 
vention must favor a candidate to obtain his nomination and that 
otherwise the party directorate would decide. There were, however, 
a number of exceptions. For example: (a) In districts where the 
opposition parties were regarded as unimportant, free zones were 
declared, which meant that two or more men of the Nationalist 
Party might stand against each other; (6) in some instances aspirants 
who nad failed to receive 60 percent of the votes of the delegates were 
designated; and (c) in at least two instances dissatisfaction with the 
man who obtained more than 60 percent approval resulted in his 
being forced to withdraw. At the end of the nominating period 
69 candidates of the Nationalist Party for the lower house had been 
officially approved and 23 districts had been declared free zones. 

The platform adopted by the Nationalist Party included the 
statement that "we declare the unflinching determination of the 
Filipino people to obtain their independence. ,, Also, Speaker Yulo 
in his kevnote speech referred to the party's solemn dedication to 
independence and asserted that "the Philippines will become inde- 
pendent in 1946." President Quezon said during the course of his 
speech accepting the nomination for the presidency that "we as a 

Earty, we as a people — want — our own independent government — 
ut whether our goal will be attained or not depends upon the out- 
come of the war." 

On the subject of economic relations with the United States the 
Nationalist Party platform stated that "as our program of economic 



*> Three of the candidates originally designated declinod. This list shows the candidates of the Nationalist 
Party who actually filed certificates of candidacy. 



78 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

adjustment has been drastically set back by present war conditio* 
we propose to secure from the United States, through the econciB 
conference provided for in the Independence Act, <>r sooner if possiUt 
a revision of the economic provisions of that act so that preferen! 
trade with America may be allowed to continue after independe: 
and shall not be terminated until the expiration of such period a> i 
be considered reasonably necessary to permit the Philippines to mil 
a proper adjustment of her economy." 

In addition to the Nationalist Party there were 1 0 others represent* 
by candidates for various elective offices at the November eleetio^ 
None of the latter, however, was nation wide in scope and most \v*# 
small local groups. The most important were: The radical wing 
the Popular Front, led bj r Pedro Abad Santos and known a 
Socialist-Communist Party; the right wing of the Popular Front, I* 
by Juan Sumulong and differing little, if at all, in ideology from lb 
Nationalist Party; the Young Philippines Ctaimp; and the Natioul 
Democratic Party. EfTorts of the two wings of the Popular Fix* 
and of the Young Philippines and the Nat ional Democrat s to coal 
for election purposes failed and, as a result, each party had its 
incomplete ticket. 

It was a foregone conclusion that the Nationalist Party wo 
obtain an overwhelming victory. The election laws were so devis 
that voting a split ticket was discouraged. Under a so-called block 
voting system, prescribed by the new election law (Act No. 664 
enacted in the preceding fiscal year, provision was made for voting 
straight ticket by writing the name of the party at the top of the ball 

r I h ! commission on elections on October 14 issued instructions tU 
there were five parties whose name could be written in by perscm 
wishing to vote a straight ticket; namely, the Nationalist Party, tS 
Popular Front (Sumulong's right wing), the Popular Front (IV 
Abad Santos' left wing), Young Philippines and Ganap. The nau>« 
of the candidates of the first three parties were printed on the balM 
and the candidates of the other two were printed and displayed at th 
polls. This arrangement resulted in a handicap against the candidal* 
of the smaller political groups. 

Pedro Abad Santos, the presidential candidate of the nu sr. imports 
minority party, withdrew on October 15 as candidate for President c 
the ground that his party had been denied the right to name elect 
inspectors in certain districts where the results of the previous d 
tions had given his party that right. In a statement to the pr^a 
Mr. Santos said: "We are denied the chance of participating in tk 
election under fair conditions. I have no security that my votes % 
be counted in those electoral precincts where my party has no elect ; 
inspectors" and "it is foolish to believe that the forthcoming elect! 
will be fair and clean, as far as my party and myself are concerned 
As a result of Mr. Santos' withdrawal his party entered the elect u 
without a presidential candidate. 

Of the 3,500,000 registered voters in the Philippines, some 2,000,00 
or 57 percent of the electorate cast votes. President Quezon \m 
reported to have been reelected by an 80 percent vote, his neai 
competitor, Juan Sumulong, receiving less than 20 percent of the to ( 
votes cast. Vice President Osmena won over his nearest com pet \\ 
by an even wider margin, receiving some 82 percent of the vote. 



KEPOHT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 79 

The 24 senatorial candidates of the Nationalist Party won with ease, 
With the Nationalist candidate who received the lowest number of 
votes well ahead of the nearest opposition candidate. 

Among the candidates for the 9S seats in the house of representa- 
tives, only three oppositionists were elected; one candidate of Sumu- 
lon^'s wing of the Popular Front, one Young Philippines candidate 
and one National Democrat candidate. 

The overwhelming victory of the Nationalist Party was due to the 
personal popularity of its leaders and to an efficient political machine. 
A considerable number of potential opponents Were dissuaded from 
competing in the electiors by appointments to attractive political 
and administrative positions. Two outstanding pro-Japanese candi- 
dates of the Nationalist Party, Pio Duran, candidate in Albay Prov- 
ince, and Cesar Sotto, candidate in Davao, were defeated at the polls. 

APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL 

No appeal was taken from any decision of the Auditor General 
during the period under review. 

PERSONNEL OF COMMONWEALTH CABINET ON CORRECJDOR AND IN THE 

UNITED STATES 

As mentioned in the general statement, part I of this report, the 
President of the Philippines and certain other Commonwealth officials 
proceeded from Manila to Corregidor on December 24, 1941, and 
ultimately the majority of these officials were evacuated to the United 
States. 'President Quezon, in a letter dated September 30, 1942, to 
the Under Secretary of the Interior, stated that upon his transfer to 
Corregidor the members of his cabinet were: , 

Honorable Sergio Osmefia, Vice President of the Philippines and 
Secretary of Public Instruct ion. 

lion. Jose Abad Santos, Secretarv of Justice and Finance.- 

Mai. Gen. Basilic J. Yaldes/ chief of stall, Philippine Army, 
Secretarv of National Defense and Public Works and Communications. 

President Quezon further stated that Mr. Santos resigned and that 
the Honorable Andres Soriano was appointed Secretary ot Finance 
on March 20, 1942. The Honorable Joaquin M. Elizalde, Philippine 
Resident Commissioner, serves as a member of the Cabinet without 
portfolio. 

COLLABORATION WITH JAPANESE GOVERNMENT 

There appears to be little or no authentic information as to what, 
if any collaboration took place with the Japanese Government on the 
part of American and Philippine citizens in localities outside of Manila. 
In January Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo, Mr. Jorge B. Vargas, formerly 
secretary to the President of the Commonwealth, and Had] a Gulamul 
Rasul, son of the late Prime Minister to the Sultan of Sulu, and a 
member of the National Assembly, made radio broadcasts from 
Manila in comparatively mild support of the Japanese, placing 

J3 In documents rclatinR to the custody and destruction of Philippine currency on Corrcpidor, Chief 
Just ce 3™ UOS Sen Ml his name variously as "Acting Secretary of Imancc, Agriculture and Commerco 
and l^aSSkI Secretary of Finance." General Valdes Simedhis name on these documents as "Secretary of 
National Defense. Public Works, Communications, and Labor. 



80 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

emphasis on the promise of the Japanese Prime Minister to gra 
independence to the Philippines. 

More definite information exists as to the situation in Manu 
Certain copies of the Manila Tribune, a daily apparently taken uni 
control by the Japanese, for the months of January and Fcbruii 
1942 were made available to the High Commissioner while on Corrta 
dor, and the information in this section is based on reports in 
Tribune, in most instances confirmed by radio broadcasts from Mc: 
heard at Corregidor, and intercepts subsequently reported by it 
Federal Communications Commission. 

The Manila Tribune of January 25, 1942, printed the follow is 
letter of January 23, 1942, from Jorge B. Variras : m<i others to 
commander in chief of the Japanese forces in the Philippines: 

Manila, Philippines, January 23 t 19{* 
His Excellency, the Commander in Chief 

of the Imperial Japanese Forces in the Philippines. 

Excellency: In response to the me- am- of Your Kxe.iieney as commaH 
in chief of the Imperial Japanese forces, on the 8th of January 11)12, thr 
Hon. Jorge B. Vargas, we have duly taken note of the contents then-of • 
respectfully express our gratitude for Your Excellency's words of solicitude 
the welfare of our people. 

We beg to inform Your Excellency that, in compliance with your advice, a) 
having in mind the great ideals, the freedom and the happiness of our country,? 
are ready to obey to the best of our ability and within the means at our dis; 
the orders issued by the Imperial Japanese forces for t he maintenance of pe:n\ s 
order and the promotion of the well-being of our people un ! 
tary administration. Consequently, we have constituted ourselves into a 
visional Philippine Council of State and we are immediately proceeding to , 
our articles of organizal ion in line with Your Excellency's advice. 

Availing ourselves of this opportunity, we renew to Your Excellency the asjtf 
ance of our highest consideration. 

Jorge B. Vargas, Jos6 Yulo, Quint in Parcdes, Jo>6 P. Laur.-l. Her .' 
S. Aquino, Teofilo Sison, Rafael Alunan, f Ma.ro M. Ue< 
Bocobo, Leon G. Guinto, Jose Fabelhi. 23 Kulo^io Rodn< 
Sotero Baluyut, Serafin Mnrabut, Kmilio Asminaldo, \i 
Madrigal, Ramon J. Fernandez, Antonio Do Las Alas, 1 • 
QuirinOj Jose Zulueta, Dominador Tan. Franeisco La\ 
Etamon Avencena, Miguel L'nson, Alejandro Roces, V 
Sabido, Alfonso Mendoza," Melecio Arranz, Pedro C. H 
Jose Ozamiz, Jose* Veloso, 23 Ricardo Navarro, Frospero i?ani !. 
Eugenio Perez. 

Commenting on the foregoing letter the Tribune of the same dftt 
stated: 

At the residence of Speaker Jos6 A. Yulo on Penafrancia last Friday mor 
30 prominent Filipino officials and private citizens, signed the document a' 
constituting themselves a provisional Philippine Council of State. The sit: 
of the document was preceded by preliminary meetings of an exploratory na 
In this document, addressed to the commander in chief of Japanese expedite, 
forces, they pledged to obey the orders of the Imperial Japanese forces in 
interest of the maintenance of peace and order and the promotion of the \ 
being of the people in the occupied territory. Pour of t.hirfv-four promi 
Filipinos failed for various reasons to sign' this document. 'They were % t 
Fabella, Alfonso Mendoza, Jose" Veloso, and Prospcro Sanidad. It \\;> ( s 
document winch was presented to the representative of the commander in ( 
in the ceremony held last Friday afternoon at military headquarters. The Co^ 
cil of State formed the basis of the civil administration of the occupied terriwi 
and acts as an advisory to the Executive Commission. Jorge B. Vargas 
appointed chairman of the Executive Commission by the commander in cl 

u Unsigned over typed names; all others signed. 



I 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



81 



On January 28, the Manila Tribune published the following: 

Commission Discusses Organization Plans — Approval of Military Is 
Sought — Services of Old Kmcloykks May Be Retained 

The Executive Commission of the civil administration established in the occu- 
pied territory hold its first meeting at Malacanan yesterday afternoon to discuss 
plans for the organization Of the new administrative oruans under order No. 1 of 
the commander in chief of the Japanese expeditionary forces. 

The Commission was reported to have reached an agreement on the general 
framework of the new government. Chairman Jorge B. Vargas, who presided 
over the meeting, will present the plan to the commander in chief for approval. 

It was understood that efforts will he made to retain as many government 
employees in the service as possible, although substantial reduction may be made 
in salaries of officials in the higher brackets. 

After the meeting vesterdav, C hairman Vargas made an announcement asking 
the heads of the bureaus and offices existing prior to the Japanese occupation to 
report to the commissioners having jurisdiction over their former activities. 

The commissioners may be reached in the following places: 

Commissioner of Interior Benigno S. Aquino, at his residence or at the oilice 
of the former department of the interior. 

Commissioner of Finance Antonio de las Alas, at his residence or at the oliicc 
of the former department of finance. 

Commissioner of Justice Jose P. Laurel, at his residence. 

Commissioner of Agriculture and Commerce Rafael R. Alunan, at his residence 
Commissioner of Education, Health, and Public Welfare Claro M. Recto, at 
his residence or law office. _ . . . „i„ . of 

Commissioner of Public Works and Communications Quint in 1 arcdes, at nis 

residence or law office. , . . flliJu, „.«m 

At the meeting vesterdav afternoon, all the members of the COn^lSSlO^nwere 
present. Chairman Varfiis also invited Teofilo Sison, auditor general and OUreCtOT 
of the budget, and Serafin Marabut, executive secretary to the commission, to 
attend the meeting. . . . u\„u 

The members of the executive commission, who were appointed by the n i^i 
command the previous dav. assumed their office yesterday morning. i nc\ 
started preparation of the lists of their respective offices and bureaus. — . , 

Commissioner of the Interior Benigno S. Aquino conferred with the omciaw 
of the department of the interior yesterday. He took up the question oi per- 
sonnel of the department. 

On January 29, 1942, President Quezon released a proclamation 
qualifying the claims to jurisdiction over the Philippines of the Council 
of State and Executive Commission erected by the Japanese Com- 
mander in Chief: 

The determination of the Filipino people to continue fighting side by side 
with tho United States until victory is won has in no way been weakened by tne 
.1 norirv reverses suffered by our arms. We are convinced that pur sacrifices 
will be crowned with victory in the end and in that conviction we shall continue 
To resist the enemy with all our might. Japanese military forces arc occupying 
sect tens bf the Philippines comprising only one-third of our territory. In the 
remaining areas constitutional government is still in operation under my au- 
thortl v I have no direct information concerning the veracity of the news broadcast 

^ ToK^ commission composed of some well-known Filipinos has been 
recent y organized in Manila to take charge of certain functions of civil govern- 
ment The organization of such a commission, if true, can have no political 
sTgnificance > no f onlv because it is charged merely with purely administrative 

S rb Ulso because the acquiescence by its members to serve ! in the 
commission was evidently for the purpose of safeguaiding the welfare of the 
SSS population Id in noSvay, reflect the se ntiments i of the ^ Filipino 

toward the enemy. Such sentiments are still those I have repeatedly expressed 
in the post: Loyalty to America and resolute resistance against the invasion of 
our territory and liberties. 

On January 31, 1942, the following broadcast was made by Jorge B. 

Vargas over station KZRH, Manila. The transcript was furnished 



82 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



to the High Commissioner by the Office of the President of lb 
Commonwealth at Corregidor: 

Fellow countrymen and friends of the radio audience, because <>f circumstaj 
beyond our control, the Philippines found herself involved in ih«« war bet* 
Japan and the United State.-. As a result of tin's war, most of the Philippines 
been placed under the military administration of the Imperial Japanese fo 
In dealing with the occupied territory, however, the high command of the 
perial Japanese forces has expressed a deep d<-i,<- i<, follow :L benign and liU 
policy predicated on the willingness of the people to cooperate with the milif 
administration in the reestablishment of peace and order, and to that end 
set up a national civil administration intended, among other things, to ten 
the rigors of martial law. The fact thai the high command ha* seen it fit that 
civil government be run by Filipinos tinder the control of t h<- Imperial Jap 
Army, should be a cause for gratification on the part of our people. r 
J ilipinos have accepted this responsibility in the convict ion that they will 
the best interests of their countrymen. 

In my capacity as Chairman of the Executive Commission, I appeal t" 
people of the Philippines to return to their respective homes and resume t 
normal life to the end that law and order may be restorer! and so that they 
be able to embark on the work of reconstruction and engage once more in a 
tive enterprises. 

The maintenance of law and order is a condition precedent to the attain 
of normalcy because without it there would be anarchy and chaos. Our 
have to be harvested, our roads and bridges reconstructed, and our lines of, 
munications restored; our gainful occupations have to be resumed and our in 
try rehabilitated. This we cannot accomplish under a reign of lawlessness m 
unless we cooperate fully with the Japanese milirarv administration And ti 
sooner we salvage what is left of our possessions, the less sulTVrin" then- win 
in the end, and we will be that much nearer to t he recovery of our economic wtM 
being and security. 

We cannot escape the inexorable fact that the fortunes of war have placed thai 
ot us in the occupied territories outride the protection of thr Tniiol SfiKs ■ • 
the m ere y of the Japanese military. We must have trust in the justice andfl 
ness Of the Japanese people. The illustrious Premier ('.imrrnl Tojo of |m, . 
a special pronouncement, promised us independence with bom r. It is he, 
tive, therefore, that we should refrain from commit tim,' act s which are detrinu- . 
or inimical to the interests of the Imperial Japanese forces. 

Our people have never abandoned our ideals of freedom and indencndeJ 
which have welded us into one nation. Under the Japanese militarv adnd 
tration, 1 am sure that united in a common cause and with the indomitable i 
which our people have shown on manv an occasion, we shall be able to r <M - 
peace and tranquillity, rebuild our homes made desolate bv the rava-es of w 
and once more brmic peace to our country. ' ^ 

r% °t Divin e Providence, [venture to hope that we shall be ahl 
ultimately to work out the realization of our nation;.! destiny. ^ 

The Manila Sunday News, an enemy newspaper which had beH 
supported by Japanese interests in Manila for a considerable peri 
?r.°o r t ' lc . wa 1 r , continued publication and its issue of February 
1942, contained the following Executive Order No. 1 of Jonre" F 
Vargas as chairman of the Executive Commission: 

Executive Order No. 1 

By the Chairman of the Executive Commission, Summary of Organizations of J 
central Administration Organs and Judicial Courts 

fKl^~^i a T«S ^ Inii "^trative Order No. 1 of the commander in chief % 
the toperial Japanese forces in the Philippines dated January 30, 1942. and i 
suant to the authority conferred upon me as head of the central administrai 
organization by Order No. i of the said commander in chief of the Impe, 
Japanese forces, it is hereby ordered that— 



ARTICLE I 



The central administrative organs and judicial courts arc hereby reconstitute 
and shall function in accordance with the following summary of organization: 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMIVIISSIONER 



83 



I. Central administrative organs 

Chairman of the Executive Commission: 
Budget and Auditing Office. 
Bureau of Civil Service. 

All examining boards. 
Office of Executive Secretary to the Commission (Official Ltazette). 
Bureau of Purchase and Supply. 
Bureau of Printing. 

Government -owned or controlled corporations. 
Department of t ho Interior: . . , . 

Bureau of Local Governments (provincial, city municipal, and specially 

organized local governments including Greater Manila). 
Bureau of Constabulary and Police. 
Bureau of Religious Affairs. 
Bureau of the Census and Statistics. 
Department of Finance: 

Bureau of the Treasury 

Bureau of Customs and Internal Revenue. 

Bureau of Financing. 

(Including Banking, Insurance, etc.). 
Government Service Insurance System. 
Philippine Charity Sweepstakes. 
Department of Justice: 
Bureau of Justice. 
Bureau of Prisons. 
Court of Appeals. 
Courts of first instance. 
Provincial and city fiscals and sheriffs. 
Justice of the peace courts and municipal courts. 
• Code Committee. 

Department of Agriculture and Commerce: w , T H q P ttlemcnt 

Bureau of Agricultural Administration (including National Land Settlement 

and Rural Progress Administration). 
Bureau of Plant and Animal Industry. 
Bureau of Lands. 
Bureau of Forestry and Fishery. 
Bureau of Science. 

Bureau of Commerce and Industries. 
Bureau of Mines. 

Departmentof Eduction, Health, and Public Welfare: 
Bureau of Public Instruction. 
Bureau of Private Education. 
Bureau of Physical Education. 
Bureau of Health (including Quarantine Service) 
Bureau of Public Welfare (including matters pertaining to laboi). 
University of the Philippines. 
National Library. 
Institute of National Language. 



institute 01 — ~o--o— 

Philionine General Hospital. 
Decent of Public Works and Communications: 
Bureau of Public Works. 
Bureau of Communications. 
Bureau of Transportation. 
Bureau of Public Utilities 
Metropolitan Waterworks Omce. 

2. Superior Court 
Supreme Court. article n 

t\ i fim .ti nT1R ond activities to be performed by the adminis- 

^«^'b^r»dJ«£ as herein reconstituted, will be deter- 

"■HWiSSg of S»^a2 U fflpP& this 30th day of January 1942. 

Jorge B. Vargas, 
Chairman, Executive Commission. 



84 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS!! 

From various sources as indicated a list of officials under theb 
administration of the Japanese Military Government was cob 
by the Office of the High Commissioner, as follows: 

1. From the (Manila) Sunday Tribune, February 8, 1942: 
Leon Guinto. mayor of Greater Manila. 
Jorpe B. VarL<a-, chairman of the Executive Commission. 
Serafin Marabut. secretary of the Executive Commission 
H llano Lara, Director of Public Welfare. 
Lt. Procopio Beltran, chief of police, San Juan. 
Lt. Cirilo Abaya, chief of police, Mandaluyong. 
Lt. Nicolas Guiwa, chief of police. Quezon City. 
Lt. Francisco Polotan, chief of police, Pasay. 
Lt. Pioquinto Bergado, chief of police, Caloocan. 
Lt. Lorenzo Ballanka, chief of police, San Pedro Makati. 
Lt. Claro Weber, chief of police, Paranaque. 
Juan Xolasco, assistant mayor of Greater Manila. 
Beniprno S. Aquino, Commissioner of the Inteiior. 
Jose Yulo, Chief Justice of Supreme Coin i . 
Ricardo Paras, Justice of Supreme Courl 
Jorge C. Bocobo. Justice of Supreme Court. 
Manuel M. de Hazanas, clerk of court. 
Einilio Abello, Assistant Commissioner of Justice. 
Jose P. Laurel, Commissioner of Justice. 

Santiago Estrada, Governor of Pangasinan, conferring with offleb 
Department of Justice. 

Mariano C. Icssiano, citv health officer. 

Jose* Figueras, Unemployment Section, Citv Hall. 

Celedonio Salvador, Director of Private Education. 

Gabriel Manalac, Director of Education. 

Eusebio Aguilar, Director of Health. 
I. Prom the (Manila) Tribune February 15, 1942: 

1 10 Duran, member of Council of State; "Duran's appointment inc 
the membership of the Council to 35." 

Just iniano Montano, recommended to be mayor of Cavito, vice Col. Ars*-* 
Aatividad, the latter having been called by the Interior Department to 
Gen. Jose" de los Reyes in reorganizing the constabulary and to act as liju^ 
officer between Commissioner Benigno Aquino and Gen. de los Heyes. 

Jose* Garrido, director, Bureau of Transportation. 

Cornelio Balmaceda, director, Bureau of Commerce. 

Because of war conditions it has been impossible to secure furtll 
details or confirmation of the above reports. 

VI. GENERAL ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND OVERSEAS TRADE 

Discussion of economic conditions in the Philippines during l| 
is limited by the absence of statistical reports and records. Du 
the intervention of the war only the data covering overseas trade 
the period January to September are available, primarily from mouJ 
summaries of the insular collector of customs. Respecting don , 
trade, communications, transportation, and production, only fj 
m ^ tai T reports from secondary sources are available. 

The basic conditions of Philippine economy, existing up to the I 
of enemy attack, need be recalled here only in topical summary: 

(a) The Philippines were engaged almost wholly in agricultural and cxtrv 
industries The entire economy rested on the production of foodstuffs, aiui 
agricultural, forestal, and mineral raw materials the bulk of which are exn 
to distant countries. 1 

(b) By value over 80 percent of Philippine exports were marketed in the UnSii 
btates, largely under the protection of near duty-free entrv and high prices r 
suiting from the application in the United States of high tariffs against coniu©** 
goods from other countries. ***** 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH CO^OHSSIOXER 



85 



(c) The 40 years of political connection between the Philippines and the 
United States resulted in an unvarying relation of currencies, sound financial 
and commercial connections, and marked similarities in consumer habits. 

(d) Banking, manufacture, foreign trade, domestic wholesale and retail trad- 
ing, public uti'ities including transportation and communication services, 
mineral production, ofT-shore fishing, and lumbering were principally in the hands 
ol American, British, Chine<e. and Japanese minorities who have no direct voice 
in local government. Except insofar as the local government subsidized or 
capitalized banking, manufacturing, and trading, the mass population confined 
its energies mainly to agriculture. 

(e) While nearly three-fourths of the area of the Philippines is suitable for 
agriculture less than half had been brought into cultivation or pasturage; settle- 
ment of new land had been painfully slow; the population piled up in extraor- 
dinary density along the coasts with continued rcparcelmcnt of 2 to 5 hectare 
freeholds and tenancies; and t he number of landless farmers increased annually. 

There were many exceptions and numbers of important secondary 
factors, but the foregoing generalities — taken as such — continued in 
1941 to describe the basic character of Philippine economy. The 
artificiality of the situation and the difficulties of building political 
independence upon such a foundation were long since realized by 
native leaders, some of whom had opposed free trade relations when 
these wore first established in 1909. However, the direct profit of 
preferential trade relations with the United States accrued to the 
benefit of the land-owning and planter groups who were by and large 
'in final control of political movements. Simultaneously, in the 
United States, pressure groups representing constituencies who per- 
ceived real or fancied competition from Philippine sugar, cordage, 
vegetable oils, tobacco, and other commodities, together with those 
who believed in independence for the Philippines from the standpoint 
of rights of self-determination or from that of isolationism, came to 
dominate American thought as to future relations between the two 
countries. The conjunction of these influences brought about Con- 
gressional legislation providing for Philippine independence at the 
end of a 10-year transitional period. 

When the Tydings-McDuflie Act (Public, 127, 73d Cong.) was 
passed in 1934 it was hoped that the quotas and graduated export 
tax levies on goods destined for the flag area would have the effect of 
causing an adjustment of the Philippine economy to a position inde- 
jpendent of preferences in the American market. Subsequent develop- 
ments, however, considerably modified the Philippine economic 
program and outlook: (1) The original quotas were generously near 
previous normal production levels, except for cordage, and the export 
tax levies (beginning at 5 percent of United States foreign import 
rates for 1941 and moving upward by annual increments of 5 percent 
to 25 percent for 1945 and the first half of 1940) were not sufficiently 
heavy up to the outbreak of the war to effect a shift to foreign markets 
lor a serious curtailment of production of leading export items, other 
than coconut oil and tobacco products: (2) the Tydings Cordage Act 
, (Public, 137, 74th Cong.) approved June 14, 1935, increased the 
Tydings-McDuflie Act annual duty-free quota of 3,000,000 pounds to 
an absolute quota of 6,000,000 which approximated normal ship- 
ments to the United States; (3) the act of August 7, 1939 (Public, 367, 
77th Cong.) lifted the export tax levies from coconut oil, cigars, leaf 
tobacco, pearl buttons, and largely from embroideries; (4) in response 
to representations of the Commonwealth Government, the act of 
December 22, 1941 (Public, 367, 77th Cong.) suspended application of 



86 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

declining quotas and increasing export taxes for the year l&U 
provided that the quota quantities and export tax rates fori 
should be those provided for 1941; (5) it was early discovered 
foreign demand was to be had only at world price lev. Is whieli 
well below the normal cost of production of the Philippine pi 
involved; (6) fear of adverse economic and polit ical condition* \> 
the islands subsequent to independence and the Sino-dapaius 
drove some private investment capital of native, American, and:, 
origin into retirement and to a substantial extent into transfer;:!" 
(7) the spread of hostilities through Europe and Asia closed nu.: 
weakened peacetime demand, dissolved established commoiv; 
nections with foreign countries, and restricted cargo tonnage; (9 
Commonwealth increased internal taxation on business and c:.; 
(9) the Commonwealth expended a large part of the coconii 
excise tax fund, designed to finance new markets and now pro: 
in public works and in other fields having little direct bearing 
problem of economic adjustment. 

The experience of the Commonwealth Government in expends 
coconut oil funds prior to the outbreak of war with Japan ompH 
the difficulty of effecting, by means of Government expenditure 
reorganization of the economy of the country so as to euslm : 
shock of independence. It had been hoped that production r 
be shifted from branches of agriculture and industry dependent ■ 
protected markets in the United States to others which would bed 
to compete in world markets after free trade with the I nited > 
should be eliminated. It had been hoped, also, that product: 
some branches might be made more efficient, thus facilitating cotf 
tition with other countries, and that production for local consume 
might be developed. 

It would be difficult to demonstrate that lnuch actual progres^ 
made toward the attainment of these objectives. Other forces, y 
in the opposite direction, were so much stronger that the 1 kihgjl 
steadily became more rather than less dependent upon the I: 
States both economically and financially. War m Europe and* 
where during the period when coconut oil funds were available 
Commonwealth both curtailed outlets for Philippine products an 
off imports from many foreign countries. At the same time \ 
rations for war created a strong demand by the United Stat 
strategic materials from the Philippines. These factors continue 
increase even further the already large proportion of Philippine fo* 
trade with the United States. 

There is little evidence that coconut oil expenditures would 
caused important shifts in production even if there had been no I 
No concerted program was developed for the use of these funds * 
large scale to induce a shift from sugar or any other Philippine pn> 
to other products less dependent upon trade preferences in the I 
States. There is, moreover, much to support the view that 
development of such a program would not have been politically fe« 
even under the best of conditions. t 

By the end of the calendar year 1941 the invasion of the g 
brought about the abrupt suspension of trade between the I 
States and the Philippines. Pending rcoccupation of the isfl 
by the United States in all probability the invaders will do i 
ever is possible under war conditions to orient Philippine e< 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



as closely toward Japan as it was formerly oriented toward the United 
States, but with this difference — that the net gain will rest with Japan 
and the minimum of profit accrue to the Philippines. 



OVERSEAS TRADE 

Data from Philippine sources covering overseas trade are not avail- 
able for the last quarter of the calendar year. Discussion is limited, 
therefore, to the 9-monlh period January through September, inclusive. 
During this period the total trade value was 1*491,065,269, which was 
11 percent above the 1*440,796,940 for the corresponding period in 
1940 and over S4 percent of the trade value for the entire year 1940. 
Had conditions remained normal during the last quarter of the year 
there appears little doubt that total values for the year would have 
registered an all-time hisrh. It is even probable that imports and 
exports for the period October 1 to December 7, 1941 (there were some 
clearances later in December under active war conditions), brought the 
total to well above the 1940 calendar year figure. 

Table 1. — Swmynarij of Philippine overseas trade values 

[Source: Reports of the insular collector of customs an 1 the Unit" I Sf-iv* Corn \Wo, Manila] 



Item 


1910. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1911. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


Exports in millions of pesos: 1 

To the United States and possessions: 


131 

53 


150 

77 






li)2 
3S 


227 
41 






230 


26$ 


Imports in millions of pesos: 3 


160 
45 


180 
13 






211 


223 


Total trade In millions of pesos: 


35S 
S3 


407 

84 






441 


491 


Ratio of trade with the United States and possessions, percent: 


83 
79 
SI 


85 
81 

S3 





for the same period in 1911. i •bvm«v n i na Avrwrtji 

3 Includes negligible value of returned Philippine exports. 

The break-down of total brack* values set forth in table 1 shows that 
exports for the first, 9 months of 1041 amounted to ^268,000,000 as 
compared with : P230,000,000 in the same period of 1040. The increase 
was duo primarily to higher prices for copra, coconut oil, abaca and 
many of the minor export wares; 5*223,000,000 represented imports, 
well in excess of the import values January through September 1040. 
As in 1940, the increased value of imports was in good part due to 
Government purchases for public works and military procurement from 



88 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



local stocks. 24 In addition, importers experienced a crowing >1 
of tonnage and anticipated American involvement in the Worlf 
and for these reasons extended their reserve stocks, particul 
foods and cloth. 

Exports oj (jold and silver. — The export of gold and silver 
reached P77,000,000 bv September :-Jl :is rotupuriMl with PoS, 
at the same date in 1940, and P79,000,000 for the whole of 
Eliminating the value of gold and silver exports, the trade vaP 
the two periods under review in millions of pesos would s 
follows: 

[000,000 omittcdj 



Exports 

Imports... 

Tot il trade 



1910. Janu- 
ary through 
September 



Peso* 
172 
212 



3S3 



To the P75,500,000 of gold and Pi, 500,000 of silver shipped 
to October 1 must be added at least Pi 2,000,000 dispatcH 
October and November and the undetermined value of several liu 
bars taken into custody by the High Commissioner during Deee 
held for 2 months at Coiregidor, and brought as submarine I 
to the United States. The precious metals constituted noarlv 
percent of the value of all exports during January through Si-pt< 
1941. The data include only bullion and concentrates and no < 
remelted metal. Gold was valued at P70 per line ounce, and s 
as invoiced. 

Predominance of trade with the United States. — Table 1 also - 
the predominance of the United States and its other possession 
trade economy of the Philippines. In addition to the fundam c 
positive considerations of mutual free trade, sta ble monetary oxchi 
and close commercial and banking connections within the Mag an 
restrictions of wartime embargoes, quotas, blocked exchange, 
the shortage of bottoms to Europe, and hostile blockades con 
to divert business to Philippine-United States trade routes. It 
long been customary to consider shipments to and from the V 
States and its possessions as in the nature of domestic trade, fl 
values in trade within the flag area be deducted, the truly fori 
trade values of the Philippines, as expressed in millions of j 
appear small: 



Exports 
Imports. 



Total trade. 



lino. Janu- 
ary through 
>eptoinber 



S3 



mi 

:\ry 



24 Military procurement from sources outside the Philippine is n >t generally covered in Conm\ v > . 
customs siaiihtics. 



KEPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COM^USSION^R 



89 



the January through September 1941 ratio of the value of United 
States trade with that of all countries was S3 percent as .compared 
with Si percent during the first three quarters of the preceding year. 
In exports, the comparison was 85 percent against S3 percent; and in 
imports SI percent against 79 percent. 

Reexports. — The value of reexports was never substantial before 
1940. During that jfear they reached a total of over 1*6,500,000. 
For the first 9 months of 1941 the value rose to nearly F10,000,000 
by reason of sales to nearby countries — particularly to China and 
Japan — from the unusually heavy Philippine stocks of American 
goods. This activity was checked during the second half of the year 
by the extension of export control measures to transshipments and 
reexports. 

Trade by countries. — The war in Europe was the dominant factor 
in Philippine trade by countries. The trade routes to Europe were 
handicapped by a growing shortage of cargo tonnage. War blockades 
coupled with United States export control measures all but elimmated 
trade with the Axis and Axis-con trolled countries. In the Orient 
these factors were not present to so great an extent. However, Japan 
was unable because of her military campaigns in China and elsewhere 
to furnish many of the commodities which the Philippines have 
customarilv imported from that country. 

Dividing Philippine trade by continental groups and comparing 
the Januarv through September reports for 1940 and 1941, it is evident 
that trade with Europe declined from 1*23,700,000 to ^7,100,000— a 
drop of 70 percent. This decline was more than oflset by a gain ol 
14 percent in trade with the United States— ^407,000,000 against 
P357,800,000— and bv the additional sain of 36 percent in trade with 
Asia and Oceania— P70,900,000 against F52,400,000. 

Table 2.— Total Philippine overseas trade by countries, in millions of pesos 
[Source: Reports of the insular collector of customs and the United States Consulate, Manila] 



United States and possessions.. 



Europe: 

Great Britain 

Germany 

Franco - 

Italy 

Netherlands 

Spain 

Switzerland 

Sweden - 

Other ~ ^ 

Total 







Asia and Oceania: 

Australia - - ;-- 

British East Indies, India, and Burma. 

China 

French East Indies r 

IIonR Kong 

Japan a* — — • 

Netherlands East Indies 

Other 



Total. 



1940, Janu- 
ary throtieh 
September 


1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 


357.8 


407.0 


8.2 
.2 
3.8 
1.4 
2.5 
1.9 
.8 
2.2 
2.7 


4.5 
N 
N 
N 
N 

\\ 

.2 
.7 


(23.7) 


(7. 1) 


3.6 
6.8 
0.9 
1.0 
3.4 
20.9 
6.7 
4. 1 


^ * * 
3.6 
7.1 
13.9 
. 1 
6.6 
22.8 
11.6 
5.2 


(52.4) 


(70. 9) 



N«Negligible, less than T 100,000. 
S301S — 13 7 



90 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Table 2. — Total Philippine overseas trade by countries, in millions of pesos — Con. 



Item 



America: 
Canada.. 
Other.... 



Total... 
Unclassified.. 
Total... 



1040, Janu- 
ary through 
Beptcmbcr 



3.0 

i.e 



1.7 
440.8 



1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 



3.4 
1.4 

(4. 8) 



1.0 
400. Si 



Trade with Germany, Italy, Belgium, France, Netherlands and 
Norway practically disappeared. Trade with Great Britain decliri ] 
to a little over half its value in 1940. Among neutrals, only the tr 1 
with Switzerland held its position. In the Orient, there Was 
change in respect to Australia. Trade with China, Japan TT U ° 
Kong, and the Netherlands East Indies improved. Also, thcBrirT 
East Indian trade, including India and Burma, increased substantial 



Table 3. — Philippine exports by countries of destination, in millions of ^ 
[Source: Reports of the insular collector of customs and the United States Consulate, M a 



Item 



United States and possessions . 

Europe: 

Great Britain 



Germany.. 

France 

Italy : 

Wt herlands 

Spain. -- 

Switzerland 

den 

Other. 



Total. 



Asia and Oceania: 

Australia 

British East Indies, India, and Burma. 

China 

French East Indies 

Hong Kong.. 

Japan 

Netherlands East Indies 

Other 



Total. 

America: 
Canada . 
Other... 



Total. 
Unclassified . 
Total.. 



X - Negligible, less than ;> 100,000. 



1940, Janu- 
ary throng] 
September 


. 10 *1 T 


- J9L8 




5.4 




3.1 
.8 


.... 25 


N 

LO 

i'h" 

1.2 


6" 


fta.6) 




.7 
.6 
2.7 

2. i 
11.6 
1.0 
2.5 


. G 
2.6 
6.8 

5."6' 
15.7 
. 9 

3J^ 


(21.2) 






I. 1 
. 9 


.5 
1.0 


(2. 0) 

1. 3~ 


(1.61 

~TF 


229. 9 


2G7.8 







REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSI OXER 



91 



In general the regional trends and shifts noted for total trade values 
applied also to the value of exports during the two periods under 
consideration. Exports to the United States increased lrom 
P191,800,000 to ^226,800,000— an increase of more than 18 peiceni. 
Exports to Great Britain and to neutral countries in Europe declined 
to less than one-half of their 1940 level, white exports to ^j»*g5 
disappeared. Trade with Asia and Oceania totaled WPJ 
agamst F21 ,200,000, with increases in the value of sales ^^Itanj 
oriental countries except Netherlands East Indies. T he ^ 
exports to British East India, including India, and Burma ^oic thaai 
quadrupled Exports to China at ^6,800,000 were more than double. 
KS3^& value of exports to Japan, 1>15,700,000, was up 3o percent. 

Table 4.— Philippine imports by countries of origin, in millions of pesos 
• tSoiiroe; Reports of the insular collector of customs and the United statesCo^ 



Item 



United States and Possessions. 



Europe: 

Great Britain. 

Germany 

France 

Italy 

Netherlands. 
Spain .... . 
Switzerland... 

Sweden 

Other 



Total. 



Asia and Oceania: 

Australia 

British East Indies, India, and Burma. 

China 

French East Indies 

nonn Kong 

Japan.. 

Netherlands East Indies 

Other 



Total.. 

America: 
Canada. 
Other... 



Total.. 
I'n classified. 

Total.. 



IMQ Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1941 Janu- 
ary through 
September 


160.0 


180.2 


2.S 
.2 
.7 
.ti 

2.5 
.3 
.8 
. 7 

1.5 


2.0 
N* 
X 
N 
N 
.4 

' a 
.3 


(ID. 1) 


(3.0) 


2.9 
5.2 
4.2 
1.0 
1.3 
9.3 
5.7 
1.6 


3.0 
4.7 

7.1 
2 

LG 
7.1 
10.7 
1.5 


(31.2) 


(35.9) 


2.5 
.7 


2.9 
.4 


(3.2) 
. 4 


(3.3) 
.2 


210. 9 


223.2 



N = Neplipib1<\ less than P100,000. 

Import values roughly paralleled the trend in export exxept that 
thegain in reference to the United States was relatively 
of goods imported from the United States during the first ^thiee ■ quartei^ 
of 1941 was 1*180,200,000 as compared with P166 000 000 dm ng the 
same period of the previous year, an advance of JfiW^ ggjj 
percent. Purchases from Europe as a who e were ^3.600,000 slig it y 
more than one- third of the corresponding 1940 value ^POTte lrom 
the Axis area were negligible and greatly reduced with respect to all 
other European countries. There was little change in the value ol 
imports from Australia. Declines were registered in respect to tne 




92 



HE PORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



British and FrcncB East Indies and Japan. Imports from China in 
creased from F4 ? 200,000 to F7, 100,000 and from the Netherlands Efti 
Indies from f*o,700,000 to Pi 0,700,000. 

Balance of trade. A comparison of import and export trade valu 
allows presentation in table 5 of the visible balance of trade. 

Table 5. — Visible balance of Philippine trad* 
[In millions of pesos] 



Item 



1040. 
January 
through 
September 



United States and possessions. 

Europe: 

Great Britain ... 

Germany... 

France... 
Italy. . .. 
Netherlands. . 

Spain 

Switzerland ... 

Sweden.. 

Other.. 



1041, 
January 
through 
September 



Total. 



Asia and Oceania: 
Australia.. 



China 1 E ^ iSdi," and Borma 



French East' indies! Y.'.VY" 

Hong Kong 

Japan 

Netherlands East Indies" 
Other 



Total.. 

America: 
Canada.. 
Other... 

Total.. 

^classified. 

Total.. 



N 



Negligible, ies S than pmo.ooo. 
Tabl 



+28. s 



- U\. u 



-h'2. 6 

— o 

+£4 
-f.2 
-2. 6 
+1,8 
-.8 
-t-.s 
—.3 



(+3.r>) 



-2.2 

-4.G 

-i.r, 
-l.n 

+.8 
+2.3 
-4.7 

+.9 



(-10.0) 



-1.4 
+.2 



(-1.2) 



+. 9 



-H0.0 



+.5 
— N 
-N 
-N T 
— N 
+.2 

_ 2 



(-.1) 




+.<r 



+ 11. fi 




public works, edu^S 80 !?!^?.?^ 0) Government revenue by which 
out! i (2) the bettor tS%ft£Sb& WdfaW ^°^ms WerTcaS 
ability at reasonable rates of "Vestment capital and its avail- 

Oflivxng, particularly evident ,i2l. an(l (3) the illcl ™ S(> d standard 

Trade wit h Europe as a wl.nl " g , thosc of the urban class, 
positive in 1940 and so remand [S^^ JaDan turned towa ^ the 
due to the war-created scare itv of « 94 , L To a lar « c cxtent this was 
these countries to the Philipnm, J available for shipment from 

pine trade with Europe w as in Un<lor normal conditions Philip- 
Jnpan was usually on (he ne<^tiv(U P r K lU ' al balance while that ™*k 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



93 



The foregoing consideration of the balance of trade was based solely 
on the movement of merchandise plus gold and silver. Data are not at 
hand for estimating the Philippine balance of international payments 
for any part of 1941 . The United States Tariff Commission 25 reported 
the average annual balance of both visible and invisible items for the 
period 1925-1934, inclusive, at a positive net of over !P16,000,000. 
The High Commissioner * estimated the Philippine balance of inter- 
national payments at a positive net of 1*54,700,000 for 1939 and 
P32 ,600,000 for 1940, and stated that the balances from 1935 to 1938 
also appeared to have been positive. 

For the first 11 months of 1941 the situation would have been ap- 
proximately the same as for 1940 with the following exceptions: (1) 
debits for ocean freight and insurance increased; (2) capital move- 
ment outward increased; and (3) United States Government mili- 
tary and naval expenditures in the Philippines increased several fold 
over any previous year, probably in sufficient amount to afford a net 
gain in international payments. 

Exports by commodities. — Data covering Philippine exports by com- 
modities are limited to values, to a restricted classification, and to 
the first three quarters of 1941. The mineral-products group ad- 
vanced to first place for the first time in the history of Philippine 
trade. Sugar, coconut products, and fiber products followed in the 
order indicated. The available figures appear in table 6 with those 
for the corresponding period in 1940 offered for comparison. 

Table 6. — Value of principal Philippine exports, in thousands of pesos 
[Source: Reports of the Insular Collector of Customs ami the United States consulate, Manila) 



Item 



Coconut products: 

Coconut oil...- 

Copra 

Copra cake and meal . 

Desiccated coconut 

Vegetable butter and lard. 



Total- 



Fibers and manufactures thereof: 

Abaca (Manila hemp). - 

Cordage 

Embroideries 

Other fibers 

Other fiber manufactures 



Total. 



Forest products and manufactures thereof: 
Logs and timber 
Lumber. - , 
Rattan and manufactures thereof 
Rubber, crude ... - 



Total. 



1940 
January 
through 
September 



10.059 
1 4. 989 
2, 300 
S, 283 
1.012 



40.213 



10. 824 
2. 500 
5. S9 I 
880 
258 



20. 305 



2, 251 
2, 038 
863 
508 



0. 000 



1941 
January 
through 
September 



22. 430 
10. 823 
834 
9. 433 
1.319 



50.845 



29, 139 
3. 105 
5, 727 
1,318 
1 , 82Q 



40.918 



1.475 

:». 80S 
009 
549 

H.~298 



25 



rj. S. TaritT Commission: United States-Philippine Trade, Kept. 118, 2d Ser., Washington, 1937, 

33-38. _ . nwl 11 Antfui leltuwlc- fcYmrih lionurt t r\ tl»<\ t>_„..i 1 



fcfttea High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands: Fourth Report to the President and 
United States, Washington, 1942, unpublished Mb. pp. 90-9,. 



pp. 33 

M Ui.„. 
Congress of the 



94 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Table 6. — Value of principal Philippine exports, in thousands of pesos — Con. 



Item 



Mineral products: 

Chrome ore 

Copper ore and matte 

Copper concentrates 

Iron ore 

Manganese ore 

Gold (bullion, etc.) 

Silver 

Other mineral products 

Total 

Sea products: 

Buttons, pearl 

Fish, canned tuna 

Total 

Sugars: 

Centrifugal 

Refined \_ 

Total 

Tobacco and manufactures thereof: 

Cigars 

Leaf. 

Other tobacco 

Total 

Unclassified: 

Hides and skins 

Pineapple, canned 

Unspecified plant products 

Unspecified unclassified 

Total 

Total domestic exj>orts 

Reexports 

Total exports 



L940 



1041 



January 
through 

• t|M I'll I IMT 


T a n 1 1 ■ 1 f V 
.1 Jill uni . 

Ibroagb 
Septeiob6' 


2, 586 
L95 
1 , 51 1 
•1. 366 
1,010 
;,<;. 2 10 

1, 105 

488 


4 295 
" 327 
i 362 
A. 077 
1.616 

75. 538 

i 548 
' ssi 


67.889 


89. 344 


291 
261 


886 

4.x> 


655 


830 


53,571 
7. 808 


47. 993 
r,5S 


71, 177 


. 1 1, ffVM 


4, 513 
l. 202 

N.V 


4.066 
610 
06 1 


6, 507 


5, 020 


318 
•l, 122 
I, 670 

820 


462 
■J. 65 1 

H, 102 

I, 237 


7. 146 


7,452 


220, (K)2 
3, U33 


257. 973 
9. SM) 


229, 935 


207. 853 



Ihe total value of coconut products was 1*50,845,000, or 24 percent 
better than during the corresponding period of the previous year, 
l he increase was due entirely to the price factor. From the beginning 
01 the year the pnee for copra and coconut oil was strong. The local 
market price for copra of T6 per hundred kilos in March was the high- 
est since 1939 and from this level the price increased to 1*11.50 in 
October Coconut oil reached a local price exceeding f 0.22 per kilo, 
ihe market for desiccated coconut was also strong. Copra cake and 
meal were out-listed for shipping space after the first quarter of the 
year. A great deal of copra cake and meal was burned in factory and 
power-plant boilers and later in the year producers abandoned or 
discarded the byproduct. Manila arrivals and stocks of copra at the 
end ol beptember were well above the September 1940 position duo 
to the attractive prices which stimulated collection with a tendency 
toward lower grade by reason of premature collection. The Cebu 
market showed a similar position in respect to arrivals but stocks of 
copra at the southern market were reduced because of the unusually 
high oil production of the three mills located in that area. The 
estimated stocks at both Manilla and Cebu were in the neighborhood 
of 90,000 picul sacks. The stocks of coconut oil, Manila and Cebu 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



95 



combined, were estimated at just under 30,000 metric tons on Septem- 
ber 30 as compared with less than 20,000 on the same date in 1940. 
The destination of the various coconut products exported in thousands 
of metric tons was: 



Destination 



Copra: 

United States 

Europe 

China 

Japan 

Other countries 



HMO Janu- 
iry through 
September 



Total 



Coconut oil: 

United states... 

Canada—*- 
Europe 

China. 

Eong Kong - 
■tftC countries 



Total. 



107.8 
01, 0 



.1 
1ft, 7 



24S. 0 



124. G 
8.0 
8.5 

.0 
4. 1 

X 
2.0 



147.8 



1041 Janu- 
ary through 
September 



173.0 



8.5 
29. 2 
8.3 



219. 0 



135.3 



5.5 
1.5 
14.4 

2.2 



15S.9 



Destination 



Copra cake ami meal: 

United States. - 

Europe 

Other countries... 



Total. 



Desiccated coconut: 
United States.. . 
Other countries. 



Total. 



1940 Janu 
ary through 

September 



55.6 
14.3 
.4 



70.3 



27.9 



1941 Janu- 
ary through 
September 



42.9 



43.5 



4G.3 
. 1 



40.4 



N_Negligtt>le, 

rri *e WW a distinct advance in all items under fibers and manu- 
U thereof except embroideries, which dropped slightly in value, 
facturcs ^ advances, and in spite of the prohibition during the 
\-\ of the year against shipment of cordage grades to Japan, 
latter P^ L for aba J ca exports, ^29,139,000, was nearly double that 
lho -\r January through September 1940. Stocks of abaca at the 
during Dtember wcr e approximately 150,000 bales, including decorti- 
eu i rher which was about 10,000 bales less than at the end of 
catecl " l " cr , 1 940. For the entire period of 9 months, 1941, bahngs 
Sep tcin . te( i from official inspection services at 1,10S,113 bales as 
were ^ hq bales for the same period in 1940. The destination 

a crain s k ^ firgt thvcc nu&ctera of 1941 and 1940 as compiled by 
of **RrZde Section of the United States consulate in Manila 27 in 



Destination 


1940. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 




338 
265 
258 
128 


724 
60 
215 
117 




989 


1,122 





the 194° period. Exports oi coraage tor the first 9 months of 
°Q40 and 1941 in metric tons were reported by the collector of 
customs as follows: 

""ITMonthly Trnde Review of the Philippine Islands, vol. XIV, No. 9, September-October 1041, p. 28. 



96 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION KK 



Destination 



United States 

British Africa 

British East Indies including Malaya 

China 

French East Indies 

Dong Kon? 

India "~ 

Netherlands East Indies... 
South and Central America. . 

Thailand 

Other countries . . 



Total. 



1940, Janu- 
ary through 
September 



. 781 

52 

Ma 

131 
91 

278 
21 
77; 

B : 
MM) 

Boa 



1941. Janu- 
ary through 
September 



8*5 
&\\ 
702 
139 

891 
193 

577 



,61] 



s. 338 



Among forest products the recession in the value of logs and timber 
continued. With shipping space at a premium, the Japanese, Chinese, 
and Australian markets preferred sawn lumber. The value of lumber 
exports at T*o,665 000 registered the highest level in many years. The 
KoSL V S UC °i r ^ e f0 / est £ rou P> 1*8,298,000, was more than a third 
Ttlrr™? the corresponding period of the previous ye** 
The destination of timber and lumber exports in millions of board 
feet was reported by the Insular Collector of Customs as below 



Destination 


1940. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


10U. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


Destination 


1940, Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1911, Janu- 
ary throne" 

September 


Logs and timber: 
United States. 


L 1 

.9 
25.4 
68.0 
CO 


0.6 
.7 
20.4 
40.2 


Lumber: 

United States 


17 2 
2.2 
2.8 

11.6 

.8 
5.8 


28.5 

t% 
12.7 

11. 1 
4.9 


Australia 


China 


Australia 


Japan 


China 


Other countries. .. 


Great Britain... 
Hong Kong 


Total 


101.4 


61.9 


Other countries 

Total . 


•10. 4 


72.5 



with TG7 889 00C fnr°T« a t0 f aI valu(> of ^,344,000 as compared 
SB^S^aS£W*p^ September 1940. Subtracting 

the base me^^SSl 7^JSS^!Sl%^ aa&M ^ bl ^report, 
during the too QU "5l d for £12,258,000 as against V10, 184,000 
priority in shipping snaoo f , °' Clirome aiul manganese had 
was encouraged by hiffh n° m thc -, first of thc y ear and their export 
later date and its deveTonm^f 8- C ,°PP C1 * was granted priority at a 
interruption of process at 5? t Was hand icapped by low price and by 
matte mill was being enlamM T t0 mine whik ' the ca P acit y of 1 1,0 
of the iron ore were shionofl t ne co PP er aml manganese and all 
mineral products was tb TT«-ffi' otherwise the destination for all 
content of copper o?e from^h^W^' . rom ^ a y on the gold 
90 percent of exports) Eea^ m T (wll,ch supplied over 

40 percent of the value XSX*^?* a V Was ^P ortcd as 30 to 
was' put on an aimual quoU b "s!s T?J? ^ Ir ,° n ° re to Japa " 
cargo tons in June. Th? auotn ™« \L a PP rox,mat ^y 900,000 wet- 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



97 



Among sea products there were comparative increases both in pearl 
buttons exported to the United States under quota and in canned 
tuna fish. _ _ , , 

Centrifugal and refined sugar at P54,651,000 Suffered severely 
from a lack of bottoms and the effect of the United States ceding price 
of $0 035 per pound effective after the middle of the year At the out- 
break of war it was estimated that approximately S0,000 long tons of 
I nited Stat es export sugar out of the 800,000 long-ton quota had not 

^Thllooacc? group at 1*5,626,000 was at its lowest level in many 
ve- u ' Onlv ciiFars held up and even these dropped m value by about 
10 ™it as compared with the previous year. The total number 
of Kfshii^Xluring the first 9 months of 1941 was 126 000,000 

♦ A" W ,i«e I St -ites and 11,000.000 to other countries; for the same 
oeHoIl V 9 10 2M00.0OO to the United States and 14,000,000 to other 
?Sries Nearly half of the leaf tobacco was exported to Spam while 
the United States took practically the entire output of scraps and 

m f- vor ts by c ( >»>»u. ( /i<i^.-Statistical material on Philippine hnports 

• ffi meaeer It is possible to arrange a gross classification and 
£ ,1, ,*s or "the first 9 months of the calendar year together with 
I.!;;, "alXcTvalues for the same period in 1940. This treatment is 
presented in table 7. 

Tabm9 7 — Value of principal Philippine imparls, in thousands of pesos 
SOUl* " f the insular Collector of Customs and the United States consulate, Manila) 



Item 



Uiry products 
Fish products..-- 



ff.ut'products- 



Vegetables-- - 



Total 

Met* and manufactures thereof: 

M i-^l^ures ^^^Z 

vf finery and parts: 

M \pricultiiral. - 

Electrical - :v;\; 

««SSi,-s 

Automotive parts ------- 

other vehicles and parts...-------- 

Other metals and manufactures thereof 



Total 

v- nmetalhc minerals and chemicals and manufactures thereof: 
N Chemicals, drugs, and dyes - 

Coal and coko 

Explosives 

Fertilizers -- - 

Glass products - - 



1940, Jnnu- 
ury through 
September 


1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1,82(5 
7,042 
2. 478 
2,244 
1. 995 
2,206 
L 130 
2.9S4 
7, 730 
1, 746 


3. 196 
8,586 
2,535 

2. 334 
L 609 
L 104 
1, 170 

3, 346 
10, 352 

2,358 


31,381 


36,650 


10. 350 
5.0S0 

6,275 


6. 140 
4,266 
5, 059 


374 
5, 557 
11,548 
3, 264 


232 
8,055 
9,200 
2, 929 


5, 435 
2, 568 
2, 239 
3,335 


3, 897 
2,798 
2, 133 
3,689 


56,025 


48, 398 


3,566 
2, 196 
2, 643 
6,817 
1,620 


4, 797 
L 093 
3,683 
1,459 
1 1,550 



98 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Table 7. Value of principal Philippine imports, in thousands of pesos < lontinueg 

Item 



Clay products... 

Medicines 

Mineral oils: 

Bunker and Diesel 

Gasoline - 

Kerosene 

Lubricating. 

Pnim 0 the - I >ctro, ™m products 

Paints, Pigments, and varnishes 

Soap and toilet preparations 

Other nonmetallic minerals and "chemicals and manufactures thereof'. . 
Total 



T "co7to^t^ n & r ° Stbcre0f; 

tt?. HB!Ptpi « :::::::::::::::::::::: 

Kay oh poods. 

Silk Roods ] 

Woolen poods 

Other textiles and Wnufaciures thereof 
Total. 



Unclassified: 

Leather products 

f fste^^^ 

Babb^g^"^:::::::::::: 

Automotive tires. 
Ciparettes. 

*BB^&&q+ :: ::: 

Total 



Total imports. 



1040, Janu 


• 1041. Janu- 


ary thro tig 


i ary through 


Septembei 


September 


l . 8QQ 




£ 791 


3,' 415 


o, !2i 


v. IL'U 


6, D51 


r. 018 


2, 618 


1,860 


2. J 0] 


2, 550 


1.381 


1,551 


1.668 


1 . 739 


2 1 88 


2 ssv 


266 


801 


■t:i, !.-•; 


43. 020 


in. 250 


24 222 


h. 450 


' <> BJ3 


i j i 


i. Ehm 


7 27-1 


0, 748 


' 833 


082 


876 


781 




681 


41, 101 




2, 503 


3. 668 


2, 7K* 


2. 3*« 


7, 702 


s 2-0 


2 508 


'{ sss 


I,' 466 


l.'l>7(» 


1,018 


1,861 


9, 920 


12, 815 


1,010 


1.411 


1,029 


448 


2, 509 


3,041 


5, OSS 


5, 745 


39. 197 


44,859 


210, 800 


228! 212 



1941, was renorJo^i? f , oods tuff imports, January through September 
nearly 20 percent K 6 Insulft r Collector of Customs at P36,650,000, 
months in 1949 *V 0Ve the value of similar imports during the same 
accounted for half fk Usual > wheat flour and daily products together 
Origin of the flour Va * Ue of all foodstuffs brought in from abroad. 
Principally American: 



Source 



United States 

Australia 

Canada 

Other countries 



Total- 



Metric tons 



1910, 
January 
through 
September 




hi, osy 



1941, 

January 
through 
September 



73. 353 
1 5, 074 
11, 257 

5 

99, 089 



HE PORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 99 
The United States was the principal source of imported milk. 

Netherlands supplies, comparatively heavy in 1040, were negligible 

in 1041: 



Sum.- 



Evaporated milk: 

United States 
Netherlands 

Japan 

Other countries. 



Total. 



Metric tons 




I0ML Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1911. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


Source 


s. fiOl 
3. 486 

S 


M. m 


Condensed milk: 

United States 

Netherlands 


240 
17 


Australia 

other oountriea 


12./VS4 


1-1,033 


Total 



Metric torn 



1940. Jaun- 
ty through 
September 



1,292 
2. 636 
11211 



1,042 



LMl.Janu- 
iry through 
September 



3. 945 



ft] 



4. 287 



In addition, over 500 tons of tinned natural milk and 600 tons of 
DOwdSed milk were imported in 11)41 principally from the United 
Q? t ! Butter continued principally from Australia, and cheese was 
1 v , led as between the United States and Australia. Rice imports 
i„u-n bv 50 percent due in part to a fair domestic crop. W 
o fie serious efforts of the National Rice and Corn Corporation 
f 1 Si Thailand and Indochina, this was difficult after the 
of the vear and it was impossible to build up the special 
midcllt oi planned. Other foodstuff imports m 1941 

r0S ln led 000 metric tons of fresh fruit, principally oranges and 
incliKlcu u f i * fttMn f i in TTnitAfl fttn.tns- llKfWI metric tons ol 



1,1(5 almost entirely from the United States; 6,500 metric tons of 
m : mostly from China; an equal quantity of potatoes largely 
onions | m ^ nileil Slales; and 150 metric tons of fresh vegetables from 
l^Tnited States. There was little change f«™ 1 Q40 

tvoe of fruit and vegetable items. Cani] 
°f 7 170 metric tons of sardines and pilch 
0 1 nnd 225 metric tons of mackerel. 



c «-i the I Illieo cuuir>, iiiui i^v/ ni^vuv. cwi.^ vr« ;^e»~ ... 

, ^ited States There was little change from 1940 in the quantity 
the umvcj * ^™fnhlA items Canned fish imports consisted 

ilehards, 400 metric tons of 
™rel. Except for 775 tons of 
sft i V VvU practically all fish was from the United States, 
P "£1 vmI uc of metals and their manufactures was 1*48,398,000 as 



1 rrun value oi melius uuu int.. j io^uojuuu «. 

1 1 with 1*56,025,000 for the first 9 months of 1940. Decline 
COl !he import values of iron and steel goods and in automobiles more 
1,1 Jj? offset 0 Buhstantial increase in the value of electrical machinery. 
Oemand to all items was heavy, but from June on it was nearly 
• possible to obtain priorities from United States producers and 
Wnoing space was not available. By the end of the third quarter 
(•tieally all stocks in this group were depleted. There had been 
P rft giderahl6 transshipment and reexport to China, Indochina, and 
00 tliAflst Asia until such transactions were brought under export 



.ntrol measures in August, 
1 inorts of passenger automobiles were lower in number than during 
rrrcent year. From January through September 1,399 card (all 
t 6 from* the United States; 260 reexported) were brought in as 
r\inst 2 523 in the same period of 1940. The corresponding figures 
fhr trucks were 1,125 and 1,572, respectively. 

The nonmctallic mineral group showed usual value at 1*43,620,000. 
Fertilizers, coal, and coke imports were greatly reduced, but losses 
in these items were ofVset by increases in drugs, explosives, medicines, 
gasoline, and fuel oil. 



100 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HKiH COMMISSIONER 



The year 1941 was marked by heavy imports in cloth and clothing 
The textile group totaled P49,685,000 in value for the first throe- quar- 
ters of the year— a greater value than that usuallv recorded for an 
entire year. The United States supplied considerably more tha n half 
the yardage. Imports of Japanese goods were sharply curtailed 
after July due to the practical cessation of transport between the 
two countries The United States consulate published the following 
detail s relative to the source of cotton and rayon piece goods imported 



Source 



Cotton piece roods: 
United States . 
Japan. . . 
Cbfn* 

Other countries 
Total 



Thousands of square 
yards 



1010, 

January 
through 
September 



50, 835 
21.378 
i.iil! 

2. 378 



ion. 
January 
through 
September 



79. 205 



57. GIG 
20, 239 
11.092 
3,499 



02, i o ; 



Source 



Rayon piece goods: 
United States 

Japan 

other countries 

Total 



'i housandfl <>r square 

yards 



1910, | ion. 
January January 
through through 
September September 



i. 

ISO 



ii. 563 
1,384 

iL't 



10, 078 



13,07, 



eo^^f^K^^ 16 ^ , itoi . r,s > ma i° r ^creases were in 
B & dS^^Sf* U ; uck fcires > ,u,(l cigarettes. In tires the fol 



Source 


Thousands of pieces 


19-10. Janu- 
ary through 
September 


1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 


Casings: 

United States 


06 
4 


144 


Japan. . 


Other countries 
Total 


i 


l 




104 


145 



Source 



Thousands of pi, , . 



Tubes: 

United sr rues 

Jipun 

Other countries 
Total 



1940, Janu- 
ary through 
September 



79 

a 

3 



85 



IM1. Janu- 
ary through 
September 



121 



121 



was due in large part to salei hvl. i thc , value of imported cigarettes 
although the major puSesfor « l ° ^' my and N *vy stores, 

rectly and are not shown in thl L , services were imported di- 

exceptions cigarette imports l«f 8 statistics. With very minor 
on tlie part of several laree I^i 1 ? the United States. Efforts 
produce a blended bright tE . fact ones in the Philippines to 

American brands continued without ^ lg ? re - tt ,° for com Petition with 

wiwiout material success. 

TRANSPORTATION 

Shipping. — The trade section of thf» tt„;* i o* 
Manila 28 reported as follows: mted States consulate in 

Shipping.— Although exports of priority material*, *. „ 
an increase, total export tonnage decline;) Z P „ • a"? lJmte d States showed 
partly to the cessation of iron*ei£and WSo^f^SSSS^K i™" was duC 
the trend seems to be distinctly toward fewer anrl L^ ? P ?i'' but nevertheless 
mann Line, which formerly had four or ft>e sluns ctliiZ L bottoms - T he Watcr " 
direct from tJ )e Straits Settlements to the Unitecl "states? r ° GS ts 8 pS 

" Monthly Trad* Revfett or the Philippine I,.an<l s , vol. XIV. No. 0. September-October .041. p. 11. 

m 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 101 



Intcrisland shipping is still in an overburdened condition. Dealers are now 
experiencing considerable dillicultv in bringing commodities like lumber to 
Manila. Warehouse space and lighters in Manila are insufficient for the requure- 

m Emort^TO^Otal8 dropped considerably from August Shipments to China 
export cargo coiui uu , shipments to the United States were one- 

and Japan were le>> by o ne- h a If* hilc s J u p n r 
third below August I art o f thi. r ^ tonnage has risen steadily from 

S s ; T Altlu ]V/n \ ^ time - Totid export 

193S to June 191 , there jias * percent less than for the same 

tonnage for the third quarte ^™yS£J2r saiUn^ were the lowest of any 
period of 193S-a pre-^a ^^ ^f^^qSarter of 1941 were 27 percent below 
month this year. Sailing* r jnc in * ^ as foUows t . 



China and Japan ■ 

Pacific roast: 

Local dclivery--r- 
Ovorland del"' very- 
Atlantic and QuU ports. 
European porta - ---- ■ 
Miscellaneous porw- 



Total 
Sailings (In 

Total 

AiiM-riian 



per): 



Total 9 months 


1940 


1941 


1, 121, 226 


1. 196,486 


310, 409 
80, 550 
1,022,342 

105, 200 
53, 14S 


ii 

33, 965 
1,008. 406 
27,544 
97. 661 


2, 7<», 884 


2. 741.662 


773 
162 


690 
217 



„Hs and exports bv nationality of carrying vessels during the 

Detail of |«"L )( J , () ; |0 ftn(l U)A \ are its follow* <in pesos): 



American--; 

punisn --- 
putcn 
3c r.nan-- — 

Aircraft--- 
^loil- ----- 

Total 



Total, 9 months 


1040 


1911 


13:341,480 
92. 812. 958 
21,699, 638 

7, 785, 653 
14, 170, 8S6 

9, 571 
1.887. 708 

8, 723, 265 
•11.411.615 

3.286, L64 
703, 898 
67, 981 
5, 197, 020 


18. 623, 610 
120. G0f>. 572 
8, 695, 748 
438. 606 
14, 113,914 


1, 108 
7, 591,658 
41. 427. 238 
2.915. 146 
3, 902, 080 
196,018 
4,641,074 


211, 106. 827 


223.212,372 


1 — Freight 


carloadim 



Export trade: 
Philippine 

American 

British - 

Danish.. . 

Dutch 

German. 

Italian ... 

Japanese 

Norwegian 

Swedish 

Others 

Aircraft _ 

Mail 

Total 



Total, 9 months 



19-10 



7. 629. 237 
66, 356. 120 
14.491,226 

3, 742, 100 

s. 206, 680 
I, 786 
959, 879 
35, 507, 990 
25,417,251 
7, 500,712 
5, 040, 669 
SO, 289 
17. 7119. 44S 



192. 713,301 



1941 



17. MS, 376 
93.914,900 

6. 301,030 
262,638 

i f 932, 131 



25, 069, 661 
39, 571,479 
2,123, 431 
8. 492, 205 
58, 807 
69, 978. 239 



267, 852, 897 



Kfol*** 0 "the figure for the same period last year. Rice 
i.vhtlv aboV *n \ for over half of the volume. Lumber and 
«opr» ^uw Details are as follows (in tons): 



Rice, lumber, sugar, and 
copra loadings rose 



^uu^^ 


38 weeks ended 
Sept. 20— 






1940 


1941 




Kice 

palay — " 

Sugar.-.-- 

Sugarcane 


08. 370 
14, 193 
174. 254 
441,031 
50, 039 
6.411 


83, 783 
13, 636 
201,024 
413,990 
60,659 
25,887 


Mineral products 

Lumber and timber 

Manufactures 

All others including less 




3, 482 


2, 176 





38 weeks ended 
Sept. 20— 



1940 


1941 


33,906 


24,584 


72.900 


89, 610 


38, 682 


47, 665 


207,682 


248, 134 


1, 116, 960 


1,211,148 



102 REBOOT of the Philippine high COMMISSIONER 

AGR I C ULT UR A L PROP CTC13 O N 




provmces— warranted a revision by late September and a near suffi- 
ciency crop was forecast. The outbreak of war came at a time winch 
coincided with the major rice harvests in north and central Luzon. 
The landing of the enemy during the second week in December 
stimulated rapid early harvesting which in some instances resulted 
in the gathering of slightly immature grain. A further effect of the 
war was the partial break-down of storage and milling facilities in the 
path of the invader. However neither the enemy nor the population 
of Manila was able to obtain new rice or other cereals in any consid- 
erable quantity. Under normal conditions in the Philippines mord 
than 50 percent of the crop is consumed in situ by the producers, 
their landlords, tenants, households, and neighbors and only about 
40 percent of Luzon rice in scattered small lots usually enters inter- 
municipal commerce. But witli war conditions even this fraction 
could not be mobilized. Most of it in the form of unhusked rice, or 
P^ v '^ s . cai ^cdofr into the hills and hoarded by the refugees of the 
central plain. 

nrJJ!f, r ° 7^* a i n imus ually large production of corn in the southern 
riSo 1,l it Cagayan Vallev, and its planting had spread into 
Bfttnninc i> Pan ^ asinan Provinces on the north and in Laguna and 
evinces on the south. Conditions of war fear among the 
JffiBW^^ the wisc encouragement of the Commonwealth's 
IIdSw ^ S ^ t l B,tion resulted in abnormally heavy plantings in 
and cSh cron Octobor of yams, other edible roots, and short-season 
The • 1 

The ^rS^^l^ n t°l W^j coconuts, and abaca was normal or better., 
iSS^SSS^ t ^ )acco declined. The production of rubber con- 
island of Lii7nn i ^«nana production was exceptionally large on the 
crops in the SJ?1 ? cal droughts decreased this and other fruit 
central and southern islands. 

MINERAL PRODUCTION 

As noted under overseas 
of^off wns Durins 

male every effc^F^^^ iVftor December 8 all mining companies 
and the value of tl • f ° ut their mills - The PrincipS companies 
first 9 months of fSSf i 1 P ro <luction, in millions of pesos, for the 
: JW an d 1941 were as follows: 



MIN^KAL PRODUCTION 

k rseas trade, mineral production was at an all- 
•vember and in fact until Christmas the run-off 
at After December 8 all mining companies 
-tear out miiic nnVio ™-iTir»i™oi ^Ai«nonips 



Company 



Balatoc Mining 

Benguet Consolidated... 

Mindanao Mother Lode 
Mnsbate Consolidated... 

Itopon - 

San Mauricio — 

Big Wedge. .. 



1^1". Janu 
ary through 
^'Ptenibor 



10. i 
8.2 
l.fi 
4.7 
3.8 
4.5 
1. 5 



1941. Janu- 
ary throiiRh 
September 



10.4 
8.0 
5. 1 
I. 8 
4.3 
3.8 
2.6 



Company 



United Paracalc 

[. X. L 

a ntamok ..... 

Surigao Consolidated 
other companies. . - . 

Total 



HMO. Janu- 
ary through 
September 



2.0 
2. 3 
2.0 

i. r> 

15.3 



58. 0 



1941, Janu- 
ary through 
September 

2.6 
2.2 
2.1 
2.1 
19.1 



07.1 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMA IISSI OXER 103 

A classification of production by districts indicates that the Benguet 
district improved slightly over previous years, the Paracale-Camarines 
district about held its own, and marked increases in production were 
recorded for the Surigao district, which includes Mindano Mother 

Production of chrome ore for the first 9 months of 1941 in metric 
tons was reported at approximately 315,000; manganese at 52,000; 
copper matte and concentrates at 107,000; copper ore at 24,000 and 
iron ore at 095,000. 

FOREST PRODUCTION 

v information other than that presented under overseas trade 
was available to this Office for the year 1941. 

MANUFACTURE AND MERCHANDISING 

Tlloro xvas little if any change in the ownership and development of 
V invincr with the exception of increased production of the 
manufaclm luj ^ ^ ^ ^ Gov0rument . o ^ llcd tcxtilc mills A ll 

coarser^g^ ^ .^^ wete working at capacity throughout the year and 

3 output must have 
rom 25 to 50 percent 




decline in the number 
American and British 
of JOP®*^^^ The Pacific Commercial Co. (American), which 
establish Q(l ' YS \ m( \ been the largest single general merchandise 
for man.^ ^ ik1 w i 10 lesaling establishment in the islands, decided upon 
iniporUn^ in t i lc yoar . It was in the final process of selling 

liquid* an fc c j c i 0 sing out its stocks when war with Japan was 

its ageiJ clL 

jeclarec . economic legislation 

. ^ only important economic legislation during the period under 
• \\v was the act of December 22, 1941 (Public, 367, 77th Cong.) 
rcV - lC h suspended application of declining quotas and increas- 
* <i>cport taxes for the year 1942 and provided that the quota 
i,l ^,,tities and export tax rates for 1943 should be those originally 
( \ U ovidea for 1941; those for 1944 as originally provided foi'1942; 
f^osc ^ 1945 anc the first . half of 1946 as originally provided for 
1043 Theoretically , the el ect of this law was to reduce the ad- 
19 iment factor of the Tydings-McDufiic Act as amended from a 

^ 194 6 and to 

25 Tre trade relations between the United States and the Philippines 



f * u have so far prevented uic application ot the law or its utility 
ti0ll fl,e vear 1942. J 
fo Vi ' action was taken m response to a resolution for amelioration of 
«mic conditions passed by the National Assembly For the 
f?i n w of Public, 367, see "Federal Legislation Affecting the Philip- 
^ ^eotioU IV of this report (p. 71). 



104 REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION J ! 1 1 

VII. SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

A summary of recent social conditions in the Philippines was 
presented m the fifth report. 29 Particular attention was invited to 
tne unwholesome growth of the landless rural class, the troublesome 
oflwkr 11 unre | t P n JwapaIly in central Luzon, the extension of licensed 
mw g ' ™ the s P rea(I of Cli »'<' tlit? Mohammedan and pagan 
hMW CCS T o re werc 1,0 substantial changes in basic social trends 
thTLi , 1 une T 3 r 0 > 194 L and December 8, whin the Japanese attacked 
th« 1 Howevc 'r, certain new conditions developed incident to 

me approach and actuality of war which deserve mention. 



EMPLOYMENT 



1941 b TT«u° r i ta # e in lligh seas tonnage left about 10 percent of the 
no imm! ; » states sugar quota unshipped. While this in itself had 
besldnnJ J • Vn^" 1 eff ? ct ' the Pi-ospcel that little or no sugar could 
with coW,w * resulted in curtailment of planting and cultivation 
Luzon, Ne^oT andTa^nay 1 " 0 " 1 am ° ng a & ricul t«inl laborers in central 

proSbifc^ftr sin, 01 V° re cxport , s to . Ja P«»' H their effectua 
several mimir;if r t - p . em . r ' caused serious uncmplovinenl in the 

Bv mi l S ^ Pall L les m the "<>" fining districts, 
the resulting, ■ ln .tcnsland tonnage was greatly reduced and 
numerous " wL P f P ?, ge f in movement of crops and commodities left 
absorbed bvtho ■ 1 ^employment which could not readily be 
manv public mn1! V . a " 1 nilll,! "y P«bKc works programs. In fact, 
because of the -i much P"vnle construction werc halted 

w me unavailability of building materials. 

FEAR OP WAR 



rr.AU U*' WAR 

amdety'lnd f eaTtw^X a ™ townspeople alike there were growing 
of war operations ^ Phihppmes would fall within the theater 
^pected to cut off' lH least suffer by blockade which could be 
sources of sunS^^ mumc , atlon with United States and othe* 
hoarding, espSThfS food .stocks; There was considerable 
future, PerceptiWbK^f 11 - d + lstrlctf V A * anxious concern as to the 
gffiwt time S inc t . Ame • L" 1 * 6 " 80 ' d . ev eloped among the people for 
p lnl.pp lno Arn iy rescue vvo, oc ? u P atl °n- The various classes of the 
inducted into the Un ted t0 thc colois b August and were 

ST'nonths. This „d 1 f , A ^ iy 111 groiips during the following 
remembered Preside t ^ ld,cat< ;Cl the nearness of war: and people 
March 1940 that -he was Q no C Ion 8 ia a public address^ 

can defend itself agains t t ^ of thc ^ion that the Philippines 
In spite of widesprc^TaLioL f gleSS10n of a nrst-class power." 30 
coward ice nor any l(CSS 0 ^ w< X cr . «'«e was no evidence of 
United States. * esscnm S m the steadfast loyalty of the people to the 

WARTIME REACTION 

of tg«Sfrf i?,t' PM^ST" f» tWRPiB*. the reaction 

^m&^S£^ftS^S^^ » Report ,0 the President and Congress of 

» Philippines Herald, Manila, Marco 2 «, inib. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 105 

the mass population exhibited a calmness and a stout-hearted serenity 
that were quite striking. There was no panic and no social disorgani- 
zation. So far as is known, there were exceptionally few desertions 
of war workers and domestic employees. 1 he people realized that 
their arms were being defeated, but they faced the situation without 
SSLSStiSfs and with the typical self-confidence of an agricultural 
SEto strongly, reliant ontoej^^ 




and in every J^jfc^ a quarter of the population of Manila is 
country ^ Wage®. ( j TJl0 jnigfations were voluntary and orderly, 
said to have c\acuu^ elements in the population was 

Th( i IV ti £ American and friendly European communities displayed 
varied. ^ 1 V/' nmin i ni ity. A large majority of American men who 
a remarKacue ^y^ ( . tiv( , s joined the Army or Navy, either as reservists 

romen had joined together 
out assistance to the Red 
itensified in December. So 
smaihed open even under 





the ha nOI 1Ilt L rsonn ll v engaged. There was little or no attempt to 
them of their controlling position in the retail trade. The 




Filipino residents of long standing who were either antagonistic, or 
bct i V r ward the current military policies of Germany and a smaller 
c0 ol to i lQ W ere active in support of Axis aggression. The Japanese 
group . an j a bout Manila were quiet and orderly, and were reserved 
group? Expression to others of elation in the turn of events. 
i^Tf should be added that the foregoing comment is based upon 
rvations and reports made prior to the Japanese entry of Manila 
0 bsci v , authentic evidence is available. 9 
after 

VIII. PRE-WAR JAPANESE INFLUENCE 

• to the outbreak of the war there had been for some years a 
Frl °!ious growth of Japanese effort m the Philippines, chiefly in the 
c °^ao ^district and in the shipping and deep- sea fishing industries. 

LAND SETTLEMENT 

lipq0 land settlement was practically confined to the Province of 
JaP olthoueh there was a belated and limited effort to push west- 
DaV f tLvm , the Davao area toward the upper valley of the Rio Grande 
ward nom ^ g0 uthwest into the Sarangani Bay district. The 
Japanese sought unoccupied areas and were careful not to encroach on 

S301S — 13 3 



106 report of the Philippine higb COMMISSIONER 



the thickly populated coastal and central plains of Luzon and the 
Visayan Islands. Widespread malarial infection prevented settle- 
ment by Filipinos, Japanese, or others on the large island of Mindoro 
lying just south of the entrance to Manila Bay. 

In respect to Davao, the Japanese were confronted during most of 
the period of settlement by the Philippine land and natural resources 
laws. Ihese laws forbade purchase of the public domain in parcels 
01 more than 250 acres or leasing in parcels exceeding; 2,500 acres. No 
purchase or lease of public land was permitted bv persons other than 
citizens of the Philippines or of the United States (the latter unti 
r nuippme independence). The same was true of partnerships and. 
companies controlled by other nationals. 

Japanese control of abaca (Manila hemp) lands of Davao had 
oeen acquired largely before 1920 and almost wholly before 1930 by 
a lease and contract system. Under this system the typical procedure 
was as lollows: A Fihpino (in several instances government officials) 
oi an American would lawfully obtain a 25-year lease from the Govern-? 
nTnr Vi n !° excced 2 > 5 00 acres of the public domain adjacent to or 
/m«;. i ™ V ^ establishment of a Japanese development company 
tW^/n ta Development Co. or Furukawa Plantation Co.) and 
thTeor™ execute a contract with the Japanese company, whereby 
on tlo panyguarai ), tced to dcar > Plant, and manage crop production 
esi^r; 1 P ^ a11 taXes an(1 otl,(I ' li,lld costs > a » (l ''•'urn to the 
of the *l£JrL2?Z (a:I T int * e * Bd . Percentage, generally 15 percent, 
forbades.hlL 9 ven " e i from . operation of the leasehold. The laws 
4re "manaSf' W ^j******* parties held thai the agreements 
record oR, ^"tracts" and not subleases. There is no available 

Vftei r v r decision on the point, 
the land dfviS ?■ ^ ™ ntract tJ 'e Japanese company would clear 
assign each W J U \ t0 25 to ^O-acre lots, build access roads, and 
More SLntW ^ Pa l ieS ? farmer- usually one of Okinawa blood, 
construction w»« 2 ! ^ UlC COst of clearing, subdividing, and road 

companies thus , thc ov erburden. The Japanese development 

under Sneir Staffs? ^ ntr ? 1 a "Private" road System within land 
system. Gates wnr! !°f g l n kiI omcterage even the public highway 
was allowed whZSSw t P g these P livate «>ads, but public use 
»>y the companies to tl Jt £ anese assignee* of lots were represented 
foremen, hut thev worn l K ov e r ')ment and outsiders as overseers or 
granted in pernct*intv wl,;i ,? believe that the assignment was land 
emigration to the Pmlh , ° y sho , uld hold against all corners. As 
the Japanese governmi i t ami™ 8 s ?}? ct[vc and closely controlled by 
means retained a lZ ! as this government through indirect 

panics with the aid' <7f i '° ,° f contro1 over emigrants, the coin- 

in selection of competent nS' at Davao experienced no difficulty 
social and economic ^Snli^^J? 0 * m exerting a comprehensive 
ployed one or two , male jl n ' ^ The assi gnees usually em- 
future assignees, and ^ndorX" esc - e allves « in tiailli »g «*> become 
laborers, noiieofZrni 080 assistailts were a number of Filipino 
of company lots ^ CVer to thc position of assignee 

nZ^'ZfonaliZtZ SESfck thv ° u ^ h acquirement of land by 
3 ^ S lal[ 7 °u f ^Onmwtm to pagan Bagobo hill women 

undei recognized but loose tribal customary law), and through direct 




REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE I Ui;n COMMISSIONER 



purchase in lawful instances, the Japanese, at a minimum of capital 
^Vestment, came into control of more limn 150,000 acres out of some 
: ^0,()()() d ( .vot lH l to airriculturc in the Province of Davao. 

VSTien the Province of Davao was opened to settlement m the early 
'lavs of \meriean occupation Americans introduced large-scale abaca 
ai Hl coconut production. During the first 15 years of development 
nioiv than f>0 sizable holdings were taken up by Americans. These 
energetic pioneers using native laborers and native overseers and 
tenants selected and seeded the appropriate varieties, developed the 
agricultural techniques, introduced food crops and secondary crops, 
invented Viber stripping and cleaning machinery and processes, 
established the crnuliim svstem, and developed commercial connec- 
tions in the London and New ^ ork markets. 

American enterprise in Davao, particularly in respect to abaca, 
Waned Vftcr 1920 for various reasons. Ihe Japanese had entered in 

,IV ^ l 1 _ 1.1!.. .. 4 .Mt.Mli Circf Hill llOil i Mo( in/if *->. ^ 




minatin^Anie'ri(-ans after independence the risk of further capital 
V 7 :ii)Peared unwarranted, Fm«%, there were social reasons 
1 "Vrnied against the growth of American development, The 



pr< 

the same reason, 

eUminn 

investi 

Which al ^ i \7on l were approaching retirement and their sons, many of 
V Sl Urr T/cated married, and employed in the United States, had no 
j i • £ succeed in the management of plantations within a growing 
desire to s . neg€ econ0 mic control. For the Japanese, the Amen- 
nucleus o ; Philippine independence was taken as an encourage- 
can fSSSSS than a deterrent to further investment. 
m 3EL generally different, but equally affective reasons, Filipino 
i lonment in" Davao remained secondary. Many had no access to 
l moderate capital required and those who had, found better oppor- 
tv in sugar production in Negros which was imder development 
t V n ihe some time, required less risk, and, with free entry and high 
- f! protection in the United States, guaranteed greater profits 
t^ 1 ' 1 on die south front of Mindanao Island, was far away from 
RV cultural centers of the various dialectal groups of the Christian 
iMiimnos— it was particularly far from the center of the most aner*AtE 
^Vo-rant and land settling group, the llocanos of north Luzon— 

(Ticient public land on Luzon was scheduled for homestead 
sl ^ ^ns a pagan and Mohammedan nonunion ; uun g 
paVtl ^TtoclirfstianFi 
^ffi officers of go 

j % S enfranchisement 



Sr^i/i was a pagan and Mohammedan population area cult,,, i?" 
VlX lZwl to Christian Filipinos. Moreover! it was a special 

h all officers of government wore appointive, while Fil ni,! • e 
rt h and central provinces were still in the first enjoySenJ of 



COMMKRC'IAL PENETRATION 



From 1000 until well alter the 1-irs World War there were co nipar 
*£STfeW Japanese enterprises in the Philippines outside of DaVad 
l thev were engaged principally as carpenters, mechanics, photo™ 
and i I the like There were less than a score of Japanese & 
s ^co"intratd in Manila and the hulk of the yCSBJg 
trade with Japan was carried on by other nationals. However, 



108 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMM ISSloX KH 

during the past two decades Japanese commercial poin t ration si rength-: 
enecl and broadened. By 1940 practically all .Japanese commercial 
nouses doing foreign business and practically all shipping companies 
W I ancl) ??> <? ffi ces, or agencies in the Philippines Some of the 
v r; n P f f ularly Mitsui Bussan Kaisha, Bad representation in 
of r?t n ;i ? W? 7 and in man .V inland market towns. The nuinher 
centrnt^ S S V ments reached several hundred hut were still con- 
on 3,h! the larger centers of population and did business la reel v 
SSSi b * s,8 > m this respect differing from the Chinese retailers who 
Fuinmo l 1 ?/" a lar S e volume of store credit in then- dealings with 
ities ChS farni , ers - , After the beginning of Sino-Japanese hostil- 
2Sw£2fR !? tailere boycotted Japanese goods. This encouraged 
of Japanese retail stores ^ * dispcrsal t,irou gnout the archipelago 

den\iS!n-mvt f J COniniercial stft tistics will show the gradual but no less 
snipping HiefeSLS . apa ™ s ? Interest in Philippine shipping, including 
remarkable iner 9 Philippines and the United States, and the 
textiles. From i o« 1U somc Japanese export lines, particularly in 
for American r, i on ' the State Department succeeded in retaining 
through a aimt° cers approximately one-half of the textile market 
cheaper lines ofi ag , recme nt with Japanese textile exporters. The 
types of Japaiips are ' stee l g°°ds, rubber footwear, and certain 

the market m anit D * £ oods , including milk, made rapid strides in 
boycott. In 1940 t? Pnilippihd import duties and Hie Japanese 
interest in the Pi c . began a slow decline in Japanese commercial 
Japanese industt; i Ppmes largely because of the dive rsioii of tlu* 
naval purposes T in nt ancl "riPP^S tonnage to military and 
Japanese from a pi t there was a considerable net emigration of 
c ?mmercial _* c yUappines. However, there was no faltering in 
^Pal tonnage fl v S tl ° n - During the earlier part of 1941 the prin- 
united States wat fi e for the shipment of Philippine sugar to the 
J™s situation luu - J 3 * Japanese bottoms. Taking advantage of 
Plant* 0 * 0 ^^ Kaisha ancl other Japanese financial 

whp S> S en erallv 1 ontercd into the direct purchase of sugar froir 
suW ° tller agenoin -? s than the normal market price, at a tim 
DSt antialp Urcha I ^w 1 th out tonnage in sight were unable to mak 



m 
imc 

e 



The Jap an mineral production 

tries^v , to °Pei^*? unable because of the laws respecting natural 
of loan** ? Cc urrorl o A er in tlle ra pid development of mineral indus- 
al >le to « d . c °ntrao t Uer 1930 - In s P ite of this handicap, by means 
Principal vL quir e a W* ai \ d through dummy corporations, they were 
the only j^ a ^t for p} 1 ^ 1 interest. Prior to 1941, Japan was the 
market f Ql . li^^Ppine chrome, manganese, and copper, and 
^Uppine iron ore. 

Before 1930 ail cl FlSHERIE s and forestry 

Snhtnr^Lff P x acti cal t i^i lme w hen it was lawful to do so, the Japanese 
OUDSequent to I930 u 0l )°Poly in offshore fishing in the Philippines. 

Wng enterprises were fraudulently ex- 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 109 

tended by the use of dummy corporations, in which Filipinos appeared, 
as owning CO percent or more of the capital stock. The same situation 
applied but with less force to logging and lumber operations. &f° ie 
the statutory prohibition on foreign concessions came into ' ettectj tne 
Mitsui Bussan Kaisha interests obtained in Davao one of the largest 
Eg and lumber concessions granted by the ^uUpmne govenmjent 
It covered an area of 75,000 acres and was located at a stiategic 
point on the Gulf of Davao. 

OTHER INTERESTS 

n.irinc the last few years the Japanese through dummy corpora- 
t - 1 . Ltnhlkhcd in the Philippines a fish cannery, a brewery, and 
tK)n ", n h. - oo wear factories. In several instances of alleged 
dmnniV co o a ions the apparent principal stockholders were dis- 
?• !?i,,.d I Filipinos who had been previously in the service of the 
TcSffives of those holding responsible public office. 

CULTURAL PENETRATION 

T . , Ws I1G t appear that the Japanese made any strong effort at 
iJL!*3 nenctration either with the mass of the people or with the 
°). tl ouns Two exchange toujrs for students and very limited 
0 F;« tic propaganda were the only outward evidences of these 
P £ n < The consensus of observers was to the effect that a great 
efforts. mify j lt have been accomplished by the Japanese along these 
deal m* i* been for the essential liberalism of American relations 
lil -°i S the islands the extreme difference in religious and philosophical 
w r tr between the Japanese and the Filipinos, and the well-founded 
feeing - fc Q f t j lc j a p auese government that pressure propaganda 
fear g 1 >eact to a point where strong Filipino elements would oppose 
.ndence of the islands and advocate permanent international 

in * m on bv the United States. 
protec^i^ At . 

IX. GOVERNMENT FINANCE, CURRENCY AND BANKING 

t the Fifth Annual Report of the High Commissioner it was noted 
t at the end of the fiscal year 1941, Government finances were in a 

icrally sound condition; that revenue collections were well main- 
Pined making possible a continuation of normal Government services ; 

A that the turning over to the Commonwealth Government of eol- 
ations from the United States excise tax on Philippine coconut oil 
\ A made possible continued large public works and Government 
r*n« to agriculture and industry. This condition continued up to the 
loa threak of the war. Revenues with which to meet ordinary expendi- 
01 c were well maintained. The deepening crisis had little effect 
tUr0 Ti Government expenditures except for one item of 1*10,000,000 
(voted in the fiscal year 1941) for the work of the Civilian Emergency 

^^i^ISSpects of the financial situation noted in the Fifth Report of 
i ITicrh Commissioner likewise continued up to the outbreak of the 
It was pointed out that, during a period when it was intended 



110 he pout of the Philippine high commissioner 

that the Philippines were to prepare for independence, they were 
becoming increasingly dependent financially upon the United States*. 
1 He transfer of large sums of money from tin- United Stales Treasury 
to the Commonwealth Government was causing the latter to become 
adjusted to a scale of expenditures which it could not hope to maintain 
alter independence Large expenditures of these funds for public 
works undoubtedly were contributing to the maintenance of prices 
and production costs at levels well above those of nearby tropical 
areas. • 1 



It was also pointed out in the fifth report that there was ;l marked 
tendency in the year or so preceding the outbreak of the war for Gov- 
ernment expenditures to exceed current revenues. Very little infor- 
mation concerning Commonwealth Government receipts"and expendi- 
TTwV 3 \ n C* months immediately preceding the war is available in the 
united states. It may be presumed, however, that the appropria- 
tions lor the fiscal year 1942, which were largely in excess of expected 
wfk U<? /' WC , r ?> , s P<mt. A loan of P2,500,000 was floated in Sep- 
TW 7 ( ! Ge o Publlc Debt," below). Shortly before Christmas, 1 94 1 . 
«i n nnnn™ °?? e , velt all ocated from his emergency appropriation 
*iy,uuu,000 which was turned over to the Commonwealth for use for 
oeiense purposes. It is not known whether these funds or any part 
ot them were actually expended. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 

na'r?o P f r Hy iOUS + - nnU ? , , rcports of tl,c Hi £? h Commissioner the greater 
££ W ™ C V°? °f th e report dealing with public finance and bank- 
th? Pom^ V\i°~ statlstics relating to the financial operations of 
no\VnS V f C S th Government and comments thereon. As virtually 
aWo wf ° i 1S nature , relating to the fiscal year 1942, are avail- 
" ri v m ft ; h ' country, such statistical tables and comments are neces- 
sarily omitted in the present report. 

COCONUT-OIL TAX 

oi^winch 0 ,, 1 !. 8 ? f thc , United States excise tax on Philippine coconut 
recent ve„rc ? ver to the Commonwealth Treasury, have, in 

CommCI.n 1 ? 1 '^'^' 1 an im P or tant part of the total income of the 
million Holloa Government, varying between seventeen and twenty 
Pir e K in a " nu . allv - S ncc thc tax became payable to the Philip- 
trust f nd , nU ^ d collections have been credited monthly to a 
avalLole fo, ; ntalned by th °, Unitod Statf ' s Treasury. They are 
Collection, l»- tPansfc ? quarterly to Philippine Treasury accounts. 
SftS l ° J W«I 1939 were transferable to an account 
denosit " T'" • the P1 »ilippines, general fund account, tim<S 

qnent collee 1 C,FeW , mtcr ost at 2 percent per annum while subse- 
mSmffiSfSJ^ tl W^ to "Treasurer of the Philippines, 
Tamp er annum 1 .' A " gUSt ? ' 1939 '" -Inch draws inters, at 

bSSSJteraWMgS^^ by heavy nn.imry an., „„v.t 



Kl PORT OF THK PHILIPPINE HIGH! COMMISSIONER 



111 



Table s. United stairs coconut oil excise tax revenues collected end credited to 
trust fund for transfer to the Philippine Government 



Collections 


Credited to trust 

fund 


Warrants 
drawn for tax- 
refund 

purposes 


Credited to Treas- 
urer. Philippines, 
accounts Nos. 35 
and 3S 


11*34, August ti> iH-ccinlu-r 

1935 

1930 

1937 

1938 

1939 

1940 ... 

1941 

1042, January to June 


$0. 990. 007. :\7 
17, 00.'.. 749. 27 
17, 206. 386. 13 
16.052.576.29 
1»;. Q93, 238. 71 
17, 468, 379, 22 
17,605,619. 40 
19,846,231.21 
7,774,377 10 


<:oo.6o6 
200. ooo 
800. 000 

400. 000 
1.000.000 


<i7, meisTes 

io.7 »o. 878.36 

14. 265. 761. 16 
22, i:.o. B20. 7. r » 
13.010. 147. OS 
15,437,266.98 


136. 622. 620. 00 


2. 600,000 


132. 370. 49:>. 8*< 



SI, 027, 620. 12 



Table 8 shows collections from the coconut-oil tax, amounts with- 
j *™ for tax refunds and the amounts transferred to other accounts 
1 e Philippine treasury with the Tinted States Treasury As 
1" ; n the* second column of the table, warrants have been drawn 
Sr I, V refund purposes totaling $2,000,000. These warrants are in 
So ature of advances to the Chief Disbursing Officer from which he 

nl^rrefunds of coconut-oil tax collections as certified to him for 
m -mo. I bv the Bureau of Internal Revenue. On June 30, 1942, the 
[5uef Disbursing Officer had on hand, for making such refunds, 

* 3 il' 7 tfie cdconut-oil excise tax is not payable until the end of the 
fL following the month in which the oil is processed or used, 
nl ?wiions continued up to the end of the fiscal year 1942 with respect 
C oi inmit oil imported irom the Philippines prior to the outbreak ot 
to cow* puling the fiscal year 1942 collections, as reported by the 
TTnited States Treasury, we're as follows: 

1942: 

January $1, 538, 172. 97 

February L 385, 496. 45 

March/. 1, 333, 437. 59 

April 913, 274. 93 

May 732, 819. 19 

June _ 322, 488. 15 

Total 17, 405, S79. 25 

Expenditures of coconut-oil tax funds by the Commonwealth 
' rn ment are restricted by provisions of the Philippine Economic 
Wustment Act* 2 stipulating that they may be used only for the 
•nose of meeting new or additional expenditures which are necessary 
P U d (listing Philippine economy to a position independent of trade 
111 fSenceS in the United States and in preparing the Philippines for 
P i assumption of the responsibilities of an independent state. It was 
l that under the Independence Act, the Philippines, when they 
x U n \c independent in 1940, would be confronted with extreme 
nomic dislocations and that Government revenues would be sharply 
eC Suced Congress evidently intended that the coconut-oil tax funds 
k uld be used in such a manner as to alleviate so far as possible the 
economic difficulties of the new state upon acquiring independence. 

— Tlct of AiiKUSt 7. 193* Public. No. 300. 76th Confess. 



V \"i*r"~~ 2,004,397.99 

) U ^ U nJ)cV"" 1, 826, 922 7i> 

Sr V i i - 2 234 005. 32 

^ vl mbVr" 1. 6ie osa 54 

ge^mbef: l. 871. 14* 27 



112 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



CURRENCY CIRCULATIOX 

Very little information is available in the United States concerning 
currency circulation in the latter part of 1941. In the preceding 
fiscal year, as reported in the Fifth Annual Report of the Hiirh Com- 
missioner, there was a steady increase in the amount of currency in 
circulation It is believed that this trend continued up to the' be- 
ginning of the war. On September 30, 1941, the most recent date for 
which such information is available, the currency in actual circulation 
S^mS? 1 t0 , ^ 20 o °> 445 >432, as compared with ^183,145,86] on Juno 
I ' ,n;, an l pl38 > 187 >035 on September 30, 1940. As in the fiscal 
ZTZ i ' expansion of the currency circulation resulted from 
Phni^ aVT ex P™J»tures by the United States armed forces in the 
fn/l il P i neS 35 as con , tin ucd large expenditures for public works 
cnn^ !nai 7i governmcnta . 1 P l » : P°ses by the Commonwealth. Details 
ft? S? g cu ™cy emulation at the end of the first quarter of 
Seotemhl^n r i^n Wlth ^mparative totals for June 30, 1941, and 
September 30, 1940, are shown in table 9 



Types of currency 


in Treasury 
vaults avail- 
able for cir- 
culation 


In actual cir- 
cular ion 


Total theoret- 
ical net circu- 
lation 


Silver pesos 

ITalf-silver pesos 

Subsidiary coins 

Minor coins.. 

Treasury certificates '. 

Bank of Philippine Islands note 

Ph!te Dc Clonal Banknotes 

Philippine National Bank emergency notes' 

Total Sept. 30, 1941 

Total June 30, 1941 

Total Sept. 30, ISMQ-lllZYJll 


1. 217 
379, 108 
24, 585 
110.741 
21, 4 40. 60S 

p:::::::: 


4. 177. 110 
4, 623, 720 
11, 205b : *70 
4.000. 110 
172.814.921 

1. 358, 385 

2. 299. 810 


4, 178.357 
4. 902. 828 
11. 229, 955 
4. 176,851 
194, 201, 016 

1, 358, 385 

2, 299, 816 


21. 902, 370 
! 488, 018 
40,913. 9G2 


200. 445. 432 
183. 145. SCI 
138, 187, 035 


222. 407. 808 
198, 834, 479 
179, 100,997 



BANKING 

equate ^ • P ull PPmes in the latter half of 1941 is 

s un to tt» « .u° Wn - h °wever, that the general con- 
*P, to \ ho outbreak of w„r ^^aJLa Cf ,t; c fne- 



BANKING 

The information 
banking: conditions 
also very inadequate 

dition of banks un to rtvl ~ .u° Wn - how evcr, thai, uic general tsv»- 
tory. The consol clator Lf„? eak of war was considered satisfac- 
latest date for which if \l f tem ?nt of banks for October 4, 1941, the 
reached the highest level l;,, aVa A ble ' shows cash on hand to have 
discounts, and overdraft* lii eml of 1939 - Thc tofcal of loans, 
changed little. More d P \ n ;i! been Wining while deposits had 
October 4, 1941, compared I i £ OI } cernin g the condition of banks on 
are shown in table 10 Vlth Jun e 28, 1941, and October 5, 1941, 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 113 

Table 10.— Consolidated statement of banks Get j ,1941* compared with June 28, 

1941, and Oet. 6, 1940 1 

[Thousands of jm»sos) 



[tern 



Loans, discounts and overdrafts 

Due'rol^^ 

Duo from banks outttdc the Philippine* 

Cosh on band "* 

Other resources 



Total resources 

Not circulation. ['.'.'...'. 

Total deposits. V>>\ii li mines I- 

X>U€ to banks in ^^^Sf^ bVeSch banks 

Duo to roreten boa oi mo . 

Other liability 

To tnl ^^^iM^^i^^ weoks'endinn 
^O^S&S reserves 



Oct. 4, 
1911 


June 28, 

1941 


Oct. 5, 
1940 


210,626 
30.S25 
24 900 


211, S79 
31.301 
12, 431 


233,545 
27. 464 
14,230 


67, 497 
IS, 659 


"37,689 
51,312 
16,997 


"36*729 
31,871 
16,022 


374, 050 


oW, wry 


359 861 


1,359 
219, 659 
25, 130 
41.064 
9, 718 
56, 947 
21.0*2 


L399 
223. 267 
11,033 
3 1. 944 
10, 544 
57, 359 
22,063 


1,549 
211,370 
10, 823 
44.36S 
9.540 
56. 189 
26,022 


374. 959 
IS, 402 
249, 698 


360, 609 
2 46, 3S2 
224. 566 


359.861 
39, 322 
202,527 



~Kxetadta«tbeApfc«ltnrri and Industrial Bank 
if" weeks average. 

ii , r,n statistics and little othcrfcdet ailed information are 
V VYV m his coimtS concerning banking after the war started, 
available ^S^bSS of the outbreak of war was a heavy demand by 
0ne of the first resutt from banks and to transfer funds to 

depositors to ^ gtates Both of the m o V ement S) however, 
the cont .mental l rf ^ Commomvcahh Government, which 

were "J^SSammti which might be withdrawn by depositors and sub- 
l^t^g^^touisactions with the United States to hcensmg 

req iin^ iu ^ exC eption of the two Japanese banks, it is believed that 
With W a ' n j, s continued in operation until a short time before the 
a ll Mai ulft 3CCU pi e( i by the Japanese. As described elsewhere in this 
city wa ^ as i 1 as well as securities were removed from the banks and 
icp^'' to Corregidor shortly after Christmas. 

PUBLIC DEBT 

rv\ p public debt of the Philippines is small. On June 30, 1941, 
At bonded indebtedness of the Commonwealth Government 33 
tllC ited to 1*72,022,137 or less than f*5 per capita, The distribu- 
a moin J between national and local issues and the net indebted- 
tion oi ^ in the following table: 



ness 

ta ^of^ 



' \ TT lnrnl government issues after deducting staking funds and excluding bonds of instrumcn- 

onal a, \° nu . nl tm . principal and interest of which have been guaranteed by the Commonwealth, 



114 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Table 11. — Philippine public debt and sinking funds as of June 30, 1941 
Item: Amount 

Bonds of National Government proper p r?s -!.")() 00n 

Bonds of National Government secured by bonds of pro- 

vincial, municipal, and other Government agencies 17, 3S7, 00n 

Bonds of provincial, municipal, and other Government en- 

titles securing National Government bonds . 17 3S7, 00n 

Bonds of provincial and municipal governments (direct 

issues) 3,070,000 

Deduct:" 1 " 166 > 894 > °°0 

Collateral bonds issued against provincial 

and municipal bonds . P17 337 000 

Sinking funds " 77 ' 484i * 863 

94, 871, 863 

Net bonded indebtedness. 72 022 137 

While complete information is not available in the Cniled States as 
to changes affecting the above figures during the latter part of 1041, 
it is believed that the net indebtedness did not change greatly. An 
S^n ™n P ™n ^P'ovcment bonds due August 1, 1941, amounting to 
1*20 000,000, matured and was redeemed but as the sinking fund was 
nearly sufficient to redeem the issue the effect upon (lie net indebted- 
ness was small. The Commonwealth Assembly in the spring of 1941 
tul ?*/o°t a . b T d °{ p20 >°00,000 to meet an expected deficit in 
2k of ?b F g f — on f Au S ust , 24 President Quezon authorized the 
S1] C first 'Sories of these bonds in the amount of l>2,r,()(),000. 

^r~0^s d SCPtCmlH>r »« } — «t 4K percent/ and 

lJfeE?ffi est f. blishl ,T lt , of the Commonwealth, and for a num- 
! 1 9 ' , the P" blic . d ^t has been declining. Regular pay- 
hi o, ilfl.t H Cm? ! n P rovid "l ^r each bond issue have exceeded 
£ Sm a .^°, Unt ° f new ]oi »<s ttai have been issued in 
ffiSi ? ^ Point of 1*131,718,789 in 192S the net 

M&ffft dC f'T ( St ™ dil y to P72,022,137 in 1941. 
the M l°a r nd S h of Z^S^l^T ^ kZ £ 

menfof'Se cSSR&^ffi ft? *™ ^ "Sf^ 

In ndditimi f b« n^. " , ^ n Sl ftl1 of tnesc were issued m Manila. 

cfnaJ I ar d nf h l«rT° nWCa th Government has guaranteed the prin- 
I , S,? "PProximately the same amount issued by in- 

stiumen tali t ies of the government 

but Uoi YSStSS^ Gover . nm ™t has. also guaranteed the interest, 

have been ndi.ed and gfc beS^d Jw^^f^ 0 ^^!?!?^ 
remainder has been repurchased hv ifc* Vr-°^ 81< fe rable P*£ of „ the 
leaving not much moro t£n one Slf nf n • Rn 1 llwft - y °2» *f 
Standmg in the hands of the pubhc ° ngmal ,SSUC OUt " 

^S^Mffi^?*?!?^ ^* of 1934 differentiated between 
r t I! ,0 ^1 ?f h . llj PPine Government and its political 

Subdivisions covered by bonds issued under authority of acts of Con- 
gress and those debts and liabilities of the Philippine Government, 
its political subdivisions and instrumentalities not incurred under 



HEPORT Ol THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 115 

such authority.* With regard to obligations in the first category, 
, £e C 'ess provided («) that the independent government shd 

, ,nn tl it Dortion <>f this indebtedness outstandmg on July 4, 1946; 

/ V i , l> 1 ne ( iovenunent shall make adequate provision for 
(fe) that the I fillip] »u u o% hereon. ( ( .) that such indebtedness 

^ that these mWions shall be embodied in a treaty between 
and ( /) .that . these pio% o With regard to obligations 

the United St es an us ' n ly vitIed lhat the mde- 

m tl J e ? CO, !l 1C nt 'slmU assume these obligations and that a pro- 
W***} 7 K^hafl be embodied in the aforementioned treaty 
v %°'i }° oclas'ifies an outstanding interest-bearing obligations issued 
Table 12 c /. ass ?"f n nvommC nt and ts subdivisions according to 
bY U e iSSedhrfort or after May 1, 1934, and gives de- 

u hot her they veio issuea ui . based upon the 

tailed ^^*^S^5hy^in the Division of Territories and 
best infonnatoor l "¥^££S DeiSKment of the Interior, and is 
Island Possossioi s u ten q ^ intemipted communications, 

believed t <» * f^SKe to be absolutely cert ain that the Comnion- 
howcyer it s ot poss > d . ^ e several weeks 

wealth ( ove, »» >| J.^ 1 and iinme diately after the outbreak of war 
"V nlndmexl in minor degree the figures shown. 

,*_^rf«K«rf of inicrctt-bcarino »bli ? <Uio,« teirt by the Phd.pp.nc Go,- 

Table \2.-— >">"'" • gmntnt and ttt *tiM*w*MWW 

, 1K |,,,KK M.W 1. iW, AND OUTSTANDING DEC. 31, 1931 



i>iiii' »< maturity 



<••'''"'' . ort Works: 

S^fe 



Total. 



Dec. 1, 1046 20. 

Fob. I, 1952 

July 1, 1952 

juiy ic, ton 

Mar. 1. I 
Sept. 15, 1059 ... 
Mar. 15, 1900... 

April I, 195S. .. 
Oct. 15, 1959.... 
Apr. 15, I960... 

Apr. 1, 1955-35. 

Oct. 1, 10M 

Apr. 1, 1901.... 



Amount 
Issued 



PS, 000,000 
10. 000. 000 
23. 000. 000 
40, 000. 000 

1,600.000 
1,500,000 
1,000,000 

1.500,000 
1.000,000 
1,850,000 

6, 000, 000 
3. 000,000 
500.000 



lrt nol collateral bonds: 

pfcrof^- Ne g ro S W 

i^eHSd 8 municipal II 
rr C^yVsnnprovcmcnts 
o^. nee of Marinduquc Ate* 
Pr0 ^iHc improvements. _ 
p£t^ 43 i's public 

improvements. 

"TTsecTTcw (3) ftml (5) - 



Dec. 1, 1950.... 
May 1,1958.... 
Jan. 1, 1950-36. 



Mar. 1,1956... 
Apr. 1, 1956. .. 
June 1, 1056... 
May 1,1956... 
May 1,1957... 



Retired 

and 
canceled 



Repur- 
chased end 
bold 



f»3. 510. 000 
:\, 178,000 
o, 722; 000 

■jo, B80, 000 

332, 000 
112. 000 



320, 000 
50, (XX) 



105,450,000 

5, 500,000 
l, 000, 000 
1,953,000 

857,000 

800,000 

518, 000 

111,000 

196,000 



1.35 1. 000 

310, 000 



in, :uo.roo 

2, 058,000 
116,000 
351,000 

156,000 

80,000 

84,000 

4,000 

12,000 



P094. 000 
3. 004, 000 
O.OS0.0O0 
7, 500,000 

l.oio, 000 
862,000 



708. 000 
42, 000 



Outstand- 
ing i" 

hands of 
public 



3,080,000 
830,000 



24,502,000 

L 128,000 
SS4.000 
1,602,000 

701,000 

720. 000 

404.000 

106, 000 

12,000 



T3, 796. 000 
2, 858. 000 
7, 798.000 

17. 014,000 

122.000 
506,000 
1,000,000 

400. 000 
90S. 000 

1,850,000 

1,500, COO 
1.854.000 
1 500. 000 



10.832.000 



2,314.000 



1,000 
172,000 



116 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Table 12.— Statement of {merest-bearing obligations issued bp tin Philippine Gov- 
ernment and its subdivision* — Continued 

. BEFORE MAY 1. 1934, AND OUTSTANDING DEC. 81, 1941 



National collateral bonds-Con 
Province and municipal Ilocos 
bur 4» s improvements. 

Imnr 06 ° f Bu,ftCa n public 

improvements. 

^l? 06 , 0 ' Nueva Kcija 4k's 
Public Improvements. ^ 
nnffi 08 . of p »nipanga 4^'s 
public improvements ^ 

^roVn^ « 

Se°m C e^ ma1 ^ 
Total...... 



Date of maturity 



Bonds of direct issue: 

Municipal Sta Cruz, La K una 5's 
JJmrfcjpal Majayjav LaSJniU" 

Total 



July 1, 1957 

- - do 

do 

do 

do 

Aug. 1, 1957-37. 

Jan. 1, 1958 

July 1, 1903... 



A mourn 
issued 



Jan. 1, 1949-29 

do. 

--..do ' 

Apr. 1, 1959. . . 




P35O.000 
474,000 
090, fx hi 
054. 000 
^42.000 
222.000 
220.000 
1.277, 700 



Retired 

and 
canceled 



15, 494, 7<K> 



90,000 
40,000 
40.000 
1.0(10.000 



P02. 000 
124,000 
200. 000 
244,000 | 

Ss, Mil 

24,000 



Repur- 
rha^Mj and 
held 



3. 009, 000 



04,000 



< mi: <\ in 
Ing in 
hands of 
punll< 



!»;ss. 000 



106, (XK» 



.V.M. (KKJ 



782, <><*> 



PI. 248.000 



2,000 
220,000 
, 277, 700 



5, 23 1. 700 



« (X), 000 
i 40.000 
i 40,000 
154.000 



E?"'; th series 5's.:;; 

gixtn series 5's 

°«venth series 4's 
P.,K. Act 528 > "rst 4's i 
P ^j^s first series 13 ,- s ;; 

National collateral l>onds- 

^^^alNegros, 

S^S^^Pabllclm. 

mUU^ 10 ^ improve. 



Total. 



Bonds of direct issue- 
City of Manila- * 
Second series 5*s 
Third series 4^'s * 
Fourth series 4». i's' 
*ifth series 4 l A's..[. 
Total 



Grand total . 



Totals before May J, 1934 
Totals after May 1, 1934 . . 
Grand total, Dec. 31, 1941 



Mar. 15, 1965-45 
Nov. 1, 1905-45 
Apr. I, 1907-47 " 
Apr. 1, 1908-48 
Apr. 1, 1970-50 * 
Aug. 1, 1970-50" 
Sept. 1, 1941 



May 16, 1900... 
May 4, 1906 ... 
May lc, 1900. 



RCC. I, 1909 

May 1, 1970 ' 

b(l Pt. 1, 1970 



g*c. 1,1970 
Mar. I,i97i 
JUIIO 1, 1971" 




500,000 
500. 000 
500, 000 
500, (XX) 
500.000 
500, 000 
2. 500, (XX) 



5,500,000 



222,300 

500,000 

350. 000 

120. 000 
350. 000 
350, (XX) 



1.892.3C0 



500,000 
1.000. 000 
500, 000 
Jj OO, COO 
2. 500, COO 



9.892,300 



500,000 
500, 000 
500,000 
500,000 
500,000 
500, 000 
2. 500. 000 



5. 500,000 



222, 300 
500, 000 

350, ooo 

120,000 
350. 000 
350. 000 



1,892.300 



500, 000 
. 000, (XX) 
500, (XX) 
5(H). 000 



2, 5(K), 000 



9, 892. 300 



! Bonds issued at Manila in peso denominations i, 
Xotf:.— All bondfl Issued after May J 1934 » 7 " m ' St and P*^W«J payable at Philippine Treasury. 
at roOfpplne Treasury. ' ' ' * erc lssu <* and sold in Manila; interest and principal payable 



a 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 117 

It has appeared inevitable that pie government of an independent 
Philippines, cut off from coconut oil tax receipts and with other reve- 
nues reduced as a result of economic difficulties caused by less advan- 
tageous trade relations with the United States, will be faced with 
great difficulties. In order to permit the new government to begin 
its existence in a strong financial position, unencumbered with burden- 
some debt Congress provided in the Philippine Independence Act 
of 1934 as amended by the Philippine Economic Adjustment Act of 
1939 that the proceeds of the export taxes required by the act should 
be reserved for debt liquidation. It was estimated 35 that under 
normal conditions the proceeds of these taxes together with sinking 
fund navmcnts and other receipts provided by law would be con- 
BK S^ of the total debt issued prior to May 1 1934 

Tn accordance with the provisions of the Philippine Independence 
a * oVnorded taxes on the export of certain articles to the United 
Q?J? fXeW^Sming Janiaiy 1, 1941, and a total of TSA72 r 
271 84 representing collections during the first 9 months of that year 
limited in the Treasury of the Umted States m a special 
were df^^SeSptiox, Q f Philippine bonds. On December 22, 1941, 
account iu ^ United States made provision :J6 for suspending the 
tno ^° n f\ during the ensuing year. As the law now stands, the 
export ***** ^ to ^ be reinstat ed beginning January 1, 1943. Inas- 
export UI \ taxes were to increase progressively each year that they 
much as w ^ the datc of independence, the result of reducing 

were ID < u y e(l vs in which they are in effect is to reduce more than 
the nun ?inollv'the proceeds available for debt redemption, 
proportion* :sml thc Commonwealth Government has ample 

A ! t he United States to meet interest requirements of its bonds 
funds m w wftS aim0U nced in January 1942, on behalf of the Com- 
herc rtlU | fc t 1 t i lft t the interest payments on outstanding bonds of the 
monweai 'Government would continue to be met and serviced 
philippu* he facilities of the United States Treasury Department, 
througn . principal is due until December 1946. 

No p».v mc 

AVAILABLE TO THE COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT UPON 
ytJNP REOCCUPATION OF THE PHILIPPINES 

rri.e Commonwealth Treasury has a relatively large amount of funds 
h e United States! Table 13 shows the funds known to be held by 
# p om monwealth in the United States on June 30, 1942 classified 

-din 0, t0 tllc P ur P 0SCS for wll ich they are available. 
aCC r ]nds° available for general governmental purposes —As shown by 
• table there were on June 30, 1942, on deposit in the United 
this * Treasury and in United States banks, available for general 
St nmcntal expenses, $38,801,504.52 and it was estimated that an 
$12,000,000, approximately, were due the Philippine 
addiuu unsettled accounts with the United States Treasury. 

^° rtS , sums total more than $50,000,000, which is roughly the amount 
f ffp ordinary annual budget of the Philippines. This amount is 
? a- augmented by interest amounting to approximately $3,000,000 
•annum received from Philippine deposits with the United States 
^VAAaurV Receipts on account of interest are offset only in part 
by C the interest payable on the Philippine public debt amounting to a 

: 7„f tin* Joint Preparatory Committee on Philippine Affairs, May 20, 1938, Appendix VIII. 

ti ff^^^^S£SSSS^S& t c 017, 65 Stat. 852. For the text of this section sec "Amendments to 
TydiSg's-McOutnc Act" (p. 71) in this report. 



118 REPOUT OF THE PHIUI'IMNK HIGH COMMISSIONS 

little less tW 52,000,000, and fa* miscellaneous H 
^^Ste^oftheCoWonwealth. II may bo ass mod , more© 
that when the Minds are reoccupied the civil ^J™™^" 1 ^^" 
Mthat time will have some currency m Us treasury and will contMM 
to receive currency in the form of t&XCB. 

^^^er/fmenti£J expenses: SMm dollars 

MMetaffond: . M«mAnd deposit) 9, 906, 3 J I. 97 

Balance in U. S. Treasury 0 *jm* n 1 j . 01 7, 100. S3 

Balance in United ^^PfiSumUoine Treasury from 

Estimated amount due the I ^igj^ury 12, 000, 000. 00 

unsettled accounts Jitll U* » • j x 1939, balance 

Gocomu ofl tax funds collected prior CO 2? Qg ^ 

in U. 8. Treasury (time deposit; 

50, 801, 504. 52 

Total ^ 

Economic adjustment: 1 a fter Jan. 1, 1039: 

Coconut oil tax funds collected on a"" 29, 099 429 *>6 

5SKag*LF^S SSSSTg Commonwealth. . 1, 686, 124.' 12 

Total. 30, 785,553.38 

Sundry sinking funds • - - " 15, 553. 89 

Currency : 

Treasury certificate fund: ., , (i - )0 non nn 

Time deposit in U. S. Treasury-- - ! • gMl, 000. 00 

_ Demand deposit in U. S. Treasury "6, 238, 803. 50 

Exchange standard fund: 13 350 onn nn 

Time deposit in U. S. Treasury f™> ™0 00 

Demand deposit in U. S. Nat ioi.nl Bank) . ' 355', 83 L 41 

q o1(1 alance m United States bank l^"™ j 3(i0 ' c21 og 

Total 135, 530, 355."o8 

Public rslinf. o • / . ™ n ir^ 3 °. °00. 000. 00 

UU1IC relief: Sugar excise tax (estimate) 

mt of the Treasurer of tt» * 
; Philippine sinking funds. 



MSSgS£f «» an aeeount of the Treasurer of tl.e Philippines in the Chase Nat ,onn, Bank used 

0 purch ase of bonds for various Philippir 



om 
count 



. The $12,000,000 mentioned in the preceding paragraph results fr 
transactions n t \i n ,„«nli Treasury in Manila for the accoi 

& the fi ffiSr W.'^ amounl due to 

£ e t ,9onimouweal^r^^can he computed torn records brought 
to this eotuitrv nt tt i o. * = TWnstirV checks roid by the Common 
wealth yiZiZ^} ?, f f„ Jrfveeks of the war with Japan anc 




erWent provided by any law for any subsidy to he 

37 See "Program for snfr>i,« . , -Mas and other valuables", p. 50, in this report. 

M AM Of -May 10. wffTwjS^ of currency. R<>1 d , se c n |U J 'J of Ju no 32, 1930, c. 090, sec. 702, 40 Stat . 174$ 
act of May 28, 1938, c ^ S^. ^ t ^ktSVo 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 119 



paid to the producers of copra, coconut oil, or allied products, no 
further payments of these funds to the Philippine Treasury shall be 
made. 

Funds available for economic adjustment. — In addition to the funds 
available for general purposes, the Commonwealth had, on June 30, 
!942, a time deposit with the United States Treasury of $29,099,429.20 
accruing from coconut oil tax collections on and after January 1, 
1939. This amount, together with $i ,6S0,124.12 collections which 
had not at the time been transferred on the books of the United States 
Treasury to the Commonwealth account, is available only for the 
purposes specified in the Philippine Economic Adjustment Act of 
August 7 1939. 39 Inasmuch as the tax from which these funds are 
derived is payable at the end of the month following the month in 
which the coconut oil is used or processed, tax collections were still 
being made at the end of the period under review with respect to oil 
which had- been shipped from the Philippines before the war with 
Japan began. On the basis of reported stocks of coconut oil and copra 
on hand June 30, 1942, upon which the excise tax has not been paid, it 
is estimated that collections subsequent to that date on Philippine 
coconut oil and copra may yield in the neighborhood of $4,000,000. 
The funds available for economic adjustment after the Philippines are 
rcoccupied, therefore, will amount to nearly $35,000,000 and, under 
the present law, will be augmented thereafter by any collections of the 
excise tax on coconut oil and copra newly imported from the 

^Cur^ reserves in the United States. — When the Philippines are 
occupied it will almost certainly be necessary to adopt a new cur- 
VL \ -v system. The Commonwealth Government will be fortunate 
■ ^Yhvin 0 " 0* * ts disposal for this purpose ample reserves now held in 
"i 1 .United States. There were on deposit on June 30, 1942, in the 
tt ted States Treasury $133,813,902.59, representing reserves of the 
^i n -linnine currency. In addition, there was a small amount ($355,- 
oi iAVL of currency reserves on deposit with a private bank in the 
?? xTJA States and the * United States Treasury is holding for the 
H lU ,mionNV^» lth gold bullion valued at $1 ,360,621 .08. 40 The total of 
V ! items is well m excess of the largest circulation of currency that 
t w> ever was in the Philippines. As has been noted earlier in this 
^ort, the greatest circulation of which we have record was 
£?00 445,432, equivalent to $100,222,716, on September 30, 1941 
r The Commonwealth Government also has in storage in the United 

a lal -° aum ? er °Y sllvo . r 1 p r so coins which were brought to 
i United States by submarine after the war started (see p 57 
i Ve) After reot'cupation of the Philippines it will be possible 
• l r to reissue these coins or to melt and remint them. 

Tn addition to the/ currency reserves, detailed above, the Philippine 
T \ ona l Bank has on deposit with the National City Bank of New 
York $1,250,000 reserves against its bank notes as required by act 

dl7 FuiuIs available for public relief.— In addition to the various funds 
tioned above, the Commonwealth Government will have at its 
TSiosal a large sum which is earmarked for public relief and civilian 
defense. On December 23, 1941, House Joint Resolution 258 ap- 

-rnn^ection on Coconut Oil Tax. p. 110 1 of this .report 

" SSftiVold was brought to the United States by submarine after the war with Japan started as described 
- **,Vo«etion of this report entitled "Propram for safekeeping of currency, jzold. seeurities, and other val- 
uj bl eV Ma value has been computed at $35 an ounce. See pp. 5C-57 of this report. 



120 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

propriated specifically for public relief and civilian defense in the 
Philippine Islands an amount equal to collections prior to the date of 
enactment of the resolution of United States excise taxes on sugar 
imported from the Philippines. 41 Owing to the fact that costs of 
collection of the sugar excise tax, the amount of which has not been 
computed, must be deducted from gross collections, the precise 
amount that will be available for public relief is not known. It is 
estimated, however, that the total will approximate $30,000,000. 
This appropriation continues to be available until expended* 

Up to June 30, 1942, $35,000,000 sugar excise tax funds had been 

i. „r ~ A 4. ~ 4.1 TT^U.J Ox _ ^ i*r rv a x l . .1 ~„ 



~ ) '^^^m M. vv/Jllj/iUUUU. JLV JO 11 |;ui U l^VI , in / >> v > v i, ~ 

$5,000,000 was made available from these funds to the Commonwealth 
officials in unoccupied territory of the Philippines and is reflected in 
a credit of that amount on March 11, 1942, to the general fund, demand 
deposit account of the Treasurer of the Philippines with the United 
States Treasury. 

It is possible that certain other funds which have been classified 
above as being available for general purposes will prove to bo ear- 
marked for public relief and civilian defense. Shortly after the war 
broke out an allotment of $10,000,000 was made from the emergency 
fund of the President of the United States to the Secretary of War to 
De expended in 1ns discretion "for each and every purpose connected 
™1 nf 6 /*i? d ™ n .?. of assistan ce to the Government of the Common- 
wealth of the Philippines for public relief and civilian defense in the 
Philippine Is ands." « This allotment was conveyed in the form of 
a cneck dated December 18, 1941, drawn by Col. J. R. Vance, United 
twV 53 !^ 7 dlsbursin S of n«er in Manila, on the Treasurer of the 
united btates and is included in the $12,000,000 mentioned previously 
as the estimated amount due the Philippine Treasury from unsettled 
accounts with the United States Treasury. 

Pvnon^iH,. * war , conditions no Commonwealth accounts showing 
KSSi^f.^ fund are available. Inasmuch, however, as 
cMlfan S $1 I 0 ' 000 ' 0 °0 became available for public relief and 
JaDanese it ^u, 2 ^' cek3 before M ^ was occupied by the 
uKtolv Kl, Pr ° bable ., t]l ? at not a11 of ^ was expended. If records 
anemSLte? 6 avadabl « indicating that such is the case, the 
S£SlW° n W °" ld ap P car to bc sub J cct to thc restrictions 
holt I tr no P wit£ d u P° n / ts u sc. Thc same principle would seem to 
official m Xfpfcfl^* t0 , the «5,000,000 paid to Commonwealth 
?S n \lct\nt i ft iPPlneS fr ? m thc fimds d «"vcd from sugar excise 

S whictrwas lVp U ro n p\rea hat *" ° f ? ™ «" ^ PUrP ° SCS 

Respectfully submitted, 

TTnA*»j it- l ^ Francis B. Sayre, 

unxtea states High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands. 



repor F t° rthetCXt0f thlSrCSOlUti0n Bil * M *« Legislation Affecting the Philippines" in pt. IV, p. 73, of this 
<> Letter of December 15, 1941, from the President to the Secretary of the Treasury. 



APPENDICES 



121 



S:t018 -43 9 



APPENDIX A 



Address or I'nited States 1 1 itsu Commissioner Francis B. Saykk, 
at tiu: Manila Hotel, July 4, 1941 

We arc met together on our frontier to celebrate the birth of 
American independence. In these stirring and critical days July 4 
•i^umes to us, whether Americans or Filipinos, a meaning and a 
significance more poignant than ever before. In a world torn With 
battle miicI murder and sudden death America stands out like an 
island of blessedness. The darkness of inhumanity and cruelty and 

\\ 1 ia oppression, closing in around us, has not reached our shores; 
11 - country still remains the land in sunlight where right weighs 
° lU • than might* where homes and Uvea and liberties are still secure. 
?J 0r tr before lias America meant quite so much to us; never before 
u we heen so profoundly grateful to be Americans. 

n ' • thoughts turn back this morning to that day 1G5 years ago 
11 , Uttle group of determined men signed a daring declaration. 
N \ Evolutionary it was it is hard today to realize. Up to that 



1 Oi to exercise a wmxmxuvw* iuic ui tu uApiuit ins euiojut-: 
lie cll0 ^ c 0 f ins people, there was no recourse, in law or in fact. 
0 xpens . jreamed of something different. They had dreamed of 

1 Cental human rights- the right to be free and secure in their 
fu* 1(lnI , . HU l property, oven against the sovereign himself, the right 
person** _ {hc dictates of their own consciences,^ the light to choos 
to f° u< \ national destinies and to govern themselves through their 
their °;V osCI1 representatives. Philosophers had built airy castles 
freely not ions; no one had ever dared to try to translate such dreams 
c f sucn ,J ^ vor i t i of actual political reality. 

into fat-away America there wore some 3,000,000 frontiersmen 

V r 0 n tfce edge of the forest, hardy, self-reliant, come to the New 
li\ l,, r, (( , escape the cramped tyrannies of the old. Year alter vear 
^ (,r Colonials had watched their trade curbed and restricted And 
t' Mt T' ted i' 1 11,(1 mtcrest of othor ? m another land; year after year 
e3EP lOJ ? nU nd it necessary to submit to a government and a control 
fcbey 11 , uot by their own interests but by those of a people on the 
di° tat e&e of the ocean. 
otlier l then the miracle happened. 

VU f re with a sense of deep injustice, stirred to their souls by a 
t id faith in their cause, they cut themselves loose from their 
proionn try ant i signed a declaration of political independence, 
niotnciy inorc t i iau t h a t. It was an audacious declaration of faith 
put it ^' n j aniou tal rights of human beings and the determination 
in the i w world in which these should be paramount. Listen 
to set up «Wc. hold these truths to bo. Rolf-evirW.. fcW. nil 




123 



124 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



pursuit of happiness. That to secure these rights, governments are 
instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of 
the governed." 

fTv? C ^ r - Cause was n °thing less than the recognition and the defense 
ot the rights of humanity. And for this great cause they offered to 
give their lives. 

• stirrm K years that followed proved that theirs were not mere 

idle words. Their burning faith set others on fire; they fought and 
Died and many died, and from their sacrifice was born a nation built 
upon an entirely new ideal— a nation of the people and bv the people 
ana for the people, dedicated to a defense of the fundamental rights 
01 Humanity. It was an ideal, high and shining as the stars; could it 
daily Hf J? *° Carth ° nd realized in the sweat and toil of practical 

nt&i arin i g was \ he conception, so stirring the human appeal that 
»T iK„, I ^ COp es sou S ht to follow in the pathway thus blazed bv America. 
17SQ?o J'» f^rtyi fraternity," became the watchword of' France in 

TW *u ncw faith blazcd throughout Europe in 1830 and in 1848- 
was c2?«r if n,nete en th century in America itself the great experiment 
crueihW forward - and the American faith, tested and tried in the 
Decamp nFSSS"**' Was £ iven new content and meaning. America 
thot Tfiphtin^^ K gr ° Und betwe «n the forces of selfish privilege and 
with hfmanitv fr?^ the f °rtunes of battle were not always 
NationTew £ W oa |h " gh the C< ? urse of tbc thc American 

^dvo^e^Z^Z h'u^ 0 ^' in importance; and although wealth 
SSMir* them thcir inevitable accompaniments of self- 
never fost their eo^ S ^ ne Y c . rt , heless the rank and file of Americans 

With t tlie tw.nt? q iY enng faith ^ huma n liberty. 
anaSo^nM^?^ 1 ^, 011 ^ profound change. Before then 
only in slfSS di^r ° mam W , ork out own destiny, affecting others 
lation as actional 08 afrec <* d b y others. Splendid — 

But that *£S&F*g ™ 3 c , nti V c 'y Practicable. _ 



But that d»vh».» entirely practicable. 

ended an em tL dav^7 ^Plctely passed. The First World War 
The increase o a t!& ° f , natl ? nftl isolation and provincialism are over. 
menout^f?rnpto™ni n s ^ nff toda y ma y tomorrow throw a million 
of a n^%S3So^!22 the 0t , ber side « the world - The Mention 
of an cmpi No S . or , subs titute material may shift the trade 
of living independent >rf*P lndus trial nation can maintain its standard 

countries. Our morLJL 6 e aw materials and markets of a 
v "woern radios „ i i . 



countries. Our modern r mat ernds and markets ol a dozen otu«-* 
portation have so ewL i ° s and aeroplanes and swift ocean transr 
the concern of one ia«X, - A. pettier the peoples of the world that 
no longer be any such thfn' 3 c °ncern of every nation. There can 

We can shut our evos a9 com Plete national isolation, 
in other countries- i?» n °" r .ears, if we like, to what is taking place 
the effects. No nation r^n throu gh any remote possibility escape 
law or block the movement / aunt orderly processes of international 
tion without doing vital inh Ward organized international coopcra- 
Japan's march into Manchun t° . the Peoples of eveiy other nation, 
many's advance into Czechnoi ' Ital y' 8 expedition into Ethiopia, Oer- 
not only to those nations, but t« & n \ ^ ere of the m ost vital concern, 
Not only the political activities 5 ? f Europe and to America as well. 

vital concern of every other. H r 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 125 

So utterly interdependent, so vitally knit together, are J^P???*? 
of the world today that the crisis facing America on July 4, *** 1 * < J5L"£ 
more critical than that which faced America on July 4, 177b. a" ■ 
the issue was liberty and democracy for a handful of people in a sm,, 
colonial area in a far corner of the world. Today the issue is liDerty 
and democracy for all humanity. ' " ' - ■ , It is 

It is not onlv America's rights winch are now at stake. « « 
humanity's rights. It is not only freedom for America which is ax 
issue It is freedom for all humanity. . 

TJ.',. new! confronting us is profound and world-wide. ine 
J n r ' , force that the world has ever known is ravaging 
ffi r n lo ^ -ul . broa 1 a philosophy in direct and violent conflict 
v h u ?e! ? i I unontals of the American faith The Nazi philoso- 
phv Stag Siri^ throu S hout Europe by fire and sword is the very 

Hf^^St^*^ Mft on human freedom. The Nazi faith 
, ThC ,t .Sen c of fundamental human rights and forbids private 
initiative The American! faith is built on \lemocracy and human 
mitiative. bis f h fa dictatorship and m the 

b ~^ti2 llMMlS of all races other than his own. The American 
ffffn V i bui It on * ride of law and justice-right above might. Tie 
« - fJShips unbridled physical force as the supreme power of the 
Nazl worship unoru i meaning or place in the world 

""Tfron? mieht The American faith is founded essentially upon 
E SS ethics -tolerance, self-sacrifice, human brotherhood. These 
w ^JaS Kith is out to destroy as qualities which tend to weaken 

tUC A. » 

th 'r[w'Nazi philosophy obviously has been built up to justify £e^Je 
p A «tflH force. It glorifies brute force as the means of achieving 
of n fnrv bv the strong. To the Nazi such ideals as human liberty 
suP i r Socracy are outlived shibboleths --the cackle of geese." His 
aUC } So code of Attila, the Hun, and Genghis Khan; it is the code 
code w» nman and cutthroat who lusts for power at the expense 01 
of cvciyb What the Nazis desire is a free road to power, uncurbed 
l* 111 ]^,? restrain ts of civilization . . 
by n progress has been built upon religious and legal and cultural 

f faints. No one can lead a free or secure or deeply happy life unless 
re predatory and lustful tendencies of others are held in effective 
tb e v. restraints of one kind or another. For a million years or 
V through suffering and tragedy man has been toilfully learning 
i^? 1 1 ar d lesson. He has learned that somehow sheer physical strength 
. t all and that the richer and transcendent values of life begin 
is 110 r tght replaces might. The measure of civilization's advance is 
when ^ nt anc i t i ie effectiveness of its sociaH restraints. Because we 
t ^ C ° still a long, long way to go we must not blind our eyes to the 
have ^ we j iavc come far. Between civilized man today and the 
f act r roin which he rose lies an immeasurable gulf. Such progress 
brU uo have achieved is worth dying to defend. 

aS TT nanity cannot go forward, civilization cannot advance, except 
tV" philosophy of force is replaced by that of human brotherhood. 

£m ce two never can be reconciled, for they are postulated on alto- 
rt er different and profoundly conflicting appraisals of human 
I es Wherever the philosophy of force establishes domination 

Virilization as we know it ends. 



126 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE IJIGJI CO.M.MI.-IoN'BR 

What, then, is the situation which confronts America on this July 
day? The faith which fired the writing of the bold Declaration in 
17 ?6 — the cause of human liberty and the fundamental rights of man 
upon which America was builded — has become not the faith of a single 
people but the watchword of advancing civilization — the hope of 
humanity. With the shrinking of the world due to the growing 
solidarity and interdependence of the peoples of the earth, the world 
today is no longer large enough to hold both the Nazi and the American 
jaith One or the other must go under. Where brute force and ruth- 
less dictatorship arc supreme there can be no such thing as individual 
freedom and Christian ethics; and where individual freedom and 
Christian ethics rule there can be no such thing as nazi-ism. Each is 
a denial of the other and there can be no peace until one or the other 
proves triumphant. 

Today marks the anniversary of our Nation's birth. It is a solemn 
W, r ; i u countr y» and the faith upon which it was builded, are con- 
i y i a perd far Braver than any in 177G. In 1776 do forces 
\veie abroad comparable in smashing power to those of 1941 . In 1776 
Wi£ CC - S T ere abroad comparable in inhumanity, in ruthless bar- 
if' m , human depravity to the foe of humanity of 1941. If 
ES*??^ m the w °rld ifc is the end of what America has 
Wtfr! r a ? ei *tury and three-quarters, if in 1776 the cause of 

ES^J^*^- and dying for now that the cause lias 

n£? ?Qm d " w " le l V* infinitely more worth fighting and dying for. 
downSIf wni alread y overrun thegreater part of Europe. * If it is not 
only wr£l™ overrun every continent, including America, leaving 
liberty and I d L!? ltS The American experiment for 

by w&foldSlT CF i aCy wlU be ended - Can true Americans sit idly 



wall fiehti t ,„ ;'" s . W( ' r ls clear, Today England has her back to the 
for— the fmL* , Rau,s t t 1 cr V sI,il »g odds for the cause that we bave lived 

help eK^*^* 5 " °J lhc Christian verities. Without America's 
]>e.l, ;i ps"Asiu • **«ter. If England falls, it is Europe, «iul 

AnSica vlu n ot Series alone* 

we must oflei tn ti ' Sltat f- A11 of 0 " 1 ' Power, all of our resources, 
this does not m™,^? 0 Wh ° m< " our fight, God -rant that 

we could not do r ,, for Ar n*'i-ica. But if it does, God help us, 



Toda 

Asia tft'Pledee aWk 18 )U ",' Fili P' J 'os meet together oji the shores of 
Never before i° llr Wlty and our demotion to our country. 



Never before havA^ ^ io ^utv and our devotion to our country. 
°f what America! '., ° n so proud to be Americ:ii : *. We are proud 
to make the sum mewnt lo humanity in the past. We are prepared 
^reat tradition T \ sac . nfic es necessary for her to continue her 
to sive all that xvni° Amenc a in the service of humanity we are ready 
iat we have and all that we are. 



APPENDIX B 



Addiifss op United STATES High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre, 

* vt Los B vnos, Oct. 10, 11)41, ox Celebration of Loyalty Day 
by the University of the Philippines College of Agriculture 

[As copied from the Manila Tribune, October 11, 1911] 

T deeply appreciate the honor of being invited as your guest today 
t „ffinthis Loyaltv Day celebration. Having served for 15 
Tnn the faculty of Harvard, one of the great universities of 
years on tiu^Mti j ^ a ulliv ersity man. Harvard has been 
tV^uimtr in America as the champion of academic freedom— 
? >F speech and freedom of opinion; and I believe that no 

V.Tvcm-s itv can become really .meat except upon that foundation. To 
L iVfor university in the Philippines, characterized by that same 

i L find liberality of opinion, Harvard today sends greetings, 
tolerance I c(mfcss thftt j ahvays feel afc home amon g 

• orsitv students. Among them I find the world over a generosity 
U r U \?flook a sense of fellowship, a fresh enthusiasm and wholesome- 
n "attitude that leaps all barriers of race or creed or political 

1 } GSS *;^ I wish there were more of that spirit abroad m the world 

• front id. 

today- ^ d fortune to constitute a group which in certain 

\pcts is one of the most important in the Philippine Common- 
rC Hh To reach the heart of a nation, one must go to its centers of 
-ation, for in these are formulated and imparted to its future 
•tVcns a* nation's ideals and in them is slowly forged the national 
C i -ficter. Tn its institutions of learning the future history of o 
t Ym is largely fashioned. Particularly is this true in an institutioi 
n \,tioiml in its scope and as widespread in its contacts as the Uni- 
^rsTty of the Philippines 

NTor need I emphasize the peculiar importance in the Philippines of 
that P** rt of the university devoted to agriculture. The Common- 
health of the Philippines must for many years to come rest upon a 
foundation of agriculture. Forty-one percent of its gainfully em- 
loved people were, according to the 1939 census, engaged directly 
P Agriculture. In addition a very large fraction of the balance were 
*Waged in processing and transporting agricultural products. SLxty- 
f ° percent of the value of 1939 exports were classed as agricultural. 
STi Philippine Commonwealth cannot maintain present standards 
f living f° r its P c °P le except tlu-ough a high state of agricultural 
l velopmcnt and improvement, The fundamental problem which 
tl n Filip™ 0 people will constantly have to face is how to sell their 
oricultural products in world markets in competition with neigh- 
boring countries having lower standards of hiring. To maintain 
resent standards of living the unit cost of agricultural production in 
!he Philippines must be lowered through the use of more scientific 
arid efficient methods. Also Philippine dependence upon world 



128 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HKJJI COMMISSIONER 

markets and upon foreign sources of supply must b<> lessened through 
agricultural diversification and the increase of subsistence crops. 
The maintenance of independence by the Filipino people and their 
future welfare vitally depend upon progress along this pathway. 
You are the group to whom the nation must look for leadership in 
the solution of these vital problems. To an important derive the 
keep* 6 lndependence ancl welfare of the Filipi no people lie in your 

I rejoice that I can be with you today in t his outpouring of lovalty. 
loyalty has become one of the traditions of Los Bafios and it is a 
very great heritage. I am thin] <ing of loyalty in three important 
aspects; loyalty to the college, loyalty to the nation, loyalty to the 
cause of humanity. »■■•*..» 

w our most ] m , mc(1iate lo yalty is to your college. Los Bafios has 
nnoTf C t u nc of *,¥ outstanding departments of the University— and 
maZ ♦ we notahle educational institutions of the country— because 
H2 n de 7 0ted leadership of Dean Copeland and Dean Baker and 
seek- „„,w z ii and , now Dcan Uichanco, you hare been trained to 
Ttmsn 1 W truth and reality above everything else in the world. 
avenno^ n never P. crmifc ted Los Bafios to be looked upon as the 
what Z n J a ! y l? h °r ft comfortable living. They did not care 
thev inoUt»,i , , nt s color or crccd or circumstances in life: what 
leadSS itmaT ° n undividcd loyalty to the search for truth, 




centurv in fh*T* v marked the revival of learning in the twelfth 
centuries nurturi u m , versi ties, and which down through the 

and Harvard T scholars of Oxford, Salamanca, the Sorbonne, 
when consecrate! o £f eat a dyances in human progress have come 
to risk their ive, ,^ 00 ^ foUow ing the gleams of truth, have dared 
such shocking nffi™ P P ° smg » n »versallv' accepted beliefs and making 
the sun. Truth S ^ as thafc thc earth actually revolves around 
gradually apparent , at ls not discovered in a night; it becomes 

and experimentation ^ - r ? caTS of devoted and sacrificial study 

In the early davs of f Peering over untrod paths. ' 
tropical agriculture ^7°? J3ar J os when textbooks and facts concerning 
tireless and unending lar £ cl y lacking, the search for truth required 
judgment; and thu^ , 1 r.T Cnmentation and research and independent 
the fine Los Bafios tr»?v^ r 8tr °ng men ]ike Dean Baker, was built up 
research and of freedom f of independence of thought, of scientific 
in the tireless quest f« l TOXt } evei y deflecting or hindering prejudice 
serving of loyalty tW ., 1 "" 1 - Ther « ca » bc no tradition more dc- 
lollow you remain lov„i ♦ h As lon S as y° u and the students who 
future of Los Bafios n v at grcafc tradition I have no fear for the 
tution depends not on it c mo > the success of an educational insti- 
upon the independence ,m r?, th or Power or prestige. It depends 
its teachers and of its* stn I e fearlessness and the consecration of 
faith and the courage fflS Have you the independence and the 
seas? ' uu> Columbus, to Venture out into unknown 

On this day I know V ou 
your loyalty to the United «£' e thinking also of larger loyalties — of 
wealth. President Quezon L tes and fco tho Philippine Common- 

nas more than once declared that American 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



129 



ideals are Philippine ideals and has pledged the unstinted loyalty of 
the Filipino people bo the United States. If the future independence 
of the Filipino people is to be assured, the most critical period of 
Philippine history lies in the vears immediately ahead. Your country 
will need the very best her children can give— the devoted loyal 
service of carefully trained men free from the curse of personal or 
political ambition and ready, like -lose Rizal, to lead sacrificial lives 
in the service of t heir people. 

Yet in your lovahv to American ideals do not lose your own dis- 
tinctive traits and character. With the rapid unification of the world 
that has come with present-day radios ami airplanes and other modern 
inventions, there is deadly danger that all the world become standard- 
ized and regimented into uniform patterns and designs. All the world 
today is coloring its thoughts by looking at the same movies, reading 
the same syndicated press reports, and listening to the same swing 

™ There is not a nation or a people in existence that has not something 
unique and "-real to contribute to mankind, and the value of what it 
may give in"no wav depends upon its geographical area or wealth or 
natural resources. " The Filipino people have much to contribute; 
but to achieve to the limit of your abilities you must remain distinc- 
tive and yourselves. Be loyal to your own traditions and your own 
culture: avoid slavish imitation of the affluent. Once the East, under 
the pressure of modern life, becomes thoroughly Avestermzed, mankind 
will lose thereby a very precious and irreplaceable heritage 

Finally, there is a. loyalty higher than to college and to na tun j 
our loyalty to humanity. At a time like tins as never before m t o 
history of the world, national barriers are being forgotten in the 
cataclysmic conflict between ideologies that go to the bottom of mens 
souls. During long centuries, by dint of infinite toil and heroin 
and self-sacrifice, we have been slowly building up a civilization based 
on human brotherhood in place of wolfish fighting on truth and reason 
and justice in place of clubs and guns, on right in place of might. 
Ours has not been an entirely Christian civilization; we have fallen 
far, far short of Christian ideals But at least we have tolerated the 
Christian faith and have slow y but surely responded ^ the demands 
of the Christian ethic. Christianity has been the compass which 
controllod the direction of our progress 

Now with the rise of Hitlerism and the "new order, the whole 
underlying faith on which our civilization has been budt is cha llenged 
and denied. Force, under the teachings Of Hitlerism, is ito ■ i .ulc the 
world ; the strong a re to be lords of the earth. In p ace of the Christian 
virtues of self-sacrifice, tolerance, kindliness, brotherhood, aie to be 
enthroned unbridled, self-seeking, rutldess cruelty, utter unconcern 
for human woe and misery. . . ,. 

Today, as never before, our loyalties soar high above nationalism or 
nationalistic boundaries. Those like ourselves who fundamentally 
believe in the Christian ethic, cannot sit fchjV The vital issue 
which we now face is whether the future world shall be based on brute 
force or on Christian brotherhood. The t.me as one which calls for 
loyalty in action. Your generation is even more vitally concerned in 
this than mine; for yours is the one which will have to pay the greater 
part of the price. 



130 REPORT OF THE PHILJPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Surely it is high time for those loyal to the Christian ethic to set 
about building for the new world. The mere smashing of Germany 
will not be enough. It was our failure to realize the Christian ethic 
in our political, our economic, and our social world that made possible 
and even produced Hitlerism. Unless we build a better world than 
the one preceding the War we will sooner <>r later have to face other 
Hitlers and other Oermanys. 

In this great task our loyalties will he taxed to the uttermost. 
Nothing less than the service of humanity will be our goal. And the 
glory that will sustain us will he the sure knowledge thai as between 
those who serve self and those who genuinely serve humanity there can 
be no question as to who will ultimately triumph. 



APPENDIX C 

Address by United States High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre 
\t the Anniversary Dinner in His Honor at the Manila 
Hoi EL, October 21, 1941 

[As copied from the Manila Tribune] 

This occasion, these overgenerous and Mattering remarks of my 
friends Colonel Gilbousecr and Mr. — shall we say Senator-rRoxas and 
Mrs #yatfc-Smith Olid Mr. Selph, have touched me too deeply to 
make any adequate kind of reply. But I do want to say quite simply 
how genuinely and sincerely Mrs. Sayre and 1 appreciate this outpour- 
in^ of generosity tonight. We shall always be grateful for this anni- 
versary evening, surrounded by friends whom we have come during 
2 busy years to prize and to depend upon. It is an occasion which 
we shall nevet forget so long as we live. . 

Firsl of all 1 want to express something tonight of what it lias been 

in my heart 'to say many t imes before— how grateful I feel for the 
unfading help and* cooperation and loyalty given to me and to the 
High Commissioner's office by every -roup in the Philippines— 
Americans and Filipinos and those of every other nationality. Again 
and again 1 have had to turn to one Or another and ask lor umler- 
standmg or support . 1 have never asked in vain. I need not cxplam 
to von how complicated and difficult some of our problems are: sumce 
it to say that whether I have approached President Quezon or other 
Filipino leaders, whether I have gone to the representatives of our 
\tinv or \avy, whether I have asked assistance from consular repre- 
sentatives or t he leaders of some foreign community or whether I have 
Bought the backing or the help of American business or other groups 
always the answer has been the same: 100 percent cooperation and 
help. The officials of the Commonwealth Government lmve given 
every assistance in the defense measure which the United States lias 
appBcd in the Philippines and President Quezon has repeatedly ottered 
the entire manpower of the Islands and the full measure of then le- 
sources for the tasks at hand. Without such unfailing cooperation 
and help our work would have been almost impossible. 

Especially has this been true, as I mentioned at the Rotary luncheon 
last week, during the last few months when gathering war clouds have 
made it necessary to impose upon civilians many unaccustomed 
burdens and restrictions which have worked real hardship and in some 
cases injury. Always we have wanted to minimize so far as possible 
the resulting economic dislocation. But war is a grim business at 
best: and economic warfare, like every other kind of warfare, in- 
escapably inflicts loss and injury. Almost to a man the business 
and other groups who have been called to bear these burdens — whicli 
I fear will increase rather than decrease— have responded with a 
ready cooperation and personal unselfishness that has proved the 
genuineness of their patriotism. 



132 



REPORT OF THE PBLIIjIPPIXE HIGH COM MISM < >N F.U 



In the second place, I want to make clear that I realize full well that 
the honor you do me tonight is extended not onlj to me personally 
but also to the office of the United States High ( Commissioner. Here 
in the Philippines we stand at guard on the American frontier: and 
the whole future of the civilized world today hangs upon the strength 
and unity of groups like ourselves, devoted t<> :i common cause. It 
is not a question of race or blood; it is a question of defending a way 
of life, based on faith in individual liberty and democracy, which is 
the only faith upon which an enduring civilization can be built. 
Here are gathered staunch defenders of that faith; and at such a 
crucial time, with the world in flames around us, it is good to come 
together to renew our faith and to pledge fresh lovaltv to the ideals 
m which we most deeply believe. 

It is a solemn hour. We know not when the call may conic to re- 
deem this pledge — with our lives and all that is precious to us. We 
stand ready. No wonder we feel strongly drawn together and one on 
a night like this. 

f he time is historic. And so is the place — this frontier post in the 
au t ri^ eS * * w °nder if in all history there has ever been anything 
^itelike the story of Philippine-American relationships. A Nation 
srrown 1 ln liberty and dedicated to human freedom and democracy, 
astr P0 ^ crful an( l great through a century and a quarter, through 
over 8 ? ge ,uxta P° s ition of circumstances in 1808, acquires sovereignty 
world t C SC r Cn arul a 1,alf inil,ion P c *°P 1(i on the other side of the 
had br . ogling for freedom and seeking the same objective which 
freedom^ 0 American traditions. America must promise them the 
PromiQ * y dcman d or compromise her fundamental faith. So she 
with m £ reedom - Then for over 40 years she assists the Islands 
monev , of . the b ^st she has to give — men, ideas, sacrificial effort, 
°f those f enal res °urces. The two peoples, aided by the talents 
shouhlor + ° m i otller countries, buckle down to work, shoulder to 
is raisoH % g cr * The F sct U P schools and the standard of literacy 
^uniform?™ 20,2 P° rccn t in 1003 to 48.8 percent in 1939; they teach 
ent race c gUaR ° by which Filipi« os of different localities and differ- 
nation \ n re . ac ^ x common understanding and achieve the unity of a 
linking ttolvT 1011113 ins P irc the building of systems of roadways 
an d inaueur f dlstant P arts of the Islands; they teach sanitation 
Solera and cam P a igns against disease so that the dread scourges of 
rate from 47 ? pox are Practically stamped out, reducing the death 
Americans a l t ? 10l,sand in 1903 to 16 87 P or thousand in 1939. 
^ os > introdn ll5 P inos together open up mines, develop new indus- 
£ a ipino stan^ 0 r ? Volutionar - v clian S cs into old industries, so that the 
before An\er °* ^ v * n g is raised to double or more what it was 
{^Parts to tho C p*v a ^ ne; aml ' °* fundamental importance, America 
her own politi . i P C0 Pl° her own conceptions of human progress, 
°f a single fro Philosophy, and her own ideals. Within the span 
achieved, as I i 1 crat i°n, a progress is achieved truly phenominal — 
alone but by ^ ec l s ? ar ccly point out, not by the work of either people 
working unitedl *° mt c ff° rts and c l° sc cooperation of both peoples 
been differenced f°B ct hcr. Naturally during this time there have 
have never or 0 vie wpoint and disagreements aplenty; but these 
unity of Dun^« tllG steady progress and the fundamental 

1 L 01 the two peoples. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMAHSSIOXEiR 133 

Then in 1934 a program is agreed to for definite independence at 
the end of a 10-year term and during those 10 years the Filipinos are 
granted wide domestic autonomy and a High Commissioner is sent by 
the President of the United States to help them prepare for full-blown 
independence in 1946. All ideas of ruler and subject people quite for- 
gotten- instead a whole-hearted help to a once-subject people to be- 
come absolutely free. It is the most striking example 1 know of in 
history of the comradeship of two peoples working together for the 
kind of ideals thai make men free. 

Now comes a deadly attack upon those principles and a cataclysmic 
struggle to determine whether or not those ideals shall survive m the 
world \ml the Filipino people, once insurrectionists against Ameri- 
can rule, now loyally 8ta£d shoulder to shoulder with the American 
people pre paring to" light with them for the triumph of these great 

U, The striking thing is that this unique comradeship has proyed-a 
sound and practical foundation upon which to binld. Amid all the 
shifting sands of the present international world here we strike solid 

W ?wonder if from this we cannot take some heart for the future world 

iU UW^oS,^ pursues her present course, no matter what 
her^pfra^gS?Germany ultimately will go down m defeat For 
™SJS £m and never will permanently tolerate the ruthless 

nower wl icn is only a quicksand. Neither can we build securely on 
fnuamed nat ona sm If we arc to be practical builders, if we are to 
bmB^^Pe^St will be enduring, we must dig our foundations 
a „ «™i Jl must lav them true. In the comradeship of peoples, 
S a'lv^LeTanlfestedin these 40 yea« of Philippine-American 
hktorv T believe we have much to learn. , 
Comradeship is as applicable among, nations 
viduals. The facts of human nature being ^^^Sation^n 
code of human relationships upon which an ^urmg^KjJ on ^ 
nracticallv be based is one of cooperation and biotheiuooci. Ann 
natfon^ inthe last analysis are only groups of ^^Sfrealizatdon 
Our future must be based fundamentally ^^Y^SnSesS 
of this fact. And T like to think that all of ^^W'S 
ing and unique Philippine adventure, are having a hand in blazing 
trails for other pathfinders to a new and betterw Wld, . fc 
Tn closing 1 wish again to express my gratitude for the loyal support, 
riven by the whole "community to the High Commissioner and h s 
stiff 1 know that this can be counted on in the ^S^SSlS& 
It has been a keen delight to be With you ^MJJgJ^KJ & 
for Mrs. Sayro, as well as myself, in saying that we shall always tteas- 
me in our memories the unforgettable honor you have done us this 
evening. 



APPENDIX D 



Address of United States High Commissioner Francis B. Sayre 
at the Armistice Day Dinner of tiii; American Legion, Elks 
Clujj, Manila, P. I., November 11, 1941 

I As copied from the Manila Tribune, Movatabet 12, r»uj 

The most thrilling day that ever touched the lives of us Leathered 
here tonigl it was, I venture to say, November 11, 1918. For 4 lengthy 
and incredibly weary years the World War had been dragging along- 
we in the United States, unavoidably drawD into the holocaust in the 
spring of 1917, by 1918 were reading long American casualty lists 
and growing grim and wondering if the end would ever come. And 
when on that memorable day the guns ceased firing and men dared to 
jump out of trenches and walk into No Man's Land the armistiee and 
the end of th(» war seemed too near Heaven to he 1 rue. 

Since that shining day 2.3 years have passed. 'The great objectives 
which we thought had been won in 191S — the world made safe for 
democracy, enduring peace made secure— have not been gained. In 
our world of today there is more of human woe and misery, more 
ruthless cruelty and injustice, more wholesale fighting jm< | bloodshed 
than ever before. The fighting stopped in 1918, but somehow the 
lasting peace which wo dreamed about- has not com,.. The great 
objectives for which America fought in 1917 and H)is have not been 
achieved. 

It does not follow, as some have tried to suggest, that the great 
sacrifices made by America in 1917 and 1918 wore futile, llad 
America not entered the war there might be loft today no great Euro- 
pean powers able to champion democracy and no democracy left to 
defend. The mistake some made in 1917 was in supposing that any 
single achievement of itself can end all war As long as evil endures in 
the world there can be no such thing as static Utopia; every new ven- 
eration must battle afresh to defend its heritages. Lasting peace will 
never result from any single treaty or convention; a. peace that is 
enduring must first be constructed upon foundations which are true 
and then must be constantly guarded and defended against the 
destructive forces which are and always will bo rampant in the world, 
it comes as the result of building upon principles of universal human 
pfEpl^s rcsolutel y fighting and beating off attacks upon these 

law ^ETo 0 ' *° peacc can be lasting unless built upon justice aud 
law rather than upon naked force. 

oDoo°rt!!ni^ J?" n unlcss built u P on *l™lity of economic 

3 L ffci 7 r a11 ftatoons rather than upon economic strangleholds 
ana scmsli monopolies and unfair discriminations. 
fl rp\u;!fu CUn ! ,c lasting if men and women throughout the world 
JSldS^i^ ch &nce to work and by their work to earn an inde- 



134 



KEPOHT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONTER 135 

No peace can be lasting that is built upoii a system of forced labor 
or human slavery. ^ 

In the long hist, humanity Will not tolerate any peace except that 
built, upon foundations of justice and righteousness. 

Todav WO are witnessing the culmination of a movement that has 
been Bteadily gaining momentum during the past decade. In Europe, 
Itilv'in 1935 sr. forth to invade Ethiopia wit bout any shadow of treaty 
or other riehl The world was shocked and held its breath; protests 
„'j enithefca were Bung hack and forth; but peace to the peace-loving 

•n e o precious to risk by threatening to light. Italy took over 
Ethio ia The following year, m L986, Germany, who had been 
Soselj Watching, m Eolation of treaty provisions marched mto the 

Rhinela.u! and **fig~%* no pea co and there could he no peace 
• 7 ° w« 103S Ger.nanv moved troops into Austria, and later 

52 , vi-n into Czechoslovakia: in 1939 Germany moved troops 

that same gt^^Jg^ng that, after the Second World War had 
into Poland g»»j5Jaj; European countries, without pro voca- 
.egun, in . • instiiication or the shadow of right, basing her 
tion, en u > ' C e J aWtiOD that, might makes right, 

action solelj upon Jthe ass< a t bc 

suSoX of^ 'appeasement paradoxal as it may sound, fighting 
miv th onlv really practical way to wm peace-notonly maybe 

u riathe 0 p clid I way if unprincipled ruffians arc abroad bent 
mil is, l u oni\ m. i . | (| ,. m , , ms r of innocent victims, 
on plunder and destruction ana uu y uwub fundamental aims 
TWO conclusions follow. The fi»t concerns the i n bun t . a un 
of the United States. W bother one s sympathies lu i V* ™™ 
or Republican- with New Dealers or anti-New Dcalpis, witn nuu 
^ti^ste^tsolatioiiistSj aU agree that the fundamental objectne> 

, , v SS e A encau faith are the protection of individual frej- 

dom^democ^y S and building for world ^ahroai 

\t a time when the world is convulsed, and our \ei.\ DlVUjaawon 

ment cannot buy it, There 18 not ^?™°^™Zl7Z JS& In 

in the spring ot 1917: 

There i« one choice we P^^aSSA^^fi^*^^ 
choose the pat h of submission and suflfer tte ^"f^Xwhtah we now array 
our people to be Ignored or v ' \a',< 1. > « on^ buma n life, 

ourselves arc no common wrongs; the> OUI 10 wm vwj 

The United States must, light nazi-ism sooner or later or lose its 

"SSSl The sooner we devote our full f^«53fttS 
percent-to the war effort, the sooner the P^*^ b £ *Wg 
and suffering in the world will be over The ff»^^2b?iuC 
transcends the concerns of any domestic groups an d ca mot , b esuO 
ordinated to their interests. At such a time America cannot afford 
to bc frustrated. The issue is whether the American way of life, 



136 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

whether freedom and democracy, can and will survive in the world. 
To determine that supreme issue we stand ready again, as we did in 
1917, to stake even life itself. 

The 2 past years have been filled with discouragement. But I 
believe the turn of the tide has come. Germany is bleeding badly 
today from her very costly Russian campaign. We know that in 
that campaign Germany has failed to cany out her announced pro- 
gram. Many thought Moscow would be taken within 6 weeks; 20 
weeks have passed and still Moscow has not fallen. 

The gallant Russian Army is still unbeaten; England never can be 
successfully invaded ; and the United States is becoming a vast training 
camp and arsenal, which makes the ultimate outcome of the war cer- 
tain and inevitable, provided America shakes herself free of all hin- 
drance and delay. 

The future is bright, and always must be for the nations which gen- 
uinely fight for humanity. For humanity in thelon^ last cannot toler- 
ate any outcome except the triumph of fundamental justice and 
human rights. 

And so, on this Armistice Day of 1941, 23 years after the first 
Armistice Day of 1918; we stand not disillusioned or discouraged. 
Uur eyes are on the future; we look forward to Armistice Day of the 
forties and beyond that to a future bright with promise because of 
wisdom bought with past experience, a future in which humanity 
may once more take heart and build its hopes and go forward in the 
way of freedom and democracy and the security of law upon which 
alone lasting peace can be built. 



APPENDIX E 

tt . mnr ^ T Message to the United States Delivered by the 

B H^V^MM^KU OVEK N ATIONAI. BROADCASTING Co. NETWORK 

OnSatchday Moknixc, Dkcumhkb 13, 1041 

I am glad to send you greetings from the Philippines. 

On W v on the firms line we have come to grips with reality. We 
ha?fs^Ja?ane\e?quXns of planes shining in the sun dropping 
w ft m l. • ul «!.•« in' -lion upon portions of Manila -and upon Cayite 
across ti 1) War conditibns our lives every hour of the day and 
across tin Da\ . > .u Commissioner's office— 

efonomi S^pfi^fib^ SSttkfi advise* M water 

American Army a ,« I Na vy •> c J MacArthur, are 

^^wSirTwes the loyally pledged to the United States by 

President Quezon. America is this: We on the front line 

The message I send to you > confidence in our cause 

arc fighting to the deal h. n * j ^ me ^ ^ 

&n 1 £ ?™S not ne. it divided counsels or capital-labor disputes 
and that you n ill not P< i mu eettdne effective help to us 

or red tape or Wj^^^fiKRSf War enjoins upon 
^t^JS*-. • iffi Time is of the essence. Come on 
America! 137 



83018—43 10 



APPENDIX F 

Address by the United States High Commissioner to the Philip- 
pi x e Islands on the Occasion of the Second Inauguration of 
guwDHwr Quezon and Vice President Osme&a, December 30, 

fal7 llis Secoil(l ^ nau ^ ural i°n Day of the Commonwealth Government 
iails at a time pregnant with significance. An important part of 
iuuire history m the Far East is hanging; upon us upon the courage 
ana i iravc resourcefulness and indomitable spirit with which we mee- 
t-He present hard days. 

Dnrin? SJ'eat days o*f any country's history are not the days of pros- 
a^ni/f the da ^ s of adversity. It is when the odds are heavily 
horn?, o 0 ! 1 - 0 and victo 'T can be wrested out of defeat only throuih 
great p^^f^j^^* 116 ^ 16 • Lralkmlr >' lhnl a People writes the 

de^^ Pr ^ t d ^ m th( * Philippines arc times of trial but never of 
for th* ;a J* gl 7?R to 1,8 to fl S ht > if necessary to lay down our lives, 
heriwj^u°( hhe ?V an(1 democracjr, the most precious of the 
proerf T ave been handed to 11s in 1()I ^ r march of human 



before TTn/i r*iT w^ewier wnn n cioseuess oi nond never felt 
^ehavehnr i abl ° miIi(a '\v l«'«<l<'i'sl»P °f Ooneral Mac-Arthur 
ideals Su^ u i hers in Wood j sh(>(l for tl,( ' defense of common 
radesMntw* a nd transcends all political ties. It breeds a com- 

This aft ■ an nover(,i( 
Wan t to ovnr °° n \ as spokesman for the American Government! I 
devotion S« n ADierica ' a gratitude and pride for the lovalty, the 
this ffcats PI l ! ltry ' wilh which the Filipino people have entered 

3 weeks havo r i y America ' s sidc - Because t he events of the last 
is only be^inn- n rd We wil1 not 1)0 di ^ our ?ged< The real Btruggle 
ultimate outcome aiKl Can h ° U ° queslion wl ^dsoever as to its 

?° ^^a^v^^T^ 1 ® to sla vcry. As loil £ as humanity believes that. 
™ afc dcterminnt- Pancau ovcr conquer the world. That faith and 
throng, wlucij l lUou . Welds a11 frcc peoples together into a mighty 
n rill s aft eni( lnvinc iWe and inevitably triumphant. 
J^zon. as p!.? n - ) ve arc inaugurating for a second term Manuel L. 

J^^Cvf i 4 ' Und SeI - io 0sm , efta i as Vice President, It 
asTi « e chosen- JkZ have a Part in this historic occasion. To them, 
gratitude f or ^[^tatives of the Filipino people, America brings its 
^ggfe is ondo;i r i lne l ?yalty and its hopes after the present crueial 
Mr ^WaalfcJ^ aclli(kV(,]nont al ° n " the l )atl nvay toward 

^ d J^7m^l^^ Vice President, I have the high honor to 
our l resident "K^tH m ^ssage sent me to read upon this occasion by 

On the occa si ; m anklm D - Roosevelt: 
Vice President 0 Hn ?L^ le assumption for the second time by President Quezon and 
men please extent # tl ^e hiphest office at the disposal of their fellow count rv- 
23g lhc,r * my congratulations and best wishes for continued 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 139 

success In their administration. To the Filipino people in general I desire to 
take this opportunity to express my appreciation of the loyal and effective coop- 
eration which thev/ under the able leadership of President Quezon and Vice 
President Osmefia] have extended to the United Stated Government. It is a 
souree oi pride and satisfaction to all Americans who are familiar with the history 
of Philippine-American relations to know that hr times of crisis such as now con- 
fronts this Government, the Filipino people are ready and eager to stand shoulder 
to shoulder with the American people in the common defense. Fpr more than 4U 
years American and Filipino statesmen have lahorcrd unceasingly for a better 
understanding of Philippine- American problems. No better evidence that their 
labors have not been in vain could be found than the manner in which the l'Uipino 
people have, in the present emergency, made common cause with the people or 
the United States. Fbanklin D. Roosevelt. 



APPENDIX G 

Address ry the Honorable Francis B. Sayrk, I'mted States 
High Commission eu to the Philippine Islands, I )i;liveredOvbb 
the Red Network of the National Broadcasting Co., at 
7:45 P. M. (E. W. T.) Wednesday, March 25, 1 942. From Wash- 
ington, D. C. 

Fellow Americans: Never before 1ms home meant so much tome! 
Arn^ ore h av e I appreciated so deeply wli.n it menus to be in 
j^ nca a nd to be an American. Compared to the life we in Cor- 
ftrH!H° r am * Batuan have been living, America seems literallv like 
another world. 

livin^' ^^ rou ^ ^ ikc to sa 3 T a word about the American civilians still 
lot I m k * s ot her world, particularly those caught in Manila. Their 
vmJ^i! ? nm y constant concern. Bombs started falling in Manila 

Su • y after the outbreak of llu; war - 
least nn ? t ' 10sc c lays I sought the means of evacuating from Manila at 
Waters Wome ? and children as might want to go; but by then the 
told th S f Urrounmn g* us were infested with Japanese ships and I was 
deirrn* * 0 suc ' 1 evacuation could be carried out with any reasonable 

^ee of safety. 

the in[\\? da > T before Christmas General MacArthur, in command of 
leav e \ Ration, requested both President Quezon and me to 
toinpora witllin 4 hours and to go to Corregidor and make it the 
111 ^ianil r^?* °^ g° v ernment. Many members of my staff remained 
re maim i care for ancl l° 0,c aftcr tlie Americans and the others 

With th • ^ a I )ancse entered Manila I was in const ant communication 
the Janl° lty aud Particularly with my staff there. On the day before 
mor nber^ °f C Qniv y in y executive assistant telephoned me that all the 
city. A ft of 0Ur staff were in good health and that all was quiet in the 
nec essaril tlle Ja P anes(i entered all communication with Manila 
anv^ c f. a ^ cd - I had 10 realize that to establish communication 
f ° r saf\f 1Vldual in 0 ^upicd Manila might cost him his life; that 
^ith them 0 A° f tll0se livin S there we must not try to communicate 
s ^ nc e Jarm a resu ' t navc no direct and authentic information 

t * Wed ^ 2 colK,(irnin ^ American individuals in Manila, 
panose tS ? Very way P ossible to lcarn wliat I could about the 

|hr 0ll gh. A eatment of Americans and Filipinos after the occupation. 

^Picked xm^Li, ^lligence, through various underground sources, 



to bo tXi uch information as I could, but none of it is authentic 

Prom wh f T° atly rclied u P° n - 
I!" I<eo P ofr tl ? OU * (l S atllcr ifc seems tbat all Americans were ordered 
fPpearcd an?! 0 f ^. ets and to rc S istcr - Some took to the hills and dis- 
rWh Sftty.„ „. 01 them we have no word. Thosp. who resristornrl were. 



} Vlt « some pyV° , • we havc no word - Those who registered were, 
ar a s I know t? P s ' concc ntratcd in Santo Tomas University. So 
S?ployed T?;i;"- ey are sti11 there. In the case of those Americans who 
j I'^Pbo serv n ^ ln ? 1 * !rvffl ? ts > 1 ft m told that the Japanese allow the 
then Passrvl i , buy footl and brin K ifc to the university gate: this is 
LU m and given to the families concerned. I was also in- 

i40 



KEPOKT Ol TllK PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 141 

formed that the Philippine Red Cross is feeding those Americans who 
have no such means of obtaining food. What food the Japanese are 
providing, I bave no means of knowing. 

P I have also been told thai the Japanese have i more recently been 
relaxing the restrictions and allowing women and children to return 
tl their homes. 1 have also been informed that the inmates are per- 
mitted to move about the university grounds. . , , 

The Americans in Manila are very much in my heart. I want them 
and their a ilies to know i hat America will do everything in its power 
to he p them t'pon mv arrival in Washington I found hundreds of 
nat he < 1 ■» < from Americans in the United States asking for infor- 
fflon^egardhlg t heir friends and relatives ,n the P uhppmes and I an 
SsSessc<r.l»at L cannot give thorn more detaded information. I shall 

reply to ^J^^^^iL^ ascertain the true situation, 
wlfelhe? SJu"h a "vpre .mtative of the International Red Cross 

done is being done. . (U te(1 bv General Mac-Arthur and his 

The hard-fought .^K^eSpeopte. By order of the President 
Staff is w, 1-kno ^ ( * t ^ ^United Nations- partic pation 

he has left the I i ppi * - f remaining in the Philippines 

in the war in a large! tlu ate 1. - eNppr icnccd officers who have 

are under the comma nd otM^fd^ ne e* ^ 
distinguished IhemseK > , " m £ f tl officcr9 X can assure 
m y personal know h nig a i do bsU ation ^ ^ 

the Amcn« 1 so[ ^ American fighting forces . 

ancc with the 1 jest tW (1UI £ U R • wUh the Ameriean and Filipino 
For 2X months 1 l a ^l^or front, I have watched them 
Soldiers and sailois ( > u f ire-livimr with death. Their spirit is 
under devastat g she l ie but beaten , 

magnificent. Battie-scawea^ American traditions. They are 
SrrUinM 

SE= Wo^ft»u have reason to he 

proud ; and America owes you a great do I. ta 
P With our boys going *f°»g»?"! ^^%Stro>ltom** 

revert to a life of fear, of living m holes Wj^g^^J^S^m 
Or on the other hand, the world can be a ^C^S'^'^SS 
instincts arc restrained by law and organized jUStlCB, where ^"^ian 
virtues are respected and observed, where human rights are protected 
and mankind can progress to a richer fuller lite. 

The Axis countries are out to create the former kind of ^ 1 ^ 
Their faith is in ruthless force. They fundamentally disbelieve m the 
brotherhood of man. 



142 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMTS.SIOXBR 

America, born of the effort to make men free, dedicated to tin- 
struggle for the rights of humanity, cannot waver. The struggle is 
not one merely of power politics. It is to determine which of the two 
contacting kinds of world our children and our children's children shall 
iivem it is to decide whether humanity shall go forward or must aow 
surrender the gains of past centuries of sacrifice and st rusrgle and revert 
to barbarism and brute savagery. 

w V s ^ ? n Ci,tr ;1 ' 88U ® t '"' greatest struggle our country ever 
cam ,. Everything wo care about lom-- upon the Outcome. In a 
uuse as | U gi 1; as | |0 j y> as {Wy ^ u<> s . 1( . ri(i( . ( . on ,„,,. p;|| ., ( .. m , )(> |()() ^ 

thoron^' Amo, "' a - Awake and prove to the world how America, 
moroughly aroused, can fight. 

has3»S»^ erin ? whetIler Al "orie :1 realizes the gravit y of tlie job she 
armed 1S nofc au eas y task to v,in n war against nations 

when ithSSS (,( '™ a 1 n -y aml Japan. The job is infinitely more difficult 
our own ci I fi ? htm - thousands and thousands .»f miles awav from 
man thl ^°i!' fiS " , 1 wafflooking up the distances in the Pacific on the 
5,700 m L° s 3 f <la y- ?an Francisco to Zealand is some 

miles S .' om New Zealand to Sydney in Australia is some l 300 
manaWl tV" Uun,S!,llfl miles to Sydney. And after von have 
supplies tr. '. ( " uo y.'''oops and ])l:ines and oil ammunition and 

waters— in n . raha tl "'" ,1< - 1 ' ~> 000 ,ni| es of submarine-infested 
Manila i s still Trfnn job i,i,s only j,,s< ' be g un « Prom Sydney to 
on wo'v,. ,.-,.( .;' ? u ,I, »'les more or less; and from northern Australia 

from strait hV < 6Veiy illcb of the %V:, - V from island lo island and 
pipped enemJ k a r amst a determined, utterly ruthless, well- 
salient stroncri ,„ii V °, 0 lready has gained possession of most of the 

t ame time Germ th ° East N ° W tusk fchat " A,l(l !,t the 

history l, as na ny, armed and organized for war as no country in 

Possession of tuV J 1 before, implacable, cruel, determined, is in 
°. f Europe aIV £1 'T parl ' of Europe, and still threa tens the whole 
tunes yes / ^"wnst such odds can America triumph? A thousand 

with hSr C we}J Jte^8 Axis nations can be no match for America 
continental DOsitffS '"exhaustible natural resources, her strategic 
P r ovided only t ;. 1' '•' vi,ile and cnpablo and huge manpower- 
tllc y ^vc umW C {" ICan pco P lc awaken to the magnitude of the 
^ ( ' ssa ry sacrifice* \u 011 and l ,rovc themselves ready to make the 
sWl!^ U8t Sa orif 1CG „• Uc " lusfc realize that it will cost a heav 3 . toll. 
sl 'ghte S t doubt as £ xT ha ?, 0 not to ^ But 1 **Y6 not the 

America ca n an ° h , at the answer of the American people will be. 
nor \t l ai l d ^ Jlj 1 win tbi * w ar. We shall bo returning to 
MaSTS* 1)c yond t E ^\, W , C sha11 drive thcsc ruthless barbarians 

Sd>rf ♦ and out& l l\ llippines - Th °y are dari »g. but we shall 
mW^^h^a?^',^ and brin g infco otorna ' discredit the 
story cou P l e(1 with 7i ess and ruthless attack which will go down 
until tins is achieved 10 f , name of Japanese. America will not rest 

those of us who U v : n deed > we must go beyond that. 
Until some way can h * e . SC( m war at white heat can never rest again 
I hat is as much AmoV > • to bui,d a P ea cc that will be lasting 
Jmow that the America S as tho winning of the war. And, J 
task, will not fail People, once having set their minds to the 



APPENDIX H 



\DDRESS OF THE HlOH Com MISSION BR BEFORE THE UNITED CllINA 

Kki.iek Society, Apkil 0, 1042 

The following excerpl is taken from the address delivered by this 
High Commissioner to the PhUippinesJHon. Francis b. bayre before 
the United Chin:. lMief Society on I hursday Apri 19 ,104 _ at h 
p . m . eastern war thne. [n speaking before the United C hina Relief, 

Mr Sayre said in part: .... i ,i, 

"1,, the stupendous struggle in which we are now engaged, there 
will be no easy victory. Tin- powers of evil arrayed against us are 
strong, too terrible. We shall win only by deep saertfe^by 
riving up many of the things upon winch m the past we have buil 
o r comfortable lives by giving lavishly of our substance aye! and 
of our own flesh and hlo.nl. W or IS a grim business; and in the face 
Of its insatiable demands we must be prepared to sacrifice even 
Conceivable personal interest, no matter how precious, for the safe 

*%US£%£TtA the story of the appalling saeriHees which 
China has made .luring the 4% years of her brave s r gg le J 
Bgures cannot speak of Chinese hennsm m the face of t .1 u ds 
r,f Chinese gallantry in defense oi her homeland, of the Chinese 
Ul, s sa.-rifiee ofeverything dear to them for the : ooi.n try .the* 
ove. Onlv those who have seen with their own eyes China at yu 
,ave Witnessed China's "scorched earth,'.' have seen her aha to od 
and deserted homes gradually falling to pieees, have looked into the 
I'r-drawn and pKietic laves of the Chinese tW^^""™ 
i„ the earlv morning horns on the streets of once ^ c- s . 1 1 li> C li < > 
Sties the prostrate forms of Chinese men ami women a.i 1 lit J 
children stretched on the sidewalks fast asleep Btoppedof every 
possession and with no place to go, or watched then- do fd bodies 
Doing carried away early in the morning- on y those «foj»*»"g" 
China in the midst of her travad van understand what real Sacrifice 

^•SteSople in the world that COD make sacrifices and be-; 
Buffering and still carry on with the patience and the fortitude of the 

C '"The thought I want to leave with you tonight is this: The democ- 
racies to win must achieve a spiritual unity. The real strength of the 
democracies cannot be measured merely by their superior manpower, 
by their more extensive resources, by their greater wealth or superior 
power to produce armaments. These, important as they are, Will not 
finally determine which way the scales will turn. 1 he really vital 
strength of the democracies lies in the cohesive force, oi their under- 
lying concepts, just as the underlying concepts of the Axis 1 owcrs have 
a profoundly disruptive, force. Among the Axis Nations the funda- 
mental concept upon which they seek to build their power is self-gain 

143 



144 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

through naked force— might uninfluenced by right; and because 
among nations building upon such a philosophy there is no such thing 
own° f or fair dcal ' m g or the obligation to observe even to one > 
no w ? i v rcat y ri S hts of others, there can be among such nations 
their sun g ^ n £v es ' no true loyalties, no winning of free peoples to 
which t»? P ?f i ^ e °^ lcr nandj the fundamental concept upon 
the flpfone i i dcm °cracies is based is human brotherhood and 
as nat ionf i "^development of (he rights of humanity. As long 
hood a "inn pe ?P les build their relationships upon human brother- 
of onnorHmH aS - ey g cauin ely strive for human rights— for equality 
shape one's rJ lrro ^ cctive °f race or creed or color, for the right to 
Protection of tl * w °rk according to one's own conscience, for the 
as long as nat fi C u k a S ainst tlie unjust oppression of the strong— 
in every ^n/ 0 ! 1 . 8 "Sht * or these, men in ever}' part of the world, men 
be welded Wtl - ^ flock to their standards. Such peoples will 
accumulating n m(llssoluDl y by a spiritual unity; they will <*ain an 
ul timatelv J!5 JSf? an( * an unconquerable strength which will prove 

"That to ^ elmin ?- 
during her^? 6 1S v im P ortanco of this meeting tonight, China 
Probably no otb* ■ of . war has given and bled and sacrificed as 
to America <stm na \ lon in the world. China in her dire need turns 
and resources t^ ?"' stiU in P ossessi °n of incomparable wealth 

• 2°t, let's ston f °n^ e believe— practically— in human brotherhood? 
retime to £iA ng about wi nning the war. But if we do, now 

• ' WeshaUnev °^ Ce OUr faith " 

S„ j** arsenal %V n thc f ar ' believe m e> by merely turning ourselves 
tC tl0118 and wnV W v rld - True ' wc must Produce armament and 
]W A Th at is / K su PP llcs as no other nation has ever y«'l produced 

** Ut .that ol" 18 absolutely nccnwnnr Tl,»t ™„o ,„; t L„ 



m,7 arsenal nf Vi , ' neneve m e, &y merely turning ourselves 
tE tl0118 and wnV W v rld - True > we must Produce armament and 
]W Th at i s „ K s ^PP hcs as no other nation has ever y(>l produced 
Sri^ a lonc S ? Utely necessary. That goes without saying. 
TW th at hunw f CVCr wm the war— and still less will it build a 
^b&Wi^yoS wavtn 011 - ^l 6 ^ 0 followi "« the military victory. 

«q 1 10 How s the wn °^ in thc war— only one way to win the peace 
whicli ^ rs 13 a moral wn'i i W ii. must build upon morai foundations. 
inunor^ 81111 us tn,i, ihe break-down and thc tragic catastrophe 
f ailed 4 Unu amem ]/ arc the result of seeking to build power on 

"Exr> \° m ° tried if " f'mply won't work. Babylon tried it— and 
r egard f Pfc , as it b h«5U Mld ladcd - Hitlcr is trying it— and will fail, 
hood ' 0r bumun riX Upon truth and Justice and good faith and 

^S? i 3J53S?J5tssS 08 " is bui " upon hvaa » hrolhl "- 

kee P trn dodi cated /„" man brotherhood, born of the effort to make 
as sum 0 tl to her erUJ 1 ? defense of the rights of humanity, must 
her Pow^ rou ghout tl.n tr a d itions. Steadfast to these, she must 
freo Peoni T rue tn "°, wori .d a moral leadership commensurate with 
one ° mm s ' God h P in; ?, ldcals ' America and China and all other 
e wi H go tow& S \ »' cannot ML The cause of humanity 



APPENDIX I 

Wak Days ox C 'okkkc.idor 

- «nci« B Savn-. United States High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands 
i * *niv. . witness account of gallant defen 

| Reprinted fr.uu the April 30, 10t2, issue of Lite) 

_ o months 1 have been living under bomb and shell wito bur 
£>5r* ,md saflois on Corregidor. Coming fresh from t hat battle- 
V^here men v. ere down to the ultimate realities of life, where 
l % i uVed daily with death. :uu! suddenly plungmg as I have mto 
cJvStabTe America, with lights blazing at nlgnt and streets filled with 
'» f ?iob - with lavish supplies of faHcy food and clean c ■ lothcs and 
^»° fl 0 ' ;. lh ,. ;1 , eless laughter and movie shows and all the soft, 
' Tt&s of life I ftnd it bard to believe that 1 shall not undergo 
^ustomarv awakening on my rough cot on Corregidor and find lit 
9 ^Tw stfiil dream, and wonder where the next shells will stoke. 
. ' : -;do? and America are two different worlds; and the contrast to 

U^J'ulelwoS a half year* of my work in Mani.a 01, 0^ 
^)\\\u>,\n the horizon, upon which our gaze was constant h fixed, 
Ok In- it of war with Japan. All of us hoped that war could be 
^Sded But we were never free from t hat _ unwelcome spec to • 
inferences with General Grunert, then in command of I he 
f J s in the Philippines, and with Admiral Bem.s then 
^mandant <,f the Sixteenth Ravel District became more^dmore 
(7^' nt At, the same tune we intensified our work on civilian 
se plans sent my senior military aide on a visit to the Malay 
t^ f V/s -md the Netherlands East Indies to study and report back to 
the measures for civilian defense. heing adopted in Smgapor 
T ftxro Our own clans and preparations wore pushed, we were 
55£hE5v- moSiS nearer and nearer to the brink of the precipice. 

: : ci»m to mine Manila harbor. Later we were directed to 
< yr \nro** the news of shin movements. In November the i\avy 
control "of the iliovements of 

'<■ Fimdlv on December 1, we received a message from Wasiung^ 
, r g us to be on the lookout for a possible JHW^^K 
; miral Hart, General MacArthur, and I met m my office to confer 
., the grave situation. Every plan and preparation WPJ 
"Gainst the eventuality of war. Yet even then the possibility of 
^7;tual war seemed hard to believe. 

• NEWS OF PEARL HARBOR CAME PROMPTLY 

At about 4 o'clock on the morning of our Dec ember l&tjgJjW ! j 
ipg to December 7 on the other side of the international dat 1 e 11 
'^as awakened by the sound of bare feet running down the coiiidoi 
of the High Commissioner's Residence toward my bedroom. It was 

145 



146 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS* 

my executive assistant, Claude Buss, bringing the first breathless 
news of the attack oil Pearl Harbor. 

let when war actually came, ii still did nol seem real. That dawn 
we .acted almost automatically, setting in motion the machinery w< 
iia.i been planning for months before, Fortunately, we were able t< 
wotk quickly, for telephone win s had nol been cul and public utilities 
h Z IS l * mng wilhout interruption. ' called my staff hum their 
and set ..vrvone to work. J'.ihlic statements had to be issued 
2EW"ith officials notified, civilian defense measures taken I 
Ni'in , 0 ^ 0 . 5 for tbe;immediate closing of the Japanese hanks in 

rvfl ' and arranged lor posting guards around them, 
bofor(-T°h?. K<s,<l ; " fya to l, <' prepared for defense. Six month, 
q«antii£^r^ ed (, " ou - h *& annual appropriation ... purchase 

rials a I th . fe? '"v Ba ¥« i,s ;,s emergency tools, first-aid mat, - 
the fill „ 1 , 1 a ^« ned s " v , , l :i1 of our staff to superintend 

Planned^rSiSw. 8 " f 8andba 8 8 ' ofc hers to carry out carefully 
Proof si ( . i . v 1S S° ma ke our basemen! habitable as a splinted 
tod sum ii i' A f : "" sl a P 08 ^ lbl€ »'c boughl quantities of food 

"long , ''"'"''n.ns large garbage cans which were placed 

b * cm We^fc/ « ¥ aM «F water ' m 0036 mains shonhi 
on lyhvnass XK <• gut , c ' s ° f ° Ur < ' , '"'I'<»n„l. admitting visitor 
--^^ PhuWincConftabulal 

5£w* ti um,!; ,,, i <I:iv *» ***** feverishly and during the day received 

fe^ce with ' i ffi ^ t 1 ' 1 " '''V of ""• aftemoon 1 had a con, 
8* and S ffi^J^ft'' H , e waa Pacing the floor of his 
Ration mus f l <lnU V lln, s u " mS fa °e b-OW grave the 

»M«efed at JV u ii, , , i Vl ""i lh " ra<lio l< ' lli "- " f I'^ie losses 
0 <,1,( 'f ritaUV^D^SS? 1 0 V 1 tl1 " damage to the Nlvy upon which our 

r" WbaffirrfJS T nt "I 1 lo ^ that many of our 
Wns were Iv V l , "f "-"y'lo" tl»egro„,ul at (Mark Field. Our 
?° ni « horrible So"' 1 ",. U:,s l, 1 anl to bdlevo that we were not i„ 

8BSV»* '^^uxne^thl^ We wouW awa * en < and 
t , J 1 , could not he r 'n if\T W( '«cro moving in a dream and 

Sou!* ftauty— especially during the long watches of 

dm?" 1 " ^es^Sd^dfe , ;: no !. iou fad deepening tragedy. We slept 
E n ^ith fren U , u ' ™ few nights of the war were up and 

fe lR^^SfftiST* mo8t of i]w OurW 
pi;, 1 December \ , • there longer than positively ncccssarv, for 

a t,l "Voters by «£ i r 13 ^ 10t , free of tropical heat. Laic- we im- 

red?,, water & cha,rs ' ^t-aid materials, and emergency 

co n n ed t0 imp'otoncv L". ° m ' a i r forccs at Clark Kcld bad been 
M j on ^d bombS^fe^i^es appeared oyer Manila and 

ov J ?»b, Irb . "ff. ? /', ,,ols the mffitary airport in Pasay, a 

"head. had our hrst experience with Japanese planes 

The U" ^ C ° XlMlSSI0NER ' S RESIDENCE WAS TARGET FOR IJOMRS 

°. f r tj*e bay, iiw^^'^oner's Residence, standing apart on the shore 
Wlul target j„ \P Cc »ter of extensive grounds, offered the most beau- 
- 'fimla; and we wondered how long Japanese airmen 



REPOKT (11 Tl'.K lMUUPlMXE high commissioner 147 

could restrain themselves from practicing their an on our white, 
shining building. Manila itself is exceedingly vulnerable to air al- 
;. ~ Lis low-lying area makes the digging of underground shelters 
possible; and' the overcrowded flimsy wooden buildings in many 
portions of the <itv make ii a first-degree fire hazard if attacked by 
incendiary bombs. During those tragic days what 1 feared most was 
a Japanese air raid directed against the civilian portions of the eity. 

Such an atlaek would have resulted in indescribable; tragedy. 

With each succeeding day oame darker and darker news. .Reports 
ched us that a hundred enemy transports had appeared m the 
north We could not believe that the Japanese would be able to 
make a successful landing but they did; and soon we heard that 
Japanese troops were relentlessly pushing southward. Ehen came 
reports of successful landings to the south and the more or less rapid 
northward advai.ee of these troops. _ 

In the meantime we were working closely with an American tom- 

miti 'iranized to look after the welfare of the American civilians, 

Bfl well as With the Philippine Red Cross. Evacuation centers were 
secured and prepared in case a sudden evacuation from Manila should 
Drove necessary; the Americans in each district were organized and 
instructed what each should do: plans were made for first-aid help 
for the civilian Wounded. , • 

One of the most dramatic and tragic sights 1 have ever witnessed 
was the bombing of Cavite directly aeross the harbor from the Resi- 
dence Cavite was the old Spanish naval base which Dewej had 
captured in L808, with its beautiful Comandancia where the Spanish 
nalal commanders had lived and Admiral Rockwe 1 Q^>^ 
Quarters America had poured millions oi dollars into t ayite to make 
it a great modern naval base with naval shops, ammunition stores, 
and oil supplies, all dominated by three tall wireless lowers. 

JAP PLANES WKKK UNOPPOSED OVEU CAVITE 

Wc witched the Japanese planes— 27 of them— circling high above 
lis shinin- in the sun. Hying in V formation. They passed over 
\Hnihi dmppod a few bombs on Nichols Field and then proceeded 
to Cavite. With slow deliberation they circled around n and then 
dropped their bombs. Within 15 minutes Cavite was wiped oil Uie 
map 1 Following the roar of explosions, great clouds of smoke , and 
later leaping flame rose over the inferno. That afternoon smaU 
boatloads of mutilated human bodies came across the bay Wl*m 
their dreadful cargoes to be taken to Sternberg lhispital in Manila 
The comandancia was burned to the ground Admiral bockwcll 
barely escaped with his life. All night flamesht up the sky above 
Cavite and oven next day the (ires still raged. Cavite was left a 
shambles and a gaping ruin. . V ,.„j 

Those of my stall who were not living with their lamihes gatheied 
iu the Residence each afternoon before darkness fell. IS e improvised 
a ladies' and a men's dormitory behind sandbags along the center 
court of the llesidencc, close to the stairway down to the shelter. 
There under mosquito nettings rigged over mattresses laid on the 
floor, our staff spent the fitful nights. No lights could be shown and 
we had but one or two rooms which could be successfully blacked out. 
In these we tried to brighten an hour or two after an early supper 
by games of cards or by conversation before throwing ourselves, more 



148 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSI OUSTER 

or less fully dressed, upon our mattresses to gain strength in sleep 
for another day. 

t AS ^ r tr( ? 0 P s > without air support, were forced to fall backward 
toward Manila we could see developing a gigantic pincers movement 
witha Japanese army descending upon us from the north and another 
WiX f C A S ° Ut '' aiming to meet in Manila and crack us to pieces. 

Knout American reinforcements to save us there seemed no escape. 
ontc;^ P i5 r ^2 and cabtai w c were completely cut off from the 
outside world. All mail communication had ceased. 

cus3 lI ! g i °. nc , of my conferences with General MacArthur we dis- 
S t P u to foDow in casc lhc faU of Manila became un- 
united S xr- ^ evcnt > iu orcIer to avoid capture, he wished the 
Wealth C f atesill g h Commissioner, and the President of the Common- 
goverrunen V t CrnJ n ?nt t0 g ° to Corrc £ idor ; ^ere to set up a temporary 
appearorl *Z\ Wwto »teful as this course seemed in many ways, there 

I put s f no other solution. 
°r confi ( w£i° i thc staff to work 011 our filcs » removing all the secret 
°f forced [ fl S ? OC £ ITlcnts whidl would have to be destroyed in event 
m °ney securr' i 3 * banks and individuals 1 rounded up gold, 
to prevent th< 't iv ° tllcr valuables to be destroyed if necessary 
todundor fro„„ la . u i n g J^to enemy hands. We worked against time 
to meet eaoil V. 1 combing raids. We lived fi •om day i<> day. trying 
onihe future. ty as l * arosc an(1 not to let our minds dwell 

Packag e tof n c?| n °L Dccer ? lb(> . 1 ; 23 we spent wrapping up Christmas 
overflo w i n c ^ ar ^tesand toilet articles for the wounded who filled to 
Wttions on f 00 t S??? a , ntl , ° UI * makeahift hospitals. \V<> set prepa- 
Members of S? 0 \ ayl - Ight C1,ris 1 tma8 Kv( ' P ! ^«v for our staff and 
^fore Christmas T ^5"^ consulatc - On the morning of the day 
share Christmas 'd\» nt a s iort notc to Achniral Hart asking him to 



nnf e ? hri stmas i dhS?* aS1 ° rfc no l c to Ad "»ral Hart asking him to 
?°<c than I rece 1v P T Wltb us - N ,° 800061 had I dispatched (his 
tfc4 rthur > infSn an V rgenfc telephone message from General 
Kh d ^2.^f at thQ , Ml ° f thc cit >' ™ s imminent and 
wT Solf w oufd S Si 1 ""i? lcavc for Corregidor within 4 hours, 
file* ? mov ed in J n us there that evening. 

I reiS T hic h had J™. gaVe 0rders to bum all our confidential 
evo r ^ Cd , thc large K *° months and years of careful work, 

room t 6 , 1 e nterea Sffl and Hi S h Commissioner's Hags which 
hi two n h 5 Se I took tn n d ^ ung ovor m y chair at thc end of the 
0 th « High Comm^ ?n * Cg ! dor - , Th °y are sti " with me. I hroke 
commissioner's seal of oifice. 

n ^fS- Say r HTJRRIED DEPAIlTUUE FOR COIlREGIDOn 

cffthW to £r 2< SS ng on a Rcd Cross meeting and I had to call 
W chaffi and Personnl + u We musfc leave - We could take only such 
an d din.; en the fiwri mn S s as we could throw into two suitcases. 
th >ngs ft the preL r CUpants of the High Commissioner's Residence 
rare sto,? b °autirv u . m ?. 2 y ears wo had collected many precious 
All theso ca rving s A^hant old sQks and antique Chinese ivories, 
and bol™ Adits' m~l nt ? scrccns . vas 3 paintings, and silk rugs. 
Shtn? Mom i b ° oks and m y collection of Philippine brasses 

behind. There k nsses and a brass lantaka, we bad to leave 
not even tune to go through our bureau drawers 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 149 

and closets, nor in any case would we have had the heart to do so. 
Our minds and hearts were with the many friends, hoth American 
and Filipino whom we must so unceremoniously leave behind in 
Manila It might he many a lonsr day before we would see them 
again and who knows what "might happen in the meantime. 

Because of the cxtremelv limited accommodations on Corrcgidor, 1 
could take with me only nine of my staff. The others agreed to re- 
main in Manila to carry on official duties as long as possible and to 
look OUt for the welfare of American Civilians So tar as safety was 
concerned then- seemed little choice between C orreirulor and Manila. 
Manila had no tunnel to resort to; but ;Coiregidor promised to be the 
very center of Japanese attack, where life would be anything hut safe 

° r ^ewere" interrupted by the usual morning air raid Bomb explo- 
sions sounded close at hand. Evidently the Japanese had commenced 
fo bomb he DOrt area and the harbor through which we would have 
In K! our "c u e Half an hour before we left. I called together 
on. Kili » - Chinese servants to tell thetn that we had to leave 
and tosVv good-bye- Never have 1 had more true and loyal service 
than fro m fhese Now we must leave them behind. Claude Buss, 
mv fie and oval executive assistant who had asked to remain m 
Manila to lookafter the work there. I placed in charge of the staff. 

T ^nnar) hii.i 1>V t lit* llftiul hilt 1 ('OUlll not speak. , 

^h^bomb^shad stopped and the all-d'ar had sounded We 
iniinod our waiting automobiles and raced for the Presidential 

rir 4 o a e awav- 1 could not help thinking back to the 
da\ v be fo re. when 1 had landed on this same pier amid 19-gun 
salutes^ ., w a in- Hags and zooming planes overhead, to be greeted 
bv P resh cut Quezon and his Cabinet. Now. 2 years later, President 
guezo? and I Set again at the same pier, between bombing raids and 

^wT^afded'tWO^waiting launches. No planes were overhead. 
wl «n.l m.t to the Mavon, an intcrisland steamer which was waiting 
&Se^hfhwakwate?to take us to Corrcgidor, 27 miles across the 
52? Tn nn. nnriv wore Mrs. Sayro and our 15-year-old son Bdly, 
Presi<lcnt Q e Jo his wV and tluW children;^ Pr^cntOsn^js, 
Q nf mv staff ud some 20 or 30 of President Quezon's staff. Late 
that mlhtGenerSlM^Shur joined us with his wife, his 4-year-old 

S °Wrwent S to sfeep that Christmas Eve in cots jammed end-to-end 
aloiU the sides of the Corrcgidor tunnel. All our possessions were in 
feiJcasTs under our cotsf Life ^.^S^S 
On Christmas morning we went into khaki. Ihcic \\as no i a " n . ai A 
2 wl i "h se ad clothes and no hot water; cold water wasJmufcd 
and at t hues not to be had. Khaki showed dirt less than whites and 

^« 
£Xn^ 

believe in the Christmas spirit. We tried to forget in that hot, foul 
tunnel air that it was Clmstmas Day and largely succeeded 

Coiegidor is a high rocky island, 4 miles long, covered with dense 
vegetation. Incongruous as it may seem Corrcgidor is one of the 
loveliest spots I have ever seen. Its roads wind in and out and up 
and down through luxuriant tropical tangles and temperate torest 



150 REPOKT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COM M I S€ ION E R 

growths. Birds are everywhere. High cliffs command entrancing 
views m every direction of blue, blue Bea, sparkling in the sun. si udded 
Sr y , ,s ! lan ; ,s -., To the east lies tin- wlml, suv.-p of Manila Bay 
" th .° »w* buddings of Manila visible on a clear day. To the 
the lUX o l, ! ,:n 'V 1 "' 1 green-clad slopes of Mariveles IVfountaia on 
w r,'r t 1 Pe S u ? u te« separated from Corregidor by 2 or 3 miles of 
the air »« i\ o ,, ! < . bl 1 mvm K in frorn th «' • S «'=''«'«'«>1 and freshen 

heat of th". ' "' ^and* ^ee from inucb of the stifling tropical 
pines wi ; ,n:,ml;m,l - 1 " is * feo ""«' " ( "'- '■"^ Pi""'* i" tin- Philip- 
Xn , V, 1?» can . sl 1 i ;°P W,U,0 "« ""-^uilo „,is. During ,ho times 

fi cS 1 ' shells were falling and noi f our owii guns were 

corregidor seemed the very incarnation of beauty and peace, 

ROCK 'TUNNEL SERVED as COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE 

to ! Se& 1 S^S 0f ^ >rte l i< l 0r is flU m ° rG vivi<I in contrast 
have bSn c^ffiSfj l° Ut ¥ *" *?¥ rodt ( 'orrogidor, tunnel! 

9 the hospital U nn, i w ^'/Vr - 7°? "» ° m " ° £ 
'""ne. We eavfi Jn '• s ! :,l,llsll, '< 1 our headquarters and mad,- our 
P ate at a "com, L 1 1 pnvi "V ll °"- with the soft things of life. 
gRfted there as^K J^ 8 r' 1 l U '- bunne ' sl, l )l in tunnel, and 
;',"" M P< i'nit I inn iv? 5 e / oul an ! ""> difficuH working conditions 
gWrnat the end oftfKS ? s T,' m ' ,xvo deaks :ui<i m ako room for 
Mfthfully and toy^JtSSu l,( ' r " " ,v , secretary and stenographer 
^Jtance to drink r S^&J** i "' , ' r (li, - y > S° m S oul to the tunnel 
l0n n ?. ei - IWasch „ ,i!!T r"!'," ^'enever t^ey COuld stand it no 
f . J l'c eommandin- " . i'V °f Lh « Porregidor spirit. 
** ls '. house a lkU& hi,<1 ' >lu .rV a < li 'l>osal one of the of- 
WW-situatod n.ar on of " 'A" 1 '- fro,n , Uh ' (,l " n " 1 '"'ranee. It 
tool » f ^"^eles and P, hal ^ ri ° s and commanded a dorious 
vorVr 1 ' S ( V lfV *P to the l.o^« ; ?*? ,, 1 10rni "- a fter Christmas we 
Pla, os S °f°9- We r , T to ^>ok <he place over and arrange a 
SaV^ then by th« t ftP*** , by the drone of Japanese air- 
SKf SSJ^ea around ^ los ,r s - of bombB ond th<> ^'^ «> r 
decidefl h road a »d w .. 'a ,™ ' P'V'Ped for an open ditch by the 
Butl a^T Preferred to^S ^fireworks. After that the staff 
at ti n, J Japanese S( ] ( l? k ! n &e tunnel. 

tacked wh. 0V0,( hl ''i" 1 wTthT^' 11 a , fc ni » ht > a,ld tb(> >" 1 "- 1 ! - 
bed Sdl^S £ d •»*»• tl,:,t ■.'»-V boy, Billy, * 

A<^rdingW^f^ confined to a hospital 

and dust rSL 1 Irs - Sayre n "."f ^ of f the fever or regain his strength. 

when air r aidV VOl T Ml at *f* froni thc Berma 

two or th^T 0r sl ielli, K / f l,. ' fc fro ? a bombs, and thereafter, except 
o n custom t ° ther i k"? 8 back to thc tunnd - ^ slept with 
si" its of Se ? stoal aWf L° f (l ui ; stafF m thc bouse. It became 
n „n i\ Q ! Unnd 6VeS „f? m thc fctid atmosphere and oppressive 
I I "P thc , d, »sty r 0a d y t aftcrn °on an hour or two before sundown, 
blanket on the terrace 1 ?o? UX " ^ aven of refuge and there spread a 
fresh air and the b eautv ^ d s f re , t ch out on our backs, drinking in the 
fresh dralts of life, and it ? 10 Serenity of the scene. It was like 
U c used to lie there Watch" US Ucw stren g tl1 an< i resisting power, 
about the loved ones back • ^ g ^be stars come out and wondering 
were they faring and wouh? llcrica seeing those same stars. How 

iu Wo ever see them again? As darkness 



REPORT OF THE l'lllI.n'PIXE HIGH COMMISSIONER 151 

tt } C( l down we could see the flashes of the Japanese guns answered 
>V our own over on Uataan, followed by the sound of (he explosions. 

manv nights the whole sky would be alifht with the flames from 
VhJ. havoc and destouction following the shelling. Some nights we 
iSfre driven back to the tunnel by the scream o overhead shells, and 
SSt always meanl an exciting tfash. Hut on other ingh s we were 
Slice by absolute quiel and we thanked the Japs for fat, , 
bl v beginning of our Stay our beaviesl casualties were from air 

&t V f w days after our arrival the Japanese put on a big show, 
raids. A lew y an , ato r announced to the world that 

^inedbon bs , on 1 < ( Y olllunis . ion ;uM ns sunv „aer was only 
Corregidor In id be. n ■ m smash many of the buildings 

^ matter of daj B. dap. u m ^ . on Uyet , bofore (hc 

1 quarters a t I ops.d. . air attacks that our casualties 

trar began. Our men w, < st a uso t . OITKlol . s „ ere crowded with bloocl- 
^rcrc heavy and the hoa pi ' " !f he wlic f e tunnel shook with the 
soaked stretchers and dy mg : n u ^ da was reckoued) 

rcc of the ymhe ^R^^L-epaxable harm had been done. Each 
,«rt. from the casualties . . tiAa nvar n«VrP<riHnr our nnii- 



Ipart from the P^Jf""? $$ air raids over Corregidor our anti- 
time the Japanese repeatea " vl and the Japanese lost more 
^rcraft gunners grew more ana ^ ^ ^ Corregidor 

an d more planes. me w Japanese press reported that some 

j^nd^rnnOaSuweatWl. tad b , Sril „»1 w as beimr 

-•> : " ' '.""'''f' , „i,.,, u . ,is with Bhelling from batlcrics blant&l 
The »y began U> ff«B"°£ 0 , „ s sM1;t , , ,„ Outage 



^Sdrs^rir^i sua ^.^.^"si 



-oiild explode A shell pave no warnpg but Us own scream, and tin n 
?t was too Late to run. Also, the shells often came at night. On Uie 
JJbole, I think we preferred the bombs. 

DISPOSAL Ol MONKV WAS A PROBLKM 

One of the difficult problems that we faced at Oorregidof was the 
disposal of the <rold and other securities which had been given into my 
nistody to prevent their Calling into the hands of the Japanese. I 
found myself the proud possessor of some G)< tons of gold, of manv 
millions of dollars in United States paper currency, of additional 
pillions in Philippine paper currency, and of large boxes, given mo 
\ r ihe hanks, of securities, bank assets, and valuables of various kinds. 
What to do with them? The President had authorized me to destroy 
them if in my judgment necessary to prevent them from falling into 
Japanese hands, but I hoped a way could be found to save them from 
destruction. 

So far as the paper money was concerned, the problem was easy. 

\ftor all, it was of no intrinsic value. If a careful record of it werG 
made, it could safely be destroyed on Corregidor and reissued iu 
Washington. This was the course we followed. After the great 
bundles of bills had been counted and carefully inventoried,! appointed 
a responsible committee to witness its destruction; and during the 
<Javs that followed great stacks of American paper currency — 5- and 

jO- and 20- and hundred-dollar bills — were burned by the armful to 



152 BEPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

^J^tense interest and wonderment of thc soldiers standing bv 
Uh boy," exclaimed 'one, "I never saw so much money in my life 
but I wouldn't. trade the whole lot of it for the chance of bein" back 
on my little old farm in Tennessee." My naval aide got the thrill of 
S100 bill noncnalantlv Kghting his cigarct with a tightly rolled 
The gold presented a much more difficult problem. It could not h» 
tir^^V 11 COuld be ™ 11(>d U P s<»nu. secret hfdin' 
the h^? ^ } l UOt be f0und? U cou,d be s »»k in the harbor and 
thev ^ n?S ? f , tb ? spot kc P fc secret : bufc mi * ht no < the Japanese if 

niehA f i m th ° SC , wh ° kn ? w and 80 rec °ver it? Many days and 
a 1 sen se P of Z ± d ° VCr the P roblRn \ L ™ng m Corrcgidor we had K 
was USP W 7 alues -° r Perhaps had gained a truer sense. The metal 

There S»? ? "2" and ^ ^adache rather than an asset, 
various - h - e P roblem of boilds a»d stock certificates and 

mo to reven In ' y m e a ns which military secrecy does not permit 

°ver several tr?mi- Q f y th 9 t ? ther d , a y I had thc pleasure of turning 
weU-knovS ?Yo t l £ ^ gr&teful 0fIicials of one of ^ 

MANILA COMMUNICATIONS CUT AT NEW YKAIl's 

*s59i ManflJ fc b7Sw C ° rre P d ? , :r e weP0 in «»»*«* communica- 
rallv T . a D y telephone, bv letter n-nA Ktr i *_ », " 



witg MaSS b7t}Z C0rr T d ? r :r weP0 in constant communica- 
I kept b nartie fini Ue ^ by ¥ tei > and ^ daiI y boa ts. Natu- 
January i t tX?w ^, , y closo toucb with mv office staff n„ 
*.*e th t e tl l the lasfc time with Claude Buss He Reported 
<uiiet. Th« To!Z m ember of our staff was well and thsit thn 

an h d SS^^^ 86 ^ T to <*ter on £ c morrow Te had 

£t Cmtion ffitelT', W* 6 of my de6 P and abi< i 
members of the staff rl^ y an d. splendid service of him and the other 

TBKh! T haU SC « agahi y - 1 r 11 ^ and 1 wond er 

comt C ; Uion ^KffnSa 4 ^ S**? ? °! 1 lh ° foUowin * d «* a11 com- 

I Lvl y of a U we ,S , m the Clty m; g ht cost b »n Ins hfe. For 
AmenV n °- dire et aS rel try *9 communicate. As a result 
j8S5M5«^S^ Urination since January 1 of 

S^I^^ft^ilSr^ h ° We y° r ' and from Fili P inos who 
the <=< the ci ty all A»" ? Earned what I could. After the Japanese 

Those A eets - ftClEr* W6re ° ldeied to rc * isfcer and t0 keepoff 
itSj^cSihaS! t° ok to the hills and disappeared 
still It d ln Santo T m l ayC ?T m Manila ""I ™th some exception ' 
I was'told University. So far as I know they JJ 

Pino servants^** th ,^ Americans who had previously employed Fili- 
P"^^ to the Ite n?Q Cd t tobave tbeir servants purchase food and 
informed, are bl S S ? , Santo Tomas. Those mthout servants, I was 
Japanese are nrml • by * he Qdhppine Red Cross. What food the 
Kiing i i, ave no way of kno^ng According to* 



153 

REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

later reports the Japanese seemed to bo relaxing some ^*^^5^ines 
allowing old people and women with babies to return to tliel - vers ity 
as well as allowing inmates to move freely about the uni 
grounds. Among 
The Americans in Manila are very much in my hear live( j and 
them are close friends with whom Mrs. Sayre and I have a ■ ^ 
worked for over 2 years. I shall not rest until I am satisneu 
everything that can be done for them is being done. , ntran ce 

Each day on ( \>nvgidor we used to come out to the tunnel e ^ 
and hang over the radio, hungry for every bit of news upon iu nila? 
could build our hopes. How soon could we get back to i, ^ 
When might we justifiably hope to see American planes m Jr some 
In the earlv days at Corregidor the conservative estimate w« g 
time in February. Our hopes rose and fell with each da} 
As the tide of battle rolled southward and the Japanese ettectc 
successful Landing after another, our hopes dwindled. mashing 
We began to realize that our deliverance depended upon a ?™>j QU r 
attack and defeat of the Japanese to the south of us. We P 11 ^^^ 
hones on Singapore. Wc were buoyed up by the Allied naval ^ 
in Macassar Strait and we hoped that would mark the ^P^gfqbly 
tide. But as the Japanese advance continued to roll irre| a ^ ^ 
southward we were forced to realize that American planes a na i ^jy 
could not reach us in February or even in March— migW R^ 0 W as 
not reach us in time to save Corregidor— and that all we cpuia ^ 
to fight on, defend Corregidor to the last man and force the Jft P H 
to pay for it a terrible price. To face that realization with open 
and stout hearts took more real courage than dodging ?° n A face 
shells. The great story of Corregidor is that our troops in *u» 
of tliis kept and still keep then* determination unwavering anu 
spirits high. Morituri to salutamus. -r t n \\y 

It is a privilege to be one of a company of men like that, a j 
expected to share their lot to the end. I had given up the uo *?j 
seeing again — certainly not for many long months, if at all— my <\ , 
children, my home, the country I love. Escape seemed v^V^nm 
cut off, for no bomber could land at Corregidor, the Japanese had con i 
plete control of the air, and Japanese ships and planes commanuuu 
the seas for some 1,500 or 2,000 miles to the south of us. 

ROOSEVELT ASKED SAYRE AND QUEZON TO LEAVE 

Then out of a clear sky one February day came a radio m £ ssa S e 
President Roosevelt. He suggested that both President 9 uez ™ f 
myself, if wc were willing to risk it, should come to America; anu n 
authorized the means through which the perilous trip could oe at- 
tempted. • 1 + nf mv 

It was a hard decision to make, for my wife and son and eigiu oi uiy 
staff were with me. The existing problems in the Philippines *or uie 
time being had come to be military and not civil; my C1V1 * u i licu °^ 
had been largely superseded. It seemed clear that I could do more 
for the troops at the front— more for America— by laying the situa- 
tion before governmental circles in Washington than facing capture 
at the hands of the Japanese. Evidently the President wanted me 
home. But as our only means of escape necessitated heading lor 



83018 — 43 11 



154 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

areas where the fighting was hottest, hud I the right to risk the Lives 
of my family and my staff? 

We decided to risk it. 
w o 0 K« a i n r enin ?, ,atc J, n F e»™ary, as soon as darkness bad descended 
TouKot ^K *? Corre ^ dor - For of military secrecy we 

J 1 !;? , lfc b « known that we were leaving or even say goo< -bvc 
Sal vr n t- Du " n £ a ^ hour when no shells were falling Gen- 
ff s »n »i- h » r n and Admi,al Rockwell saw us off. "When vT.u see 
world " g n m ' Gcnera i MacArthur said to me, "il will bo a differed 
S wav at n^t S not safe to linger over good-byes; shells mighl come 

ESS2.2SS?S2d. Ve pressed Bach ot£ers ll:m<ls iu Se 

our'dTsUna'tion 1 ^ dared rovealour plans or 

Daddy?™?^ eaeW ^, hw q«estionings. "Where are we going, 

throat; an s^hTSS g ° mg $? m F 1 said U ' i " 1 ;l ch ° ke j " «5 
words. ™«»uca so impossible 1 could not believe my own 

BllenceSu 3 U a ^Jk^* 6 bay to Bataan and there waited in 
Then wo a ZZ~>- wn en the moon had set and the water was blfl.nL- 
Life tonSSi ° Ur - lon - r iO^ey homeward . *' 
too deep. As I ston 8 ^'? can b ? ouiu> the same - Experience burned 
cxtrav a g ant trav «5« er° tnc dazzling sunlight of America with it« 

^S^^VfovorSTu P.-r lt . 1 ,,,,vi ' ' <>V '" 1 sliI1 

hv, ng next to death mo , \ '"hppines, Americans and Filipinos 

dipped of every cmnS **? ******* of miles from Some 
y«y ordinarv lot riE ° rt ' ""W will, swe i iit and diet and blood. A 
teMtfOTiftW at ' SOmc ^l.ite-skinned and son* 
mined for America^ -Li \ hat bcrOGS a,(> made of, onflinching, deter! 

ffn° ur tun hd t r i ll ' K Om and democracy. We in Corregido? 
fc^ m « °«r wav T h n' h( :' ^ * dBn « BO* hot or the enemy 
casoJ ?£° T ha vc no tunnnf 08 ^ JOys on Batoan aiuI the majority on 
EM just have to"rn , T v ,U ' y ,,aV( ' OIll -V foxholes; and in man 
n^verl 5 *• 8 r ^t b / ^ir guns and take it. A few £ 

ihave a watch a8ain " S ° ^ " *** 

letting » Sp , ital to C ;he d n? Ph ! 8 blood ' bdn S ca, - , - if>d ^ from action 
toKl^^^eotoDk^? 6 ^ 1 ^ tables - ^"18 their teeth, never 
TS^^S^^Pf^enx- Ihave watched themS 
beaten ° f 9°*** £ S at r vS'?t, unhesitating and taking it all as 
Or again, I th - SPlnt ' S ma S nificcnfc - They cannot be 

arouirr er th . e httMoHn Sad ° rS on and above anfI the sea 

ESSSPk™ 8 ^ and a ° f gunhoats and surface craft, hovering 
scream?,? b ° mbera swim ? a "' A V,,0SC crews f aeed death every tin f 
E?!ffi a ^ li «CEcSS ^^or or Japanese shells can 0 
Ofatte^ WG T Vatche d one 8h ° r ? 1 sba11 ncvcr foi * e t the thrill- 
SLSTrtS* Ja P a ncse ahnf Crnoon between a destroyer and a group 
each time reached the M anc ?- As th e bombers circling overhead 
2S^l^*«K3te} P0int wb ere they could strike, the 
and turned I n spite 0 f t ant,y landing alert at their posts, twisted 
maneuvered the Japanese „ ° unco Yal odds it so outguessed and out- 
and it was able to make J*^??? that th eir bombs missed every time 

c boon its escape. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



155 



I think of the marines who hear the critical responsibility of guard- 
ing the shores and beaches of Corregidor. At their posts on guard 
behind tangles of barbed wire night and day, cheerfully making the 
best of impossible living conditions, dependable unto death — never 
have I seen a body of men of whom America had a right to be more 
proud. 

1 think of our men at work in submarines. Do Americans realize 
what life on a submarine means? In seas closely guarded by Japanese 
planes and destroyers, all day long you run submerged with the sub- 
marine's temperature m those tropical waters ranging between 95° and 
100°, so hot that life is a misery. The air by the end of the afternoon 
gets so foul and stale that you could cut it with a knife. Throughout 
the dav periodically at short intervals you come up to periscope depth 
and take a careful iook around. If a destroyer is sighted down you go 

{precipitately, hoping to heaven he has not seen you; knowing that if 
ic has he will come for vou and drop a succession of depth bombs. All 
the machinery— even the electric fans — must be immediately turned 
off so that he cannot follow you with his sound-detecting apparatus. 
You wait in dead silence minute after minute, wondering if this time 
you will be blown to eternity. If a plane is sighted you must sub- 
merge to a great depth, since planes can see down below the surface; 
and there you wait in silence to find if you have been seen. At the 
end of a long day when darkness has settled over the world above, you 
rise to the surface so as to charge the batteries and begin the night's 
run. 

XJNITKD STATES SUBMARINES STALK ENEMY SHIPS 

The first draft of fresh air is as intoxicating as wine. It pulsates 
through the ship and makes you care about living again. Yet even at 
night all unnecessary hands must remain below, for the ship must be 
prepared to dive under the surface within less than a minute if a 
destroyer or other ship is sighted. Living the life of the lone wolf, 
fired upon or bombed on sight by either friend or foe, not trying to 
escape danger but positively seeking it and hunting for enemy ships 
that will blow you to kingdom come on sight; undergoing this inhuman 
existence uncomplaininglv day after day and week after week— only 
those who have lived with submarine crews at work can quite know 
what quiet, unassuming heroism really means. 

Does America realize the sacrifice that that gallant little band ol 
soldiers and sailors are: making for us? Are Americans prepared to 
shake off their complacency, to forget their differences and to make cor- 
responding sacrifices in return? We must match their gallantry. JNo 
sacrifice on our part of personal comfort or of special interests or 
privileges or even of life itself can be too great. r 

I keep wondering whether America realizes the gravity of the job 
she has undertaken. It is not an easy task to win a war against 
nations armed as are Germany and Japan. The job is infinitely more 
difficult when it involves fighting thousands and thousands of miles 
away from our own shores. I was looking up the distances in i the 
Pacific on the map the other day. From San Francisco to New 
Zealand is some 5,700 miles and from New Zealand to Sydney in 
Australia is some 1,300 miles. Seven thousand miles to Sydney! And 
after you have managed to convoy troops and planes and oil and am- 
munition and supplies to Australia through 7,000 miles of submarine- 
infested waters — in a sense the job has only just begun. From 



156 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Sydney to Manila is still 4,000 miles, more or less; and from northern 
4andIl°L WC ? ^\ t0 fight ever y inch of *• «W from island to 
weU calnten 84 ™ 111 tp stl ,' ait aga , inst a detenuined, utterly ruthless, 
*al ent T™7,£ iT y rt? al ^° ady h e s ga,ncd Possesion of most of the 
sam ?tim £ g ° kis ° f the , Easfc - No eas y task that! And at the 
Sri W^^' W ed and organized for war as no country in 
scSJf h^ b r before implacable, cruel, determined, is inpo™ 
Sr At^P" 4 ,?^ and sti " th«»tena the whole of 
Athousa A nf Sesyet ^ ^ Americft 

AXIS NATIONS NO MATCH FOR AN AWAKENED AMERICA 

provided onM Ceding Axis Nat ions can be no match for America 
tod ^ tl eViS^^f^ 8 " People awaken to the magnitude of the 
necessar? S s pro . ve themselves ,ctu| y to make the 

We mult Series ™ W tbat ifc will TJ cost a hcav y toll, 

slightest doubt as not bcgun l ,° yct - But 1 havc nofc the 

Never in our counW, an f^ Ver of i the Amc ™an People bo. 
as that of today 5 ° *> blstor y havo wc faccd atl issuc s "ch 
fury and naked world can be a place where lust and hate and 

band is against , evWJ£ 6 glVcn ^iidled rein, where every man's 
have to revert to a lif * ™an's, where force is paramount and men 
savagery. Or on tl,„ *i ,' of hving m boles in the ground, of 
brute and lustful mSL'Sf " hand ' the worId can be a P lacc where 
w her c Christian vhSfV"* strained by law and organized justice, 
nghts are protected and m«° , r ? spcctcd a,ld observed, where human 

The Axis countries are n,?f^ ld Can P ro ,g ress to a richer, fuller life, 
their faith is in ruth W ? fc to crcatc the former kind of a world 
bro ^rhood of man! C - The y fundamentally disbelieve in the 

struggle Sr foe^rhmt? «f C ? OT t to make men free, dedicated to the 
not onemerely of inanity, cannot waver. The struggle is 

conflicting kinds of worhl Polltl ?:, U is to determine which of tlTc two 
Zl m - Et is to deci P do °K r *f hUdrca and our children's children shall 
thc SS of n n h f r humanit y shall go forward or must 

T? L ?u barbari sm and ?i P f St Cen - fc uries of sacrifice and struggle and 

au is the greatpci ; uru te savaeerv 

S a cause Cd - u? v 4th nt Ueand the grea y test struggle our country ever 

gVcat C OI 5 ,gh ' a * hSy LT ab ° Ut hangS UpSn the OUtCom «- S 
Amnrino ?i mo on . Amorio^ no sacrifice on our part can be too 
^AnSf^ to P the world how 

™i a, l d to CorregTdi Wil ? ] „ this war - W * shall be returning to 
£ ( b ^d S tLi W ? Sh , a11 drive thcso ruthluss barbarians 
tSSS- « tC6 ' be y°nd the fc land Ind ics, beyond Borneo and the 

Si hCn ? and 0ttStW ,Ppine 5- The y are darin S> but we «hall 
kind of treacherous ^du , them and b ™ng into eternal discredit the 
m h'story coupled with tfe 688 and rutb less attack that will go down 
until this is achieved t„ , n . ame of Japan. America will not rest 

I hose of us who haves ' We must £° be y° nd that, 
until some way can be fo, CCn War at wb ite heat can never rest again 
That is as much America' - i to build a P cace that will be lasting, 
know that the American n i as tbe wmnm g of the war. And I 
task, will not fail. People, once having set their minds to the 



APPENDIX J 



Address by Hon. Francis B. Sayre, United States High Com- 
missioner to the Philippine Islands, at the Dinner of the 
American Newspaper Publishers Association, Waldokf-As- 
toria Hotel, New York City, April 23, 1942, at 10:15 P. m. 

Before speaking of Corregidor, as you have asked me to do, I should 
like to pay a tribute to your own men, the correspondents who have 
covered the story of the war in the Philippines. They have done a 
magnificent job. They have written history as it exploded before 
their eyes. They have carried out the supreme duty of the good 
reporter under the supreme test; they got the story and they got it 
in the face of death. 

It is still difficult for me to realize that, under the President's 
direction, I am really back in America and not dreaming on my rough 
cot in the t unnel on Corregidor. 

War against Japan was a cloud on our horizon at Manila which for 
months we had been watching and planning for. In the summer of 
1941 we had mined Manila Harbor; for a long time our Army Intelli- 
gence officers had been preparing lists of suspects to bo arrested upon 
the outbreak of war; the movements of American merchant ships 
had been put under Navy control. Finally, on December 1, we 
received a message from Washington warning us of the possibility 
of attack, as a result of which Admiral Hart, General MacArthur, 
and I met in my office to confer and outline plans. Even then the 
reality of war seemed hard to believe. 

At 4 a. m. on the morning of our December 8 (corresponding to 
December 7 on the other side of the international date line) I was 
awakened by the sound of bare feet running down the corridor. 
Claude Buss, my executive assistant, burst into my bedroom and 
breathlessly told me of the Japanese attack upon Pearl Harbor. 
Rousing my staff, we went at once to work. Commonwealth officials 
had to be notified, press releases given out, constabulary guards posted 
around the residence compound, and our gates closed to all except 
those holding passes. I ordered the closing of the Japanese banks. 
In accordance with carefully worked-out plans some of our staff 
I put to work filling and piling sandbags to protect our building; 
others were detailed to procure food and water-storage cans in case of 
8iege; still others were set to work gathering first-aid materials in our 
splinterproof shelter in the basemont. At the end of that memorable 
day I went down to General MacArthur's headquarters to confer 
with him over the situation. He told me of the gravity of our posi- 
tion — of the ships that had been lost that morning at Pearl Harbor 
and of the flying fortresses and planes that had been lost that noon 
at Clark Field and Iba Field, north of Manila. 

The days that followed were crowded with activity. We worked 
against time, never knowing when Japanese bombs would wipe us 

157 



158 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



out. We slept in our clothes, up and clown those first few nights — 
three or four times a night because of air-raid warnings. All of our 
staff who were not living with their families gathered at the residence 
every evening before dark; we improvised a men's and a women's 
dormitory of mattresses spread out on the passageway around the 
court and protected by sandbags; and here we caught what sleep 
we could against the coming day. Nerves were taut and ears always 
strained against every noise; exaggerated rumors Were rife: yet never 
nave I seen a group of men and women working in more splendid self- 
control and fine cooperation. It helped one over rougb places and 
was a constant inspiration to work with a staff like that. 

llirough those crowded days and nights amid a few hopeful and 



^any disheartening reports, one fact became increasingly clear 
Japanese troops had landed in large numbers on Iingayen Gulf to 
ad™ 1 - and also iu lar S c numbers to the south; both forces were 
WithT> mg T Up ° n Manila with the evident intention of cracking us. 
tmvSJ' Ja P?nese in complete control of the air our own troops were 

Fin V nablc to check th(? double advance. 
TO^d^'i?^^™ 181111043 Evc > General MacArthur decided Manila 
toeothpt -* c t ^ ld " Hc called mc on the telephone and said that I 
regidor «? Resident Quezon, must leave within 4 hours for Cor- 
to join'iiQ 101 ^! 0 up a temporary se at of government. Hc agreed 

That m U * lslaud fort ress the same evening. 
Manila and*^^ 16 Japanese commenced bombing the port area of 
President n m ,:)ctween tw r o bombing raids we made our getaway 
off in two sm ^ and to g cthcr with our families and staffs, putting 
Mayon an int . laimcllc s from the presidential pier and boarding the 
We 

^ent to S S ^ steamer waiting for us outside the breakwater. 
a l°ng the si A that Christmas Eve in cots jammed end to end 

suitcases nnA Corregidor tunnel, with all our possessions in 

sharing with ° U A r C0 ^ s * There wc lived during the next 2 months, 

It is a priv1 ll > r mcr i can and Filipino troops a memorable life, 
never seen tW^ to 130 one of a company of men like that. I have 
? e gan to fall ^ ?vf U * • We liad our tunnel to run to when the bombs 
J us t had to Qf i , sllells came our wa y- But the majority of them 
and they nevo y their S uns and takc ' lt - The y ncvor f,iri( 'hed 
gerous posts ni i C f on JP laincd - I've watched them going out to dan- 
J? tllc day's wo } a , ni ght, some of them whistling as if it were all 
Jjae hospital tr? r fV * ve scen them carried, torn and bleeding, into 
takmg i tt T j^°. the operating tables, gritting their teeth and still 
1 i few get xr\ l \ S i P ' r ^ i s magnificent. They cannot be beaten, 
dark and are « C ; tlle & rea t majority, just as brave, go out in the 

i; 0 ,^ as ! ™r heard of again, 
soit life — , a i- f L P into the dazzling sunlight of America with its gay 
boys over i n "}? ^at I have loved and still love— I think of those 
death. Correal ^ipPin cs > Americans and Filipinos, living next to 
contrast is ai^ 1 , 01 * and America are two different worlds, and the 

I know 8h ? ckin 8- 
not indifferent o truly when I say that the American people are 
But what can fl* ^f^etic. They care, and they care tremendously. 
What can we nSf^ ' believe all America is asking that question. 

First, we must * T v not in uniform do? 
fronts— the battl r ^ ze ^ iat the war is being fought on two separate 
t-ue lront on the other side of the world and the produc- 



RKPOKT OV THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMTSSIOXEft 



159 



lion front back home. Each is of equal importance. No matter how 
magnificiont their spirit, men can't win without planes and guns and 
ships and war supplies. Because we lacked sufficient pianos and 
1 fining material in the war areas our best lighters were powerless to 
stop the Japanese sweeping southward from Lingayen Gulf to Manila. 
The hardest thing our men had to face was not savage hand-to-hand 
fighting with fanatical Japanese, not even planned mass attacks at 
critical points, hut the helpless feeling of watching oncoming waves 
of Japanese bombers in the sky with no American planes to oppose 
them— having to stand by one s guns and just take it, utterly unable 
to fight hack. 

One of the most tragic sights I have ever witnessed was the bombing 
of Cavite a few days after the outbreak of the war. Cavite was the 
old Spanish naval base which America had taken over in 1S9S and had 
converted into a modern naval base with repair shops, Ammunition 
stores, and oil supplies, a very vital link in our naval defense in the 
Far East . From the terrace of our residence one noontime we watched 
the Japanese planes come sweeping over Manila above us and then on 
across the hay to ( \avite. Shining in the sun, in perfect V formation, 
with slow deliberation they circled over Cavite and then dropped their 
bombs. Following the roar of explosions, great clouds of smoke and 
later leaping flame rose over the inferno. Cavite was wiped off the 
map. That afternoon small boatloads of mutilated human bodies 
came across the bay and landed their dreadful cargoes to be taken to 
Sternberg Hospital in Manila. All night Barnes lit up the sky above 
Cavite and even next day the fires still raged. Because of our lack of 
planes, Cavite was left a shambles and a gaping ruin. 

Wars these days are won or lost by what happens on the production 
front quite as much as by what happens on the battle front. Fighting 
on the production front is probably the more difficult job of the two. 
It is less romantic and requires even more tenacity and ingenuity and 
brains and grit. Upon victory or defeat on the production front will 
ultimately hang the winning or losing of the war. 

The wheels of war production are turning in America, but we must 
get them turning faster. Time is of the essence. A plane today may 
be worth 10 planes next year. We must drive production more 
furiously. 

Surely, America will not fail her boys at the front. TVe are engaged 
today in a grim struggle, far more difficult than any previous war in 
which w r e have taken part. It will not be an easy victory. The 
power of evil arrayed against us is stupendous. Never before in our 
history have we had to fight on so many fronts at once and so far away 
from home. It will demand sacrifices such as America has not yet 
even begun to make. 

America must awake to the grimness of the struggle. TVe must 
learn to forget our differences — to unite all our forces in the great 
common cause. 

I remember at Corregidor, as we hung over the radio at the tunnel 
entrance, hungry to hear encouraging news from home that would 
mean the sending of help — I remember more than once how heartsick 
we were over news of this plant or that falling down in its production. 
We were not procapital or prolabor, closed-shop or open-shop men. 
\Ve were but soldiers at the front trying to defend our countrymen, 
with our lives at stake and forfeit if our countrymen failed us. 



160 REPORT OP THE PHIMPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

If we, back home, win on the production front, there is not the slight- 
est question about ultimate victory. We shall have discouragements. 
We shall have reverses. But final victory will be sure. I know- 
whereof I speak. I have seen our boys fighting. Given anything like 
equal chances they outfight the Japanese at every turn. 

In the second place, we must remember that we are fighting not 
merely to win a struggle, but to establish a world where our children 
can live in peace and security under law. The real objective for which 
we are fighting is a world of freedom and democracy. We can have 
such a world only if we find the way to build a peace that will be lasting. 

lnat is as difficult a job as the winning of the war. And it is also 
as necessary if we are to obtain the objectives for which we are 
and h WG l0Se the peace our m 'lit a ry victory will turn to dust 



To find the way will demand months of hard work and study and 
Planning— before the making of the peace treaty. For inst ance,* after 
a^>inT e war ' are we S° in K to a,Iow individual nations at will 

r\i • , up . g'g an tic armaments, and thus compel other nations 
Sffi their dewre to divert money vitally neccssaiy for economic 
buUflmJ^A 0ther P eaceful n e«ds into competitive armament 
*h a „. g " e T e SOing to leave eveiy small nation to the mercy of 
wort^T?™ A nd fc f he f freebooters? If not , »iOW practically can the 
Sh£ tn ^ , C f. afe for fche Peace-loving? How practically are we 
need 0 t>°r^ u he earth ' s raw materials accessible to peoples who 

everl indus/i " <T 5*$ Upon which thc ~ standards of living of 
ticallv can P °° ple an(1 inescapably depend? How prac- 

crin^nations whfr."!?? 1 ^ t U , nfair com mercial practices and trade dis- 
• We cannnVc, H le wa y directly to the final crash of war? 

and a host 3 «S , ully build a P° acc thafc ^ffl be lasting until these 
through bv rnS! 8 ! snotty problems have been studied and thought 
enough The T -i 1 ^- ex P e rts and economists. But this is not 
backed' bv a t , T reached by experts will be valueless unless 
Public opinion understanding of the real issues by an informed 

mak?ng h and n^wf™ Tit V tsd P art tha " *Kt other group in the 
issues are comnlov n T u * tha J °P im on. This will take time. The 
wait until after tL ™ obscur ed by much emotional prejudice. If we 
begin now. And vnl 1S i Won ' H wiU bc too late. That work must 
Ana yours in large part is that responsibility. 



APPENDIX K 

Address by Hon. Francis B. Sayre, United States High Com- 
missioner to the Philippine Islands, at the Thirtieth Annual 
Meeting of the United States Chamber of Commerce, Stevens 
Hotel. Chicago, 111., on Thursday Evening, April 30, 1942, 
at 9:15 P. M. 

CORREGIDOR — AND AFTER 

I feci highly honored to be the guest tonight of the United States 
Chamber of ( \>mmerce. I see many of the faces of my friends around 
me — men whom I have known in past years; and it is good .to be back 
among 3-011 a train. It is still difficult for me to realize that, under the 
President's direction, I am really back in America and not dreaming 
on my rough cot in the tunnel on Corregidor. m _ - 

War against Japan was a cloud on our horizon at Manila which for 
months we had been watching and planning for. In the summer of 
1941 we had mined Manila Harbor; for a long time our Army Intelli- 
gence officers had been preparing lists of suspects to be arrested upon 
the outbreak of war; the movements of American merchant ships had 
been put under Navy control. Finally on December 1 we received a 
message from Washington warning us of the possibility of attack, as a 
result of which Admiral Hart, General MacArthur and I met m my 
office to confer and outline plans. Even then the reality ol war 
seemed hard to believe. • 

At 4 a. m. on the morning of our December 8 (corresponding to 
December 7 on the other side of the international date line) I was 
awakened by the sound of bare feet running down the corridor. 
Claude Buss, my executive assistant, burst into my bedroom and 
breathlessly told me of the Japanese attack upon Pearl Harbor. 1 
called my staff from their beds a>nd set everyone to work. Common- 
wealth officials had to be notified, press releases given out, constabulary 
guards posted around the residence compound, and our gates closed to 
all except those holding passes. I ordered the closing of the Japanese 
banks. In accordance with carefully worked out plans, some ol our 
staff I put to work filling and piling sandbags to protect our building, 
others were detailed to procure food and water storage cans in case 
of sie^e ; still others were set to work gathermg first-aid materials m our 
splinterproof shelter in the basement. At the end of that unforget- 
table day I went down to General MacArthur's headquarters to conter 
with him over the situation. He told me of the gravity of our posi- 
tion— of the ships that had been lost that morning at Pearl Harbor 
and of the flying fortresses and planes that had been lost that noon at 
Clark Field and Iba Field, north of Manila. 

The days that followed were crowded with activity. We workea 
against time, never knowing when Japanese bombs would jnpeus out. 
We slept in our clothes, up and down those first few nights three or 
four times a night because of air-raid warnings. All of our stall wlio 
were not living with their families gathered at the residence every 



161 



162 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION' K K 

evening before dark; we improvised a men's and a women's dormitory 
of mattresses spread out on the passageway around (lie court and 
protected by sandbags; and here we raught whal sleep we could against 
tne coming day. Nerves were taut and ears alwavs si mined against 
every noise; exaggerated rumors were rife; vet never have I seen a 
group of men and women working in more splendid s.-lf-eontrol and 

hfcn; C ^ pera t tl0n - 1 It he] P ctl onc ov,T ro "'- n I )1:,r, ' s <""3 was a constant 
inspiration to work with a staff like that. 

rnoV^Ti those crow d«d days and nights amid a few hopeful and 
w£ ™™rtenmg reports, onc fact became increasingly clear 
tv,? ,S tr <x>ps had landed in large numbers on Lingayen Gulf to 
a7lvnl°^« *°. in lar S e ""mbcrs to the south; hoi h "forces were 

With^i g T upon - M . anila the evident intention «,f cracking us 
Diivir Sn^Pi a T° P c , om P lete co »trol of the air our own troops Vere 

Fin fl b l ° ( * ll0( ' k 1,10 (lo,ll,l( ' "'Ivanee. 
could no? 'k?. !. 1 ' 15 ^* 13 Eve ' General MacArthur decided Manila 
Sthi? itl P- -? C CaUcd me 0,1 tl,n ,(> lephon<. and said that ] 
Correiilov Vi 1 Pre t SK,ent Quezon, must leave within 1 hours f 0r 
agreed to Vm,, 1 ' 0 ° , set n P a temporary seat of government. II,. 

That in " US °u 1 island fortress the same e vening. 
Manila- an^f k ♦ Ja P ancse commenced bombing the port area of 
President oL! r)eUv ; ee r n two bombing raids we made our getaway, 
off in S te aW V' l ?^thcr will, our families and staffs, puttin- 
MaywZnhtSH™^** from the Prcsicloiilial pier and boarding i} * 
We went to 3 Sland steamer waiting for us outside (he breakwater 
al °ng the side of A G hristnms Kve in cots jammed end to end 
suitcases under Conregidor tunnel, with all our possessions j n 



omental. 



suitcases nnrln,. ^orregidor tunnel, with all our posses 

There wo lived r i° U - C ° ts ' Life ,uicl bccn educed to the ell 
and Filinino t,Ji U,lng lbe noxt 2 mpnths, sharing with our American 

It is a pHvilec? P | \ mem ™able life, 
never seen their i ? ne of a coln P an y of men Uke that, I have 
began to fall or t { ,u a V ^ e had our tunnel to run to when the bombs 
just had to stand 1 • came ol,r wa ^- Bllt tlle majority of them 
lli ey never comnln i lr Rllns and tako il - They nevcr Hitched and 
Posts night after /Vi' Ive watched them going out to dangerous 
day's work. p v ' g ht > ***** of them whistling as if it were all in the 
Pital to the onorn*; 1° m carried > torp aml Weeding, into the hos- 
A he hardest thim! r$& tabIes > gritting their teeth and still taking it 
nghting with fanpti l t lad to face was not sava £ e hand-to-hand 
critical points but ti i panese ' not even P IannC(1 mass attacks at 
Japanese bombers ir? J 1 , 0 P less feeling of watching oncoming waves of 
them—having to at<T i H le sk y with no American planes to oppose 
to fight back. ancl b y one's guns and just take it, utterly unable 

Give them anv tl * 

Japanese at every t g 0 an cc l ual c,iarice and they outfight the 
equipment and ai^o 1 ! 111 ' 0nce we manage to get to them adequate 
country, I promise v V sucl1 as 1 liave seen bein g developed in this 
Their spirit is maw? 11 0 ^ be no c l uestion as to the outcome. 

A few get medals- fi 001 ^' ^hey cannot be beaten, 
dark and are never h F reat m ttjority, just as brave, go out in the 

America has a ,£25 rd f of again. 
Filipino, and of her " ;i be P roud ?* her soldiers, American and 

submarines. Do Amerinn ' to ?* I , tl,in i k f of our n ? ei) at work in 

llca ns realize what lite on a submarine means? 



KKPOKT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 163 

In sons closclv guarded by Japanese planes and destroyers, all clay 
long you riiii'siil)iii(M^c(l with the submarine's temperature in those 
tropical waters rnnirinir between 95° and 100° T so hot that life is a 
misery. The air bv the end of the afternoon gets so foul and stale that 
vou could cut it with a knife. Throughout the day periodically at 
riiort intervals vou eomo up to periscope depth and take a careful look 
around. I f a tlest rove* is sighted down you go precipitately, hoping to 
heaven be has not seen vou; knowing that if he lias ho will come for 
you and drop n succession of depth bombs. All the machinery — 
even the electric fans must be immediately turned off so that he 
cannot follow vou with his sound-detecting apparatus. You wait in 
dead silence minute after minute, wondering if this time you will oe 
blown to eternity. If a plane is sighted you must submerge to a great 
depth since planes can see down below the surface; and there you wait 
in silence to find if vou have been seen. At the end of a long day when 
darkness 1ms settled over the world above, you rise to the surface 
so as to charge the batteries and begin the night's run. 

The first draft of fresh air is as intoxicating as wine. It pulsates 
through the ship and makes you care about living again. Yet even 
at night all unnecessary bands must remain below, for the ship must 
be prepared to dive under the surface within less than a minute if a 
destroyer or other ship is sighted. Living the life of the lone wolf, 
fired upon or bombed on sight by either friend or foe, not trying to 
escape damrer but positively seeking it and hunting for enemy ships 
that will blow vou to kingdom come on sight; undergoing this inhuman 
existence uncomplainingly day after day and week after week— only 
those who have lived with submarine crews at work can quite know 
what quiet, unassuming heroism really means. 

Does America fully realize the sacrifice that that gallant band ot 
soldiers and sailors are making for us? 

How does all this affect you, members of the United States Cham- 
ber of Commerce? 

Very vitally, it seems to me. 

Our count rv is en^a^ed in the most terrific and stupendous struggle 
of her history— a fight literally to the death. All that America has 
sacrificed and struggled for in the past is at stake. All that is most 
precious to us in life is at stake. Our future hangs m the balance 

Our Government is now engaged upon the monumental task of 
harnessing the Nation for this titanic struggle. Surely at such a 
crisis all America must pull together. In the fax* of such an issue 
there is no room for disunity or divided counsels, in this grim struggle 
all America is one, , . . . TT lAl 

I do not mean that there must be no criticism. Healthy criticism 
is the life blood of every democracy. But criticism must be construc- 
tive In the carry iiur out of a work as gigantic as this,. of course there 
will be mistakes, errors of judgment, inefficiencies- But that is part 
of the experience of war. Of course, there will be differences of opinion. 
Everyone will want to light the war according to his own ideas, -but 
the men in the trenches can't wait until issues are debated and ironed 
out over the country. We must go forward. We must leave the 
strategy of war preparation and war plannmg to our experts, mnitary 
and civilian. We must let them who know the facts make the deci- 
sions Then wc must solidly back those decisions. That is the only 



164 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS 

way to win. It is the only way for America to prove that democracy 
can wage war more successfully than dictatorship. 

You^ business leaders, can play a vital role in solidly uniting Amer- 
ica. The essential function of the United States Chamber of Com- 
merce is to unite and unify American business groups. Now, as never 
lot e, D e , r ! lca charges you with that responsibility. Capital and 
labor, Kepubhcans and Democrats, New Dealers and anti-New Deal- 
ers, rich and poor, Catholic and Protestant, black and white— all of 
us are Americans— and all of us, determined to pull in harness together 
are going to win this war. ' 

«^ lsh i 1 tad the £ ift of language — could make vou see the realities 
war vividly as I do. For soft, comfortable America still 
Zf A °f ] lke a dream, and Corregidor the reality. Those boys 
America line— they represent, I suspect, the real soul of 

Bat^^ffi^ l6tter WrittGn by " y ° Ung AmCrican 

I am proud to be a part of the fight that is being made here- 
to wrote: 

^onir^lnev^ahi 611 W ? r ? P 0SsibIe > leave here until it is over, and we have 
had my share of n ve seen some horrible things happen, and have 

courage, self-saoHfi™™ , c ? ca P es > but I have also seen some wonderful acts of 
for all my lif^ lh ™> and loyalty. At last I have found what I have searched 
"which I can cive pvo?,! ~ & J ob in which 1 can lose myself completely and to 
a nd spiritually connnLn!J nce °/ my stren gth and my mind. And I have mentally 

Should anyCS" 1 ?^ 0 ^ 0 ^ * * *• 
^dlc as it would h*™°u ^ here » ]t wil1 not be likc closing a book in the 
F or in the last 2 Lntv! r£ n had 1 been killed in thc first few clays of the war 
on e of the most un^ifil ave donc a lifetime's living, and have been a part of 
group of individuals ' cooperative efforts that has ever been made by any 

Those b 

minds prepared an ^ Hving on the fronfc line > closc to death, with their 
realities. o„3 - ay shingly to make tlie supreme sacrifice, sense 

front lin e must i w?li and the a S° n y amicI which we lived on tho 
unless the forces of V 1? 7 COme also ^ a11 the People of the world 
and overthrow th«» fn * sness organize themselves, first to combat 
«P an order which wm° S i evi1 ' and > sec °nd, after such defeat, to set 
catastrophe forever irt ma -, e a repetition of the present tragedy and 
mte difficulty; but uS P °^ Tbat is a backbreaking labor of infi- 
and man must revprt t S !i 5 s achieved our civilization cannot survive 
inspiring fact is that it u Vel or below the level of the beast. The 
of tiie earth can achieve!? achleved - A nd the democratic nations 

based upon hxSS^KM unit e the peoples of the world by a program 
rally and sustain our fe w 1, No other kind of a P ro ^ ram w "l 
ing, not merely for Am • ' • musfc m ake it clear that we are fight- 
or Chinese rights Wf ° a , n n ? hts or English rights or Russian rights 

Such a program invoL he nghts of a11 mankind, 
field, we must five un m Very concr ete issues. .In the economic 
Let us be frank 3 Whofh 7 °- ur P re -war prejudices and practices, 
return to the world of t£«^o™» n 0r T fhether we lose we shall never 
return to that world, with it* ° Ur ob i.ective were merely a 

unsalable surpluses,' Tts vast and^ P ° Verty m , h ° ^ rf |Wf^ 
economic warfare and ZnJnZ , • S r ? w "?g unemployment, its bitter 
wanare ana cruelly unfair discriminations among the peoples 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 165 



of the world — if that were our objective, humanity could have but 
little heart for the fight. 

Our experience of the 1930's has made certain facts indisputably* 
clear. We have learned that no industrial nation today can possibly 
carrv on without a very large volume of exports and imports. Hitler 
did iiis best to achieve German self-sufficiency, but even he was finaly 
forced to cry out "Germany must export or die." Industrial nations 
must trade to survive. Through poignant suffering we learned that 
accumulating trade barriers choking and strangling international trade 
spelled mount ing unemployment and lengthening bread lines and deep- 
ening international hostility. No serious statesman in this day and 
generation advocates the complete elimination of all tariff walls. But 
responsible statesmen do advocate —and if we are to win the objectives 
for which the democracies are fighting they must insist upon — the 
elimination after the war of those unconscionable trade barriers which 
inescapably choke the How of international trade and as a result sub- 
stantially depress the standard of living of entire peoples. The pre- 
war system of mounting and excessive tariffs, of quota restrictions, of 
artificial exchange controls, of government monopolies, of bilatcralistic 
trading arrangements — the whole economic panoply of fighting de- 
vices to enforce some form or other of special privilege or unfair dis- 
crmination — all these must go if our criterion is to be, not the private: 
profit of small pressure groups buttressed with political power, but the 
welfare and the advancement of humanity. We must insist upon the 
enjoyment by all states, great and small, victor and vanquished, of 
access on equal terms to the trade and to the raw materials of tho 
world which are needed for their economic prosperity. 

America, has a right to look to you, leaders of business and of trade 
in your chosen fields, to bring homo to tho American people a true 
understanding of the real issues and to create and mold a public 
demand for the realization of this objective. 

We must find the means to unshackle international trade or else 
perish. Believe me, there is no other possible way to advance or even 
to maintain existing standards of living — no other possible way to 
build a peace that will last. 

Our program must go far beyond even this. In early days men 
fought with clubs and knives and bows and arrows. These could bo 
quickly fashioned and a nation could in large part prepare its defense 
after an attack had been launched. But today we live in a machine 
age. War is waged with mechanized devices— tanks and flying fort- 
resses and intricately planned battleships, which take months or years 
to build and cost a lung's ransom. A nation unarmed with the latest 
mechanized devices is at the mercy of one so armed; for its factories 
and producing centers can be bombed and smashed by the other long 
before it can organize its production on a scale sufficient for defense. 

It is clear as crystal that in these clays of heavy mechanized equip- 
ment peace cannot be won by mere good will or the ardent desire for 
peace. It cannot be won by appeasement. Peace can be won only if 
the peace-loving make themselves secure against attack. ' And tho 
only practical means of doing this under the conditions of modern 
life is through some form of international control to prevent nations 
at will and for their own selfish purposes from building up excessive 
armaments. After these have once been created it is too late for any 
form of restraint to be effective. International control must step in 



166 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COAIMLSSTOXTvR 



before the armament is built. Had this been the case during the past 
10 years Germany and Japan would never have gone to war. The 
achievement of such an objective raises profound and complex prob- 
lems. But these are not insoluble. We must and we will find the 
way to solve them. 

The experience of the last 20 years has burned deep into our souls. 
We know now that no nation can live unto itself alone. The old 
nineteenth century concept of separate, watertight, national sovereign- 
ties, utterly independent each of the other, has broken down under the 
conditions of our twentieth century world. If we are to prevent a repe- 
tition of the present world tragedy, we must learn the way of coopera- 
tion and organized collective effort. There is no other way. 

A civilization based upon nothing but naked force cannot endure. 
Our present world proves that. The Axis nations have shown again 
and again that they care nothing for humanity. They do not believe 
in human brotherhood. They are fighting to establish themselves as 
master races of the world in order to enslave and exploit all other 
peoples. The world they envisage is a world of nationalism, of self- 
seeking isolationism, run riot — every nation pitted against every other 
in a bloody struggle to determine which, by unbridled force, can smash 
and victimize the others. 

Isn't it obvious that no lasting peace and no civilization can possibly 
be built upon such a foundation? That is the way of self-destruction 
and chaos. 

The present struggle is one to determine whether the world of our 
children and our children's children will be built upon naked force or 
human brotherhood. All that America has struggled for during these 
past 150 years, all that humanity has sacrificed and bled for since 
civilization began, is at stake. It is the most momentous issue which 
America has ever faced. 

We back here in America cannot fail those boys, living with death, 
on Corregidor and on our other fronts. Many of them have already 
made the supreme sacrifice for us. And they are calling to us not to 
allow that sacrifice to be in vain. 

Come on, America! Forget your differences and your divisions! 
Get back of the boys at the front and show Germany and Japan what 
a solidly united America can do! Give up your old-time prejudices. 
Make irresistible the movement for a new world — a world in which 
people's standards of living will not be depressed by unconscionable 
trade restrictions — in which international gunmen shall not be allowed 
to loot at will. 

All humanity with hope is listening for America. And there is no 
question as to America's reply. It is the same as that which thrilled 
the world in 1776. I can hear the sound of an oncoming host, 
130,000,000 strong. The cause of right and of justice and of human 
freedom once again marches forward. 



APPENDIX L 

Commencement Address by Hon* Francis B. Sayre, at Bucknell 
University, Lewisburg, Pa., Saturday Afternoon, May 23, 
1942 

THE TASK AHEAD 

I want to speak to you quite simply this morning about the job 
before you in the stirring and critical days that lie ahead. 

We are living in what has been aptly called an age of science. Our 
daily lives arc built upon marvelous scientific discoveries and inven- 
tions. Our progress has been made possible, if not inevitable, by the 
so-called scientific spirit —the objective, fearless, consecrated search 
for truth and reality on the part of scientists which has been carried 
on for centuries. From the t ime when everyone believed the earth was 
flat and that the sun moved in an orbit around the earth, down 
through the days of Copernicus and Gallilco and Newton and Ein- 
* in, the scientific spirit has led men on, objectively seeking what 
was true regardless of where it might lead them and rejecting what 
experience proved to be false, relentlessly and persistently seeking to 
know the realities of the universe as the foundation for future achieve- 
ment and new scientific progress. Power has come through finding 
basic truth and building upon that truth. 

Xo social or economic or political institution can be enduring unless 
it is built on what is true and what is real. Each generation must 
make its own decisions as to what is basically true and what is basicalty 
f;il<e, and upon these decisions will depend the lasting worth or the 
futility of its work. Will your generation, for instance, as we do, 
judge democracy as a true and sound foundation upon which to build 
your political institutions or will you regard democracy as an out- 
lived fallacy that leads to futility and ultimate disaster? 

No human life can be thoroughly happy or satisfying if it is built on 
sham or on untrue assumptions. Every boy and girl here this morn- 
ing will find life a mockery and make of it a miserable failure unless 
he or she finds truth upon which to build. So that although it may 
Bound pretty abstract, in fact it is a vitally intimate and personal 
and profoundly important matter that I want to talk about with you 
this morning. < . 

You are graduating at a time unparalleled in human history. Uia 
faiths, old beliefs, old institutions are under determined fire. The 
fundamentals upon which we built our civilization— the sacrcdncss of 
family life, the sanctity of the pledged word, the inviolability of each 
individual life, many of our anciently accepted moralities— are being 
discarded in important areas of the world as outworn and false. 
Whole nations are losing their faith and wondering which way to 
turn. If ever there was a time when men need to know what is true 
and what is real, it is now. v 

A certain amount of doubt and even destruction is healthy. lou 
can't build a new world without clearing away the false beliefs and 

167 



I 



168 REPORT OF THE PHIUPPINE HIGH COMMISSIOTEiR 

superstitions and hypocrisies of the old. The new world will prove 
only a disillusionment unless you build on foundations of (ruth and 
reality. You must get away from cant and sham and shallow make- 
believe and discover for yourselves what is profoundlv real 
J«? £ ♦u Ve *T S i °i der generation on a day like this to say to you, 
Hi^W 1 /' 01 ? cloistered student days into the hurly- 
burly of life? What of truth and reality have we ourselves discovered? 

ShJ Jlf J£ eCi r S SeCr ?- ts of ex Perience which we can pass onto you 
who will soon be crowding us olf the stage? 

a rishMn ana PP allln g question. And yet, one which I think you have 

OTjS t0 US ' and - a ri # ht > t0 °- to insist upon an answer. 
abb^ateranswer and m ^ lct me humbl y atfccm P fc an 

apparent £^2^ °, ne 1 ° f the P^und realities of life, not perhaps 
SftWsholfl ^ f? nl °? J** ° r t0 mosfc of fchose who stand only upon 

ToKohnnlvfn ? . utfc er mterdependence of human beings, 
coula it bfn?i y '- 1 T S S f 13 U l e mosfc important thing in life. How 
^TolhtJroT'T\ FTOm birth mmsel f has been the end and 
career of nis life ' ±S Sffl^i bis small world. He dreams of his 
not comnr^L fVri f ; SU ? Cient and self-contained. What he does 
3SS3E£St^&ta actuall y P Iu ^ed into the thick of the 
as thouo'h somin?iii ^ < ? areer cannot be fenced off from others, 

*tte?^deS^^ n ^^ Whafc , he makes of himsclf wil1 be 
toward him K L £? n ,?, ther People's actions and relationships 
happy except as hi X hf f eannot be even to him rich and full and 

to relate WBttSSSttSSP taste , the ful1 W of hc must lcam 
self alone The L it o ° thei * P , e0 Pi e - No ™» can live unto him- 
produces upon otl er mL a , n } ans hfe depends upon the effects he 

UP In our f Ct& ^° d -e upon him!^ ° f * ^ ^ dePCndS 
this n sam e C biescaptbT e C ^^ ^ come to realize even more strikingly 
tbat city sh m an so SSffi interde Pendence. Men used to think 
tricts were none nf S unhyg,eruc tenements and red-light dis- 
and the outbreak of en fw* IMiS8 -, ? ut thc Urease of fire hazards 
taught us though tuff and i he s P rpad of social disease have 

of human beings MAI ^SS?^ th , e roali ty of the interdependence 
wages and child labo and "fn^ u f ed to think that less-than-living 
workers were none of teta?^ dl x S f ases on the part of the 
again through hard exnJrL, \ bu finess. Now we have discovered, 
and antisocial lives i ii™ T'. tlle P rico We have to pay, hardened 
lessened SoSf^S^^'^^ 81 uulc st, labor violence, 
torn this bXt^WiSfSSE and , output. You can't get away 

We havebeen^lln^^ 1 ? 6 ^ 6 ^ of human hein S s 
upon forewX^o^?S™^ P l ailBt ^ stem bascd fundamentally 
wages of thf mdTvidnn? ^"^rf 1 ?,^ 11 relentless competition the 
worker's SSflSSSJrtS % SCel ? ed sim P le - ^ hc lcss the 

economists afe'belinS to tSElSt H thc , mul owncr - But now 
the Nation's worfeS to ?i ^ V* a V f wc force down the wages of 

dent 2SSiSJSS2S5S Poverty level or below there will be insuffi- 

keep fhe ^S!lZdu7^Z t0 Tlfro 110 ^ C T SUme ^' S ' g °° ds t0 
we learn the nmfln i 7* » f, g ' through hard experience again 
man behW P M Z *i* ° f the universal interdependence of hu- 
man Demgs. JN o man can live unto himself alone. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSI ONEUt 



169 



If that is true of separate human beings, it is infinitely more true 
of nations, which are simply collections of human beings. No nation 
today can surround itself with a Chinese Wall and live a hermit exist- 
ence. The old conception that each nation is and should be completely 
independent of every other and may freely formulate its own policies 
and take such action as it chooses utterly regardless of every other 
nation — that conception was developed in a day when ocean trans- 
portation was by sailing ship and there were no cables or radios. That 
concept ion is today, under t wentieth-century conditions, obsolete and 
profoundly untrue. Our modern radios and airplanes and swift 
ocean transportations have so closely knit together the peoples of the 
world that life in every country is the direct residtant of life in every 
other. 

There are st ill men living in the ideas of the past who refuse to be- 
lieve that. They would have America in some way live selfishly apart 



backward. We are living in the twentieth century. The experience 
of the past year proves beyond cavil that neither America nor any other 
nation can possibly live unto itself alone. 

An unconscionable tariff wall or an unfair discrimination instituted 
by some government, perhaps on the other side of the world, may cut a 
whole nation off from its accustomed overseas markets and bring to its 
people lengthening bread lines and industrial revolution. A Ger- 
many^ or a Japan's decision to throw every national resource into 
armament building may compel a competitive armament race that will 
6pd in disaster for the innocent as well as for the guilty. America 
today is compelled quite against her will to turn aside from the pursuits 
of peace, to undergo the convulsion and tragedy of war, to send her 
men and ships and planes across the seas — because of what happened 
in the past 10 years in Manchuria, in Ethiopia, in Munich, in Austria, 
in Czechoslovakia, in Poland, in Norway, in China, in Indochina, 
nnd elsewhere in Europe and Asia. Was there ever a more terrible 
object lesson set before our eyes of the utter incongruity of the thesis of 
national isolationism with the reality of the profound interdependence 
of human beings? 

You see what I mean. Human interdependence is one of the basic 
realities of the universe. Many* never come to realize it and many 
ignore it. But nevertheless it is one of the inescapable facts of life; 
and sooner or later, with the inevitability of the movement of a Greek 
tragedy, every policy which ignores it and every institution built upon 
a contrary foundation will crash to pieces in utter ruin. There is one 
basic truth taken out of our own life's experience which we of an older 
generation would like to pass on to you. 

May I mention in briefest terms one or two other such basic truths? 
One is the futility of material force as the source of ultimate power. 
I suppose the most common and prevalent belief among those who have 
not tasted deeply of life's experience is that the source of maximum 
power lies in material force. Compel a man by brute force to work 
your will and you build up power. But what is often forgotten is that 
the forcing of others to act against their will builds up a counterforce 
which eventually explodes. Physical force has its uses; resort to it 
Sometimes becomes necessary as a temporary expedient, as in cases of 
feelf-defense. But in the long view the secret of maximum power lies 

83018 — 43 12 



from all the rest of the world. 




170 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONS 

in the winning of men's wills and desires; and that cannot be done 
through physical force. Once you win over men's wills their physical 
force becomes permanently massed on your side. Do you remember 
in those grim August days of 1914 how the heroic little Belgian Army 
stood squarely athwart the oncoming endless hordes of German gray- 
green troops? Pathetic, it seemed, this chimerical attempt of a tiny 
army to withstand the most magnificent armament the world had ever 
seen. Yet when the peace treaty of 1919 came to be signed, there 
stood Belgium on the winning side, and there lay Germany crushed, in 
spite of, nay, by very reason of, her one-time seemingly invincible 
physical power. Was ever there a more terrible example' of the ulti- 
mate futility of merely physical force? 

Belgium in 1919 was on the winning side because she chose to fight 
for human rights and thereby won humanity to her side. Belgium 
when the present war ends will again be on the winning side. For 
Nazi Germany fights not for humanity, but for the selfish advancement 
of a small and selfish group of Nazi politicians, at whatever cost to 
humanity. That is why Germany never can win allies who are 
stanch and true. The nations who fight genuinely for humanity are 
bound to win in the long last, for humanity cannot tolerate any other 
outcome. 

If you want to build maximum power, create faith in soul-stirring 
lueals. The greatness and power of America were generated by ] 1( >r 

i i l u ^ e *deals °* individual freedom and democracy — a faith so 
vital that Americans were ready to die for them. The only thing that 
can defeat America today is the loss of this vitalizing faith. Once 
western civilization comes to believe that everything in the world is 
aetermined by a mere physical chain of events which can be manipu- 
WW* by man's cunning or might, it has signed its own death warrant. 
Any nte, or any policy, or any institution, or any nation based upon 
neiiel in the ultimate supremacy of material above spiritual force is 

wSa^^Sm t0 TUm because ** flics in the face of ono of lifc ' s P r <>- 

Qtui n the .? earc h f or reality we of the older generation have discovered 
gJii another basic truth. It pertains to the finding of happiness 
wanhtffin°7 and every schoolgirl, cveiy man and every woman! 
DArSm . thc P atl way to happiness. Very curiously, each younci 
w?!nf!T S Wlth unquestioning confidence that he knows the 
t 2'^ - s oufc with ardor to reach the goal— through acquisi- 
thm,^h P f° SSCMI0I l s and th ">ugh self-seeking. Years later men learn 
™ U f te ara and sweat and Wood that these bring not lasting happi- 
hnnninoe ^sdlusionment and frustration— that the pathway to 
mppiness lies in precisely the opposite direction— through ©vine 
c?mes^v£ ^^fiee- Happiness is a by-product that seldom 
tC who C1 ° U i ly S0U S ht " The s "P™mely happy ones are 

crate thot v the ™ scl ^ cs . in some great cause to which they cons* 
l„ m sir lives the David Livingstones renouncing everything to 

hri VLnfno 9 the wilds of Africa > thc WiKrcd Grenfdla sacrificing 
S?^SSf7 ° glVC themsrfv es to a people in dire need, the count! 

her ?°f> struggling perhaps in unromantic and humble 
surroundings against heavy odds to serve and to heal. 

1 o your generation this is a point on which I need not dwell. Your 
country is calling upon you for self-sacrifice in terms such as we older 
generations never knew. You will go forth in the service of your 



REPORT OF THK PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 171 



country with willing spirits and glad hearts. You will experience 
ering such as few generations have boon called upon to bear. 
But ii von accept the suffering in terms of glad service to your coun- 
try, as 1 am sure you will, you will find in life a profound new joy and 
inner happiness, denied to those who have never sulFercd. Disillu- 
sionment and cynicism will be replaced by a new faith and hope 
phich will tinge with inner joy even outwardly bitter experience. 

1 know whereof I speak. 1 have lived with our soldiers on the front 
line at Corrcgidor. I have seen them when all the earth was rocking 
with exploding bombs and shells, standing by their guns and taking 
it with a smile on their faces. 1 have seen them, torn and mutilated, 
being carried in to the operating tables on blood-soaked stretchers, 
still taking it, with a certain pride ami joy that they could have such 
a vital share in tin* service of their country. 

Here is what one young officer wrote to his mother: 

I am proud to be a part of the fight that is being made here; and I would not, 
even if it were possible, leave hen* until it is over ana we have won as we inevitably 
will. 1 have seen some horrible things happen, and have had my share of narrow 
< cai i s, but 1 have also seen some wonderful acts of courage, self-sacrifice, and 
loyalty. At last I have found what 1 have searched for all my life — a cause and 
a job in which 1 can lose myself completely and to which 1 can give every ounce 
of my strength and my mind. And I have mentally and spiritually conquered 
my fear of death * * *. 

Should anvthing happen to me here, it will not be like closing a book in the 
Idle as it would have been had 1 been killed in the first few days of the war. 
F<»r in th ■• la-i '2 months 1 have done a lifetime's living, and have been a part or 
one of the most unselfish, cooperative efforts that has ever been made by any 
group of individuals. 

As each of yon will gradually come to realize, happiness depends 
very little upon the length or brevity of life's span. It is the quality 
of life that counts, and that depends on whether you devote your life 
to the service of self or others. Of all people on earth the wretchedly 
unhappy ones are the greedy and the self-seeking. The radiant ones 
are those who give their all to a cause. 

Here, then, are three profound facts of life which we of an older 
generation have found to he part of the great reality of the universe. 
Yours will he a generation of builders; for the war which is now raging 
around us is n consuming lire which is destroying not only the physical 
monuments and wealth of our civilization but also very many of our 
polit ic; 1 and social institutions, our beliefs and our ideals. You come 
onto the scene amid many blackened ruins to build a new world. 
Upon what foundations are you going to build? If ever there was a 
need of searching for and coming to know reality, so that your archi- 
tecture can be more enduring than that of former builders, it is now. 

How are you going to discover and know reality? That is one of the 
supreme problems of life. There is no easy or simple way. Your 
coming to know what is reality and what is sham must flow out of 
growing experience, wisely interpreted and carefully weighed. 

Yet there is, I think, one very practical and real help to which you 
can turn.. The striking identity between life's basic realities as they 
come to be illumined by long experience and the fundamental teach- 
ings of Jesus Christ is thrillingly suggestive. The reality of the utter 
interdependence of human beings — the almost pathetic dependence 
of one upon the other — is not that the very core of what Christ taught 
of human brotherhood? The futility of material force as the ultimate 



172 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



source of maximum power — is not that the very essence of Christ's 
teaching of the power of love — that love is the single foundation upon 
which a really stable society can be built? That happiness comes not 
through acquisition and self-seeking but through giving and self- 
sacrifice — is not this the substance of Christ's words echoincr down'tho 
ages: "He that findcth his life shall lose it; and he that loscth his 
life for my sake shall find it"? 

That strange figure of nineteen hundred years ago seemed to sum 
up the deep realities of life as no one else has ever done. J lis young 
life was snuffed out centuries ago in a byway of the world, forgotten 
except for Him. Yet His life, the very negation of material '"force 
has upset kingdoms and changed the face of the world as no Other 
before or since. Somehow He understood the source of power, some- 
how He understood life's realities, as no one else. He is often pictured 
as an impractical dreamer, an idealist ignorant of the cold realities 
of life. That is profoundly untrue. He was the most practical realist 
that the world has ever known. Nineteen centuries of human ex- 
perience prove that lives and institutions built on His teaching bear 
infinite fruit and those built on an opposing philosophy prove ulti- 
mately self-defeating and perish. Surely no one need point out 
today that the cause of the present world breakdown and fcragedv w 
failure to build on the fundamentals taught by Christ. & 

If, then, you, future builders, want to learn reality, the most 
practical way I know is to turn back to Christ— not to the distorted 
and often misshapen images men have made of Him, but to the flam 
mg master realist that actually lived and lives, in love with life and 
with humanity. Live with Him and learn of Him. 

lhus you will come to understand life. With understanding will 
come mastery and a sense of joy that no man can take from you. 

iou are graduating from coliege at a time when somber shadows 
overhang the world. But do not let yourselves become dismayed 
iou i are entering upon life's work at a thrilling time. You will bo 
builders and creators of a new world. Joy should be yours I u 
these days of apparent gloom I often think of the words of Fra 
Oiovanm, written in the turbulent days of 1513. May I close with 
nis words, which are worth remembering all through your lives: 

Hpa° ^ ea \r en Can come to us unless our hearts find rest in it today. Take 
£cf« V * ^? peace lies in tho future which is not hidden in this present little 
infant, lake peace! 

inv 'n °° m . 0f tnc wor ld ™ but a shadow. Behind it, yet within our reach i s 
lnere ls radiance and glory in the darkness, could we but see: and to see 
we have only to look * * * ' 
AtvV/ e J S so generous a giver, but we, judging its gifts by their covering, cast them 
»>vay as ugly or heavy or hard. Remove the covering, and you will find beneath 
n a Hying splendor, woven of love, by wisdom, with power. Welcome it, grasp 
trial you touch the angel's hand that brings it to you. Everything we call a 
An i f£ sorrow > or a duty, believe me, that angel's hand is there, the gift is there 
Sri Vv? wond er of an overshadowing Presence. Our joys, too, be not content 
witn them as joys. They, too, conceal diviner gifts. 

in *u 1S so ful1 of meaning and of purpose, so full of beauty — beneath its cover- 
ing—that you will find that earth but cloaks your heaven. Courage, then, to 
claim it. 



APPENDIX M 



Address by the Honorable Francis B. Sayre, United States 
High Commissioner to the Philippine Islands, Before the 
Boston Chamber of Commerce on Thursday, June 25, 1942, 

at 1 O'CLOCK 

I fool honored anil happy to he here today, honored to be the guest 
of this great and influential chamber of commerce, and happy to be 
back again in Boston where I spent many of the best years of my life. 
It is good to look around and see the faces of many old friends, men 
whom I have known and worked with and admired these many years. 
Often lying under the stars at Corregidor my thoughts woidd go back 
to the old days, to Boston and Cambridge and the Cape. What 
millions of miles away they seemed. 

Out in the Far East all through the summer and autumn months of 
1941 we had kept a close watch upon the darkening horizon. One 
could sense the coining storm in the increasingly rigid trade restiic- 
tions which wo wore forced to impose. Practically unrestricted exports 
were moving from the United States into the Philippines; and there 
a growing danger that belligerents would try to drain away the 
Philippine reservoir of goods. To the High Commissioner fell the 
Uwk of restricting the export of war and other materials from the 
Philippines. I T p until the outbreak of the war between Russia and 
Genrany wo had to keep a watchful eye open to prevent exports 
going from the Philippines to Shanghai or Japan, destined for trans- 
hipment across Siberia into Germany. After this gap had been 
closed, our efforts were increasingly directed toward preventing ship- 
ments to Japan, occupied China, Indochina, and Thailand which 
might assist or strengthen Japan in her war effort. 

Jn the summer of 1941 we markedly tightened our control by greatly 
extending the lists of exports from the Philippines for which licenses 
were required so as to include most goods. In addition, licenses were 
required for most financial transactions covering overseas shipments 
except to friendly destinations. Except with reference to such coun- 
tries no payments for exports or imports, no transfer of funds or secu- 
rities abroad, no banking transactions based upon foreign overseas 
Shipments, were permitted without license. By this means wo exer- 
cifled almost unlimited power over exports; and each succeeding week 
under instructions from Washington wo clamped down tighter upon 
commerce with Japan. 

Coupled with the shortage of shipping on all trade routes, the cur- 
tailment of exports of Philippine goods, such as iron ore and copra, to 
Axis countries, of course, worked hardship to Philippine producers 
accustomed to ship to those markets. It meant the sacrifice of indi- 
vidual profit — and in some cases largo profit — for the common good. 

We explained to business and commercial groups, singly and collec- 
tively, why we had to take these measures. I want to pay a tribute 
to those businessmen of Manila. They were game. They coopera- 

173 



174 REPORT OF THE PHIUPPIXE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

ted 100 percent. I even remember speaking to a large public gather- 
ing of them in late September, outlining to them wlmi we W^ re doing 
and planning to do, telling them that we would turn the screws si if] 
tighter, and they would suffer still more— and they actually apl lauded 
me. 

Those American businessmen of Manila have the spirit. When 
someone was in trouble, down they would dig into their trousers' 
pockets and meet the need, almost before the request was made; 
Ihey are generous to a degree. The majority of them are today 
interned at Santo Tomas University in Manila. They deserve our 
unyielding support; and I know that America will send them in o n- 
erous measure the help they need. Let me add that active negotia- 
tions by the Red Cross are now in progress to make possible the send- 
ing of an American relief ship to Manila with food and medicine; and 

nn 1 ' I s P ced y consummation of these nozotiations. 

Un JJecember 1 we received a message from Washington warning 
us of the possibility of attack. That afternoon Admiral Hart, ( Jen- 
cral MacArthur, and I met in my office to confer over the situation. 
Jfiren then the reality of war seemed hard to believe. 

At 4 a m. on the morning of December 8— corresponding to Decem- 
ber 7 on tuc other sidcof the international date line— I was awakened 
kL™ SOUn n, ot °°™ feet running down the corridor leading to m v 
,T°™ n Claude Buss, my executive assistant, burst in and brent ll- 
5SL T m n ? f thc attack u P° n Pcarl Harbor. Jumping into my 
SSS^&S^fj? 1 ? Sla,1 i from thcir bcds a » d immediately wc set to 
Zit,!?^ iad -, t0 be issued > Commonwealth officials notified, 
eon=f«hnl^l 0U1 ' rc f ,dcnce dosed to all except those holding passes 
wSSft g r rdS Slu 7 lm0ncd and P ost «l Mound the residence 
and SKI = ftWese banks. Some of my staff set to work filling 
^JtSSJ^^^^ wc had Purchased the previous spring" 
jSfSSS? f f ll0d l ? procurc food and cans in case of siege 

&SSJ?Jh. r 0, : k 1T ^ aking read y iu our Bplinterproof shelter in 
hefn^l™ 1 r° materials which we had gathered months 

down to rZ C ° f , 1 \ C , ed -, ^ the ond of tha * unforgettable day I went 
the situat?on w^ a ^ rthu ?' 8 ^quarters to confer with him over 
t at had Cn 0f fchc gravity of our position-of the ships 

Fort roil : 1 ? St tha , fc m ? rn ing at Pearl Harbor and of the Firing 
FbaFiS! ZrAi^ a had bCCn l0St that n0011 at Ckrk Fidd and 

a^nstlimo thab fo ' lmvcd we ™ crowded with activity. We worked 
jfJXK' aever knownig when Japanese bombs would wipe us out. 

cause of Vr r«M t^^SP and 4own-those first few nights be- 
cause of air-i aid warnings three and four times a night. 

«r £ %4STO^ gamed almost at the outset complete control of the 
a , r^, fc Uey COld , d bomb Manila afc will ; then- control of the sea 
sui ounding us was almost as complete. Our shipping lines were cut ; 
« «, J l na a< t "V-mail communication ceased; wc were beleaguered 
and cut oft from the outside world except for radio. 

w e louncl that we could always count on thc support and backing of 
the business groups whenever we needed help. They never failed us. 
lliey worked tirelessly on committees and subcommittees which con- 
tinued functioning in spite of air raids and bombings. 

A few days before Christmas I received a radio from the President 
empowering and instructing me to take over valuables, bank seeur- 



RE POUT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 175 

• : currency and gold and, if in my judgment necessary, to destroy 
these to prevent their f m 11 i n«z into Japanese hands. 1 drafted the 
tervices of hank officials and others to help; and during those last few 
days before Manila fell we gathered in millions and millions of dollars 
worth of securities and other valuables. Commonwealth Govern-j 
: in ofiiciuU splendid assistance and cooperation. 

On the morning of December 24 1 received an urgent telephone call 
from General MaoArthur, saying thai the Japanese were closing in 
■round Manila and insisting that President Quezon and myself go to 

orregidor and make it the temporary seat of government. He 
that In- would join us on that island fortress the same evening. 

\W went in sleep that Christmas Eve in cots jammed end to did 
tlonLr the side of Malinta Tunnel, on Corrcgidor, with all our possessions 

suitcases under our cots. Life had been reduced to the elemental. 
There we lived during the next 2 months sharing with our American 
and Filipino troops a memorable life. 

One of the problems 1 wrestled with on Corregidor was what to do 
with the gold and securities which we and our agents had gathered in 

lanila. So far as the paper currency was concerned the problem was 
v. We appointed an official Committee to count and list all the 
• tilted States paper currency. Then, with the help of the the com- 
mittee, we burned it so that corresponding hills could he reissued in 
Washington. My naval aide got the thrill of his life by lighting his 
cigarette with a Si 00 bill. 

Our real problem was the gold. We had over Q% tons of it. For 
vs I wondered whether to try to hide it by hurving it on Corregidor 
and walling it over or to sink it in the harbor. In either case, I feared 
that in the event of capitulation of the fortress the Japanese might 
discover its whereabouts and capture it. And I kept hoping that a 
way might be found to save it. 

The American Navy came to the rescue. Following radio messages 
hanged between Admiral Hart and mvself a submarine stole into 
Corrcgidor Harbor one dark night to deliver ammunition and other 
-applies and wo proceeded to load her bilge with golden ballast. Thus 
weighted she lay on the bottom of the bay all next day; and on the 
following night, with our gold and other securities, she set forth— a 
twentieth century galleon. Not content with merely transporting 
ber cargo to America, she actually torpedoed and sunk two Japanese 
lops on the way, the only submarine in history operating with 
golden ballast. 

To another submarine we owe our own escape from Corregidor. 
As the Japanese, with complete control over the air and the sea 
surrounding us, pushed their attack farther and farther south, as one 
stronghold after another fell before t heir victorious advance it became 
Increasingly evident that our island fortress of Corregidor could 
-not be rescued in time. The glory of Corregidor was that our troops, 
in full realization of that fact, fought on, undaunted and unyielding. 
Morituri tc salutamus. 

It is a privilege, to be one of a company of men like that and I fully 
expected to share their fate. Then suddenly one February day I 
received a message from the President suggesting that if it were pos- 
sible I should return to America to report to him. We decided to 
risk it. I radioed to Admiral Hart asking if a submarine returning to 
its base in the south could stop off Corregidor and pick us up. 



176 

REPORT OF THE PBaMPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

th?r n aid\ a rf P?in i t ^ 1 Dight after darkness had fal] en, General MacAr- 
surfacevessl Rockwell drove us down to the dock where a small 
for at anv - S awa *ting us. We dared not linger over our farewells, 
we shovecl n^° me i nt ^ a P anes ^ shells might come our wav. Hastily 
There we wn * 1 crossed the ba 3 r in the moonlight over to Bataan* 
Then we stea 1 UUt ^ fclie moon iiacl scfc and thc watcr was black - 
°ur plans had ^° t ^ ie e( ^ e °* ^ e °P cn sea > hoping tliat no word of 
peering intentl*^ cc * 'he Japanese. As we reached our rendezvous, 
Perhaps misca * ^ * nky darkness, wondering if our plans had 
shape a blacl m ? g rad ually out of the black watcr loomed and took 
more like a nK TTn > miraculously rising out of the sea. It seemed 
climbed aboar T Utom tlm n a ship of steel. A few minutes later we 
through the s rTif a S ^PP CI 7> dripping deck and let ourselves down 
wa rd part of tl } latc h into the control room and then into the for- 
long journo^ r s hip. The engines started and we commenced our 

Two JSSfcS 6 ^^ 
Australian w ' one morning shortly after dawn, we arrived at an 
?. ut of the hatch 801X16 3,000 mUes south of Corregidor. We climbed 
hght. \y e inki 1 ! 0 ^ 011 ' 0 the deck and saw once again the blessed sun- 
our eyes on th k great gulps of fresh air into our lungs and feasted 
W? seemed vervl'i l line » frin g ed with pine trees and white sand. 

pack here in a * suspect paradise must be. 

^°us automobil i ? nca ' with its soft hfe, its bright lights, its lux- 
til °se boys on On ^ s fan °y f°od and easy tempo, I keep thinking of 
^cricans renl£ rreg i dor and Bataan and our other battle fronts. Do 
We A °o t heprod 11 pr W ^ at the y are g° in g through— for us? And are 

America has n nt backin g them to the utmost of our power? 

Joggle. The fo^ VC1 before faced so gigantic a war, so perilous a 

p We must learn f° S ° f evil arrayed against us are stupendous. To 

-But we have n sacr ihce as we have not begun to vet. 
Sh SlV0 ' ^erion aUS | t0 fi g ht f or wh ioh is more than worth all we have 
an 1 -5 fightino. ^ ls "ghting in defense of her homes and her firesides, 
nn H ^erica i J ! ause shc wa s treacherously and savagely attacked ; 
^ursei Vcs ^ut \v° continue to exist we have no choice but to defend 

trl? %htino. fr! G ai i' e fi ghting also for more transcendent issues. 

-tlitler Hag * x °r a decent world for our children. 

mmff ? liv cinif h t us in tho dark as t0 the kind of world we will 
dof Y 0r Euronn T m l' A Nazi victory will mean economic enslave- 
err^ ° r sueffl r Latin America, for the United States. Nazi 
^g^life^^^ 118 ! a s you % men of business know, literally 

■quisn 7 i lle heavy 6 '* lf 1 vict ? rious ' wil1 build U P and concentrate in Ger- 
hcav- Ua tions fc t m r UStlies nec essary f° r war an -d compel the van- 
in^t i^trv nl° dlScont inue their own munitions, armaments, and 
will ♦ i ln the n£! a i nts ' and to support their diminished populations 
heav • the sc It n Ction of foo dstufTs and raw materials. Germany 
no . 0 - y ln dustrv rj ^ erm an-dictated prices, to feed her armament and 
a £ ai n at Germa n P f. nts >* and shc wil * scl1 to the vanquished nations, 
^ey need and A l : aicta ted prices, such products of heavy industry as 
countries thus n any chooses to let them have. With European 
war suppli es Gorm rrnancDt ^ unable to manufacture armament or 
have them at her Uny like a fat s P idcr at tlie center of her web will 
treaties, to grant merc $y- She will be in a position to dictate trade 
0r withhold vitally needed industrial supplies and 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 177 

ritaily needed markets, to discriminate against those not playing her 
..::.*■] to fat im <»r strangle such European peoples as she pleases. 
- not a pretty picture. 
Once Germany has acquired it stranglehold on Europe, those South 
American count t ies which depend upon European markets for the sale 
: -hrir surplus products will in turn lie at the mercy of Germany. 
, for instance, will Argentina possihly be able to sell her beef and 
at and wool, for which such a post-war Germany would be the 
•utstanding market, except upon the terms dictated by Germany and 
.j.vii the promise to buy needed imports only in German markets? 
Utin America will be compelled to cuter into bilat cralistio trade 
arrangements \\ ith ( ierman-con trolled Europe and to sell their surplus 
products for German-blocked currencies. 

nee this is achieved Germany will be prepared to suck the economic 
Mood out of the United States. * With European markets closed to our 
typhis cotton and wheat and tobacco, except upon German terms, 
►pen at all, with Latin American as well as European countries 
eomp« 11 (1 to buy their industrial products in Germany rather than in 
the Unit <l States, our own people must face increasing and staggering 
.r.wnploy nient , lengthening bread lines, idle mills, and ruined busi- 
nesses. The world of free initiative in business and of individual 
effort in trade will be gone. Rigid and one-sided German trade 
arrangements, forced upon unwilling victims, will kill American free 
• ntcrprise and free exchange. 

If Hitler wins the war we know exactly what to expect. The stand- 
ards of living of every civilized people will be depressed in the effort to 
ate Germany's. The life of the world will be gripped in a German 
rise. Every country except Germany will face business strangulation 
and industrial ruin. All humanity will bleed. 

And what if the AJlied Nations win? Listen to the significant 
words of the Atlantic Charter, setting forth in unmistakable terms the 
economic objective for which we are fighting: '-The enjoyment by all 
states, great or small, victor or vanquished, of access, on equal tel ™^ 
to the trade and to the raw materials of the world which are needed 
for their economic prosperity." Not the exaltation of the special 
interests of the United States or of England or of other victor nations, 
but the furtherance of the rights of all humanity. For unless after 
this war all nations, victor and vanquished, great and small, black ana 
white and yellow, are allowed access upon equal terms to necessary 
raw materials and to equally necessary foreign markets, there can be 
no lasting peace — there can be only bitter economic rivalry ana 
1 niggle which, as surely as the rising of the sun, will lead to World 
War III and disaster for all. 

You see, then, how profound the economic issue for which we are 
fighting. It is the choice between a world of savage repression where 
the trade and industiy of every country is crippled and restricted in 
the interest of cruel and ruthless gangsters who care nothing for 
humanity, or on the other hand a world of free private enterprise 
built upon individual initiative and ingenuity, where business ana 
commercial life depend, not upon political intrigue or dictation but 
upon considerations of cost and quality of product, where peoples 
are free to elevate their standards of living by increased sales of 
surpluses abroad and purchases in the cheapest international markets. 



178 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



It is the issue between slavery or freedom — not only for Americans 
but for the peoples of the world. 

The political issues of the war are even more profound. If the 
Nazis win there will be no room left in the world for the American 
way of life. The Nazi philosophy is the very antithesis of the 
American faith. 

The American faith is built upon human freedom. The Nazi faith 
denies the existence of fundamental human rights and strangles 
private initiative. The American faith is built upon democracy. 
The Nazi believes in ruthless dictatorship and in the essential inferiority 
of all races to his own. The American faith is built upon a rule of 
law and justice — right above might. The Nazi scorns everything 
except ruthless physical force. The American faith is founded 
essentially upon Christian ethics — tolerance, self-sacrifice, human 
brotherhood. These the Nazis are out to destroy as qualities which 
tend to weaken the race. 

Shall the future world go back to savagery or shall humanity con- 
tinue to advance? This is the real issue essentially underlying the 
present struggle; and with an issue as profound as that America 
cannot and will not hesitate. All that America has stood for in the 
past, all that we hope for for our children and our children's children! 
is at stake. There can be no room for division of opinion or divided 
counsels at a moment like this. To America in the service of humanity 
we are ready to give all that we have and all that we are. For such 

cause as outs America will fight to the last man ; and America will win. 



APPENDIX N 

i.v m ('. (). M \kkon. I x ited States Army, Relating 
\j Ti:i:r \ 1: \ n« >n> 1 ok Civilian Defense in British Malaya 
aNI) the Nktiii;ki,\m)s Kast Indies 

September 18, 1941. 

Memorandum to the High Commissioner: 

Three reports of a comparative and factual survey made between 
Vptember 7 17, 1041, during a flying trip, are submitted. Much 
tail was not obtained but each report accurately presents a view of 
< forest" uiiobsc-ured by the "trees." In them are indicated^ how- 
ilrtails which might prove useful if adopted by the Civilian 
: . < v Administration within the limits of its present organi- 
,j id basis. t f 

Three reports, instead of one, are submitted in order to permit oi 
more accurate comparison of the salient differences found. The 
Uport of the Malaya Emergency Measure (the second report en- 
closed) is intended to afford a ready comparison of its < Passive 
<e Services" with the Civilian Emergency Administration .or* the 
* r ilippine Islands; the Report on Emergency Measures in the Nether- 
Kast Indies (the third report enclosed) similarly is intended to 
mpare its " St a t emobilization" with the Civilian Emergency Aci- 
ir/mtration; while a combined comparison of the salient character- 
istics of the throe organizations, in general form, is intended to be 
- ..ven by the Report of Inspection of Malaya and Netherlands East 
jrs Emergency Measures (the first report enclosed). 

"C. Q. Marron. 

September 18, 1941. 

port of Inspection of Malaya and Netherlands East Indies 

Emergency Measures 

As Batavia, Singapore, and Manila are approximately the same 
oopulation, and have many other physical characteristics in common, 
„ch as clusters of lightly constructed grass or frame homes, con- 
", os ted districts, the lack of elevation (preventing digging), mixed 
lCC s the center of the governmental departments, the adjacency to 
an important harbor; there are many factors present which invite a 
>rn parative study. Any such comparison, however, to be accurate 
must be restricted solely to the aspect considered. This must be 
done or futility would result; for behind the physical characteristics 
are the political, social, economic, racial, and military factors wlncn 
arc the truly controlling elements. . 

It is remarkable how the titles of the three wartime organizations 
identify the salient differences of concept with which the self-same 
nroblem was approached by three distinct nationalities: "State- 
mobilization' ' in the Netherlands East Indies; "Passive Defense 



179 



180 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIOXEiR 

Services" in Malaya; "Civilian Emergency Administration" in the 
Philippine Islands. 

The "StatemobUization" rec o?nizes the existence of the total war 
with the complete disruption of what previously might have been 
considered safely outside the range and destruction of war. It 
ffif , War t ? da T is nofc onlv a question of a struggle between 

foroeTl^f f force t s - land ' sea air-but that all social and economic 
affiXSPK ™" tjeir former limited military aspects, arc now falallv 
on£ r « ffe Z f S • W,g S t : 11 ^cognizes that war today is a war not 
a"r borne trnol e S ttU ranks ' bufc tbafc . fh,e to bombers and 
SstS gas ; the entil 'e civilian population must be ready 

825S£ 1h t8S3 th ?, fuU shock - of war = iusfc as mi,ch as «SK 

ito and w e a11 organizations previously considered civil- 

Sncen o nf ol War S fui ?' must be revamped on a war basis. The 
SE?%h££iEE absolute kteajation of all civili:.,, hmc! 

Food and IiJ&JSJS 5, J h °x natl0n and a11 its resources are in arms. 
Estate Tmuafcfffe ° f w ¥& ver natur e, including all resources of 
imposs ble thtn tVfn t0 rCpel tb ° enemv > or - in fcbe event that proves 
en^^%* w «!S f m ™, t ^ destroyed to prevent the 
with thoso tw« • ■ S^temobihzation" has been organized 

utmost ^Sonerntinn , m Affi rmative help to the military by 

SSSSm ?Tto tSt^$t mn ? m ' ! )hysical ' ^tangible, or human; 
tactics thufVw; • , milltarv ' b y destruction— "scorched earth" 
ffl&vffi the enemy of material or incentive. 

their conc^pT as doX^/r 8 ' °J HS* 1 * do not £° s ° * » 
forces nrr. lL i i • Netherlands East Indies. The militarv 

^mSt^S^^Si T ° ] V f are maTle suK 

is attempted Tn&£13& ^ d °- S ? Wrdnutfaon and cooperation 
of Integra ion ^"SftSS ° a f istance > however, falls far short 
of the muitarv and oLZn P ° nd - nt ^ P ° n Personalities of the leaders 

The d C ^e ils^^ iT^ ni,aiil0nS ftS - 0 , fche SUCCess achieved, 
sonnel Thr. -JSE «• U> °1 couvsc > vary with each change in per- 
bv ?he nersonni/ nf 1VCS S ° Ught , wiU likcwisc ^ differently interpreted 
^^SSSi^ff^^ fl Basical1 ^ the eniphasTs 

civilians and their hf^ Q fT ! 7 i' rom / bo H 1Cr ° r concorn with the 
from the attention m f tcr ? sts - ^eluding (so far as can be divorced 
caused by wa?s effort Lft^,^ casualties and disruption 
mediate Lmcction with tl tbos « P e ° plc & d thin S s nofc of direct im- 
tbat the TmedZZsmtt U»*4* W A appears to bc a be "ef 

defeating th? enemy ?hn t ff H W ° f a11 ?° nc( ? rn exce Pt that of 
that an°air rSl Ts y comini £™ 7 ^ P ° Pl J aCC ^ S Waraed bv **» 
care of themselves So % l lTi h T °? th< ? ^ans must take 
its passive nature h* AiSl f tbe plan for civilians is concerned, 

their extensive Medirnl A^^" ^ ? are ?, f theU * casua lties through 
continue Service; they must keep order and 

prgamzatio^^th^Sfflr^^i t J 0ir W** Permanent 
be nntorl , y must kc cp down fires at all cost It should 

^struct! ^LT'rT 13 thcrc Seated any consideration o he 
thfvS! (Potential) power of the civilians. Full realisation in 

S^l^SS^Sf 9" necd for utmost Preparation from the first 
mstant a bomb attack occurs, is everywhere evidenced The "man 

d hS in/- rCCOgniZCS tbat enemies 4 the air insS'tly produce 
their maxmium havoc upon civilians, and therefore that preparat ons 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMI&SJOXEiR 181 



lo be effective must be executed prior to hostilities to such a high 
degree that a pi nk load of disruption can be immediately withstood. 
So far as the " Passive Defense Services" have missions assigned 
them they are prepared to execute them without delay. Their 
organizations arc complete anil trained. But the "Passive Defense 
Services" arc only one step closer to the concept of total war than 
is the Civilian Kmcrgency Administration; and that step is made 
- .is>il»le by its use of liaison ollieers. Integration, however, is neither 
sought nor achieved. 

The "Civilian Kmergency Administration" of the Philippine Is- 
lands, when compared with the "state mobilization" and the "Passive 
qsc Si rvicos," discloses that it is the furthest removed of the 
uree from the total war concept The National Emergency Com- 
mission is charged, in the Civilian Emergency Administration, with 
the formula t ion and execution of policies and plans "for the protection 
£nd welfare of tin* civil population in extraordinary and emergency 
conditions." In general ell'ect, the Civilian Emergency Administra- 
tion organization is mainly concerned, in comparison with the other 
two, with enormously expanded peacetime emergency measures. Of 
course, its air-warning service and its emphasis on protective measures 
from bombers are additional measures not used in peacetime emer- 
gencies; but a fair generalization, nonetheless, is that the Civilian 
Emergency Administration is primarily a supersized peacetime emer- 
gency organization. 

So far as it concerns the main reason for having to prepare emergency 
measures at all (total war) the Civilian Emergency Administration 
organization gives lip-service only. It foresees huge disaster and 
disruption, but moves to meet the kind nature causes, not man- 
raiised. 'Fhe difference in objectives is fundamental, although both 
have many common traits. Disaster caused by nature can rarely 
be prevented; only after the happening do emergency measures 
normally spring into action; furthermore, such disasters rarely repeat, 
certainly not with the continued hammering of bombers. Man's 
greatest disaster is total war; but since it is man-made it also is man- 
eont rolled. Since, it is man-controlled, other men can foresee its 
directions and move to counteract or reduce the force of the disruption 
b fore it strikes any given civilian community. It is after the dis- 
;uption occurs that the peacetime type of emergency measures most 
closely blend with total war emergency measures. During this period, 
for all practical purposes, the two are identical. Also there appears 
.1 third phase of total war emergency measures, which may come 
either after or before the period wherein the two types of measures 
merge. The phase is the "scorched earth" program in action; it is 
the civilian's moment for active participation, as an effective, in the 
total war. By the destruction of all resources of military value to 
Hie invader, the enemy's future fighting strength is proportionately 
reduced. By the known, planned destruction also of resources, such 
as oil wells, which have both great military and commercial value, 
fin incentive is taken from the enemy's attack. "Spoils of war" for 
nations still rank as fundamental causes of war. 

Four main symptoms of adequate total war emergency preparations 
appear: First, thorough integration of the military and the civilian 
forces and resources; second, limitation of disaster to restricted con- 
fines as possible; third, automatic relief for victims, and fourth, the 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

thaf 1 ti le( ^ ^^h" tactics. If these conclusions are accurate, it seems 
I A tlle Civilian Emergency Administration of the Philippines is 
rim g otl1 in integration with the military and "scorched earth" 
Preparation. 

theo must conform to reality: No matter how attractive or 

be re 1 1 y ^ ogica ^ a P" an may a PP oar , it is worthless unless it can 
tion ° t0 e ^ oct i vc execution in accordance with the actual situa- 
thc ^ res ? ntc d. All three systems have sufficiently sensible plans for 
take arning °{ Aw civilians of an air raid; likewise all three plan to 
v entio are °/ civ ^ ian casualties. Plans also are present for fibre pre- 
feedum tl c . 0I } t ™ 1 > for maintaining order during the emergency, and 
planne 1 f i Clvilians * Somc de S*ree of evacuation is considered and 
been ,*l ? r ?y a11 - Tii e various agencies to effectuate these ends have 

coml°n! tl i n ' however, in each place varies greatly within each of the 
East In i- s Jllst tabulatcd .- The food situation in the Netherlands 
distrihnt; '* country is self-sufficient in food, is merely one of 

Islands TtK - 1 stora P c centers. In Singapore, like the Philippine 
tities n« , Z°\ 1S a nee " for outsi(lc stocks to be stored in great Ouan- 
forcinff »i, ? r of the lattor are self-sufficient. Yet Singapore is not 
f oocl sum^?" i a . short -crop food program. The Philippine Islands 
accumuln/ i P ls alu ' ad of t,ie Singapore plan in that respect. In 
Singapore ores ' bowever, it is believed to be less effective than in 

Ittdie^aSw f^Ff 0 * has been notcd between the Netl errands East 
Sin gaporp T u ■ • P n antl fiXccution as against the Malaya plan, 
selves ai d i f consider air-raid shelters death traps in Iheni- 
m °squitoPs ?pi a ", calth m enace as a potential breeding place for 
splintcrnmAr e 7 /"WW believe that even if sufficient quantities of 

bility tl in? r ° OU e erectcd to 1,ousc a11 th e people— an impossi- 

tropical wo-uk^ and corruption (due to people jammed together in 
strain on tl WotUd cause untold sickness, and be an unbearable 
encouraged 5« 5 commimit y- Bla st walls, however, are very much 
blocks 3 fLt\i 1U ? apore - The y a,e solidly built of brick or concrete 
al °ng the stL I to 10 feet hi - h ' aml ate fably well distributed 

ot ber hand I n V • ? onts of thc more im portant buildings. On the 
Proofs vpi4 , . av ; ia bas few blast walls but has numerous splinter- 
cit y block ft M l y dlstri,n, ted. Some of them run along an entire 
Present- Th iV* are sm aller and dispersed. Two main types arc 
having "had n ° V mt IS ' thc earth fillin S on top and sides, after 
ls > open-to' a com P le tc wooden frame first built; the newer type* that 
? OI *e cases construction, with thc "trench" made of bamboo, and, in 
fa addition to m W thatch roof (meant to keep off the elements only) 
by public funrl ff 0 so " called tatsiiph shelters, which are all constructed 
Proofs, some nf' " e are many homes having more elaborate splinter- 
ing bombm^^f V ? ry Kood ^inforced concrete construction, approach- 

Manila Rnt Sa - fety - 
confronted wJfv Vla,J an(1 Singapore, being all at near-water level, are 
of spluUernrn f a PP roxun ately the same problem in the "trenching" 
appear plausiW con A struction - Thc arguments given by the British 



appear plausiM con A structlon - ine arguments given by the British 
however is' tl i much stroller one, from a utility point of view, 
involved— bal ? ol(1 -oloodcd consideration of the law of averages 
recognize thl fi? C \ ng lifo a S aillst property. All three organizations 
t> w nre hazard from incendiary bombs as the most dreadful 



REPORT OF THK PITILiIPPIXE HIGH COMMISSIONER 183 

zanl. Incendiary bombs, it. is recognized, can be effectively 
-otliered, or at least kept within restricted confines, if immediately 
Sought. To accomplish this end, constant watchers and fire fighters 
ist be immediat ely ready. The question then to be answered is, 
uld such lire lighting and guarding be better accomplished by 
families dispersed in their homes; or by the same families huddled in 
* splinterproof? It may he that watchers in their homes, with no 
place to seek safety, will more readily discover and light such fires. 
Also, in order to complete the arguments against splinterproofs, dis- 
persion itself saves lives and although several homes may be destroyed, 
oot so great a tot al loss of life would come as when one splinterproof 
became a "hit." On the other side of the controversy should be 
considered, however, mathematical probability of being killed by a 
s^OO-pound high-explosive bomb. Consider blast effect first: Anyone 
itlnn a 20-foot radius of the center of impact of the shell will be 
lh-d: tin- danger of being killed from blast thereafter directly de- 
creases with the distance taken; at 100 feet it is 50-50; at 200 feet it 
is practically nil. If the shell is shrapnel, then the danger zone is 
fairly evenly distributed over the entire circle whose radius is 350 
t from t he center of impact. It has also been estimated that about 
2 out of every LOO casualties are from direct hits; that leaves about 
98 percent of all losses due to blast and splinters. The splinter- 
proofs have been advocated only as blast and splinter protection. It 
ten becomes, it appears, an economic problem for each individual to 
ride: Balance his budget against the additional safety factor given 
bis family. 

To the Government , however, the problem is burger and more com- 
plcx. Manila cannot afford to build adequate splinterproofs for ail. 
Also, as in Singapore, the danger of a breeding place for mosquitoes 
present. The other arguments also apply as in Singapore, Singa- 
pore has answered its problem to some extent In' building disper- 
ion camps; Manila has likewise made a partial solution by planning 
aeuation. The direct responsibility for protecting the people 
belongs to the Government, but funds in the Philippines are very hard 
to obtain, whereas in Singapore the director can get anything: 
"When 1 want a blast wall built anywhere, I tell the" public-works 
department to build it, and the government furnishes all materials 
,id costs." The Netherland East Indies, despite their three-way 
collection system (detailed under the Netherland East Indies dcscrip- 
tion) also has sufficient funds, particularly due to the state-military 
integration. The Philippines' decision is for the National Emergency 
( Commission to execute. The decision, however, is for the Government 
to make. 

Singapore ranks first so far as training is concerned, particularly 
OS to black-outs. A very exhaustive detailed consideration has been 
^iven to training, and to testing its results. An umpire system has 
been perfected and all units are active-trained units, not empty titles 
and numbers (as is feared are many in the Civilian Emergency Ad- 
ministration). (Of course, both compulsion and pay are behind both 
the Singapore and Batavia systems, and those factors in themselves 
permit a closer approach to necessary training and discipline.) In- 
cidents are written up previously to black-outs; umpires are stationed 
in the key positions and their various units are tested on an actual 
problem basis during black-outs. This testing has been done to all 



184 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSI O^NTEiR 



units. Both Singapore and Batavia systems have planned for the use 
of their public-works departments in repairing mains and other similar 
utilities; commercial concerns of major importance are required to 
maintain their services. Batavia's system of demolition and destruc- 
tion is very complete. All over the Netherland East Indies arc trained 
■wreckers — men trained especially in destroying anything useful to the 
enemy. One of the administrators, an Army officer, is charged 
directly with that responsibility. Oil wells are so very important in 
the rsetherland East Indies that their destruction is to be done by 
another Army officer, who is oil administrator. Preventive measures 
in respect to oil have been taken to guard fields against parachutists 
to guard the refineries against fire by circling them with brick walls' 
Finally, if prevention fails, complete destruction is arranged, and can 
instant y be accomplished. Black-outs in the Netherland East 
Indies last 3 consecutive days; in Singapore, 2 consecutive days. 
; A sulhcient account of the three svstcms has been given, if studied 
ffi conjunction with the separate reports submitted as to the Nether- 
SJ:™ W and the Malaya organization, to afford a factual 
DacKgrouna of the problems presented and their practical solution 
™* "PP cars self-evident that planning must be done on a 

Sr!5 ™n h T*\ V nlGSS P re P arcd f °r the worst contingency sur- 
Ef • n UUerly dcm °™^e People lulled previously into a mistaken 

advanco fW r SGCUrity - .» Snould bc mu <* bcttcl " to ^ them S 
tnZVln „ i n ° P rc P a , ra tions for their safety are made than to have 
later to acknowledge their trust was misplaced. ° 
^aZ ;■ i a PP cars that within the limits of the political structure 
mal P T;hn 1 t aCCOmplishment ' integration with tl/military m st be 
SSfi a ■ a ? ncar 118 Possible an approach to total war prenara 

co^nnfS Pn ° r t0 itS disrUpthlg f °^ C bcing Visited on th^cTvU 

cerned rd iV S liTi a u the P ivuia » Emergency Administration is con- 
™IaI - J? 10 ^ be revitalized in conformance with the decision, 
S b 0n t, fi ^ two points; and by all means have training su per! 
vised by qualified experts and checked by umpires. h P . 



September 18, 1941. 
Report op the Malaya Emergency Measures 

energS g 7n?tLuvlr S ™ have onl J gently become 

of coord; i y fche efforts were disjointed and listless. Failure 

execution Latelv fc m httle P ro S r 1 css i ve P ani » ng ^d less effective 
<rcatlv 'mnJ^A^ howe ver, not only has the tempo in Singapore 

C 22*!? B ^ ti3h Malaya , is a L S ° *<*><MP TSe 
onlv one of *h~ Zl defenso - The Singapore sector, however, which is 
report Thl sectors organized, will alone be discussed in thS 
All are sim Li ■ * two headquarters are at Penang and Malacca. 
side?ed of I ' n ^rg^ization (but the one at Malacca is not con! 

aps mssssA. Tbe heart of aU passive de " 

llie Governor of Malaya is the nominal head of the passive defense 
measures; his powers have been delegated to the Colonial Secretary, 



REPORT OF THE PHlIilPPIXE HIGH COMMISSIONER 185 

who, in turn, outlines policies and resolves all conflicts, but entrusts 
the actual detail work and all except the major problems to the judg- 
ment of the "Director of Passive Defense." The regulations pre- 
scribing the present organization was sinned by the Governor February 
1941. In those regulations it was suited that the "passive, defense 
! irvices may include any of the following services: A corps of air-raid 
wardens; a medical auxiliary service; an auxiliary fire service." 

Although tln^ Passive Defense Services were thereby broken into 
three main divisions, no real clue to the set-up is given by them as in 
reality they are very elastic. A functional approach, rather than 
terminology studw therefore is necessary. 

To begin with, the Colonial Secretary and the "Director of Passive 
Defense''' art* roughly the equivalent of the National Emergency 
Commission of the Civilian Emergency Administration. To the 
Director (unlike the National Emergency Commission) are assigned 
liaison ofiiccrs from all the armed forces: Army, Air, and Navy. 
Through the use of these liaison officers, coordination with the armed 
forces has been achieved. The "Director of Passive Defense • in 
turn has a divisional air-raid warden (a civilian who has the rank 
status of a major) on duty as liaison officer with the Army Air Warning 
Service. Under the "Director of Passive Defense" is a chief air-raid 
warden, who is his principal assistant. These two, together with 
department heads (who roughly compare with our administrators) 
together form a "Directorate." The ^Directorate" therefore could 
be considered as the National Emergency Commission plus its 
administrators (the Governor, acting through the Colonial Secretary, 
resembling the ultimate power of the Commonwealth President;. 
The Director has his office divided into five sections; each s ^ 101 ^ 
has a suitable staff. The sections are termed: Director's Orlicc; 
Stores; Finance; Transport; Air Raid Precautions; and Disposal of 
the Dead. Their titles are self-explanatory. The departments have 
been divided into separate functional units: Warning Signals; Report 
Centers; Air Raid Wardens; Casualty Service; Fire Service; Lighting 
Control; Immediate Action Squads; Control of Civil Population; 
Special Information Bureau; and "departments with self-contained 
schemes": Thev are Singapore Harbor Board, F. M. S. Railways, 
Civil Air Port, Straits Trading Co., and Asiatic Petroleum Co. w 

The title "Director" itself might better have been "coordinator, 
for his power to order is so restricted that he must resort to consulta- 
tion and coordination in major instances. These obstacles to immedi- 
ate direct control bv the Director arc due primarily to the fact tliax 
all the major heads of departments in the Passive Defense scheme are 
heads of corresponding permanent agencies. Their Passive Deiense 
work is in addition to their normal duties, and they have not sur- 
rendered their normal peacetime control over their respective de- 
partments. t , 
At this point it is important to note that the functions penormea 
by the Passive Defense Directorate do not dovetail with the Civilian 
Emergency Administration organization; and neither affords a m ™\ n <* 
basis for either a true contrast or comparison with the Civilian 
Emergency Administration. It is possible, however, by avoiding 
technical distinctions of form and concentrating on substance, to 
gather an accurate idea of the major differences. The less paint ui 

83018 — 43 13 



186 REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

mcnrfiVflPP^w t0 gi - Ve a brief statement as to each separate depart- 
to rclat?vJ ?sS? f f unctl0 »s, as initially tabulated, and without regard 
^ordanlnZri' tan v C - L^ e Ornate purpose being, of course, to 
gene^ AdmS5S^ g baS ' S COm P aiiso " ^Civilian EnW 

and SotISSI^C 5 ^ sir ? ns arc sct U P afc over a r,xt> d P° ints 
wardens e-iv P in i - ^ i c , pollcc - In addition the police and air-raid 
Harbor Board J supplementary warnings. The Singapore 

sirens. Inform,. L , n Squired to install and operate two fixed 

by Military hS r °gar d mg impending air attacks will be conveyed 
The latter ir^nT la -u? rs , to tbe Director, Passive Defense, Singapore, 
essential Service* i laying tbe warning to the public and 
organi za ti on nfy( f n 4, • 1 /ranches of the Air Raid Precautions 
organized teicnlmn. ! s , e Director has established a very well- 
ancl intends that T K°^ tro1 room > with di,ccfc wires to all ke vmen, 
Air Paid Precaution, f hl ? ^ headquarters. It is therefore (he 
l n respect to siron^ ; u dquarfcers - A Precaution worthy of mention 
»or u se in the event «? two gasoline-engine sirens are available 

Report centers : -_. p power £ oes dead for any reason. 
geogra pllic districts i P f 0rt W 5 ^ are established at each of the 7 
f a rl P °c es of Passive TW whlch Sin g a Pore has been divided for all 
>ary Servi ce install^ n SG organization (except the Medical Auxil- 
stat.oned at the a r R?f wiU be undcr a P officer in charge 
tcLI d . 1Vls ional offir^l • cautions headquarters. Likewise there 
3 c f ttve office af tE •? ch . argc ; Eacb wil1 bc in the same 

Eaeh b r c Usod also win™™ 1 Wftr4ett ; The 8tttff of former 
^iT^^Srtrf^^fWWi by thc divi sional warden, 
into'? Cl ? rks ; 12 mo «f 08 a t0 - tal of 34 P^sons: 6 telephone opera- 
eha°, g 3 e *b Of aSSSBg ThCSC W arC f«SS 

°f the 1„ cacb report T? hci ' C 1S ' however, bllt 1 officer in 

i°to Sc l ? catl ou of K L • cr ;., For , ac ? u !' atc and ra P id description 
•MraES WAS 170 v^f? . CaCh ° f , thC , 7 d x isfcr i C . ts , is subdivided 
th o scinn Ubor « , d on «11 J C ' S along a fS? s cdge) ' whlch ft re consecu- 
readiS®^ in RivinJ fl naps uscd - A11 rc P° rts of "incidents" use 
c an fif ° fl the n Vn 1 ° c , atlon ; , Bv m erely stating the district nnd 
*ion of dtto? mb ? r of thc sauare ' thc "incident's" location 

naM^pniaSon^ 111 ^ To fm ,I,er facilitate the rapid S° 
Whi «li aL° f ad report" 31 ^ ^ bCCn isSUt " L WSB» 
i ^4ffi Cars to be ti S e n, dcvclopod a nerve ccn ^r for control, 
de Putv*T War de ns Jj£ Penary object of report centers. 
A >' RaiJ'^^s, volnn hcrC 1S .° nc TS* War TO ful1 time, and three 
Chie f Wali l roc «tot 2 i ^' Wh0 Wdl have llu ' ir stations at the 
Wa *lens ? 0, V Each S di 1 ' eadf l uarfccr S 1 - A staff of 42 is furnished l e 

I lOUsl v st?/ 1 , also 6 staff T 10 ! 1 war ? cn 13 assi <? n ? d 3 de P ufc y divisional 
r ad ablc t ' ted ' the rosn lr nrd r 1S ' Hf «*r 2 clerk-typists'. As pro- 
a mon K tll to yardens Sp ^ tlve divisional report center clerical force is 
anothV n c 7 divi s !, no ^i ere arc 32 group wardens unequally divided 

E ard ei ls * ] de PenduS nL Ma ?, imum ' V n - 1 diyisidn—minmium, l i n 
Each o.l ba s assi , "Pon the population. Each of thosn 



v "^> ix » ociivua biLuiition arises, 
remises and the establishment and 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



187 



sufficiency of (irc^ safeguards, including checking the qualifications of 
fire guards. Business houses are compelled to have fire guards; it is 
compulsory for their male employees between IS and 55 years of age? 
to take tours of duty, without additional compensation, in aggregates 
of not more than 24 hours per month. 

Compulsory lire precautions, such as sand boxes, shovels, axes, 
snuffer shields, etc., must be installed in business houses and important 
buildings (whose names are published in the Gazette and within 14 
days) and fire guards must he provided. The judge of their suffi- 
ciency is the Air Raid Precaution chief warden, who has delegated 
the inspect ion to divisional wardens. The law is binding on o\vner r 
agent, occupant or renter — so the enforcement is certain. Fire pre- 
cautions are demanded proportionately to reasonable safety limits- 
and not automatically nor arbitrarily applied. A particular duty of. 
the Air Raid Precaution wardens is to evacuate everyone within a 
radius of 100 yards, at least, of a bomb; then immediately contact a 
bomb-disposal officer; barricade bomb craters; block streets in danger 
area; detour all traffic so as not to vibrate area. Bomb-disposal 
officers head special volunteer-corps units formed into bomb-removal 
squads; squads first receive special training and function under the- 
guidance of military authorities. Air Kaid Precaution wardens do 
not participate in this work other than by assisting police traffic? 
control and passive protective measures of the general scope just- 
stated. Bomb-removal squads, when displaying their special sign 
on their truck, are carrying an unexploded bomb. The wardens 
therefore give them right-of-way through traffic, and against traffic 
lights. Air Kaid Precaution wardens are required to report accurately 
and periodically through their ports to division headquarters, thence 
to Air Kaid Precaution headquarters, all information concerning 
unexploded bombs within their areas. This information will bo then 
transmitted to the Army. The Army authorities (bomb-disposal 
units) will be responsible in disposing of bombs on all civil and public? 

Eroperties. When reports are received as to unexploded bombs, the 
omb-disposal officer in charge will classify them and determine the; 
priority of removal. A fully detailed system of classification has 
been worked out. Another innovation in personnel related to the 
Air Raid Precaution wardens in their functioning is the detail with 
each warden of one "incident" officer. This officer goes immediately^ 
to the fire or other disaster, and places himself in the most prominent- 
position available. He is the coordinator of all work, and is to report 
back to next higher headquarters when all services are finished. His 
duty day is 8 hours, and at the end of that period he will be relieved 
by the "incident" officer from another post, who has not yet been 
called out for active field work during that day. While on the ground 
of disaster the "incident" officer will carefully log everything that 
has taken place, including details of names, damages, and casualties. 
He is supplied, for identification purposes, with a huge flag by day and? 
a hurricane lamp by night. He must bo reasonably intelligent. 
Three runners are detailed with him. A basic distinction from W& 
Civilian Emergency Administration organization is that the Air 
Warning Service in'Malaya has been completely militarized and does^ 
not use civilians. 

It may also be here noted that the immediate action squads perform 
many duties which, under the Civilian Emergency Administrations 



188 REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

A^ntft? ai ' e dir ectly V nde , r Civilian Emergency Administration 
C l£ « !cautlon Service, but should not be confused with the 
eenSJf ffiw&Sf** ^tmnsta-ation Air Raid Wardens Service. In 
" 1UUCS P crf °™od by the Malaya Air Raid Precaution 
SSSSL^^-J^^ 001 ^ to thc CiviIian Emergency Ad- 
Sncv Adm?ni;i r Wardens Service; whereas the Civilian E-nor- 
mTnv of S n V ?n A " R a»d Precaution Service includes not only 
those of scvo,T,\? S ° f , the Mala * a Air Raid Wardens, but alsj 
t^inoLv L h °-i de ? a rtmenls. It is unfortunate that the 
caXcJsfy na XJift* ¥ functions, but the difference 

the reoSLfi P • clearly kept in mind. To sum up, in general 

prLSd bv th oT^ CablC t0 thc Cor P s of Ail> Kaid Wanfens, as 
presc iioed by the Governor, may prove helpful: 

control o ^htinl n C °° rpS ° f Air Kaid Wardens shall include the 
in ^S^^LZgSL 1 ^ hx f*b* °* ™ sd * ™ a »y vehicle 
warning to .the i ^ madc for that P^ 086 . thc giving of 

and asfistaneo 1 1 f aCtUal or apprehended attack by an enemy 
area S C1 W SrfESSPW ? crson * or Protecting property in any" 
orderSu? tfewluth^ and any ° ther duUcs m ^ b * 

detliied fet? S^^A* the air raid wardcns m " st bave a 
they must know fi ■ • inh abitants and houses in their areas- 
yards ec) in L are? nnC !F al fire b^rds (gasoline stations; timber 
agency to 'the sLZ of /} d mU ^ bc ab i c *? quickly guide ot, '-r 
effective. Wardens a ro .S,° mt # ent ' ,f , they a - rc - to be ^Mered 
mav remain at fK ex P<* ted to patrol in pairs in order that one 

Casualty s fJ l%\ le of th e 'incident" while the other reports 
and is intended to provide- 0 7 SerV1CGS 13 VC17 com P rch cnsive 

m Tr T zL»n r ?\± he Site of & e "incident." 
c) S,L a f t,on to tbe first aid post or hospital. 

W) ArSem/'r- *?* ai - d P osfc to ll0S P ital in so ™ ca *es. 
Patients. to in hos Pital for sorting rapidly a largo number of 

S Proven f in r Ualty hos P itals - 
Prolonged treatment Vu" 8 ' 01 ' to basc bospitals of cases who require 
removal from hosnitnl re P cated raids i also provision for 

becomes untenable becomes overcrowded or if hospital 

Tne1 l w!]m°S e - pafcient when Charged, 
responsibility of fcbL ^W 6 ?* *° casualties have been made the direct 
regulations of SJXiSfrSj Auxiliary Service. This service, by the 
ment Medical Services of tbeV'f 8 or e anized as a P* T \ [<* the Govern- 
or the Government £ ° the Settlement. Hie highest medical officer 
charge of the MedW a" '-, e mann cr, also responsible and in direct 
0/ the service and £ i Auxdiary Service. He is the officer in charge 
deems necessary £ am £°wered to appoint such other officers as fie 
governed by the i fc mto tbc Msfficd Auxiliary Service is 

This is not a Red n re e ida tions as other passive defense units. 
Although Endan ] bn J° SS 01 * °, the . r fP 3 *?. S ivil reliof organization, 
time which auler ;,7 - ? any cbantable relief organizations in pcacc- 
ticularly, the «kt i k a rclicf work of this nature, and one par- 
ing in Singapore it Ambulance Brigade Overseas," was function- 
Wft s decided that the disorganization of the life 



REPORT OF THE PHILrlPPHtfE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

of the community to be expected under mass bombing at tack required 
the full power and responsible coordinating controfof the Govern- 
ment to assure proper functioning of this most essential service, f ° r 
h reasons the control was taken away from charitable organiza- 
tions and placed in the hands of the Government, The trained per- 
sonnel of such charitable organizations is, of course, welcomed into 
the Medical Auxiliary Service. Volunteers enrolled in the Medical 
Auxiliary Service, as in all other passive defense units are require 1 
to subscribe to an enlistment form. Once such form is signed, leg? 1 
control is established over the individual and performance of his 
duties can be required. Compensation for those passive defense 
workers rendered unfit in line of dutv is pavahle hv the Government. 
In the Straits Settlements compulsory resist ration of nil European 
British subjects, between 18-55 years, is required. The Medical 
Auxiliary Service classifies and reports to the military the compara- 
tive fatness of each individual. The order of iitne^ is- Military serv- 
ice; local deiense corps; fire brigade; Medical Auxiliary Service; air 
raid precaution wardens. The physical and acr C requirements of the 
wr raid precaution wardens mav easiest be indfeated by the fact that 
they are not only the residue, but follow the Medical Auxiliary Serv- 
Wii, 118 ? 11 has bcen ter med b >' other groups as an abbreviation 
for Middle A-e Spread." Of course, men m the key positions, or ot 
outstanding special qualifications are not automatically placed in any 
one group; both exemptions and special assignments' are made. 

JNo mobile canteen service is contemplated for the Medical Auxiliary 
bervice; but women canteen specialists are to be assigned from the 
hrst-aid posts through all echelons, including reserve workers in 
hospitals. A carefully detailed scheme of helping the injured has been 
worked out and is actually ready to function immediately. Basically 
the Medical Auxiliary Service divides Singapore into 13 areas (thus 
dillcrmg ; irom the 7 geographical divisions used by other passive defense 
units. Ihere is an aid post or hospital, or both, in each area. The 
areas arc divided by population (or estimated vulnerability) to 
equalize the work load so far as can be foreseen. First aid posts are in 
reality surgical dressing stations and are intended to take the load oft 
of hospitals. Of course minimal first aid attention necessary to save 
life, or to make it reasonably safe to move a patient, is given at the 
place of "incident" when the patient is first reached. First aid posts 
personnel are fixed and await arrival of patients which are brought to 
them by first-aid parties which work out, by transport including 
stretcher bearers, from first-aid party depots. The tirst-aid party 
depots may or may not be in the same building as is located a first- 
aid post; in any event, their control is separate and distinct from that 
of the aid posts. The members of the tirst-aid parties are all men 
(except women arc allowed to act as drivers). About 12 depots are 
established with a personnel of an average each of 34 whole-time staff, 
with about GO volunteers, part time; total persons each, about 100. 
The usual method of first-aid parties is to work in "combines/.' 
consisting of one light ambulance car, and 2 ordinary (improvised) 
cars; 4 stretcher bearers, an attendant (doctor if available) competent 
to render first aid, at least; and 3 drivers; First-aid posts each have 3 
doctors assigned, one to be always present for duty. First-aid posts 
are established about }.< mile apart, depending on the population, 
and it is not intended that their importance be exaggerated. Em- 



190 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSION® 

phasis is, on the contrary, directed to taking straight to hospitals by- 
motor transport all serious cases; sending only minor cases, shock and 
fright to first-aid posts. The full equipment is available for all these 
posts to open immediately; and continued practice is being under- 
taken. Buildings have had rooms assigned for first-aid posts, includ- 
ing storage of equipment. Hospitals have been selected, and in addi- 
tion "shadow;' hospitals have been designated. The, "shadow" 
hospitals are intended for the emergency additional requirements; 
their staffs have been assigned; equipment collected; and can immedi- 
ately open. There are two other first-aid provisions made, distinct 
irom the main plan: 

(1) First-aid points, usually set up in private homes in suburban 
areas, or small dispensaries to which people have been accustomed to 
■going in i peacetime for trivial cases, or in large business or Government 
establishments, are very strongly encouraged; (2) mobile-aid posts- 
inese correspond to the usual ambulance teams from a peacetime 
hospital and is sent out on call from a hospital in cases of serious 
incidents It should be noted especially that the Medical Auxiliary 
service difiers very much in many basic respects from the Civilian 
^mergency Administration's nearest corresponding agencies, and par- 
ticularly, that it performs no evacuation function (in the sense' used 
oy the Civilian Emergency Administration) whatever. In brief the 
lvieaical Auxiliary Service concentrates its efforts, under its first-aid 
commandment, in using first-aid party patrols and ambulance services 
to transport injured to fixed first-aid posts or hospitals, through* 
utilizing a general clastic plan of essentially casualty-clearing stations 
ll ere has been no provision made ("unlike in the Netherlands East 
£m£ ? V fo , r gas vi ctims. Reasons given are that the use is dis 
S ah ° thU - thcre would bc bad c "" ect on P ublic opinion unless 
SLvf^Zf 8 1SSU ^ d t0 everyone. Gas masks are issued to all 

anaS'' d wkh S %I 0rkc, i 3 * S 80 stc ? 1 Tbc "government 

of III i ! I 12 mcn > has bcen assigned a laboratory and the dutv 

Cleansin!"' C r) 10n ' , A of 216 men, drawn from the "TowS 

fcHSisauS^n*' ai \decontaminators. Protective clothing 
lipliovnJ i «i , to a11 members of decontamination squads It i* 
SeToni 7 the .¥ ad of the Medical Auxiliary Service that h ere are 
S&fi quantities of initial raw materials available to extend 

2E3?EK it&Tf 1 **"^ C0Uld b i c insta \ lcd 

No speciaffiStnMn Cftl A . u ?. lbai 7 S T 1Ce P la ° W,th , 0ufc 

ral H no |Pital for gas victims has been designated. The Medi 

iThas bipn y ^, CrV,Ce has advanced far in another direction; owever 
wi ti ^fuU C ol 0llc< ; u, g Wood for transfusion purposes from the a?my 
the kevnote H b ° n fr ° m the militarv authorities. An exchanges 
be used ?f SU f ess - : J? P^ce, the soldiers furnish the blood to 
blood necessn?w ry ' bv . Chilians; in war, the civilians will furnish the 
he grS nln ° r S ° ldlC1 ?- ■ Thc Medical Auxiliary Service believes 
has been whl? T de - m anv Medical Auxiliary Service work 
bVusefb?S« feS 00 ? I° cid entally, all doctors expected to 
Kffltt^ Service arc P aid : those not n ow on 
ier vSr tSJH '' the ^ r rate of P av is $50 ° ( Straits Settlements) 
for the t'rnint ,< -° r P^vides his own transport and is responsible 
tra,nm g of his units. The advance hiring of the services of 
these doctors and using them in training, creates a team of great value 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 191 

for war. Sufficient volunteer-paid doctors arc obtainable; compulsion 

necessary. 

Fire senders. — It should be recalled, as stated above, that one of 
the 3 groups of activities into which the passive defense services "may 
include" was "an auxiliary lire service. M Fire hazard in Singapore 
'and in the Netherlands Kast Indies plan) is recognized as most serious. 
The superintendent, fire brigade, as soon as an air-raid warning is 
received, assumes charge of all lire-lighting apparatus. The peace- 
time fire-fight ing forces have been greatly supplemented by auxiliaries 
who work as an integrated unit. In addition to the normal fire appa- 
ratus, over 300 "trolley fire" squads, requiring 3 men each to operate 
the equipment improvised, are installed in all large business, govern- 
mental, and private establishments. These trolleys consist of simple 
wooden :\ small-wheel carts, carrying 3 filled tins of water; 1 stirrup 
pump and hose; 1 sand bin, filled; 1 shovel; 1 bomb hood; and 1 
snuffer shield . which is used for protection against sparks of spluttering 
bombs. As the cost is only about P45 complete, the use of such equip- 
ment appears to l>e highly desirable wherever incendiary bombs may 
be anticipated. The "trolleys, " complete, arc available for purchase 
at all air raid precaution stores. As previously stated under air raid 
wardens, fireguards and fire safe-guards are compulsory. Through 
the reports of the "Incident" officer to the Air Raid Precaution Control 
at Air-Raid Preeaut ion Headquarters, by phone, the fire-brigade super- 
intendent decides what fire apparatus will be dispatched. Fire depart- 
ments cannot leave without his orders. All normal fire warnings, 
peacetime, arc ignored. Only in the event that the telephone system 
breaks down is fire control decentralized to lower units. The total 
fire department brigade, war, is about 1,000 men; whereas in peacetime 
it is barely 200 men. Two practices of 2 hours each per week are 
required of all volunteers. Incendiary bombs are actually fired on 
the streets and men are trained to handle them. In event that fire 
lanes need be made in major fires, it is expected to call on the military 
for the handling iof explosives necessary. Canteen service has been 
planned only for the men fighting extensive fires; otherwise they pro- 
vide their own food. 

Lighting control includes road safety. Both terms are sufficiently 
explanatory of their purposes. 

Immediate action squads. — Gas detection and decontamination have 
already been discussed. 

Road repairs and repairs to bridges have been assigned as a duty of 
the deputy municipal engineer, and his personnel is drawn principally 
from the existing permanent staff of the municipal engineer's depart- 
ment supplemented whenever necessary by gangs from the estab- 
lishment of the public works department and rural board. At four 
key points 10 to 15 squads of 20 men each are assigned. Two of the 
"self-contained departments," the Singapore harbor board and the 
F. M. S. Railways have been charged with maintenance of their own 
repairs. # * 

Rescue and demolition parties are under the municipal engineer, who 
will work out from his present headquarters; 138 of his present per- 
manent men will be divided into 6 heavy parties of 8 men each, and 15 
light parties of 6 men eacli suitably equipped to perform necessary 
rescue work resulting from bombs or fires, including demolition and 
clearance of debris. 



192 



REPORT OP THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Repairs to essential service are done by the departments or firms 
normally responsible in peacetime for such work. Services such as 
damaged cables, wires, mains, pumping stations, power stations, etc., 
are required to be repaired and maintained by repair gangs furnished 
by the respective utility from its peacetime personnel. Stores of 
essential stocks that are known to be difficult to obtain in war, how- 
ever, are the responsibility of the "directorate" to arrange for and 
C u rry f i hclp 111 facilitating transport, supplies, and equipment for 
all of these three repair groups, above detailed, an engineer stores 
control subcommittee has been formed. In general, each repair 
group is dependent upon its own peacetime organization for ( ransport 
and other needs, and has recourse to the engineer stores control sub- 
committee only when it has exhausted its own resources. 



September IS, 1941. 

Report op Emergency Measures in the Netherlands East 

Indies 

The Netherlands East Indies established a government planning- 
board in 1936. The board was composed of the heads of all depart- 
ments and the attorney general. The object of the composition of 
the board was to facilitate coordination between the different eovem- 
mental agencies, and to cany promptly into execution decisions 
Until the outbreak of the war in September 1939, however, it did not 
reduce "preparation" quickly to "execution" (in other than economic 
defense considerations and the simpler air-raid precautions). Efforts 
were accelerated progressively to reduce to action and detailed 
HnK n i PlanS . Pa r tic ul arly since May 1940, when the invasion of 
Holland showed the situation of the Netherlands East Indies to be 
™ 6 ' /niplemcntmg acts and ordinances gave unlimited emer^encv 
powers to permit total utilization of all the potential resources of he 
Netherlands East Indies, whether persons or property. Moreover 
t 11 : 8 defense measures arc thoroughly integrated [with SS 
?hem Se E S r^'- b0m ?,V Oth complementary and supplementary ?o 
ISriW flin p r S V ^ tally im Portant in cither contrasting or com- 
11 i C ' V ! an Emergency Administration of the Philippine 
The KeVwl lS , U r ^standing difference between the two systems 
totnUv.I fl? dS E ? S l fc Indies civilian d cfcnse measures appreciate the 
J?v?l ™ aCt ° r am have for their objectives full participation of the 
^^SZ^ 0Ugh thorough subordination ond'cooXS 
A^MsS^ ^J 0TCeS - In comparison, the Civilian Emergency 
and f ? J ™ £ easure ? a PPcar to be far short of that integration, 
3te PaSS1VC in nat ^ 6 - As g0nelflI comparisons are 

S^d«SS*2Sr' a ?T e S P cciflc and dctailcd description of the 
proitte S fr;;S reS *« by the ******* East 'indies may 

d*2L^Si w i th ' l fche technical differences between titles or names of 
departments (or boards or agencies) are relatively unimportant. If 
detailed they would only serve to confuse; because, of course, the 
political structure of the Netherlands East Indies, as compared to the 
fliUippine Islands, is so different that necessarily the civil defense 



KEPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COM^IISSIOXEiR 193 



: -.?t-up must greatly vary. The important thing, it appears, is to 
ly the civil defense functions performed, and their interrelation- 
ship between themselves and the military. 

First to he considered, therefore, is the equivalent of our National 
Emergency ( 'ommission. There is, of collide, no exact title equivalent. 
The National Emergency Commission, including the administrators 
meeting with it, arc in reality the executing agencies of the Civilian 
Emergency Administration; a much smaller group, however, in the 
Net herlands Kn st 1 ndies has correspondingly been assigned or delegated 
from the Netherlands East [ndies Planning Hoard, not only all func- 
tions combined in the consolidated National Emergency Commission 
previously mentioned, but virtual dictatorial powers within the scope 
of their assignments. Many of these powers due to the thorough 
integration with the military," are absolutely binding and: final. Action 
thus taken gives the maximum in speed and coordination. The group 
the state mobilization) charged with such heavy responsibilities is 
compact and permanently assigned the self-same duties for war ; and 
have no other work to "distract them. At their head is a retired 
lieutenant general; under him is a responsible individual in charge, 
each, of the following functions: (a) Economic warfare, (b) civil 
service, (c) Army matters, (d) naval matters, (e) legal adviser, (/) mis- 
cellaneous, and ((f) oil matters. , 
(In addition to Ins work of economic warfare, the individual charged. 
With those duties, D. F. Blokhuis, is also Secretary of the state 
mobilization".) 

Each of these individual functions will be briefly explained: 
Economic warfare. — This section combines not only all the functions 
covered by our Food Administrator and Industrial Production Ad- 
ministrator, but also has many military aspects, as well as lnclxuung 
the field of Economic Sanctions. In short, so far as any product 01 
the Netherlands East Indies — or any resource — has economic value 
(locally or as an export) it can move only within whatever limits it is 
decreed by the Economic Warfare Administrator. One exception is 
oil. There must, of course, be necessarily an overlapping within the 
"state mobilization" of its functions. Such overlaps (particularly 
oil) must be and are worked out by the state mobilization members. 
(This membership, it must be continuouslv recalled, has on it repre- 
sentatives of the Army and Navv.) Not only is tan S lbl ^ I ^ pC /3 
controlled by this section, but also intangible property. Debts aim 
all money matters, in their economic affect or effect on total w i , 
arc within the scope of the dictatorial planning and execution ol tms 
section. Unlike the Philippine Islands, the Netherlands East incnes 
is self-sufficient in food, so that problem is ono of distribution primarily. 

Civil service. — This section is very roughly comparable to the n ±^ c ~ 
tions performed bv our national air raid warden, the Philippine sxea 
Cross, and our Department of Health and Welfare Administrator. 
(Its title has no resemblance whatever to what we term ' civil serv- 
ice.") It would only tend to confuse to make a detailed comparison 
of this section's functions with each of the corresponding sections in 
the Civilian Emergency Administration, separately; therefore, tne 
functions of the civil service will be treated as a whole. Just wl \ c ™ 
the similar function is performed (or not performed) by corresponding 
sections in our Civilian Emergency Administration will appear inci- 
dentally. Evacuation, under the civil service, is divided mto two 



194 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

primary groups: First, real evacuation; second, emergency evacua- 
tion— the latter dependent upon air raids, fires, and other outgrowths 
of war s dislocation— and, in fact, is termed "dislocation" evacuation 
ihe distinction between these two terms is not arbitrary as Under 
certain contingencies they necessarily fade into each oilier. Real 
evacuation, for instance, is itself divided into certain evacuation and 
probable evacuation.' These latter two arc known danger zones evac- 
uation Camps foodstuffs (stored nearby), and of her necessary equip- 
ment ior those whom evacuation is certain arc completely in readiness 
to receive the evacuees. Real evacuation, regardless of whether cer- 
tain or probable, is not automatic but is dependent upon order of the 
Governor General acting on the advice of the commanding general 
EE23K wK ? informod >: ht ' re to S°; tow to go; which routes to 

fna^lrSfiS S .° 15 % mi lta , ,y dccision aml llot bL ' disclosed 
in (Kance, although individuals can/go if they have permission 

r2Z CV f n 8 IOU WlU T, bc made ^ for simple, from around great o l 
also ?-iT tallatl0nS - , R °^ ls and ^importation means to thoS points 
fcKSh £f V a ; n,n - CcL Foo <* medical stores have been arranged 
through muUial assistance with the Economic Warfare Section 

ment W°h ' lf th ° "f J** 8 ? 8 ' of the Netherlands East indies Govern- 
™ f t^ 0mplC :' ly P anned, with all arrangements already co - 
dlZZf r °i the small 1 ost detail. Another responsibility of the chil 

leeaWv^rfclf 00 i dmati ^ ,l, ^ th other st!Ctio » s ' PaiculSy , 
Si! ° the determination of the assignment of any person 

tW n" ei nf ag .? ° f 18 l ° 5 ? yoars - Registration is required he e 

lectivelv tH i , s P° wcr has been exercised already col 

iobs t& " • ' P (>m P lo yces (such as railroad workers) on their nw£ 

whatever will kl • j mobilization occurs everyone of anv val«« 

»me1a5ty1s b aBo^ef S S unlil ¥ ^bili^ti^occu^ 

can move ablt ! r ■ ' K ' < ' harshnoss and oppression. Persons 
tofo^^^fe^»«^J nonetheless, the ultimate p?w 
effect. Potentially present and may be instantly put into fi 



er 
full 



f^e civil service, but decen- 
varyin"- number S m W^J*** are circles usually drawn a 
quent lv Stimi ^f 8 ^ dlUa fl '° m towns and cities, and CoSe- 
EBlKSSSr&JI!^**^ r UP , the Netherlands East Indies 3 £ 
ization of the Soth/J f\ 4 description of the political organ- 
stand fir ai?^J Uld8 E, i? t Inthcs ,' s essential in order to under- 
former. raid opsonization, as the latter is built around the 

^jSJ^SSA^JtSf- Indies. there are about 40 residents 

Islands In 7o ™ P *i the ,5 r ?> vmc , ial governors of the Philippine 

^entis^lo^,wT e * a ? e i 8Redd ^ lt ?' In the arcas of each 

the cZivalcn of t. ° f ° f Imh - ans i 4fe> W ^ ivcn area there is 
uie equivalent ol the mayors in the Philippine Islands. To obtain 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 195 



money for governmental purposes, these three persons are very 
influential. The emergency expenses have been allotted to the 
ident, who dominates, agreeing with the other two as to propor- 
tionate taxation for the expenses. 

The resident acts for the Netherlands East Indies Government as 
its representative and agrees to pay the initial costs; the chief of 
Indians and the equivalent of mayor undertakes to pay the upkeep 
eosts. Tlif result being that a throe-way financial agreement must 
be reached in any given resident's area before the Air-Raid Protection 
Service can be fully developed. To this triumvirate is added, as 
the working head of the Emergency Air-Raid Protection Services, a 
trained specialist in Air-Raid Protection Service. He is called the 
air-raid manager but has functions more extensive than the Civilian 
Emergency Administration air-raid wardens. Within his ring and 
limited only by the financial assistance furnished him by the three 
local heads, he (except of course for the chain of command running 
up through the civil-service administrator) is the dominant air-raid 
chief. Cooperating with him, and under him, are the permanent 
heads of the following from peacetime departments, augmented by 
volunteers: Fire brigade, municipality health department, police 
department, and public works department. 

These units are all thoroughly organized; and training of volunteers 
is more intensive than in the Civilian Emergency Administration. m 

Fire brigade. — The fire hazard is very well recognized (as it is in 
Singapore) and preparations to handle fires due to incendiary bombs 
have been carefully laid. Working in conjunction with the profes- 
sional fire brigade arc volunteer firemen, who not only add to the 
regular strength as a reserve force, but are specifically assigned special 
duties. Cities are subdivided into districts; within each district is 
at least one professional fire station, with the senior professional tire 
chief as district commander. Much extra equipment has been pur- 
chased and is on hand; more is on order. There are, for example, 
45 fire engines in Bat a via , somo owned by Government departments, 
one by a private firm; 36 of them are in the fire departments. J3ig 
fire engines are held back in war and are sent out only when ordered 
by the fire chief, whose headquarters in war will be in the control 
room of the air-raid manager. There are available, in this group, 
some fire engines (10 Hales, and a mixture of others) winch can oe 
sent out by the district commander. Also, there are on hand p£ 
small fire carts, somewhat like the Singapore '•trolleys," but larger 
and effective for fireplug use. These may be drawn by hand oi 
attached as a trailer to a passenger car. Thev may, unlike the Jarge 
engines, be sent out by the district fire chief. The basic idea is to 
keep control of the professional fire equipment centralized so tnat> 
the main fires wall bo reduced first, regardless of districts or local 
clamor. Batavia has been divided into 7 districts for fire control, 
and in general its emphasis on fire prevention and control has produced 
effective results. Details have been worked out; for instance, alternate 
camouflaged fire stations have been made away from the permanent, 
fire stations, and protection of the firemen from splinters has been 
undertaken by erecting splinter proofs. The effectiveness of tliese 
latter precautions is debatable. . , , 

Municipality health department. — Medical stocks are obtained oy 
the military authorities for civilians, not by the Red Cross. Medical 



196 REPORT OF THE PHIMPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



stocks have already been obtained for use of hospitals now existing 
as well as additional bospitals which have been planned for. .Dis- 
tribution of medical supplies to civilians will be done through both 
the Red Cross and oilier civilian relief organizations. All doctors 
(necessary for any emergency work) will be compelled to devote one 
third of each day to emergency victims, one third to their own private 
patients, the other third is theirs for them to rest. A very elaborate 
system of first-aid stations and hospitals has been set up". Supplies 
and equipment are now installed, ready for immediate use. Private 
hrms and businesses, as well as governmental departments, have 
emergency first aid, or better, equipment either actually set up or 
stored in adjacent rooms. Unlike Singapore, Batavia has already 
designated where all gas casualties will be taken, for both first aid and 
Hospitalization. Special medical supplies and equipment for all such 
installations are on hand and are stored where they are quickly avail- 
able. Decontamination squads also are organized 'and equipped All 
members of the Air Raid Protective Services are issued gas masks 
me Ked Cross has organized a blood transfusion branch which 
A i ' k »m complete cooperation with the Health Department head 
•a publicity campaign to obtain blood donors was successful and he 
work of accumulating a sufficient supply of proper blood has pro 
greased satisfactory. The Red Cross has kept its identi v in 1 i To 
Js etberland East Indies and undertakes much of the nursing and ot her 
casualty preparation work. It has a 2-year course for Re 3 [ C roll 
£X!fi m i conjunction with hospital work for them; and also undef 
As nn !n 7 d " )stru ^ 1011 *<>r those who arc to help 'at first-aul osts" 
hnsniV 11 ,Stratl0, l 0 thc SC °P C of Rcd Cross activity, a complete 
TSSSk ?M 8p0r *#P Was ont&tted and donated fy t 5 the 

*32ss%* issssssiir^ — l that ™ ^ 

nnll^ 0 !"! 1116 A T Raid Profce ction Services, the police department'* 

SSffiS^E^^-^ for al1 its n °rn?al work under £Z 

thkTctZ"r;r The V**M (lu ty of the Army officer in charge of 
W n f Jfif maintenance of the closest liaison betweenthe 
chSed witl ,1 ,9 i r f cctlons .of the state mobilization. He s alsS 
SJ ^H e *? de ?i. 8 ?P ervi3ion aml determination of all billeting 
officer KS 1 Y ltU the movement of Government personnel a d 

featl^sS^to^^ Efi /f* ° n the ^ 
service is made. Army-Navy exemptions or compulsory 

Naval waters.— Emergency harbor precautions, moludmg the 
destruction arrangements of their facilities are charged to hinf All 
communication systems with which the Navy is connectcTcomes 
under his supervision so far as they affect state mobilization functions 
Liaison, of the closest nature, is maintained by him with the Navy 
and all members of the state mobilization heads, particularly with 
the Army m determining exemptions from service. 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 197 



Miscellaneous.— Hidden under this title is the function of reducing' 
to practical effect the scorched-earth tactics. A general staff officer, 
regular Army, lias been given the task of arranging for the complete 
destruction of all property ami resources, other than oil fields and 
refineries, that could conceivably help the enemy. This information 
issceret, ami must he so treated. Over 30,000 trained men, properly 
equipped, are ready to dismantle all civilian automobiles; all railroads; 
til factories: and anything or any resource that can aid the enemy 
either directly or indirectly. Demolitions have been spotted and 
connected, as near as safety permits, for instant use. Men have 
actually rehearsed their assigned destruction jobs, and the time factor 
has been reduced to a certainty. The enemy will find nothing usable 
when it invades. 

Oil matti rs.— Because of the great importance of oil, a reserve 
military odicer w ho has had 20 years' oil experience in an important 
executive position, has been added to the "state mobilization" and 
riven dictator powers over the entire oil business of the Netherlands 
East Indies. lie has compulsory authority and has used it to force 
protective measures, such as shooting with bricks the outside of all 
tanks, camouflage, etc.; and to prepare for the instant destruction of 
all wells, refineries, and other equipment. Complete alternate trans- 
portation systems, over numerous substitute routes, have been pre- 
pared. Concrete tanks and steel barrels of reserve oil and gasoline 
nave been stored underground for the known needs of the armed 
forces and civilians. As in other preparatory measures, the detailed. 

flans are military secrets of vital importance and must be so treated, 
t can be accepted as a fact that there has been worked out to the ut- 
most practical perfection, a complete oil safety scheme. Because oil 
is of such great importance to the economic life of the Netherlands 
East Indies, and because it in itself aifords a primary incentive lor 
attack by an enemy, it has been separated from the "miscellaneous 
destruction plan and will be controlled directly by the officer charged 
with it to prevent any premature or fatally delayed action. Timing 
must be perfect either for protection or destruction; and it is believed 
that the arrangements made approach that ideal as near as is possible. 

Legal adviser. — All matters of contracts, proclamations, and J, 0 ^ 11 ' 
matters are passed upon by the legal adviser. Determination of the 
status of each component or suborganization under the "state mo- 
bilization, " whether military, semimilitary, or civilian, causes mm 
much worry. The semimilitary units are an artificial and arbitrary 
classification, for example, that places groups which draw pay from 
the governments, are in uniform; but have no weapons, in a status, 
he hopes, which will give them a prisoner-of-war status when cap- 
tured — and, as a result, prevent them being shot as civilians who 
are assisting the military. This field is a twilight zone of legal pioneer- 
ing in that the merging from military assistance given b}^ the "scorched 
earth' 1 workers to the functions legally performable by civilians under 
past rules of war is nothing less than a blur under the present chaotic 
condition of international law. Making "effectives" out of civilians 
in order to fight a total war, particularly if the enemy is an oriental, 
causes nightmares to tho legal adviser. Civilians are not expected 
to fight, even against air-borne troops. A 
"To the Ladies of the Netherlands East Indies": Although not treated 
under any particular "state mobilization" function, the preparations 



198 



REPORT OF THE PHIIilPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONED 



of the Netherlands East Indies would be incomplete if a remark was 
not made to the many aids given by various women's organizations. 
The sponsorhood of many emergency- women's organizations have been 
by individuals, but later have received tacit or express recognition by 
*bf "^ate mobilization'' without apparent effort to integrate them. 
I he Dutch names would not be helpful to understanding, so func- 
tions only will be generally treated. Women sew for soldiers, collect 
parcels and mail them; they prepare themselves as practical cooks 
to iced those whose homes are destroyed or from which they must 
evacuate; they are taking (100 in Batavia) daily driving lessons on 
public works department trucks to qualify themselves either to drive 
their lamihes and themselves out of Batavia while their husbands are 
on other duty, if the need arises, or to aid Government functions if 
allowed; there has been a house-to-house visit of women to acquaint 
each occupant with practical preparations and instructions for all 
matters 01 air raid or evacuation or casualties; women have formed and 




^ iruy the staff used in the blood-transfusion branch of the lied 
v^ross it appears, in fact, that all women of any social or professional 
patriotic caliber in the Netherlands East Indies arc engaged in at least 
one activity directly helpful to the "StatcmobilizatiSn" purposes 



APPENDIX O 

Report to the National Emergency Commission Regarding 
Reports by M aj. C. Q. Marron, United States Army 

October 20, 1941. 

The honorable the Chairman, 

National Emergency Commission, Manila, P. L 
Sir: In accordance with the instructions contained in paragraph 4 of 
the minutes of the meeting held by the National Emergency Commis- 
sion on October 8, 1 94 I , your committee appointed to make a stud} 7 of 
and submit a report on the confidential report covering inspection of 
Malava and Netherlands East Indies emergency measures, by Maj. 
CyrifQ Marron, dated September IS, 1941, to His Excellency, the 
United States High Commissioner to the Philippines, has the honor to 
make the following comments and recommendations. 

Your committee he ld a meeting on Tuesday morning, October 14, 
at which the following members were present: Col. H. Gilhouser, who 
acted as chairman; Mr. Felipe Cuaderno, member; and Lt.-Col. 
Antonio Villalobos, in representation of Brig. Gen. Guillermo 13. 
Francisco. Absent were Brig. Gen. Guillermo B. Francisco (chair- 
man), who was about to depart on an inspection trip to the southern 
islands; Mr. Alfredo Eugenio, national air raid warden, who was in 
conference with the representatives of the Manila Gas Corporation, 
the Public Service Commission, and the city engineer; and Mr. Charles 
II. Forster, who had been called into conference by Lt. Gen. 
Douglas MacArthur on matters pertaining to the Red Cross. 

(a) Differences in concept and scope of the three emergency organiza- 
tions. — lt is apparent that the titles used under the various Govern- 
ments apply to the situations or conditions obtaining in the various 
countries concerned. „ 

In the Netherlands East Indies the name "state mobilization 
clearly indicates that, to all intents and purposes, actual war con- 
ditions exist. . 

In Malaya "Passive Defense Services" as used indicates that there 
is no actual war, and the civilian population is merely mobilized ana 
being trained to assist in combating the enemy, should actual war 
conditions arise. , * 

In the Philippines "Civilian Emergency Admmistration" is used 
to distinguish active defense conducted by the military from 
passive defense which pertains to activities essentially civilian m 
nature, and to make the civil population aware of the probability 
of war and to prepare them for such an eventuality. , 

(6) Integration of civilian functions with the military. — It is sub- 
mitted that absolute integration or subordination of the civilian 
activities directly under the military authorities cannot be made 
under our form of democratic government, without war conditions 
actually existing. The Civilian Emergency Administration must 

199 



200 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

concentrate on preparedness, and our work should be in such shape 
at all times, so that in case of emergency the whole set-up can he 
transferred to the military without obstacle or delay. 

The Civilian Emergency Administration is very closely following 
the recommendations of the Emergency Planning Board whose 
membership was composed of officers of the United Slates Armv and 
Wavy and civilians, presided over by a military officer, and it is felt 
tnat.should circumstances warrant or make it necessary, the whole 
administration can be taken over by the military authorities. 
kJ£2 If momen 4 fc .there is, however, noticeable the absence of effective 
l™f?nn bc S C 7 - he m £tary and the Civilian Emergency Adminis- 
5?ffVl haiso '\,? mccr ' Lt. Col. E. C. Williams, who was form- 
erly in charge of civilian affairs at Fort Santiago, has been relieved 

sSua a tion% a iirt "° ° mCer ! iaS been dc[ ^ d ijl hiri This 
8^o?^?«SLo^ ;Cpn?ected , ^mediately. An officer on the 
A~LZ f i i command 'ng general of the U. S. A. F. F. E. should be 
designated m charge of civilian affairs during the present cine. m 
mS^ffV? bc to th « advantage, of t ic 

ffitiSft ^i^ 6 him at 011 tm,cs lo ^eep informed 

T L Oi2f„ I C Cmllan Emergency Administration: 
nnint J * Emcrffenc y Administration must naturally have a 

^military matted Z^m^^^^i 

problems of the Civfta^m^? ^ft^W WOm^fava&ovm 
complex and broader in fJS^T* ^lustration become more 
for ill purposes A dctaU of E 4 ^fficer^may not be sufficient 
bring abouf more ASK&jHg" ^ ° ff,CCrS WOU,d > 

tionsf p y& £ & 0 lfc' establish a definite point of rela- 
Administration. """tary authorities and the Civilian Emergency 

provide for'Se detaTa m miri dCtl H StCpS be ***** to 

may be necessary to bWn I Ik 7 lcadc l u « lteis of such personnel as 
authorities and the Civile i? Ut doscr contacfc between the military 

(c) Direct r^o&iS- SEW** .^'ministration, 
corresponding authoritv'''^ ihe jl mca , of . direct responsibility with 
Emergency Administration io° r adm 'nistrators of the Civilian 
report, where he sta tes « S ^tom.zcd on page 5 of Major Marron's 
man of the National P, tUrecl °r (who is equivalent to the chair- 
When he wants a blast »SfW Commission) can get anything. 
Director to build it mil if 7V lfc hc asks the Public" Works 

costs." tnc Government furnishes all materials and 

Your committee full^ mil -i. 
Emergency Administrat i«n i b ? S t ° the nccd of makin g the Civilian 
for the activities assiemSi "administrators more directly responsible 
trators bc given a wide « n w m / nnd , recomm , ends fchat the adininfe- 
of their activities, subject S £ \f cdon \ m , «"> J£»P* carrying out 

normal activities should be set aside and made to give way to a 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 201 

•direct responsibility with corresponding authority" policy whereby 
it administrators can act promptly without hindrance and can 
icquire equipment, materials, and supplies; employ necessary per- 
itonei for their work, etc., so long as the corresponding funds have 
teen previously allocated to their corresponding administrations. 
Ibey must undertake such activities as in their best judgment are 
rjlucive to :i prompt and adequate result toward preparedness, 
(d) Black-outs.- As far back as the middle of August 1941, in con- 
lection with the second black-out practice and long before the receipt 
rf Major Marion's report, now under study, the matter of holding 
tUck-outs for 2 or more consecutive nights was brought up at the 
■tixiir of the black-out committee of your commission. Mention 
•f this fact is made hi re by way of concurring with Major Matron in 
the opinion he expresses on page 6 of his report that black-out drills 
flbould be for 2 or more consecutive nights and for longer periods. 
^Hdias not so far been done in view of the diiliculty experienced by 
the general public in obtaining materials needed for covering windows, 
doors, and lights during black-out practice. 

Scorched-* a rth program. — Your committee believes that, while 
program will no doubt prove effective as a defense measure in 
i.iirhly indtist rialized countries, such action would probably accom- 
plish no purpose in the Philippines, where developed resources, par- 
jularly food, are limited. . , 

Our resources of any immediate value to the invader consist of food 
products which it would be more dangerous for the invaded than for 
the invader to be without. Hence their destruction does not seem 
Mlled for. Besides, should food supplies be destroyed, the invader 
has more ways than one of compelling the invaded to produce. 

f) Destruction qf bridges. — Program for the destruction of bridges, 
c, to impede the advance of invaders should be left to the authorities 
m charge of active defense — the military. 
The following paragraphs on air-raid shelters, blast walls, splinter- 
<K>fs, organization of demolition and repair units, and organization 
Q(] training of air-raid wardens prepared by Mr. Alfredo Eugenio, 
. ttional air-raid warden, are incorporated in full: f 
(g) Air-raid shelters. — The policy adopted in the construction ol 
air-raid shelters is the one iriven in the preface of the pamphlet on 
Rules and Regulations of the Civilian Emergency Administration, 
rhich says that, for lack of funds, air-raid shelters will be provided 
Dnly for the protection of those employees of the Government who win 
have to be on duty during wartime, and private concerns will be en- 
couraged to construct air-raid shelters for their own use, the Govern- 
ment extending necessary advisory service to them by way of prepara- 
tion of plans and inspection work. This has been prompted by the 
studies made by the Civilian Emergency Planning Board, which has 
concluded that "because of the low terrain in Manila and most centers 
of population in the Philippines, the construction of underground 
bombproof shelters for the public will be prohibitive. 

Following the above policy, the amount of 1*250,000 has been 
appropriated from Civilian Emergency Administration funds, 01 
which 1*195,000 was intended for construction of air-raid shelters. 
From those funds, air-raid shelters have been constructed m the 
following buildings: Post Office Building, Legislative Building, 
Intendencia Building, Customs House Building, Bureau of Science 

83018 — 43 14 



202 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Building Agriculture and Commerce Building, Department of 
Finance Budding, Bureau of Plant Industry Budding and In 
Manquina. - 

The above projects arc in reinforced concrete buildings of modern 
construction, which, according to authoritative opinion, can offer verv 
good resistance against bombing. 

Work is going on in buildings of masonry construction where walls 
can offer sufficient protection against blasts and splinters, particularly 
if the openings are sandbagged. 

Up JO the close of December, the amount of Fl35.268.85 has been 
expended m the construction of the above-mentioned air-raid shelters 
w" ■ i ?v i , P o rpo . ses in connection with the function of the Air- 
l!l ar ! CnS Semee. However, it is believed that there is still a 
necessity to appropriate funds for this purpose as, unless the office 
population of the city of Manila is evacuated as recommended by he 

SSJdSSiSSS 1 *^! shl ; ItuI-s for th(! Go^rnment employees on 

par&to'sSdS^ffK 0 * 6 bllil(li "gs of private ownership are pi*. 
ffiS2f^t bSM T^ and K tom ^ floors for *• Protection 
financial ons Pv W them scem t0 dda y &o*work for 
o SS a r3?n,rS« e r lf 11 18 needed that one-fourth of the city 
o us places toEX , Zon , cs '" can be evacuated to less danger- 

thosf who'wi a i no be Protection^ 
numbering around 450 000 Pnn f WPf" SChe '" e ' lhis WPl* 

per head will be ,2 ' J ,lf, i l,1! i a nj^unum of P20 

inhabitants thorn i = , . for a »'- raid shelter protection for these 

found in Singapore a J B? t »v;„ Ti CrS ' P" r P ose > as are now 

changing the existing now ^ v Thcr ? SC T S , *? be 8 necessity of 

privately ciSSPtt^ffilSSh^ ^ ^^construction in 

Unless there is some w n?h™ a ) >° USC lai ' ffC ?!l mbe £ of P****8. 

be compelled totaHbZjSA**? T^ 1 ' 3 ° f th< ? S ? b "»dings may 

protection for ^bTI^S^L^A^ ^ of air-raid 

buildings will be worsTfe 1, l P atlo , n \' he W&esa in 

mended that the E)£f fi S^ J* ^ »<*»»- 

immediatelv executed U m- i * t ^ - carefull y studied and 

to either pay half of ? he cos? of it™ t^SM* th ° Government 

the work at Government eJnon, I i f ai 1 r " ra,d . shclte ™ or to undertake 

owners la ter on simS J n t f , C to kW.^* samc WWt property 

(A) Blast i^uSte^;^n?^ f0 P°H England. 7 

that in Singapore, as MaK? ' atten t 10n « invited to the fact 

blast walls is encoumged t W ^ f 0n rep0rts ' ,7 here the eiecfci °n of 
avenues. On the S^orMy as wide as our wide 

erally much narrower the S, , Xt****! where the streets are gen- 
the buildings will add to our " f 0 " °- b > St Walls ° utsidc of 

house owners, however can "bo ™ dy t Scrious fcraffic P">olem. If the 
can be constructed indde^f ^^ufldmS^ > T th ? sebIast -Proof walls 
undertaken only where l!ie^^JHn?$Ll ' ) %V™*\ » *f> b e 
and splinters, as prescribe in f^S^^if 1 ? 818 
Construction issued hv Vi! w s Pe c| ncations on Air-Raid Shelter 
Uonst.riM lion issued by the War Department in Washington The 
Protection of people who find themselves in (lie streets an ' sto, s 
during busy hours is a very important matter. Hence,^aoh and 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



203 



v. rv store should have blast-and-splinter-proof walls, behind which 
the people can hide in an air at lark. 

(i) Sj.lh.ti r-jn'oo m fs. — The constitu tion of underground splinter- 
proof shelters has not been adopted by the Civilian Emergency Ad- 
ministration because of the difficulty of draining the ground water 
from them, and we are well aware of the fact that unless these under- 
ground shelters can be made bombproof, the} 7 are only death traps. 
The construction of small-capaeity splint er-and-blast-proof shelters, 
wholly above ground surface, therefore, is being encouraged* Several 
hundreds of plans of this type of shelter have been acquired by the 
public. However, where there are modern reinforced concrete build- 
ings provided with strong thick walls, which are in themselves blast 
and splinter proof, the conversion of suitable refuge rooms in these 
buildings is being encouraged in preference for separate blast-and- 
splinter-proof shelters in the yards. 

0) Organization of demolition and repair units. — The organization 
and training of demolition and repair units in the Philippines is well 
under way. This activity has been placed by Executive Order No. 
337 in the hands of the district and city engineers. 

These engineers have, in most cases, organized and trained the 
volunteer guard units assigned to these services; and in provinces 
where the volunteer guards have not yet been fully organized the 
district engineers have grouped their building and road construction 
personnel to servo as rescue and demolition repair units in the event 
of an emergency. This Government personnel arc well versed in 
construction ami demolition work and need no further training i 11 *^ 
respect. District and city engineers' organizations are well provided 
with the necessary equipment to perform any demolition and repair 
work common to bombed areas. 

A detailed report on this phase of Civilian Emergency Administra- 
tion activities can be submitted if desired. 

(k) Organization and training of air-raid wardens. — With regard to 
the air-raid wardens' service, I am glad to report that the organization 
and training of this unit of the Civilian Emergency Administration is 
well under way. At the present time, approximately 30,000 a ^" rai ^ 
wardens throughout the Philippines have been duly appointed and 
are undergoing training. I am enclosing herewith a copy of the 
outline of instructions furnished to these air-raid wardens in London 
and New York. The organization of the air-raid wardens' service m 
the Philippines, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the 
Civilian Emergency Administration, is more or less as follows: 

NATIONAL AIR-RAID WARDEN 

Provincial air-raid warden. City air-raid warden. 

1 chief deputy provincial air-raid warden. 1 chief deputy city air-raid warden. 

3 provincial deputy air-raid wardens. 3 assistant deputy air-raid wardens. 

Municipal air-raid warden. 1 district air-raid warden for every 

1 chief deputy municipal air-raid warden. 10,000 inhabitants. 

3 municipal deputy air-raid wardens. 1 chief deputy district air-raid warden. 

1 air-mid warden for every 500 inhabi- 3 deputy district air-raid wardens. 

tants. 1 air-raid warden for every 500 mnaDi- 

5 assist ant air-raid wardens for each tants. 

group. 5 assistant air-raid wardens for eacn 

group. 

1 special assistant air-raid warden for 
every building housing more than 7o 
porsons. 



204 REPORT OP THE PHIMPPENE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

It is interesting to note that while the Civilian Emergency Adminis- 
tration was organized, and its members were appointed, only on 
April 1, 1941, or soon after the receipt of the report of the Emergency 
planning Board at Malacanan— from the reports of Major Marion, 
it is seen that Singapore had been preparing long before that date 
Although its passive delense service has been only "recently energized " 
And as a matter of fact, the regulations governing its present organiza- 
nf Min w T"? 1 Y ^° Go T vernor sin ce February 5, 1941. In the case 
of the Netherlands East Indies, it was since September 1939, that it 
«f,, UC tr ll * Preparations into execution, and efforts were "accelerated" 
A/ m y I? 40, Ifc 1S ' th erefore, hoped that our Civilian Emergency 
Dro3f£T Preparations may also be accelerated in due -time, 

n\ r- * ds bc mado available. 
K»A?« lHre '^° *£ W mipment— Auxiliary fire-fighting brigades have 
been organized by the Civilian Emergency Administration. However 
tie c^n^l° 0d A hat therc is Iack 0f firc-fiihting equipment throughout 
mvners ofTnil f rn Campa,gn sb . m ! ld bc conducted at once to induce 
orcranTzo ° f nn b f V ud ' n S^ Pnyate individuals, and commercial houses to 
ownorlnf w, ™" 1 111 their establishments fire-fighting units. All 
^ should al S o n ^ S V COmme , rcial h ° US ? S ' in el»ding government build- 
£cesSble Wi™. Tc ^? d to Provide and keep in storage in easily 
„f locations within then- premises, supplies of sand and 
S e ; c t^ dcd for P" ttin S out incendiary bombs. The trolleys 

2 numn „Ll T U ^ heel ? arts carrying 3 filled tins of water! 
SSto i bin ' 1 S,l0Vc1 ' 1 bomb llood > and I 

the coU S of1vhL°h SpS-TonSE SParkS ° f SP,Uttering &6 b0mbs > 
unSS IfMon^tlt 0 ?r P 5 ? ?* e Red ^'.-There follows hcrc- 
Kp^Eed^Cr^fe^ ° barleS H -, F °rster, manager of the 
fiS^wor?wSL«Kte r , ep01 t clcarl y indicates the prc- 

withlhe De pa? K 1! S b S^a^ Publl'f ^Tf^' 1 * coo P eraS ? n 
military authorities. and PubLc Welfare as well as the 

iWfflSPJS advisable, in Singapore, to eliminate all 

preparatory^ wSrk, iud T«S«St iT .PfW" 011 *} *? tUftI 
seas" it i/folt thnt tIL bU Jolm s Ambulance Br gade Over- 

^££^%£S^*?^ t0 thG r b *PP-elied Cross 

of Sr a nd Publ^ T^Vll'&i *°S thG Department 
recommends that this nSn??«SS i b^desirabU and your committee 
of the National Em^Scy Swi^ C ° nSldci - atl ° n on P*" 

or taa^y^ercharifcaHA«3 - Jo i m 8 Amblll ™ec Brigade Overseas" 

Govenmient institution, ifreeognked as ?Jo KBs 5ffi ?7 SS ' 15 a 
nized as the governmental JJf, ll: • ls , denil »tcly recog- 

eithcr from nature, or bei, g^^RnTs war^' T 

Your committee feels that fchiq wnri- io ;~ V i i_ i 

especially, since a ^dX^g a^e$or^^^ S 
Cross comes from the United States, this organization is in a preferen- 
tial position to eftectively carry out the work which has been assigned. 



KEPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 205 

to it. At this time, it is also to be noted that certain additional Army 
Navy j a -i u \ \ iel lias recently arrived from the United States to 
cilieally look alter the welfare of the armed forces in the Philippines; 
J this work, how ever, is to la* done directly under the local lied Cross 
conization, thus indicating a practical integration of this organiza- 
tion with the military forces. 

MK. rOUSTEirs COMMENTS 

(m-1) There is no f tiiulainental difference in the objectives of state 
Mobilization in the Kast Indies, passive defense in the Straits Settle- 
ments, and the Civilian Emergency Administration in the Philippines, 
rhc difference appears to lie in tlie placing of responsibility. In the 
Philippines, as in the United States and the British Empire, a large 
measure of responsibility for civilian defense is placed upon civilian 
agencies. It. should not bo anticipated that civilian responsibility, 
: ivd to deal with war conditions, will break down, or that it will fail 
□ the tasks assigned to it, unless it is integrated with the military. 
By integration, the military would be. responsible for civilian defense, 
and burdened with a responsibility that should not be theirs. It 
would be regrettable if civilian agencies, both governmental and 
vate, could not organize and adapt their forces to undertake civil 
efense in all its phases. Civilian responsibility is a principle oi 
democratic government. 

1 lowevcr, an administra t ive agency created by the civil government, 
tod made responsible for civil defense, must maintain perfect coordina- 
tion with the active defense forces. It must be trained and prepaiea 
to remove civilian obstacles that would handicap active defense, -i* 
must make its plans, it must train civilians to carry them out, it must 
coordinate them with military planning and strategy* l> ut after V-i 
of action have been decided upon the responsibility for accomplish- 
ment will be left to the civil authorities. This kind of coordinated 
efforts, with its placing of responsibility, was successful in the Worm 
War, and it has been made effective in the current emergency. 

Major Marron's report suggests deficiencies in our Civilian &™ cv - 
gency Administration. However, these deficiencies do not warrant an 
assumption that passive defense should he integrated with the mili- 
tary;. Deficiencies can be corrected without changing the form 0l .™*~ 
ministration. Frank and constructive cirticism between the vall °\ lS5 
administrative units shoidd be welcome, for the efficiency of one aa- 
ministrative unit depends upon the efficient operation of the otliers. 
If one unit fails, other units are likely to break down. , 

Camouflaging the real purposes of the Planning Board, and we 
purposes of the Emergency Administration later organized, may nave 
handicapped our work in its beginnings. When administrative re- 
sponsibility for "evacuation, welfare, and morale" was placed upon 
the Philippine Red Cross last April, all its peacetime services were 
reorganized to deal with conditions caused bv war. We consuiteu 
the United States Army authorities, and other responsible sources 01 
information, to get a picture of what might happen and what measuies 
should be taken to meet given situations. A civil deienso institute 
was hastily organized. It met in Baguio last April. About 6W 
members of the Red Cross staff were trained to undertake the prepa- 
ration of reception areas, to conduct a census of vulnerable areas, ana 



206 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



to organize these areas for rapid evacuation. Offices wore opened in 
38 reception areas, in 16 vulnerable areas in Manila, in the city of 
Cayite, and in the Province of Bataan. As the work proceeded (he 
United States Army authorities were constantly consulted. 

Our one purpose was to set plans, and to execute such plans in 
coordination with military movements, to get the helpless part of the 
population out of the way and to maintain morale in the rear. These 
plans included the organization of reception areas for the 300,000 or 
more evacuees, to make provisions for cars, and to establish them as 
productive communities by the organization and financing of coop- 
eratives and other similar measures. A member of our Civil Emer- 
gency Service staff is now in China studying the Chinese Industrial 
Cooperatives. Our purpose was to try to carry out evacuation and 
at the same time conserve the productive capacities of the evacuees 

We realized very soon that success or failure depended upon the 
success or failure of other units, especially those responsible for .public 
health, first aid and emergency hospitalization, food supplies, water 
supply, and sanitary facilities. We therefore decided to actively 
cooperate with these units. This we have done at our best ability 
we brought over a first-aid expert from the national headquarters of 
the American Red Cross in Washington. We suggested and coop- 
erated in carrying out the Victory garden plan. We now have stored 
m Manila, and en route from America, more than a quarter of a million 
pesos worth of medical and relief supplies, including 10 complete 
50-bed emergency units. We have more than 100 of our personnel 
especially trained for this particular service, on this detail, and they 
will be kept on the job keeping preparatory measures at the proper 
pitch and up to standard We recognize that the situation may 
change, requiring an entirely new set of measures. We arc holdup 

S8 \l G V n r CS3 T f -° r SUch a con t'ngency. We will spare no effort 
to help the Civilian Emergency Administration to carry the burden 
of Civilian defense, for which it was created by the President of the 
HUhppines, and to cooperate with other administrative units. 

nf thl°i\ M ? Fr(?n St r\ QS l } mt the Civili »" Emergency Administration 
?£VttL?t r Pme i Is A an t s c ? m P»redwith the State mobilization £ 
mon? ?« L n< P and thc Pass ve , Dcfcnsc Service, in the Straits Settle" 
S t'hir fl th ^?\ rom ° ved of the three from the total war concept 
Si? ftl ?1 an Emcr ? e , ncy Administration, compared with the 
2™™ ' 5 conccrn .° d ^th an enormously expanded, peacetime 

th?PiviliL S v^' ment 1 f§*. ^ ith Ma i° r Barron. The purpose of 
^wJ^^ e ^ C J^ dn ^ ^U8t, *^ 0,1 is ^finitely to set up adminis- 
ISaZ " h* 6 ^° or ^nizc, to establish procedures, 

tott \r ?3 « g?T° nt - cl t0 deal with a11 I 3hascs of a total war emer- 
Ti ? P1,ul IV ),n ] CS ' «W*P* what is called the scorched-earth 
El ?i" pi r so . orchcd - ear th policy cannot be carried out in a nation 
like the Philippines made of islands, 90 percent or more rural, with 
only one metropolitan industrial area. To carry out a scorched- 
earth policy here would help the enemy. A scorched-earth policy 
can be carried out in China or Russia, with their vast rear areas to 
which the civilian population can retreat into comparative safety, 
but such a policy would be of little value in a territory where no rear 
areas exist to which the civilian population can retire into safety 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 207 

would mean annihilation to a large part of the civilian population 
rouirli starvation, privation, and disease. The invading army would 
adoubtedly take into consideration the matter of supply for them- 
ttjves by sea and by air, while the civilian population, by destroying 

-Miirrrs, w ould l )r destroying their own means of survival. Total 
win one area does not set up a standard for total war in another area. 

lajor Man-on states thai the program of the Civilian Emergency 
Administration is built up to meet a disruption of normal life due to 
thuge disaster from natural causes. May I point out that many 
measures, set up to meet natural disasters, are precisely the measures 
■mired to meet man-made disasters. The following paragraphs are 
being mcluded in this statement, not merely for the purpose of de- 
fending Lied ( Voss responsibility, but to point out the position taken 
v the American Red Cross that measures to deal with disruption of 
normal hfe caused by a Inure disaster from natural causes can be 
idapted to and utilized in wartime, and that such transition can be 
effected speedily and smoothly, and to show that, with the exception 
of a few phases, measures set up to take care of huge disasters caused 

nature can hardly be distinguished from measures set up to deal 
With the disruption of civil populations due to war. 

Ihe American National Red Cross, a civilian voluntary-service 
organization, set up by law, and the largest relief organization of its 
kind m the world, has, from time to time, been called upon to assume 
responsibility for natural disasters affecting entire populations. A 

uonal Defense Bulletin issued by the American Red Cross, wasii- 
mgton, D. C, on May 15, 1941, states: 

Underlying all Red Cross activities related to national defense is the basi^as- 
Ittmption that its peacetime organiiation, program, and experience will beadaplea 
to, and utilized in, wartime, and that such transition will be effected speedily 
ana smoothly. 

It further states: 

That the Red Cross is now susceptible of ready expansion without fu nda ™^j2 
change to meet any increased responsibilities of national defense or war. _J-™5J°| 
recent years it has, as occasion demanded, in time of disaster, expanded wiuj » 
rapidity and in total number of personnel to a degree exceeding e ven W 
which was necessary during the World War. * * * It is possible thusja? 
approach with confidence the expansion of the Red Cross necessitated by prj-sci" 
national defense activity and to contemplate further expansion which wouia u 
necessary in event of actual war. 

While the functions of many governmental civilian agencies have 
been increased in recent years, the Army and Navy are expecting me 
Red Cross, in event of future war, to conduct its basic, tra . dlt ; 1 ^ 
services— not only those related to the medical departments but aiso 
those, concerned with morale and those representing service to civilians 
who may be involved in a theater of operations or in areas of iorcea 
or voluntary evacuation. . . 

The Philippine Red Cross, as a civilian agency, and as an administra- 
tive unit responsible to the Civilian Emergency Administration, is 
following out the principles quoted immediately above. 

It matters little whether certain administrative units of the Civiii an 
Emergency Administration, in their preparatory measures, visualize 
disruption of population due to huge natural disasters or man-causca 
disasters. They run almost parallel. As a matter of fact, prepara- 
tions for the disruption of normal life due to war can be set up witii 
greater facility and efficiency because we can foresee with a fair 



208 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



degree of accuracy the nature and scope of the destruction and also 
the localities in which the destruction will occur. In sudden, natural 
disasters this is not possible. 

The Civilian Emergency Administration, with the assistance of the Armv and 
by study of experiences in countries now at war, has drawn up for itself a picture 
of what disruption caused by war is likely to be and the localities which it may 
occur in. Since last April, as a civilian agency, it has been preparing measures 
to meet this disruption. 

(n) Food Administration— The greatest problem of the Civilian 
^ e W enCy Adxninistration, of course, is the question of food supplies. 
A 1 i^ Administrator is devoting much time toward encouraging 
the local population to preserve foods and store them for future use. 
He is also encouraging the planting of Victory gardens with quick- 
growing crops. In addition he constantly checks on all matters 
which refer to corn and rice cultivation (the two principal cereal crops 
in the Philippines), reports of progress under all these headings have 
currently come to the attention of the Administrators, and in this 
respect, it is felt that the only thing to be done is to continue encourag- 
ing the local population in their efforts to plant food crops and pre- 
serve every item and every scrap of food which can be raised within 
tne country. 

The more important phase of the food situation is the apparent 
lack of canned foods and quantity of rice from overseas. This is 
primarily due to the shortage of ships and consequent difficulty i n 
obtaining bottoms to carry supplies to the Philippines. 

it has also been noted that the Food Administrator, apparently, is 
not clothed with sufficient authority to make purchases abroad of 
important necessary food supplies on his own initiative. Since there 
appears to be a reluctance on the part of the leading commercial houses 
to bring ; m food supplies at their own risk, it is the belief of your com- 
mittee, that the Food Administrator should have authority to purchase 
and lay in supplies of canned staple foods which will provide for a 
minimum of a 6-month reserve. 

In this respect, the Food Administrator should be able to function 
by merely obtaining the approval of the Chairman of the National 
JSISP^ Comm 1 lss i°n for any and all purchases which he deems 
necessary to provide for this reserve. 

In the recommendation of the Emergency Planning Board, pa^ 4 
section (b), it was recommended that the Commonwealth authorities 
promptly cause a suitable reserve stock of food supplies to be cstab- 
iVJ.«i 1X i s >5 lta ?J c locations by either: (a) Acquiring and storing such 
stock at the Commonwealth Government's expense; or by (b) en- 
Su P^ rS 0f tllcse items to build up the necessary reserve 
W! ii U d( \ fl !! l . tc ^angement that in case of emergency the Govern- 
ment will requisition and pay for such stock on an equitable basis. If 
no emergency develops, the Government will insure suppliers against 
loss in disposal of such stock. 

Storage for these reserve stocks should be established in localities 
that will be reasonably free from bombing attacks and which would 
thereof ° dlstnbutl0n of supplies to areas known to be in need 

Under this recommendation, and since suppliers have not under- 
taken to establish reserves, it appears that the obligation has been 
definitely shifted to the shoulders of the Commonwealth Government 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 209 



i it would, thei vfniv, soom that the Food Administrator should havo 
Wand complete authority, subject to the supervision and control of 
Chairman of the National Kincrgency Commission, to lay in such 
jupplies us in his judgment will provide for a 6-month reserve. 

At the same time your committee feels that the distribution of 
itaplefood supplies to\hc indicated reception areas of evacuees should 
be undertaken immediately. First as a measure for protecting an unr 
:^ial inilux ami increase of population in the reception areas; and 
•econd, because of the didieulties which may bo encountered in the 

.hi of an emergency, due to the lack of transportation, or duo to 
the inability to use roads leading to these areas, which may be under 
the absolute control of the military for war measures. 

(o) Industrial Production Administrator* — The only reason for com- 
ment in respect to this Administrator is because his duties are so 
elosely linked with those of the Food Administrator. The canning oi 
•t and packing of fish which are two of the most important staple 
food items, has been actively undertaken and much progress has been 
made. 

In order to nrovido encouragement to this industry and in order to 
accustom the local population in the consumption of locally canned 
foods, it is recommended that, all staple canned and packed food sup- 
plies produced by the Industrial Production Administrator bo pur- 
used by the Food Administrator and stored for emergency PU r P? s ^{ 
at the same time endeavoring to place these products on the ioc 
market through the National Trading Corporation. ^ 
Comment has been heard that certain brands of canned mca ^ Uy 
fish from abroad are better in quality and palate than those 
produced, but in this respect, your committee invites attention , 
fact that the entire situation is an omergoncy; and that in tno c 
of shortage from abroad, locally produced supplies, no matter no 
ferior to those brought from abroad, are better than no supplies ab " ' 

Your committee feels that this is an excellent time to introduce an 
to accustom the population of the Philippines to purchasing ana co 
suming staple items canned and packed in the Philippines. 



CONCLUSION 



In reference to the recommendations of Major Marron, which app 
on pages 6 and 7 of his report, your committee submits: ^ Q 

First. Plamung is definitely being done on the pessimis tic sm £' nt 
Administrator entertains any optimistic views regarding- P 
situation. It is undoubtedly somewhat difficult to mcuJcate > a u 
spirit of pessimism into the civilian population as a whole, but , g- 
in no way be construed as applying to the Administrators t ,lie j 1Us com l 

Provincial and municipal emergency committees should oe ^ 0 
pellcd to realize the seriousness of the situation and t ^ 1 ?^ r s r 10U |. u f a 
made to appreciate the fact that there is not only a possibility, oi 
probability that this country may be compelled to defend itsel ft «^i 
a foreign foe. But even in this respect, progress is actually 
made, and the responses received from outlying points ; d .eiuutei\ 
cate that Provincial and Municipal Administration Umts are 
concerned in preparatory measures for emergency and are coope • & 
to the extent of their ability. 



210 REPORT OF THE PHHiIPPrNTE HIGH COMMISSIOXEIE 

At no time, since the Civilian Emergency Administration 1ms been 
organized has it the slightest idea of lulling the people into the mis- 
taken belief of security. The vulnerability of the Islands has been 
commented upon and repeatedly pointed out; and the people have 
always been informed that their safety depends upon their complete 
and lull cooperation in the national plans for defense and security 
'*S3+' • T° Ur ? ommittcc does not concur in the opinion that a 
integration with the military must be made. Nor does the 
K i f that there is any desire on the part of the command- 
P«r/f ° r any such migration at this moment, or that he would 
ti,„ o«° assume the responsibility of preparing protective measures in 
the sense of passive defense for the civilian population. 

shmflrPhi 1 i°T 9 ?\ m the -early Part of this report, military officers 
d °taded, m charge of civilian affairs at the headquarters of 
XL ?™ mandin S general. These officers should at all times be avail- 
be f.mV f° nSulta , tlon h Y the Administrators. These officers should 
thus m w}°T Sffe^Hh ? ^ m g on and what is be ing done and 
£r«i P i a defi mte link between the Civilian Emergency Admin- 
istration and the commanding general. J 

Civilian Fm» What is A intended by the term "revi taxation of the 
Civilian Emergency Administration" is not clearly understood 
feels tW C ° ntaCt With ^ hc Administrators, in gen^^e^Stee 
everv r f L e in CI T 13 fS^ant of the fact's of the situation, and 

aStSa^to" 1 ^ 6Very eff ° rt t0 faithfully 

petesi£e-3i t r AdmmistLor is 

qualified ™fi° ^ g A pities supervised by trained and 
S wheS P .h2 n and C ^ Ccked by com Petent umpires, the question 
SefS#§ e fl e ^ to |. a S? umpires may be obtained. Yo u- com" 
havV^^iwL 68 ^' , tha ^ we are a11 m fche same boat, that we 
great deal to ^arn ° f ° thciS and that we are still having £ 

S!#W«^aM? , .. 3 «? WeW f' SmCe no cx P erts and competent , m 

pirifor SmJtt^ fu ™ isb qualified experts and competent um- 

A^tt^^jais^ capacity wouid in the ^ 

Respectfully submitted. 

Fuel and Transportation Mf^iS^^Sing Chairman. 

IK a ^ CHARLES H. FoRSTER, 

Manager, Philippine Bed Cross, Member. 

Alfredo G. Eugenio, 
National Air Raid Warden, Member. 

F. Cuaderno, 
Director of Communications, Member. 



APPENDIX P 



N'TROL OF THE EXPORT OF CkRTAIN ARTICLES AND MATERIALS 

by the President of the United States of America 



a proclamation 



Whereas section C> of the act of Congress entitled "An act to 
expedite tin- strengthening of the national defense/' approved July l, 
1940, provides as follows: 

Sec. G. Whenever the President determines that it is necessary in the interest 
of national defense to prohibit or curtail the exportation of any military equip- 
ment or munitions, or component parts thereof, or machinery, tools, or f m , alc "~; 
or supplies neeessarv for the inanufaet ure, servicing, or operation ihcreot, lie imiv 
bv proclamation prohibit or curtail such exportation, except under such rules aim 
regulations as he shall prescribe. Any such proclamation shall descri ne xne 
articles or u :tt( rials included in the prohibition or curtailment contained tnerem; 
In case of the violation of anv provision of any proclamation, or of any ruie or 
regulation, issued hereunder, such violator or violators, upon conviction, sujm 
be punished bv a line of not more than .S10.000, or by imprisonment for not more 
than two years, or bv both such fine and imprisonment. 'I he »™*^ 1 t ^f2rSS 
Id this section shall terminate June 30, 1942, unless the Congress shall otherwise 
provide. 

Now, Therefore, I, Franklin D. Roosevelt, Pr^id^t of the 
United States of America, actinir under and by virtue of the auwonqr 
vested in me by the aforesaid act of Congress, do hereby proclaim 
that upon the recommendation of the Administrator ol ^P 0 , 1 * 
Control I have determined that it is necessary in the interest ot tne 
national defense that on and after August 27, 1941, the following- 
described articles and materials shall not be exported except wlien 
authorized in each case by a license as provided for in 1 reclamation 
2413, of July 2, 1940, entitled "Administration of section 6 of the act 
entitled "An ActTo expedite the strengthening of the national detense 
approved July 2, 1940: . *i inroo f 

All military equipment or munitions, or component parts tne eoi 
or machinery, tools, or material, or supplies necessary lor tne nnu i 
facture, servicing, or operation thereof, in addition to the articles anu 
materials the exportation of which is prohibited or curtailed by any 
proclamation heretofore issued under the authority of section 0 oi ui« 
act of July 2, 1940, as amended. , 

In Witness Whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and causea 
the seal of the United States of America to be affixed. 

Done at the city of Washington this 27th day of August, m tne 
year of our Lord nineteen hundred and forty-one and ot tne im- 
pendence of the United States of America the one hundred ana sixty- 
sixth. 

[ SBAIj ] Franklin D. Roosevelt. 

By the President: 
Cordell Hull, 

Secretary of State. 

(No. 2506) 211 



APPENDIX Q 



December 23, 1941. 

PR the sf^ A r! E ~° FFICE 0F THE HlGH Commissioner Respecting 
and CtaSSuro? nra ° F United States Government Securities 

United Sto A« ^ rotect the interests of rightful owners or holders of 
Ph ilippinertL rp Vemmon t securities, checks, and currency in t ho 
and deposit of th ireasur y Department has approved the registration 
States Hio-h fw^- 0 s . ecunfc , ies . checks, and currency with the United 
declared Sv tho %™ ls ? 1 , oner f j>* the duration of the national emercroncy 
The oSer 1C J r f sl 1 (, r nt of , the Unit( ' d Statea on May 27, 194? 7 
^ e °ks, or currenev k of , Uni . tcd , Stafccs Government securities, 
Slx cou nte e ncy to be deposited should prepare an affidavit in 

. 1 : Name Sdr , ly 5 nn ?*«*i 1 to 6, setting forth: 
S^ ^y ia^TinSf 6lt k«pWP v of affiant and of all persons 
{ List SUch Sests Secunt,es ' chccks or currency listed And the 

lot! nm ^SmSfJ& t tifc !-' ^ tcrcsfc rate ' denomination, 

Sn nS 0r wupo? si S ! a ° n . ' f 1 r ,st * rcd > number and dates of 
stam p or notarial n^ ^ 108 ' a ? d a descri Ption of any tax or other 

^TS^^S^S^ seal of a bIockcd count,y which ™y 

^jf^Sdi 8011 ^ of' acquisition of coupon securities by present 

of twt na ^ln°d f ffi n tT cy ' a SfU°l such currcnc y b y kiud * and 
5 in th e ° iss ^'- ° aSe R<?SerVC n0t ' the name 

^ta^^^^TS S afc is > government checks 

A a h st oHS 2 the i XJm ^ ed States or authorized 

(if anv^ f <Wer svm£i ° ks b ? datcs - amounts, name of payee, 

f 6 A rec u ^ ^ * ° f endor ^ 

SS5SS§85 $Eh?$2!il!^ chccks or currenc y be acce pt«d 

7 - A rt[ ay 27, ig jf the natlon »l emergency declared by the Presi- 

^edu^cSU 1 ^' ™ *h? e 7 enfc of destruction of such securities, 

for tho\^ ym ^ be issued'hvH, 8 ' T nfcleS ' % e6ks > or « 
Cor PoraH CcoiJ nt of tC 2* ° Tr f a ? ur y Department and be held 

8* X> n - or indiv ,fn d i P ° S A t0r or delivered to a designated bank, 
?*th raWSBRS 5 c , onLincn tal United States. 
Com m - JJ* Presence of 5^ n^ 011 counter P art of the affidavit under 

9. Th °, ner - G ° r agent de signatcd by the High 

" ifc ems dJSh Ch i C I?' T d curre ncy shall be checked 
deposited and the designated officer or agent shall 



against th e 
212 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 213 

certify under official seal on each counterpart as to the deposit and 
rification. 

10. Counterparts Nos. 1 through 3 shall be forwarded by the High 
Commissioner by separate means to "Treasury Department, Wash- 
ington, D. C.;" counterpart No. 4 shall be retained by the 
designated officer or agent; counterpart No. 5 shall be delivered to 
(he depositor; counterpart No. 6 shall be plaeed with the securities, 
checks, and currency in a scaled envelope which shall be properly 
; !t Iitified. 

In the event of the destruction of securities, checks or currency so 
deposited, if the evidence is satisfactory and acceptable to the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury, and subject to all applicable law, substitute 
securities, cheeks, or currency, or check in payment will be issued by 
the Treasury I )epart ment and be held for the account of the depositor 
or delivered to the designated bank, corporation or individual in the 
continental United States. 

The President of the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury, 
and the Secretary of the Interior have approved this procedure. The 
purpose is to give registration and protection insofar as may be 
possible to the securities held by persons, companies and institutions. 

A special office for the purpose of deposit and registration will be 
opened at the National City Bank of New York Manila Branch 
bepinnine; 10 a. m., Tuesday, December 23. 

Mr. Woodbury Willoughby and Mr. F. C. Bailey have been desig- 
nated by the High Commissioner as agents to receive securities, cur- 
rency, and checks accompanied by affidavits. 



1 



APPENDIX R 

_ _ Washington, December 2A, 19.il. 

Radio Received (RCA) 
No. 725— Clear. 
Sayre, 
Manila: 

inF, 011 ™" 18 from Treasury: Re your telegram of December 19, 
iy41 on enemy property: 

a 9 n ,? ecembcr 18 > 1941 > tnc President approved the first War Powers 
Act, mi (Public, No. 354, 77th Cong.). Sections 301 and 302 of 
title III of such act read as follows: 

Title III. Trading With the Enemy 

the fL^V \ The r fi J? t fi entenco of Subdivision B, section 5, of the Trading With 
S*rSdffiitoTO: 6 ' 1917 (4 ° Stat - 411) ' as amend * d > is hereby amended 

dedar.^Tv th^P*'"^ of . war °7 durin K any other period of national emergency 
dSl b fJ*?, Pre ? ,dcnt > the President may, through any agency that he may 

by means of inJj.^S an , d under 8Uch rules and regulations as he may prescribe* 
«y means of instructions licenses, or otherwise 

transfers of cre K r a itV^ U e '.°r P rohibit - any transactions in foreign exchange, 
and £? bfi eS.^ ,CtW ? Cn ' by> V , - r0,,gh ' ° r t0 anv bankinR "istitution 
»ihor bX!^^^e^^ or earmarking of gold or silver 

any M^^^i^^^S^.^ Compel, nullify, void, prevent or prohibit, 
ImportStoi Zal^^*-.^ withdrawal, transportation 
privilege wil r ^ tU ? llng ? r .^ercising any right, power, or 

foreign country or a .mtinnni h SaC VT S lnvol Y ,n K- any property in which anv 
«*pect to any\ro wrt rS ! 0r ?? f ! .'as any interest, by any person, or with 
property or uriew*ft^»™ J 60 *.* 0 tho Jurisdiction of the United States: and any 
as, and" upon the term ^ Hir!>TTK C °V, n,r 'Y> or . national thereof shall vest, when, 
may be dEffiS by the President, in such agency or person as 
conditions if the Preside n,v SSI >' the and upon BUOh terms and 

used, administered He ffi i \ ' ,r f scrll ' c Buoh mtcrest or property shall be held, 
for the benefit of the I ? e kl V ° r 0{ >vr ^, ***** with in the interest of and* 
perform any and all acts ineiHont ^' 82? S "° h do : si S natcd agency or person may 
purposes; and the PnsSw i " Ul , c accomplishment or furtherance 
any p ers on to keen I t wnZ. ' l n th ? ma "»'r hereinabove provided, 
reports or otheEZ *J£j2»&SL!&* under oath, in the 



i of these 
require 
form of 




or as may be otherw Vo n,.^ y nat, o»al thereof has or has 1 
and in any case ^ whfch *° T°J CC thc Provisions of this subdivision 

manner hereinabove rMk&QlX^JP rec iuired. the President, may, in the 
national sccuritv or defensr u,, '•'' rC thC c Production, or if necessary to the 
tracts, letters, memora, ,ln ™ l,T ' ZUrC ' ° f any hooks of account, records, con- 
person; and the Preside i„ . "h pap ° rs ' in thc custody or control of such 
and further meaBWteTnot iSSi!Sf manner hereinabove provided, take other 
division. ^-^urcs not inconsistent herewith for the enforcement of this sub- 

inte^Lym^fCT^'i transfer ' assi gnment, or delivery of property or 
directed pui*uan?to thS Zu?v account of the ^ited States, or as otherwise 
tioTSed heJfitmH^ ^n^^i? or anv r,lle . regulation, instruction, or direc- 
tion issued hereunder shall to thc extent thereof be a full acquittance and discharge 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 215 



for all purposes of the obligation of the person making the same; and no person 
ehall be held liable in any court for or in respeot to anything done or omitted in 
good faith in connection with the administration of, or in pursuance of and in 
reliance on, this subdivision, or any rule, regulation, instruction, or direction 
issued hereunder. 

III. As used in this subdivision the term "United States" means the United 
States and any place subject to the jurisdiction thereof, including the Philippine 
Islands, and the several Courts of First Instance of the Commonwealth of the 
Philippine Islands shall have jurisdiction in all cases, civil or criminal, arising under 
this subdivision in the Philippine Islands and concurrent jurisdiction with the 
district courts of t he United States of all cases, civil or criminal, arising upon the 
high seas: Provided t however. That the foregoing shall not be construed as a limita- 
tion upon the power of the President, which is hereby conferred, to prescribe from 
time to time, definitions, not inconsistent with the purposes of this subdivision, 
f<»r any <>r all of th«. terms used in this subdivision. 

Sec. 302. All acts, actions, regulations, rules, orders, and proclamations hereto- 
fore taken, promulgated, made, or issued by, or pursuant to the direction of, the 
President or the Secretary of the Treasury under the Trading With the Enemy 
Act of October b. 1917 (40 Stat. ill), as amended, which would have been au- 
thorized if the provisions of this act and the amendments made by it had been in 
effect, are hereby approved, ratified, and confirmed. 

You will note thai these sections amend section V-B of the Trading 
With the Enemy Act of October G, 1917, as amended, pursuant to 
which freezing control has been administered. 

With the approval oi the President, and for the purpose of dealing 
with the Philippine situation, all of the powers and authority conferred 
upon tin* President under the above-quoted provisions of law are 
hereby delegated to you insofar as the Philippines are concerned. 

In addition, 1 am allocating $100,000 from appropriation entitled 
"2020120, Salaries and expenses, Foreign Exchange Control, 1942' to 
cover your initial expenses in carrying out this program. Please for- 
ward to me at once an estimate of the amount of funds (by month) 
that you feel you will need during the next three months. 

It will ol course be necessary for you, in cooperation with the mili- 
tary and Commonwealth Government authorities, to formulate a 
program for dealing with this emergency situation. We will be glad 
to cooperate with you and oiler advice and suggestions on any points 
you may care to raise but we do not want you to feel that you must 
wait for instructions from Washington. You will be advised from 
time to time as plans are developed for dealing with enemy property. 

The powers conferred by the statute are very broad. Congress 
expects that complete records will be established and maintained with 
respect to property seized or otherwise received in your custod} 7 . 
Please be guided accordingly. . . 

You are authorized to take any steps you deem appropriate to make 

Eublic the authority herein conferred on you. H. Morgenthau, Jr. r 
ecretary of the Treasury. 

Swope. 

Received December 27, 1941. 



APPENDIX S 



Washington, December 26, 1941. 
Radio Received (Navy, Corregidor). 
No. 727. 

United States High Commissioner: 

Following: from Secretary of the Treasury: We have received cable 
from Manila Clearinghouse urging President take immediate action 
on question of protection bank reserves. 

Cable No. 725 sent to you on December 24 gives you full and 
ample authority to take any and all steps you deem appropriate to 
take over for safekeeping and destruction any reserves or assets in 
or with banks, brokers, safe-deposits companies, insurance companies, 
or elsewhere, including any form of currency, coin, bullion, securities 
drafts, checks, negotiable paper, etc. This authority is by no means 
confined to property owned by enemy nationals, but extends to such 
property no matter who is the owner. 

As indicated in cable No. 725 vou do not have to wait for further 
or specific instructions from Washington. 

In particular you are fully authorized by the President to take 
whatever steps you deem necessary to prevent such assets and reserves 
from falling into the hands of the enemy. 

lhc President states that if you have the time you should destroy 
such assets and reserves before competent witnesses and make records 
?Lo I ProPfrty fc o Corregidor, but that if there is not sufficient 
Sw y r ^lr\ d ^erthelcss destroy such assets and reserves, 
ZXCfeT- f e W Thc P riraar y P ur Pose is to keep the 
P £ •? f ? Uln ,? mto the han ds of the enemy. 
United Vtn^K V V VCry shortl y 'ssue an order freezing assets in the 
portion PS tL b p,° n . ein P to ^sidents and business institutions in those 
portions of the Philippines that are overrun by the enemy. 

Received December 27, 1941. Swope. 

216 



APPENDIX T 

Department of the Interior 

information service 

Division of Tkruitouif.s and Island Possessions: 

The United States Eligh Commissioner to the Philippine Islands, 
Francis B. Say re, today made public the list of persons believed to 
have been interned in "Manila. This list of mcrj than 1,500 names 
came into the possession of High Commissioner Sayre shortly after 
Manila was occupied by the Japanese. 

Persons listed, mostly American citizens, but with a considerable 
number of British nationals among them, are believed to be in buildings 
formerly occupied by the University of Santo Tomas, a large uni- 
versity on the outskirts of Manila. High Commissioner Sayre 
emphasized that the accuracy of the entire list could not be guaranteed. 

Examination of the list by the Philippine section of the Division of 
Territories and Island Possessions indicates that the entire American 
civilian population of Manila was not included. There is no fl } rtlie jJ 
information as to the whereabouts and welfare of people not included 
in the list. % . 

"It was difficult and dangerous to attempt to communicate with 
Americans in Manila," Commissioner Sayre* $aicL "Heavy penalties 
might be inflicted upon persons suspected of communicating wtn 
American authorities in the unoccupied area. TVc understand that 
the Japanese were permitting family servants of interned persons to 
bring food to them. In cases where this was not possible, the Philip- 
pine Red Cross was supplying food. We have also heard that re- 
strictions have been relaxed' recently to permit many of the women and 
children to return to their homes." 

He also reported that the International Red Cross now is trying to 
secure the appointment of a Swiss citizen, now in Manila, as its dele- 
gate. Once this has been accomplished, the information received 
from the International Red Cross representative regarding persons in 
Manila will be forwarded to the next of kin hv the Information Bureau, 
Oflicc of the Provost Marshal General Washington, D. C. Ino 
Provost Marshal General's Office maintains direct contact by cable 
with the International Red Cross at Geneva, keeps records pertaining 
to all internees and prisoners of war, and conducts correspondence 
regarding them. Inquiries about Americans last known to be m the 
Philippines are accepted by local chapters of the America Red Cross, 
The list follows: 

Aaltcn, H. van Agncw, C. G. Allen, Robert 

Abarbanell Agnew, Mrs. Alloy, Mrs. Lilhan 

Abarbanell, Marcclle Airriess. Eric M. Almy, Mrs. ChlTorct n,. 

'Abarbanell, Michael Ale, P. EL Alston, W. G. 

Abraham, Miss Marjoric Alexander, J. C. Allison, Mrs. R. R. 

Adrian, M. J. Alexander, Mrs. J. C. An ers, A. P. 

Adrian, Mrs. M. Allan, J. C. Ames, Mrs. Aubrey 



217 



83018 — 43 15 



218 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Anderson, C. 
Anderson. Mrs. A. B. 
Anderson, C. S. 
Anderson, D. 
Andres, Antonio 
Andres, Mrs. J. C. 
Andrews, Mrs. Rav, and 
child 

Anney, Mrs. W. E. 
Apelseth, K. A. 
Aplin, Mr^. 
Aplin, T. D. 
Arctander, Mrs. L. E. 
Arida, J. 
Arick, M. R. 
Armstrong, C. W. 
Arriandiaga, P. 
Ashley, Master Allen 
Ashley, Mrs. J. M. 
AfWey, Miss Muriel 
Atkinson, Mrs. E. F. 
Atkinson, E. P 
Atkinson, W. A. R. 
Aubrey, Miss j. 
Aubrey, Mrs. M. 
Ayres, Glen 
Ayres, Mrs. 
Bachledler, L. J 
Bailey, F. 
Bailey, Mrs. F. C. 
Bailey, Daughter 
Ba dwin, ^ewland 
Ba dvvin, M rs . Newland 
Ba dwin Mi ss Alice 

Mrs. Jenny 
Balfour, W 
Balis, D. 
Ballon, E. H 
Barkas, Master Bfflie 
games. Miss Carroll 
games, Q. S. 
Barnes, Mrs. G. 8 

Barnes, Mrs. j w 
Barnes, R. p 
Barnes, Mrs.'R. P 
Barnes, W F 
garr, Mrs. H. L 
Mrs. J. M 
Barr, R. W> M ' 

| arr , W. E. 
Bartgis, F. R 
Barth, Mrs. P hvlli8 
Baskerville, R E 

S$SS 'Balph 
Bateman, j 
Bateman, J. j. 
Bateman, Baffle 
Baumann, Carl 
Baxter, Mtsa Isabel 
Baxter, John C 
Beaman, Miss Maudie 
Beaumont, Mrs. 
Beaumont, Mrs. A. M 
Beaumont, Master 



Beck, E. 
Becker, Frank 
Beebee, W. W. 
Beeman, J. R. 
Beeman, N. C. 
Beeman, R. R. 
Beeman, Mrs. S. 
Beeman, W. E. 
Begole, E. R. 
Bellis, A. G. 
Bender, Mrs. A. 
Bennett, C. C. 
Bentley, E. 
Benton, John W. 
Benton, J. \V. 
Bergman, R. G. 
Bergman, Mrs. 
Berkenkotter, B. H. 
Berkenkotter, Mrs. John 
Berkin, Mrs. C. M. 
Berman, W. H. 
Berry, F. N. 
Beskid, Mrs. Carrey 
Besser, L. L. 
Bettles, Gordon 
Beusse, G. H. 
Bieganowska, Miss Casi- 

mira 
Birchall, J. R. 
Bishop, A. H. 
Bissinger, George W. 
Bissinger, Mrs. George 
Black, J. 
Blair, H. E. 
Blair, Mrs. S. G. 
Blake, E. T. 
Blanton, Vale 
Blechynden, L. de C. 
Blechynden, Mrs. L. de C. 
Blessing, Gretchcn 
Blessing, L. R. 
Blvthe, D. W. 
Blythe, David 
Blvthe, Mrs. David 
Blythe, Richard 
Bogle, E. 
Boniface, Jane 
Boniface, Judy 
Boniface, M. 
Boniface, Rosemary 
Boniface, Mrs. Winifred 
Bonner, N. E. 
Boots, J. L. 
Bos well, Miss Eleanor 
Boswell, Daughter 
Boswell, G. 
Bousman, fit. H. 
Bousman, Mrs. Hugh 
Bousman, James 
Bousman, Martha Ann 
Bousman, Tom 
Bowen, Mrs. Dmitra 
Bo wen, Mrs. F. A. 
Boyce, Leila 
Boyce, Viola 
Boyd, W. G. 
Boyers, J. S. 



Bradley, Mrs. Amelia 
Bradley, John 
Bradley, X. J. 
Bradney, R. 
Bradshaw, J. W. 
Brambles, R. D. 
Brambles, Mrs. R. D. 
B ram well, E. K. 
Bramwell. Mrs. H. L. 
Bratton, C. H. 
Brazee, Mrs. Consuelo 
Brazee, Miss Elizabeth 
Brazee, Miss Florence 
Bree, J. de 
Bree, Mrs. J. do 
Brewster, C. 
Brines, Caralie Mrs. H. 
Brines, R. 

Brines, Mrs. Russell 
Brinson, II. E. 
Brockway, A. G. 
Brock wav, Mrs. Merna 
Brooks, W. L. 
Brown, B. 
Brown, Mrs. C. 
Brown, George 
Brown, II. B. 
Brown, Hugh 
Brown, Mrs. Hugh 
Brown, Mrs. M. B. 
Brown, Miss Mary 
Brown, Mrs. Nell 
Brown, Mrs. R. A., and 

children 
Brown, R. H. 
Brown, R. S. 
Brown, Mrs. R. S. 
Browning, Mrs. H. B. 
Browning, Michael 
Browning, William 
Bruce, Miss Janet 
Bruce, Miss Sally 
Bruen, D. A. 
Brune, W. C. 
Brush, J. 
Brush, Mrs. J. 
Bucher, H. H. 
Buck, H. H. 
Buck, James 

Buckburrough, Mrs. R. A 
Bulteel, C. V. S. 
Bunje, Mrs. L. 
Bunnell, W. J. 
Bunnell, Mrs. Wilbur 
Burke, Miss Helen 
Burmeister, H. L. 
Burmeister, Mrs. 
Burn, J. B. 
Burn, J. D. 
Burn, R. 
Burns, J. 
Burnham, E. 
Burton, Mrs. F. E. 
Bush, Mrs. A. 
Bush, E. S. 
Bushman, S. 
Buss, Mrs. A. D. 



Bntl 

E:itl 



WBPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 219 



ttler, J. N. 
_ lUer; Mrs. J. X. 
B itler. O. K. 
B itterv, Mrs. Harriet 
Butter v. J. W. 

I. I.. F. 
Cadwallader, W. |). 
Cadawallnder, Mrs. 

Brooke 
Cadwallader, Fred 
Cadwallader, Miss 11. 
Cadawallnder, Ted 
Cad wall ado r, Wm. 
Cadawullader. Mrs. Win. 
I lirns, J. W. 

Mrs. J. \V. 
Caldwell, L. 
Calhoun, A. 1). 
Cameron. Miss Constance 
Carey. Mrs. Adcle 
CareV, Ed. 
Carey, C. V. 
Carlson, C. F. 
Carlton, Mrs. 
Carpenter, C. F. 
Carpenter, 11. 
Carpenter, Thomas 
Carrero, Miss Sylvia 
Carson, A. B. 
Carson, Mrs. A. B. 
Carson, Miss Mary Vir- 

ginia 
Carter, Mrs. M. 
Carter, W. L. 
Carter, Mrs. W. I,. 
Casad, Miss Joan 
Casad, Mrs. Louise 
Case, 11. E. 
Cassell. Mrs. M. F. 
Cates, L. C. 
Cease, F. "L. 
Cecil, Robert 
Chanin, A. J. 
Chard, D. L. 
Chard, Mrs. Olga 
Charnock, Mrs. Ivy 
Charnock, Miss Kathleen 
Charnock, Miss Mavis 
Charnock, M. B. 
Charter, T. U. 
Chennery, Mrs. C. E. 
Chestnut, A. 
Christcnsen, Joseph 
Christenson, Mrs. Irene 
Christian, F. 
Christie, A. 
Chun, Miss W. 
Citeman, Charles R. 
Clark, Mrs. C. H. 
Clark, IT. D. Ill 
Clark, Mrs. H. D., Jr. 
Clark, Henry 
Clark, V. V. 
Clear. Miss B. 
Clear, Miss Barbara 
Clear, C. N. 



Clear, Mrs. Ruth 
Cobb, B. E. 
Cobb, Mrs. M. 
c logan, Mrs. B. O. 
t U >gan, Miss I. 
Cohen. Miss 

t 'ole, ( icorge T. 
Cole. ,1. 
Collins, J. D. 
Collins. Mrs. D. J. 
Collins, Miss M. 
Collins, Hubert Edward 
Concopcion, Mrs. Eliza- 
beth 

Cone, n. 
c lonway, J. 
Cook, Edward 
t look, Mrs. Pjuiline 
Cooke, G. P. 
Cookingham, Mrs. 

C 'ookingham, .1 . 
Cootc, Miss Betty 
C 'oote, Leonard John 
Copley, C. C. 
Cooper, Mrs. G. F. 
Copper, It. G. 

Core, Mrs. G. W. 
Core, Charles 
Core, Miss Dorothv 
Corkle, MLss Annie B. 
( 'orlias, F. 
Corliss, Mrs. F. 
Corliss, Daughter 
C 'ortcs, Miss M. 
Corwin, A. o. 
Costa, F. do la 
Costa. Mrs. F. A. de la 
Covit, Bernard 
Crablc, Mrs. K. M. 
Crane, C. W. 
Craw, J. S. 
Craw, J. YY. 
Crawford, J. C. 
Crawford, 11. A. 
Crawford, S. 
Crawford, Virginia 
Creech, II. 
Crews, R. A. 
Croisant, Everett A. 
Cromwell, EL H. 
Cronin, Mrs. Ray 
Cronin, Hay P. 
Crosby, Miss K. A. 
Cr others, J. Y. 
Crothcrs, Mrs. J. Y. 
Crovat, Mrs. Dorothy 
Crovat, Dorothy 
Crump, Miss Patricia 
CuUens, J. W. 
Cummings, E. 
Cunningham, J. M. 
Cunningham, N. 
Cutting, Mrs. Helen 
Dahlke, G. A. 
Dahlkc, Mrs. G. A. 
Damcron, Robert 



Damrosch, L. 
Dandois, C. S., Sr. 
Dandois, C. S. f Jr. 
Dandois, Lucille 
Danie, IL A. 
Daniels, J. II. 
Danner, Paul IL 
1 )anner, Mrs. P. R- 
Dargie, D. 
Dargios, Mrs. Mary 
da Silva, Miss Eivinia 
da Silva, Miss L. M. 
Davidson, A. 
Davis, Mrs. 
Davis, A. B. 
1 )a\ is, A. C. 
Davis, Derwin 
Davis, Miss Dorothy 
Davis, Eva Grace 
Davis, L. H. 
Davis, Mildred 
Davis, H. W. 
Davis, \V. W. 
Dav, K. B. 
Day, Mrs. K. B. 
Docker, L. 

Dc Coito, Mrs. L. V. 
De Coito, L. V. 
Dee, Mrs. M. F. 
Deihl, Mrs. 

Del Pan, IL F. . 

Del Pan. Mrs. Stephanie 

Dcinuth. Bill 

De Prida. Mrs. Larry 

Derhvshiiv. Mrs. 

Derbyshire, F. 

Desborough, V. 

Detzer, L. W. 

Dewhirst. H D. 

Dickson. K. N. 

Diehl. IL 

Dietz, S. 

Dodge. Mrs. L. 

Doig, L. L. 

Donnely, WUbam 

Donnelly. Miss Elizabeth 

Doolan, R. G. 

Doolan, Mrs Roy and son 

Douglas, R. 1 • 
Douglas. \\ dham 
Dow, J. Fred 
Downing. V. 
Dovle, Dr. J. U. 
Doyle, Mrs. J. 
Duckworth, Mrs. A. 
Duckworth, Nunny 
Duckworth, Master Peter 
Duckworth, Mrs. Rosa- 

lind 
Duckworth, S. 
Dudley. Mrs. J. 
DufL Miss EleanoT 
Duff, Mrs. Helen 
Duff, N. A. H 
Duggleby, A. *. 
Dungey, Arthur 



220 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Dungcy, Mrs. Arthur 
Dun I on, Gerald L. 
Dyer, Phyllis 
Dyson, Mrs. 
Dyson, Miss Babs 
Dyson, Daughter 
Dyson, Son 
Dyson, W. V. 
Earl, Mrs. 
Earl, G. R. 
Earl. J. 
Earl, J. R. 
Earl, Miss Martha 
Earl, R. 
Eburn, W. G. 
Edwards, G. 
Edwards, John 
Edwards, L. B. 
Edwards, Mrs. L. B 
Egner, C. a. 
Eemer, Mrs. 
Elam, J. W. 
Elfstrom, Katharine 
Klfstrom, Lucy a 
E strom, R. J. 
E i.ott. Cecil L. 
Elliott, Mrs. G. L. 

Elhs, Mrs. E 
Ellis, E. p 
^JJi% Mrs.'F. D. 
EU*, Miss Florence H 
gktner, Mrs. c 
glwood, J. D 
Engel, R one 
Ervme, Mrs. N. C 
Etmre, Mrs. Robert 
Evans, Miss ert 
Evans, A. H. 
{-vans, Geor Ke H 
Evans, Mn p 
Evans! Son ° COr ^ 
Everest, C. \y 
Everest, R 
Everest, D 
Everest, ft. j * 
Eairchild, k c 

Faneuf, s (■ K - c - 
games, 

Farnell, T. \ V 

Farnsworth, c • 
Farnsworth Vj rQ 
Feldman, & '\ lr? - 
Peldman; 8, 
Feldman, M rs 7 
Ferguson, R ' ^ en a 
Fernandez, j j 
Fernstrom, M r ' s " 
Fitzgerald, D. & 
Flanagan, J. M * 
Flannigan, Mrs. 
Flavin, William 8, 
Fleming, J. 



Fletcher, T. H. 
Flood, Bertha P. 
Flood, Jimmy 
Flood, EL P. 
Flood, T. P. 
Fog, E. H. 
Foley, Ella 
Foley, F. G. 
Foley, Mary Alice 
Ford, Charles 
Ford, Henrv 
Ford, Miss J. B. 
Ford, Miss Mary 
Forney, \V. T. 
Forster, Mrs. C. 
Forster, C. H. 
Forster, Clif. 
Frampton, Mrs. A. B. 
Frampton, Miss Muriel 
Franks, C. 
Franks, Mrs. C. W. 
Frasier, Mrs. A. C. 
Frasier, Barbara 
Freeman, E. 
Freeman, Mrs. Eddie 
Freeman, J. P. 
Freeth, Mrs. L. 
Friedman. P. 
Fry, J. 

Fryers, Miss Isabel 
Fulstone, J. 
Fulston, Jerry 
Periston, Mrs. M. A. 
Fulton, Mrs. Jolin J. 
Furman, Ethel 
Furman, Mrs. R. 
Furman, Sallie 
Furman, Sybil 
Fuxman, C. 
Gabrielson, C. 
Gaelics, S. F. 
Gaillard, J. G. 
Gallern, Mrs. W. F. 
Gallin, W. C. 
Gardner, C. D. 
Gardiner, C. A. 
Gardiner, Miss Elizabeth 
Gardiner, \V. A. 
Garmezy, Sam 
Garrard, John 
Garrard, L. A. 
Garrard, Mrs. L. A. 
Garrctson, Miss Alice 
Gates, Miss Barbara 
Gates, Mrs. E. 
Ga.es, Miss Wendy 
Gay res, Irene 
Geddes, Mrs. E. C. 
Gee, Miss Betty 
Gibbs, A. J. 
Giles, Mrs. J. 
Giles, J. c. 
Gilhouser, H. 
GUlett, B. J. 
GUman, A. B. 
Gihnore, J. B. 
Gilmore, Mrs. J. B. 



Gisport, F. M. 
Glaiserman, Mrs. C. M. 
Glaiserman, Miss Dorothy 
Glaiserman, J. M. 
Glaiserman, J. M., Jr. 
Glen, J. 
Glen, Mrs. J. 
Gobson, Mrs. Marie 
Goldberg, L. 
Golucke, L. H. 
Goodwin, M. L. 
Gordon, M. D. 
Gordon, D. 
Gould, G. B. 
Goyncs, C. 
Goynes, George A. 
Goynes, George A., Jr. 
Govnes, R. 
Grant, C. V. 
Grant, Miss Helen 
Gray, Mrs. A. T. 
Gray, Miss B. 
Gray, Miss D. 
Green, E. B. 
Greene, G. H. 
Greenfield, M. 
Greenland, Mrs. 
Greenman, G. A. 
Greenville, Alonso 
Gregg, \V. B. 
Gregg, Mrs. W. B. 
Grcwe, J. 

Grieve, Miss Helen 
Grieve, J. B. 

Grimes, Mrs. L. B., and 

child 
Grimm, W. E. 
Grimmant, D. H. 
Grove, Mrs. W. K. 
Groves, F. 
Groves, Mrs. F. 
Gulick, P. A. 
Gunison, R. 
Gunnels, R. L. 
Gunneson, Mrs. Royal 
Gutters, Deanna 
Haan, J. de 
Haar, S. 
flackett, Alice 
Hackett, Mrs. John A. 
Hackett, Miss Shirley 
Hackette, Bessie 
Hagans, J. D. 
Haigh, J. 
Haigh, V. A. 
Haight, Mrs. A. 
Haight, Miss Renee 
Hails, H. F. 
Haimovitch 
Hale, F. H. 
Haley, C. A. 
Hall, Norman S. 
Hamara, A. 
Hamblin, Mrs. D. C. 
Hamilton, C. A. 
Plamilton, S. 
Hamilton, Son 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



221 



Hamilton. Mrs. S. W 
gamm, Mrs. VV. F. 
gammon, H. L. 
Hammond, A. M. 
Hampton, James A. 
Hancock, Mrs. 
Hannings, ( 'arl 
Hannings, Mrs 

Neale 
Hansen, M. G 



Hill, Mrs. Robert 
Hill. U. G. 
Rinsohe, O. 
Hodges, Mrs. A. I. 
Hodgson, F. X. 
Hoey, K. 
Hoey, Mrs. Ruth 
(Uadys Hotfman, Mrs. E. G. 

H oilman, Miss Margaret 
Hoffman, Mrs. W. J. 



Hansen, Mrs. Vicki Grieve Hoffman, Win. 



HfM <>n, E. J 
Hanson. Mrs. Kenneth 
Hard, H. W. 
Hard, Mrs. H. W. 
Hardcastlo, ( !. O. 
Harmon, K. E. 
Harper, E. K. 
Harper, Mrs. C. B. 
Harrell, R. M. 
Harrell. Mrs. 
Harria, W*. W. 
Harrw, Mrs. A. G. H. 
Harris. Mrs. E. 
Harris, Miss H. 
Harrison, P. F. 
Hart, Irving 
Hart, J. C. 
Hart, W. W. 
HasdorfT, Chas. C. 
Haughwout, Mrs. F. L. 
Haven, I,. O. 
Hawthorne, F. W. 
Hazzard, E. W. 
Hazzard, .Joan 
Hazzard, Mrs. Lillian 
Hazzard, Susannc (child) 
Heudington, John L. 
Hearnden, J. 
Hearnden, Mrs. Phyliss 
Hebel, Walter 
Hedriek, Miss II. 
Heesch, H. 
Heise, Mabel June 
Hellmcrs. Mrs. Gladys 
Hellmers, H. G. 
Henderson, B. C. 
Henderson, Mrs. B. C. 
Henderson, Mrs. G. 
Henning, John 
Hernden, Mrs. Alice 
Herndon, R. F. 
Herridge, Mrs. 
Herridge, J. R. 
Hertel, R. 
Hess, Carl 
Heyward, A. S. 
Hezzelwood, Miss Mary 
Hczzelwood, Mrs. 
High, Mrs. G. 
High, Miss May V. 
High, Patricia 
Hileman, A. D. 
Hill, Mrs. A. J. 
Hill, Miss Blaine 
Hill, Mrs. Diana 
Hill, Mrs. M. E. 



Hoffman, Wm., Sr. 
IlotTman. Mrs. Winifred 

Hoffmaster, C. 
Hogarth, A. 

Hokanson, M. 
llokanson, Mrs. 
Holden. W. F. 
Holland, A. E. 
Hollowav, G. I. 
Hollow-ay, Mrs. Miriam 
Holmes. Miss 

Holmes, H. 
Holmes, Ruth 
Holt. Bridget 
Holzer, C. C. 
Honigsberg, Mrs. M. 
Hooper, K. S. 
Hooper, Mrs. E. S. 
Hooper, G. 

Hooper, Ruth Williams 
Hoover. Mrs. R. J. 
Hoover. Mrs. W. 
Hoover, W. S. 
Horlcy, Miss Cissy 
Horridge, G. R. 
Horton, J. 
Housman. L. M. 
Howard, Mrs. A. S. 
Howard, S. 
Howard, Mrs. Sam 
Howells, J. W. 
Howie, James 
Hoy, Miss Rosemarie 

Hoyt. Miss Eva 
Hubbard, R. H. 

Hubbard, Mrs. 
children 

Huggins, Miss 

Hughes, Eleanor 

Hughes, J. C 

Hughes, J. L. 

Hull, E. M. 

Hulme, E. 

Hume, W. M. 

Hume, Mrs. Wilson 

Humphreys, J. 

Humphreys, It. 

Humphries, Ruth 

Hunt, A. J. 

Hunt, D'Arcy 

Hunter, Mrs. J. 

Hunter, Michael 

Hunter, Peter 

Huppman, J. M. 

Hurst, William 
Hutchinson, D. D. 



and 3 



Hyde, Allan 
Hvde, Gordon 
Hyde, Mrs. W. 
Hynes, C. S. 
Hvnes, Mrs. C. S. 
[ddlings, P. L- . 
Isaacs. Miss Gloria 
Ivory, G. M. ^ 
Jacks, Mrs. B. C. 
Jacks, Miss Mattie Lee 
Jacobs, Ann 
Jacobs, Mrs. A. B. 
Jacobs, Jean 
Jamieson, S. 
Janda, R. _ 
Janda, Mrs. Robert 
Japson, L. B. 
Jaques, S. H. 
Jay, J. L. 
Jeavons, Mrs. F. 
Jeavons, Mrs. P. . 
Jeavons, Master Ronald 
JelTerson, F. C. n 
Jefferson, Mrs. Frank U 
Jefferson, Julienne 
Jensen, W. E. 
Jepson, Mrs. Constance 
Jepson' Miss Margaret 

Ann 
Johnsen, Jack 
John, Miss 
John, Mrs. 
John. Miss Betty 
John, Miss Helen 
Johnson, A. B. 
Johnson, C. W. 
Johnson, F. A. 
Johnson, Mrs. Teresa 
Johnson, W. E. 
Johnstone, J. S. 
Jones, B. E. 
Jones, Mrs. M. 
Jones, R. B. 
Jones, W. H. 
Jordan, Mrs. K. 
Jordan, W. M. 
Judge, Mrs. J. 
Judson, Miss M. 
Juillot, J. 
Jurgensen, A. J. 
Jurgensen, Mrs. A. J. 
Kalhnan, George 
Karrer, Arnold 
Karrer, Mrs. Arnold 
Kastner, Philip 
Katz, Miss A 
Katz, Miss F. 
Kay, A. T. 
Kearer, Arnold 
Keaton, M. R. 
Keiffer, D. R. 
Keiser, Margie 
Kelly, H. M. 
Kelly, R. K. 
Kennan, Clement T. 
Kenney, J. T. 
Kerns, Karon 



222 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 

Kerns, Mrs. Bryan 
Kerr, Miss Marjorie 

Ker m ' MrS ' GIad >' s 
Kidder, S. L. 
Kiene, C. K. 
Kiene, M rs . E. 
Kingsbury, S. C. 
K leinpeU, It. M. 
K eyn Mrs. Heliose 

Kneed er, Mrs. E. D. 
Kneedler, H 

HfSf** T - -"el son 

&3>*. Mrs. S. 
S°Wy, Mrs. R s 

Krft Se ' man » B. 
£ re tzer, D c 

Fffi^ ^ Edna 

f arson '^wt W. 

rn Ie n 'ser, Mrg «^ 
W glgaer, r. £ 



£ each, rj S? 



Lehman, S. 
Leigh t on, Miss Ethel 
Leith, H. 
Leith, Mrs. Mary 
Lennon, Miss H. 
Leslie, Mrs. and 2 sons 
Leslie, H. N. 
Leslie, W. A. 
Lester, A. II. 
Lester, Miss Barbara 
Lester, Geoffrey 
Lester, Airs. L. 
Levy, Mrs. Bona C. 
Levy, David 
Lewis, Ann 
Lewis, C. M. 
Lewis, Grace 
Lewis, Juanita 
Lewis, Robert 
Leverlev, R. 
Liddell/ P- F. 
Ligertwood, C. 
Lile, Mrs. 
Lile, R. L. 
Lincoln, A. 
Lind, N. I. 
Linder, C. 
Livingston, Mrs. 
Livingston, C. C. 
Lloyd, Mrs. and 2 chil 

dren 
Locke, J. C. 
Lockhart, Mrs. Mae 
Logan, G. L. 
Long, Miss Frances 
Long, Samuel H. 
Louis, G. J. 
Lovatt, G. F. 
Loving, Mrs. Edith 
Loving, W. H. 
Loynes, W. C. 
Luckie, Mrs. A, 
Luck man, Miss Elsie 
Luehe, Master B. 
Luehe, Mrs. E. A. 
Luhrsen, F. L. 
Luna, Miss 
Lusk, F. 

Lynch, Miss Phyllis 
Lynn, Craven 
Lyttel, Ethel 
Lyttle, Mrs. Consuelo 
Lyttle, Erna 
Lyttle, Gerald 
Lyttle, R. G. 
Lyttle, Walter 
Macadie, Mrs. 
MacDonald, J. H. 
MacDonald, R. K. 
MacGavin, W. 
MacGregor, J. A. 
Maclntyre, Miss Nora 
Maclntyre, R. 
MacLaren, W. H. 
MacLennan, D. O. 
MacLeod, A. M. 
Mac Master, J. D. 



MacTurk, D. II. 
P. MadiU, Mrs. K. 
Mahoney, J. C. 
Mahoney, Mrs. J. C. 
Makepeace, Lloyd 
Malcolm, J. 
Malkinson. S. C. 
Malone, Mrs. C. E. 
Malone, Master D. 
Malone* Miss K. 
Malono, Mrs. Paul 
Mangels, Miss Margaret 
Mangels, Miss Nieves 
Mangels, Mrs. Nieves 
Mann, Mrs. J. C. 
Manser, D. L. 
Marcuson, P. 
Marsh, E. Li 
Marsh, L. 
Martin, Mrs. 
Martin, Mrs. C. 
Martin, F. G. 
Martin, J. M. 
Marx, PI. J. 

Marx, Mrs. EL J. and two 

children 
Mason, Katherinc Jane 
Mason, L. W. 
Mather, W. G. 
Mathews, Mrs. A. H. 
Mathews, A. R. 
.A Tat hews, Miss Clio 
Mathews, Nick 
Mathews, P. B. 
Matthews, A. H. 
Maxey, W. E. 
May, Mrs. Doris 
May, Miss J. H. 
May, Miss Joan 
Mayger, William 
Maynard, Mrs. 
McAllister, Miss 
Me Alpine, Mrs. Elizabeth 
McAlpinc, Miss Margaret 
McAnlis, J. A. 
McCalister, J. 
McCall, James 
McCallum, Miss A. M 
McCandlish, W. F. 
McCann, D. E. 
McCarthy, George 
McCarthv, Miss Mariam 
McCord, J. 
McDonald, Miss 
McGaritv, H. C. 
McGinley, R. J. 
McGinley, Mrs. R. J. and 

two children 
McGinnes, T. 
McGrath, Dick 
McGrath, R. V. 
McGrath, Mrs. R. V. 
McGrath, Stephanie 
McGrew, K. 
Mcintosh, A. J. 
McKeehan, O. E. 
McKenney, Warren 



REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



223 



McKeown, Hugh 
HcKinley, A. H. 
McKinne> . M rs. K. J. 
McKinncy, Josephine 
Mc Kinney. L. N. 
McKinncy, Thomas 
McKinncy, Virginia 
McKinncv, William 
McLaughlin. K. 11. 
McLea, H. J. G. 
McLean, T. 

McLorn, Mrs. G. F. C. 
McLoughlin. Mrs. 
McMiUcn, Miss 
McNair, Mrs. J. \\. 
Meadows, H. 
Meagher, V. J. 
Meagher. Mrs. V. J. 
Merchant, E. S. D. 
Meredith, Mrs. A. C. 
Meredit h, Guy- 
Meredith, Philip 
Merrian, R . T, 
Merritt, Frank 
Merrill, Miss Jean 
Merritt, Mrs. Mary 
Metz, Mrs. C. 
Meyer, Gus 

Meyers, Mrs. Rollin G. 
Michic. C. 
Middlcton, A. E. 
Middleton. Mrs. G. L. 
Middlcton, Miss. J. 
Middleton, Miss M. 
Miles, Mrs. F. C. 
Miley, W. J. 
Miller, Mrs. G. C. 
Mills, M. B. 
Mills, Miss Maria M 

cedes 
Mills, Mrs. Ray 
Millward, S. J. 
Milne, George 
Milton, J. E. 
Mirams, Anthony 
Miravallo, A. 
Mladinich, Mrs. Ruth 
Moorhouse, J. S. 
Moran, Larry 
Morley, I I. 
Morriscy, L. F. 
Morrison, R. A. 
Morrow, M. D. 
Mortlook, P, O. 
Morton, Miss A. 
Morton, Miss H. 
Morton, Mrs. R. C. 
Moss, Mrs. G. 
Moss, J. K. 
Moyers, Mrs. John 
Mulcahy, F. B. 
Murphy, Helen 
Murray, Mrs. E 
Murray, Miss Pat 
Murray, W. K. 
Murrey, Charles 
Musry, A. 



Musser, B. 

M ydanas, ( 5, Mydans 
Mvdans. Mrs. Carl 
Myers, R. G. 
Nabors, Mrs. S. 

Nabors, William Sidney 
Naftaly, H, A. 
Naftaly, Miss Lilly 

X aft lay. Mis^ Nancy 
Najors. Jose A. 
N:mi/. Mrs L. K. 

Keale, Mrs Editb 
Neale, Miss Hilda 
Necker, E. .1. 
Meeker, Mrs. E. J. 

Nelson. Miss 

Nenbauer, P. R. 
Nestle, Mrs. M. 
Net BOTgi M. L 
Nenbauer, Mrs. Paul 
Nowcomb, Walter 
Newman, Mrs. Ethel 
Newsom, Mrs. J. H. 
Newsome, P. X. 
Newson, O. C. 
Nichols. Norman 
Xieol. A. L. 
Nieol, Mrs Arthur 
Nicol, Miss Celeste 

Nieol, ( Sharles 
Nicol. Miss .Jacqueline 
Nieolson, J. 
Nihill, Mrs. 
Noble, F. II. 
Nokes, Wilbur C. 
Nolting, E. L. 
Nolting, Mrs. E, L. 

Nunt. P. O. 

or- O'Brien, Mrs. F. 
O'Brien, F. S. 
O' Brien, J. 
O'Brien, .1. W. 
O'Brien. Mrs. Seldon 
O'Brien, Son 
O'Brien, s. \V. 
Obst, T. J. 
O'Hara, T. 

Ohnick, Mrs. B. 
Ohniek, Ben 
O'Neill, C. J. 
Osborn, J. W. 
Osborn, Miss Ophelia 
Ostcr, Miss Ethel 
Oswald. J. H. (Judge) 
O'Toole, J. 
Owen, J. G. 
Owen, Mrs. J. G. 
Owen, O. II. 
Oxnam, Mrs. G. 
Pacheco, M. A. 
Paddon, Mrs. Lucy 
Paddon, Son 
Parker, H. V. 
Parker, Mrs. R. L. 
Parker, Rav L. 
Parker, W.C 
Parker, Mrs. Wilbur C. 



Parkinson, G. V. 
Parkinson, Mrs. G. V. 
Parsons, G. A. 
Parsons, N. George 
Patcrson, Miss M. D. 
Patey* W. B. 
Patterson, J. 
Patterson, W. H. 
Patterson, Mrs. W. H. 
Pauley, Charles 
Payne, Miss Audrey 
Payne, Mrs. M. 
Peacock, C. B. 
Pearson, C. L. * 
Pcarcc, Ronny 
Pedder, G. H. 
Peek, E. R. 
Perm, William L 
Penny, H. R. 
Perkins, Charles 
Perkins, Mrs. Charles tt. 
Perkins, W. R. 
Perrine, J. F. 
Perrv, L. 

Perton, Mrs. R. H. 
Peters, Miss C. 
Peters, Mrs. E. 
Peters, F. 
Petersen, J. S. 
Peterson, Mrs. J. o. 
Petterson, K. O. 
Philip, Mrs. G. A. 
Philip, George A. 
Phillips, H. L. 
Phillips, Mrs. W* H. 
Picard, F. L. 
Pickup, Mrs Hedda 
Pickup. M- B. 
Piery, A. 
Pinel, Mrs. D. R. 
Pinkerton, S. C- 
Pinkcrton, Mrs. b. o. 
Pollard, A. 
Pollock, Barbara 
Pollock, Mrs. Ivy 
Pollock, M. . ■ 
Pollock, Muriel 
Porrello, P. 
Powell, Riva 
Pratt, Miss Paula 
Preston, Mrs. Marie 
Picston, W. D. 
Prichard, R. A. 
Prill, William 
Prising, F W 
Prismal, Mrs. E. 
Prismal, Master Robin 
Prismall, A. 
Pritchett, B. G. 
Proudfoot, A. 
Prout, J. 0. 
Purington, J. R. 
Purinton, Mrs. J. F. 
Purkiss, G. G. 
Purnell, Mrs. J. F. 
Putney, H. B. 
Quinn, B. A. 



224 REPORT OF THE PHILIPPINE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



Ramsey, Miss 
Rand, Miss Grace 
Ransom, W. F. 
Ransome, Lance 
Ransome, Mrs. \V F 
Rasa vet, Miss D. 
Reese, J. M. 
Reich, H. L. 
Reiter, J. E. 
Renolds, John 
Hesse, Mrs. 
Rhudie, O. 
Rhudie, Mrs. O P 
Rice, C. E. * r - 
Rjce, Mrs. Clara 
Rice, F. E 
Rice, Mrs. Peggy 
Richards, Mrs. 
Richards, T. 
Riches, T B 
Ridley, J.' E. 

g?ey, h. d. 

Riminer, W G 
Rjmnier, Mrs. W G 

PS; Sfg Vel - 

Rizzuti, C 
Roberts, Mrs. T A 
Robertson, H. L 
Robmson, Mi ^ 
Robinson, G 
Robinson, ^ G w 
Robinson, G. W 
Robinson, H. * 
Robinson, R. l 
Robinson, J ean 
Robinson, J. p 

Rodgers, T. J. 
Roehr, O. C 
Roehr, Mrs.'o C 
Rogers, E VeIyi ; ^ 
Rogers Joselyn 
£oka, M iss T 
Komfren, 
gompen, Mrs. M 
Rontinson T 

Rosenbaum, R osc 

Rosenstock,Mrs AdflTU 
Rosenstock, G W - y 
Roseveare, M rs . R j? 

Koyston, J. 
Ruiz, O. H. 
Runyon, R. E. 
Rurka, S. 
Rushiton, G. 
Rushton, Mrs. Violet 
Russell, R. K. 
Rutler, Mrs. 
Safine, Esther A. 
Sage, Mrs. Katherine M 
Salet, Betty 



Salet, H. Wn 
Salet, Jean 
Salet, Mrs. H. N. 
Salet, Philip 
Samara, E. 
Samara, S. C. 
Sampson, J. S. 
Sands, Mrs. Martin 
Sanford, R. M. 
Sanford, Mrs. R, M. 
Satterfield, F. M. 
Saunders, Frank 
Saunders, Mrs. Frank 
Saunders, Miss Norma 
Saunders, Frank, Jr. 
Schafer, David 
Schafer, Mrs. P. A. 
Schafer, Paul 
Schell, A. W. 
Schier, Mrs. 
Schell, Mrs. A. W. 
Schofer, Paul A. 
Scheameck, E. A. 
Schrameck, Mrs. 
Schrameck, E. A. 
Schrameck, Miss Queenie 
bchreiber, J. R. 
Schultz, A. 
Schultz, Carmen 
Schultz, J. R. 
Schultz, Pacita 
Schwartz, Miss Ann Berle 
Schwartz, A. S. 
Schwartz, Mrs. A. S. 
fcchworer, D. 
Schofield, Donald E. 
Scott, D. A. 
Scott, Miss 
Scott, Mrs. George 
goals, Miss Margaret 
gearl, Janet 
gechrist, David 
gechrist, Harold 
gechrist, Mrs. Harold 
Scitz, C. L. 
Selph, E. 
Seman, F. 
Shaw, Mrs. 
Shaw, J. R. 
kneonev, P. 
Sherk, David 
Sherk, Mrs. P. II. 
ghoemaker, A. W. 
Shrader, F. B 
Shurdut, J. M. 
gigler, Mrs. C. O. 
gigler, son 
gigler, son 
Simmons, R. L. 
Simonson, Fred 
Small, W. V. 
Smiley, R. R. 
Smith, A. C. 
Smith, Bruce M. 
Smith, Mrs. C. 
Smith, C. R. 
Smith, 



Smith, EL G. 
Smith, Harrv J. 
Smith, J. A. Q. L. 
Smith, Mrs. L. E. 
Smith, Mrs. L. M. 
Smith, P. L. 
Smith, R. E. 
Smith, S. L. 
Smith, Mrs. T. 
Smith, Willard 
Snow, G. 
Snyder, G. 
Snyder, Mrs. Lucile 
Sotelc, F. J. 
Southerton, Mrs. 
Southerton, Master Bobby 
Spear 

Speir, Mrs. M. 
Speir, Patrick 
Speir, Thomas 
Speirs, Jack 
Spencer, Beverly 
Spencer, Mrs. R. N. 
Spencer, R. \V. 
Spering, I. G. 
Spering, Mrs. I. G. 
Sperry, II. M. 
Sperry, Mrs. H. M. 
Sperry, H. M. 
Stacey, Mrs. G. H. 
Stagner, R. C. 
Stamfield 
StapfT, Mrs. Eva 
Stapff, M. 
Stapler, Miss J. 
Stapler, J. B. 
Stapler, Mrs. J. B. 
Staples, E. W. 
Steel, J. L. 
Steen, Oscar 
Sternberg, G. M. 
Stevens, Miss Elizabeth 
Stevens, Mrs. L. R. 
Stevens, O. B. 
Stevens, T. 
Stewart, C. E. 
Stirni, J. W. 
Stirni, Mrs. J. W. 
Stokes, H. M. 
Stone, Mrs. E. 
Stone, Imogene 
Stonham, Mrs. W. J. 
Stratton, J. G. L. 
Straub, R. E. 
Strong, H. E. 
Strong, R. M. 
Stuart, James D. 
Stuart, L. 
Stumpf, William 
Sturm, S. M. 
Struth, James B. 
Sudhoff, R. G. 
Symons, J. 
Synder, G. 
Tait, S. 

Tait, Mrs. Stewart 
Taylor, Miss Betsey 



UKPOKT OF TUK PHILIPPIXE HIGH COMMISSIONER 



225 



Tavlor, M. B. 

11. T. S. 
Jerry, J. E. 
Thomas, Betty 
Thomas. Kllen 
Thoma-. Kn-d 
Thomas, G. 
Thomas. Mrs. J. A. 
Thomas, Joe 
Thomas H. 
Thomas. Mrs. H. 1). 
Thompson, Elizabeth S. 
Thompson, Frank 
Thompson. Mrs. G. K. 
Thompson, Mrs. Pauline 
Thompson, R. E. 
Thompson, R. J. 
Thompson, Mrs. V. ant 

2 children. 
Tibbetts, Miss Marie 
Tilling. M. 
Tinling. Don 
Todd, Mrs. C. 
Tolman. Mrs. Haidoc 
Tolman, Mrs. T. B. 
Tolman, T. B. 
Tomkins, Master E. 
Tomkins, Miss E. M. 
Tomkins. Miss II. (). 
Tomkins, Mrs. T. 

Tootle, Mrs. M. 

Towne, W. J. 

Trehilcot, M. N. 

Trebilcot, Mrs. M. N. 

Treash, R. PI. 

Tremper, T,. 

Trevor, W. W. 

Tuplin, Ellesworth 

Tumbull, Miss 

Turner, Miss 

Turner, E. S. 

Turner, Mrs. Stan 

Turner, W. 

Tuten, D. 

Tyre, Mrs. 

Updyke, Mrs. 

Updvke, G. A. 

Vanderplas, P. 

Vansickle, C. E. 

Vansickle, Mrs. C. E. 

Vergunia, Mrs. Mary 

Villcr, C. IT. 

Vincent, Mrs. 

Vlasate, A. B. 

Vlasate, Mrs. Anthony 

Von Stetton, S. K. W. 

Wabraushek, Mrs. R. 
and 2 children. 



Wagelie, G. a. 
Waldo, W. 
Waldo. Mrs. W C 

Walford, H. 
Walford. Mra n 

Walkor. A. l\ ' 

Walker, Miss Barbara 
A\ allace, Mrs. a c 

JValshram. Miss \. 

\\ alshram, Mrs x 
Walter, Mrs K 

WaUon, Mfea Patricia 
A\ ard, W. v. 

Warenam, J. M. 
Watenrtradt, A. E 
Waterstradt, Mrs. A. E. 
M at hen. J, n 
1 Webb, William B. 
Webster, M. a 
WeekB, II. 

Wcinhurg, Mrs. 
Wemburg, Samuel 
\\ emzheimer, C. L. 
3 eiser, Mrs. L. J. 
Weiss, M. C. 
Welbeseheek 
Welch, C. R 
Wellborn, W A 
Wcndt, Mrs. II.' 
Wenetski, C. E 
West, Mrs. A. P. 
West, Jeannette 
Weston, Mrs. G. M. 
\\ etmore, F. 
Wheeler, G. A. 

Whishard, G. 

Whitacre, Dr. 

Whitacre, F. J. 

Whitacre, Mrs. H. and 
two children 

Whitacre, W. G. 

Whitaker, Mrs. Evelyn 

Whitaker, J. A. 

Whitaker, Miss Margaret 

\Vhitakcr, Miss Betty 

White, G. 

White, Mrs. J. D. 

Whitehead, G. 

Whiteneck, Mrs. Fred 

Whiteneck, Karen 

Whiteneck, L. L. 

Whiteneck, Mrs. L. L. 

Whiteneck, Laurie 

Whitfield, Mrs. N. C. 

Wightman, E. H. 

Wightman, E. J. 
A. Wightman, G. A. 

Wightman, Mrs. John 



Wilder, Mrs. K. 
Wilkinson, Mrs. L. M. 
Wilkinson, Mary June 
Wilkinson. Rupert Hugh 
Willard, R. D. 
Willbom, Mrs. Elizabeth 
Williams. A. D. 
Williams, H. T. 
Williams, J. 
Williams, J. J. 
Williams, T. E. 
Williamson, Mrs. 
Willson, Wallace P. 
Wilson, Daughter 
Wilson, Ed. 
Wilson. E. T. 
Wilson, Mrs. E. T. 
Wilson, F. G. 
Wilson. H. X. 
Wilson, Mrs. H. R. 
Wilson, I. TV , 
Wilson, J. S. 
Windle, W. 
Winiker, Mrs. D. B. 
Winiker. Niece 
Winn, Mrs. Ethel 
Winshix, S. D. 
Wishard. Mrs. G. P. 
Wblfgram, Mrs. C. 
Wolf gram, H. 
Wood, Mrs. 
Wood. W. C. 
Wooding, W. • • • , 
Wootten, Miss Madeleme 
Workman, Mrs. 
Workman, Dorns 
Workman, George W. 
Workman, Helen 
Workman, Lillian 
Workman, Mildred 
Worthington, Mrs. Anne S. 
Wotherspoon, N. S. 
Wrinch. Mrs. E. 
Wrinch. Master P. 
Wrinch, Master 1. 
Wright, A. 
Wright, T. H. 
WveofT, O. C. 
Wyne, Miss 
Yankey, W. R. 
Yankey, Mrs. William 
Yarborough, Mrs. H. E. 
Yard, L. H. 
Young, Carlos 
Young, W. H. 
Youngberg, Mrs. b. 
Youngberg. Stanton, Dr. 
Younger, W. C. 
Zamudio, A. 1. 



APPENDIX U 

Statement Respecting Communication With Persons in Occupied 
Areas of the Philippine Islands 

(Prepared by Philip E. Ryan, Assistant Director, Insular and Foreign 
Operations, American Red Cross) 

Attempts to establish communication with persons in occupied areas 
of the Philippines have not up to the present time been success- 
A * cw reports have come through diplomatic channels, but 
the Swiss are not in a position to maintain an inquiry or message 
service. Inquiries about persons thought to be in the Philippines are 
accepted by American Red Cross chapters and referred to the Inter- 
national Red Cross Committee, but reports on such inquiries, begun 
m January, have been extremely few. 

ost , al communication with enemy-occupied territor}' was suspended 
do^Vi ou 1 tbre f k of w ar, but two methods of communication remain 
possible under the provisions of censorship. Brief personal messages 
on torms available at American Red Cross chapters may be sent to 
n«H^ S i Z thou ght to be interned or not, through the Inter- 

ihnlTl ° d ^ ross Committee. It is not vet known that any of 
havo ^ essa g° s hay c been delivered in the Philippines, although they 
corYim w 11 f ° nt }° Gen eva since January. The second method of 
rr c T ?' "prisoners of war mail," may later be possible. When 
letters nin a J> definitely identified as internees or prisoners of war, 
nels witK * SC ? t to thcm Postage free, through regular postal chan- 
Janaru^ l?o U rcf ? rcn <>e to the American Red Cross. So far the 
internet ^ t ave . not submitted to our Government any official lists of 
™ees 01 prisoners of war in the Philippines. 
Washington, May 26, 1942. 



226 



APPENDIX V 

Treasury Department, 
Office of the Secretary, 

August 12, 1942. 

General Ri ling No. 10-A Under Executive Order No. S3S9, 
as Amended, Executive Order No. 9193, Sections 3 (a) and 
5 (b) of the Trading With the Enemy Act, as Amended by 
the First War Powers Act, 1941, Relating to Foreign Funds 
Control 

(1) Unless authorized by a license expressly referring to this general 
ruling: 

(a) No Philippine company shall make any payment, or perform 
any covenant, duly, condition, or service within the United States on, 
or with respect to, any direct or indirect obligation or security of, or 
claim against, such company, . 

(6) No person shall exercise within the United States any '.right, 
remedy, power, or privilege with respect to, or directly or indirectly 
arising out of or in connection with, any obligation or security °*> or 
claim against, any Philippine company, including any right, remedy, 
power, or privilege with respect to any guaranty , covenant, or agree- 
ment that such Philippine company will perform any covenant, duty, 
condition, or service. . 

(2) Unless otherwise provided, an appropriate license or other 
authorization issued by the Secretary of the Treasury shall remove 
all the restrictions, disabilities, and other limitations imposed by this 
general ruling to the same extent as such restrictions, disabilities, and 
other limitations have been imposed by this general ruling. 

(3) This general ruling shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise 
restrict the ordinary purchase, sale, transfer, pledge, or hypothecation 
of, or similar dealing in, securities which are issued by, or the obliga- 
tion of, any Philippine company or to prohibit or restrict transactions 
incidental thereto. . „ 

(4) As used in this general ruling, the term "Philippine company 
shall mean — . 

(a) Any partnership, association, corporation, or other organization 
organized under the laws of the Philippine Islands and which prior to 
January 1, 1942, derived its principal income from the llnlippine 
Islands; . , 

(6) Any sole proprietorship which prior to January 1, 1942, derived 
its principal income from, and was primarily engaged in business in, 
the Philippine Islands; and 

(c) Any agent, trustee, transfer, or paying agent, or other repre- 
sentative of or for any Philippine company to the extent that it acts 
as such. 

Randolph Paul, 
Acting Secretary oj the Treasury. 

227 



APPENDIX W 

Treasury Department, 

Washington. 

[Press Service, Xo. 32-83] 



For immediate release, Wednesday, August 12, 1942. 

The Treasury Department today announced a moratorium on obli- 
gations of Philippine companies held in the United States. This 
moratorium does not apply to the obligations of the Philippine 
government. 

Pursuant to General Ruling No. 10-A issued today under Presi- 
dential freezing orders, no Philippine company may make any pay- 
ment in th.s country on its obligations and no' person may enforce in 
™™ « i tes any claim or' obligation against a Philippine com- 
nn /if . thK P a y i " cnt f c an be made and such claims can be enforced 

T™? ? UUC,S Contro1 license is obtained, 

it 2t°J Cials S . tat - Cd \ hat toda > r ' s actlGI1 *as intended to make 
were ffullv Ltl Sfrtf^e United Stalcs of P^ppine companies 
be ' fu lv an 3 T nrnf \ h(lt th . C inte rests of a11 the P«^ties involved could 
these Philinnin PClly P rote eted. It was pointed out that some of 
Sons o r<TSu~ kF*** had aSSets m the Philippines worth many 
of SediJSl 0 " War and onl y a relatively small amount 
Unite Sta es a ^ GSS ;- Th ° com P anies ^ not have assets in the 
no one Ss or i/r t0 f , meot during obligations and since 
erty in the Phflir^ ^now the P rcscnfc condition or value of prop- 
fairly W ith tho EE T S ;- 11 1S -' f the , prPscnt tim c- impossible to deal 
other creditors HnT f righ , tS °l stockholders, bondholders, and 
until it i s poSleVo *?^S r V Uns fchc sit «ation will be frozen 

It was do t i ascerfcain the facts, 
companies would w u y Trca ?" r y representatives that Philippine 
P^ing their oblUnS?!^ P erm,tted to us e today's ruling to avoid 
such Payments coSl i f ™ "P 7 CaSC whcrc fimds available and 
^e Treasury wi n l i, e mado ° n / n e qmtable basis. In such cases 
interested parties Payments upon appropriate application by 

Moreover fVi^ 

their creditor unonT™' 7 Phili PPino companies to furnish 

cnt ability to pav t P ?r Sv*^ information concerning their pres- 
tation will b rSLi lClr . f °, hhgations. Any failure to furnish such infor- 
228 th a PP r °P ri ately by the Treasury. 

o 



